                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          VENTURE CAPITAL INVESTMENT CYCLES:
                             THE IMPACT OF PUBLIC MARKETS

                                             Paul Gompers
                                             Anna Kovner
                                              Josh Lerner
                                            David Scharfstein

                                         Working Paper 11385
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w11385


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       May 2005




We thank for their research assistance Vanessa Broussard, Daniel Goodman, Leif Holtzman, Alex Lee,
Miriam Tawil, and Chenling Zhang. We thank Raffi Amit, Bob Gibbons, Ed Rock, and seminar participants
at Harvard University, the National Bureau of Economic Research, the University of Chicago, and the
University of Pennsylvania for helpful comments. Harvard Business School’s Division of Research and the
National Science Foundation provided financial assistance. All errors and omissions are our own.The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

©2005 by Paul Gompers, Anna Kovner, Josh Lerner, and David Scharfstein. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Venture Capital Investment Cycles: The Impact of Public Markets
Paul Gompers, Anna Kovner, Josh Lerner, and David Scharfstein
NBER Working Paper No. 11385
May 2005
JEL No. G2

                                            ABSTRACT

It is well documented that the venture capital industry is highly volatile and that much of this

volatility is associated with shifting valuations and activity in public equity markets. This paper

examines how changes in public market signals affected venture capital investing between 1975 and

1998. We find that venture capitalists with the most industry experience increase their investments

the most when public market signals become more favorable. Their reaction to an increase is greater

than the reaction of venture capital organizations with relatively little industry experience and those

with considerable experience but in other industries. The increase in investment rates does not affect

the success of these transactions adversely to a significant extent. These findings are consistent with

the view that venture capitalists rationally respond to attractive investment opportunities signaled

by public market shifts.

Paul Gompers                                           Josh Lerner
Morgan Hall                                            Rock Center for Entrepreneurship
Graduate School of Business Administration             Graduate School of Business Administration
Harvard University                                     Harvard University
Boston, MA 02163                                       Boston, MA 02163
and NBER                                               and NBER
pgompers@hbs.edu                                       josh@hbs.edu

Anna Kovner                                            David Scharfstein
Morgan Hall                                            Morgan Hall
Graduate School of Business Administration             Graduate School of Business Administration
Harvard University                                     Harvard University
Boston, MA 02163                                       Boston, MA 02163
akovner@hbs.edu                                        and NBER
                                                       dscharfstein@hbs.edu
1. Introduction

       The high volatility of the venture capital industry is well documented. This

volatility manifests itself in a number of ways: the funds flowing to venture capital firms,

the investments firms make in portfolio companies, and the financial performance of

portfolio companies and venture capital firms. (Gompers and Lerner, 2004). Much of

this volatility appears to be tied to valuations in public equity markets. An increase in

IPO valuations leads venture capital firms to raise more funds (Gompers and Lerner,

1998; Jeng and Wells, 2000), an effect that is particularly strong among younger venture

capital firms (Kaplan and Schoar, 2005). Moreover, returns of venture capital funds

appear to be highly correlated with the returns on the market as a whole (Cochrane, 2005;

Kaplan and Schoar, 2005; Ljundqvist and Richardson, 2003).

       Many industry observers (see, for instance, Gupta, 2000) argue that the volatility

of the venture capital industry is a symptom of overreaction by venture capitalists and

entrepreneurs to perceived investment opportunities. These swings result in periods in

which too many competing companies are funded, followed by ones in which not enough

companies have access to capital.       The boom of 1998-2000 provides an extreme

illustration of these problems. Funding during these years grew dramatically—in real

terms, the financing level in 2000 was more than 30 times the level in 1991—and was

concentrated in two areas: Internet and telecommunication investments, which accounted

for 39% and 17% of all venture disbursements in 1999. Considerable sums were devoted

to supporting very similar firms—e.g., the nine dueling Internet pet food suppliers and

the many companies that undertook the extremely capital-intensive process of building

second cable networks in residential communities. Meanwhile, many apparently
promising areas such as advanced materials, energy technologies, and micro

manufacturing languished unfunded as venture capitalists raced to focus on the most

visible and popular investment areas.

       This alleged overreaction may have its roots in the behavioral biases of venture

capitalists who irrationally associate past investment successes with future investment

opportunities. Or it may stem from venture capitalists who feel compelled to follow the

herd out of concern for the reputation consequences of being contrarians (Scharfstein and

Stein, 1990) Indeed, in 1999, even private equity firms with investment mandates to

invest in leveraged buyouts felt compelled to back Internet startups.

       A contrasting view is that the volatility of the venture capital industry stems not

from overreaction, but from the inherent volatility of fundamentals. In this view,

fluctuation in venture capital investment activity is simply a response to changes in

investment opportunities.    There may be shocks to the investment opportunities of

existing entrepreneurial firms, or entry by new entrepreneurs, both of which increase the

demand for capital.

       This paper takes a step towards distinguishing between the “overreaction view”

and the “fundamentals view” by examining the responses of different classes of venture

investors. We start with the observation (and empirically document) that the most

experienced venture capital firms generally have the best performance (Sorensen, 2004).

We then examine how these most successful investors respond to public market signals

of investment opportunities. Are they more prone to increase their investments when the

market heats ups? And, how well do they do on these investments relative to less

experienced venture capitalists? If we find that the most experienced investors are more




                                             2
prone to increase their investment levels when the market heats up, this suggests that

shifts in fundamentals are likely an important component of venture capital investing.

This interpretation is further supported if there is also little degradation in their

performance.    On the other hand, if we observe that the least experienced venture

capitalists are most likely to increase their investment activity during hot markets, this

lends more credibility to the view that overreaction is a more important cause of volatility

in the venture capital industry.

       Our empirical results indicate that investment by the most experienced venture

capital firms—notably those with the most industry experience—are most responsive to

public market signals of investment opportunities. We start by showing that venture

capital investment activity at the industry level is very sensitive to public market signals

of industry attractiveness such as Tobin’s Q and IPO activity; a shift from the bottom to

the top quartile in these measures increases the number of investments by more than

20%. This effect is driven largely by venture capital firms with the most experience

doing deals in the industry. General experience (across all industries) has no effect on

investment sensitivity to industry Q and IPO activity, once we control for industry

experience. Moreover, although the success rate for deals done in a hot market is lower

than it is for deals done in a cold market, the difference is small. This difference between

hot and cold market performance is even smaller for experienced venture capital firms

than it is for less experienced venture capital firms. These findings suggest that an

important component of volatility in venture capital investment activity is driven by

volatility of fundamentals.




                                             3
       Of independent interest is our finding of the importance of industry-specific rather

than general experience. It points to the importance of industry-specific human capital

and suggests that a critical part of venture capital investing is the network of industry

contacts to identify good investment opportunities as well as the know-how to manage

these investments.     These contacts and know-how come only from long-standing

experience doing deals in an industry.

       This rest of the paper is organized as follows. The next section describes the

construction of the data and provides some basic summary statistics. Section 3 examines

the impact of shifts in valuations and IPO activity and the determinants of venture capital

organization investment activity. In that section, we also look at the determinants of

successful investments both in terms of the investment cycle and the characteristics of the

venture capital organizations. Section 4 concludes the paper.



2. The Data

A. Constructing the Sample

       Our data on venture investments come from Thomson Venture Economics

(Venture Economics). This database provides information about both venture capital

investors and the portfolio companies in which they invest. We consider an observation

to be the first record of a venture capital organization and portfolio company pair, i.e., the

first time a venture capitalist invests in a particular company. This approach results in a

dataset with multiple observations for most portfolio companies since several venture

capital firms typically invest in a company. We exclude follow-on investments by a




                                              4
venture capital organization in the same portfolio company since these investments may

result from different considerations than do initial investments.

        Our analysis focuses on data covering investments from 1975 to 1998, dropping

information prior to 1975 due to data quality concerns.1                In keeping with industry

estimates of a maturation period of three to five years for venture companies, we drop

information after 1998 so that the outcome data can be meaningfully interpreted. As a

result, we are not studying investments made at the height of the Internet boom (1999 and

2000) and the crash that followed.

        From 1975 to 1998, Venture Economics provides information on 2,179 venture

capital firms investing in 16,354 companies.              This results in a sample of 42,559

observations of unique venture capital firm – portfolio company pairs.



    B. Critical Measures and Summary Statistics

        Before we turn to an analysis of investment cycles, there are three data

construction issues we need to address.

        The first issue is how to classify venture capital industries. Our approach is to

assign all investments into nine broad industry classes based on Venture Economics'

classification of the industry. The original sample of investments was classified into 69

separate industry segments. However, these 69 industries are too narrowly defined for

our purposes, as they do not correspond to lines of specialization within or across venture

capital firms.      These 69 industries were thus combined to arrive at nine broader

industries. The industries we construct from the narrower definitions are: Internet and


1
 Gompers and Lerner (2004) discuss the coverage and selection issues in Venture Economics data prior to
1975.


                                                  5
Computers, Communications and Electronics, Business and Industrial, Consumer,

Energy, Biotech and Healthcare, Financial Services, Business Services, and all other.

While any industry classification is somewhat arbitrary, we believe that our classification

scheme captures businesses that have similarities in technology and management

expertise that would make specialization in such industries meaningful. In addition, this

scheme minimizes the subjectivity associated with classifying firms into narrower

industry groupings.

       Panel A of Table 1 shows the distribution across the nine broad industries. The

first column is the number of companies in each industry. It is no surprise that Internet

and Computers is the largest industry with 4,679 companies. Biotech and Healthcare,

Communications and Electronics, and Consumer are the next largest industries with

between 2,285 and 2,745 companies. The other industries are considerably smaller. The

table also reports the number of observations for each industry in our sample; there are

more observations than companies because there are multiple venture capital investors in

most of the companies in our sample. On average, there are 2.6 venture capital investors

in each company.         The overall industry distribution provides some comfort that our

industry classification is meaningful.      While there is variation in the number of

observations across industries, there are enough observations in each industry to make

our analysis feasible.

       The second challenge has to do with the measurement of perceived investment

opportunities.   We use two measures of perceived investment opportunities in our

analysis, industry Q and IPO activity. Because we do not know whether these measures




                                              6
overstate or understate true investment opportunities, we will refer to industry Q and IPO

activity simply as “public market signals.”

       The measurement of Q follows the standard approach in the investment literature.

We calculate Q as the ratio of market value of the firm to the book value of assets, where

the market value of the firm is measured as the book value of assets plus the market value

of equity less the book value of equity. Since we cannot observe the Q of private firms

that constitute the pool of potential venture capital investments, we use an estimate of Q

for public companies as a proxy. However, in order to do so, we need to link the SIC

codes of public companies to Venture Economics industries on which our data is based.

Our procedure is to identify the SIC codes of all Venture Economics firms that went

public. Because there are multiple SIC codes associated with each of our nine industries,

we construct Q as a weighted average of the industry Q of the public companies in those

SIC codes, where the weights are the relative fractions of firms that went public within

our nine industries. Within the SIC code, Q is calculated by equally weighting all public

companies.

       Our second, less standard measure is the level of venture capital-backed IPO

activity in an industry.   We use this measure for both theoretical and practical reasons.

The theoretical rationale is based on the observation that IPOs are by far the most

important (and profitable) means for venture capitalists to exit an investment (Gompers

and Lerner, 2004). Thus, an increase in the number of IPOs in a particular sector may

make investing in that sector more attractive. In addition, an increase in IPO activity may

also attract more potential entrepreneurs into a sector, thereby increasing the pool of

potential investments and the likelihood that a venture capitalist will find an attractive




                                              7
one. The practical rationale for using IPO activity is that our Q measure may not

accurately reflect the shifts in public investors’ appetite for venture capital-backed firms

both because it uses data on mature public companies and relies on an inexact match

between SIC codes and Venture Economics codes. Given the strong link between IPO

activity and market valuations (Pagano, Panetta, and Zingales, 1998 and Ritter and

Welch, 2002), the IPO measure may actually be a better proxy for the public market’s

perception of the types of investments in our sample.

       Figure 1 shows the relationship between industry venture capital investment

activity and the two measures of public market signals for four of the industries in the

sample. In Internet and Computers, the correlation between IPOs and investment activity

appears to be very high throughout the period. This high correlation can also be seen in

Q in Figure 2. In other industries, the relationship is less pronounced. For instance, in

both Biotechnology and Healthcare and Energy, the number of investments declined

during the last half of the 1990s, even as the number of IPOs in the industry climbed.

       The final challenge is to measure the experience of the venture capital groups in

the sample. The second panel of Table 1 presents data on three characteristics of venture

capital firms that we use throughout the paper. The first such characteristic, “General

Experience,” is the total number of investments made by a venture capital firm prior to

the time of the investment in question. The second characteristic, "Industry Experience,”

is constructed similarly, but includes only investments in the same industry as the

investment in question. The third characteristic, “Specialization” is the fraction of all

previous investments that the venture capital organization made in a particular industry,

i.e., this specialization measure is the ratio of industry to general experience.        The




                                             8
specialization measure is not computed for the first investment by each venture

organization.

       Panel B of Table 1 presents the distribution of general experience, industry

experience, and specialization measures across all venture organization-industry pairs in

the sample. Since many of these observations include cases where the venture capital

firm did not invest in an industry in a particular year, we report the sub-sample that

includes only investors in the industry in a given year. In addition, we provide summary

data for 1985, 1990, and 1995.

       Overall, venture capital firms made an average of 36.3 previous investments, of

which 4.1 were in the same industry. The numbers are higher if one conditions the

observation on the venture capital firm making an investment in the industry during the

year. The medians of these experience measures are considerably lower, reflecting the

skewness of the distribution. Not surprisingly, there is an increase in experience over

time. On average, investments are made by venture capital firms with 19.75% of their

investments in the industry of the company in which they are investing. This suggests

that most venture capital firms spread out their investments across industries.

       Table 2 breaks out venture capital firm characteristics by quartile, and examines

the relationships among them. Industry experience and specialization quartiles were

calculated by industry, by year, so that industries with fewer investments would not be

disproportionately sampled in lower quartiles, and that the highest experience quartiles

would not disproportionately reflect later investments. The first quartile represents the

least experienced or specialized firms, while the fourth quartile measures the highest.

Not surprisingly, venture capital firms in the higher quartiles of industry experience have




                                             9
made more investments overall than firms in lower quartiles of industry experience. This

shows up as well as a high correlation between industry experience and general

experience.   Specialization, on the other hand, is not highly correlated with the

experience measures; in fact, it is negatively correlated with general experience. This

low correlation is driven by the firms in the highest specialization quartile who make

fewer investments than those firms who specialize less. The pattern is probably due to

the fact that extreme specialization limits the pool of investments from which a venture

capital firm can choose.



3. Analysis

A. The Determinants of Investments

       We first focus on understanding how public market signals affect the investment

decisions of venture capitalists.     In Section 3.B, we turn to understanding the

determinants of investment success.

       Table 3 presents a regression-based analysis of the relationship between the

number of investments and our public market signals. The first column shows the results

of regressing the logarithm of the annual number of investments in an industry on the

lagged logarithm of the number of IPOs in the industry, including industry and year fixed

effects. The coefficient estimate implies that an increase in IPO activity from the bottom

to the top quartile increases the number of investments by 22%. Likewise, the second

column indicates that there is a strong positive relationship between industry investment

activity and Q. An increase from the bottom Q quartile to the top Q quartile increases

industry investment by 22%. The third and fourth columns of Table 3 report the results




                                           10
of using detrended variables in the regression. For each industry, we detrend both

industry investments and the public market measures. We then use the residuals in the

regression. Again the magnitude of the effects is large and similar across regressions,

although the explanatory power of the IPO measure appears to be significantly greater

than that of Q. These regressions would appear to validate the use of Q and IPO activity

as measures of public market signals that affect venture capital investments.

       Table 4 begins to look at the relationship between venture capital firm

characteristics and investment behavior.     In this table, we use as observations each

venture capitalist-industry pair in each year the venture organization is active, i.e., all

years following the first observation of an organization and ceasing in the year in which

the organization'
                s final investment is observed.      We first present results using IPO

activity and then check for robustness using the Q measure. The results are essentially the

same using either measure.

       The first column of Table 4 repeats the industry level regression at the venture

organization-industry level.   We include both industry and year fixed effects. Not

surprisingly, the regression indicates that venture capital firms tend to increase their

investments in years and industries in which IPO activity increases. The coefficient,

which is statistically significant, implies that an increase in IPO activity from the 25th

percentile to the 75th percentile boosts the venture organization’s investment activity in

the industry by 4.9%.

       As the second column of Table 4 indicates, there is also a strong positive

relationship between general experience and investment activity.        The third column

decomposes experience into industry experience and non-industry experience. The




                                            11
regression indicates that what drives the relationship is industry experience; prior

investment activity outside the industry has no appreciable relationship to investment

activity within the industry. The average venture capital firm in the highest quartile of

industry experience invests 24% more in the industry than a firm in the lowest quartile of

industry experience.

       Columns 4 and 5 of Table 4 add industry specialization to the regressions. In both

regressions, it is clear that prior focus on a particular industry increases future investment

in the industry. The results in column 5 indicate that an organization in the top industry

specialization quartile makes 8% more investments in that the industry than one in the

bottom quartile. Finally, the last two columns of Table 4 replicate the results in columns

3 and 5 using Q rather than IPO activity as the measure of the public market. The basic

patterns continue to hold in these regressions, and the magnitude of the effects is similar.

       The next two tables present our main results on how venture capital firms with

different characteristics respond to changes in public valuations and activity. In this table,

we add to the specifications in Table 4 variables that interact our public market measures

with our measures of firm characteristics, i.e., general experience, industry experience,

and industry specialization. Throughout our discussion of the results, when we refer to

periods with high IPO activity we are referring to those in the top quartile of IPO activity;

low IPO activity refers to those periods in the bottom quartile. Likewise, high general

experience, industry experience, and specialization refers to venture capital firms in the

top quartile, while those with low general experience, industry experience, and

specialization refers to those in the bottom quartile.




                                             12
        The first column of Table 5 indicates that the industry investment activity of more

experienced venture capital firms is more sensitive to IPO activity than it is for less

experienced venture capital firms. This effect is statistically significant. It is also much

larger in magnitude than the effect from the average firm in the sample. At the mean of

the other variables, highly experienced venture capital organizations invest 9.2% more

when IPO activity is high than when it is low. By contrast, relatively inexperienced

venture capital firms actually invest 1.2% less at times when IPO activity is high rather

than low. The results also indicate that industry experience increases the level of

investment, not just the sensitivity of investment to IPO activity.        More industry-

experienced venture capital firms invest 11.9% more than industry-inexperienced firms

when IPO activity is low and 22.4% more when IPO activity is high.

        While both industry and non-industry experience is positively associated with

greater investment sensitivity to IPO activity (columns 2 and 3 of Table 5), only industry

experience retains its positive effect when both interaction terms are included in the same

regression (column 4 of Table 5). In fact, the non-industry experience interaction with

industry IPO activity is negative in this regression. When IPO activity is high, industry-

experienced venture capital firms invest 7.4% more than when it is low, while venture

capital firms with experience out of the industry invest 2.0% less when IPO activity is

high.

        The fifth and sixth columns of Table 5 look at the effect of industry specialization

on investment behavior. Consistent with our findings on industry experience, we find

that more specialized venture capital firms tend to increase their industry investments by

more than less specialized firms when IPO activity increases. The effect, however, is




                                            13
small, implying an increase in investment by 5.7% for specialized firms and 3.9% for less

specialized firms.

       Finally, Table 5 in the last two columns, reports the results using Q as an

alternative public market measure.     Those columns replicate the basic findings in

columns 4 and 6 of the table. The magnitude of the effects is similar to those estimated

using IPO activity.

       In Table 6 we check whether our results are driven by venture capital firms that

choose not to invest in a given industry. Thus, we eliminate from the regressions all

observations in which the venture capital firm made no investments in the industry in a

given year. All of the findings in Table 5 continue to hold although the magnitude of the

effects is somewhat smaller.

       Collectively, these results suggest that industry-specific human capital is an

important channel through which experience influences the reactions of venture capital

firms to shifts in public market signals. Contrary to popular wisdom, it does not appear

that the booms and busts are being driven by the investment behavior of inexperienced or

new venture capital firms. In fact, these results suggest that the cyclicality seen in the

venture capital industry is driven mostly by the more successful venture firms, that is,

those with the most experience. Section 3.B considers the question of whether the

sensitivity of more experienced firms to public market signals is a rational reaction to

fundamentals or an overreaction.



B. The Determinants of Investment Success




                                            14
       In this section we explore whether the greater responsiveness of more experienced

venture capital firms to public market signals is efficient. If these experienced firms are

able to ramp up the number of investments they make in response to public market

signals, but suffer a significant degradation of performance, the investment response to

public market signals may, in fact, be an overreaction. In addition to the practitioner

accounts alluded to above, there are at least two reasons to believe this might be the case.

First, Baker, Wurgler, and Stein (2003) show that industrial firms whose investment is

most sensitive to Q have the lowest subsequent stock returns following periods of heavy

investment. A similar effect might be observed among experienced venture capital firms

whose investment is most sensitive to Q and IPO activity. Second, at the same time that

venture capital firms are buying equity in portfolio companies, these companies are, of

course, issuing equity. We know from numerous studies, including Loughran and Ritter

(1995), that when firms issue equity, their subsequent stock returns are abnormally low.

       To assess this question, we examine the performance of the companies in which

the venture capital firms invest. Ideally, one would have data on the actual returns on the

firm’s investment.    Unfortunately, the best we can do is to determine whether the

investment resulted in what would appear to be a profitable exit for the venture capital

firm. This is most likely the case if the company went public, registered for an IPO (as of

the date we collected the data from Venture Economics), or was acquired or merged.

Venture Economics does not collect valuation information for all of the companies that

were merged or acquired and it is possible that these outcomes are not as lucrative as

those where the company exited with a public offering. However, investments in the

category we characterize as successes are likely to have generated higher returns that the




                                            15
investments those that have not yet exited or have been characterized as bankrupt or

defunct.

         The final column of Table 2 provides some initial indications of the patterns of

success by venture capital firm characteristics. The tabulations suggest that investments

made by venture capital firms with more general—and especially more industry-

specific—experience are more successful. The patterns with specialization are non-

linear, but the least specialized organizations appear to be the poorest performers. One

consideration in the definition of specialization is that young venture capital firms are

more likely to be in the first or fourth quartile, since the specialization measure is always

100% if its second deal is in the same industry as its first, or 0% if its second investment

is in a different industry. We later consider the results looking only at organizations at the

point in time where they made more than 10 investments and achieve consistent results.

Our interpretation of these tabulations must be cautious, of course, because of the lack of

controls for industry and time period.

         Table 7 examines the determinants of success in a regression framework. The

dependent variable here is a dummy variable, which takes on the value one if the

company was successful before the end of 2003.2 Each initial investment by a venture

capital firm in a portfolio company is used as an observation.3 In addition to the industry

and year controls used earlier, we also control for the stage of the company and the

financing round at the time of the investment, since these are likely to be associated with

2
 It should be noted that while the dependent variable is binary, we continue to use an ordinary least squares
specification. This reflects the fact that with non-linear specifications, the sample size drops dramatically
due to the large number of dummy variables, some of which perfectly predict certain outcomes.
3
 In the first regression, since no venture organization-specific independent variables are used, each
portfolio company is used as an observation. (In this case, the round control refers to the first financing
round where there was professional venture financing.) In all other regressions, standard errors are
clustered by portfolio company.


                                                    16
the outcome. As in our previous regressions, we exclude observations occurring after

1998 in order for the outcomes of the investments to be meaningful.

       The first two columns of the table suggest there is a negative, but statistically

insignificant, relationship between IPO activity and success in the sample as a whole.

The third column of Table 7 indicates that more experienced venture capital firms are

more likely to make successful investments. However, the fifth column shows that the

effect of experience is limited to venture capital firms with industry experience.

Investments made by venture capitalists with the most industry experience are 4.3% more

likely to succeed than those made by the least experienced venture capitalists. Given a

baseline success rate of 54%, this amounts to a significant increase in the probability of

success. The regressions with industry specialization in columns 6 and 7 support this

basic finding on the role of industry specialization. The last two columns replicate the

results using Q as our measure of the public market signal.

       Table 7 makes it clear that experienced venture capital firms do not perform

worse on average, as a result of being more sensitive to shifts in public market activities.

Table 8 digs deeper by investigating whether experienced venture capital firms perform

worse on the investments they make when IPO activity and Q are high. The results

indicate that just the opposite is true. Overall, venture capital firms do somewhat worse

on the investments they take when there is a lot of IPO activity and Q is high, although

the estimated effect is statistically insignificant. However, the more experienced venture

capitalists exhibit less degradation in their performance than do the less experienced

venture capitalists. Based on the results in Table 7 and Table 8, it would be hard to argue




                                            17
that the greater responsiveness of experienced venture capital firms to IPO activity and Q

comes at the expense of performance.



C. Robustness Analyses

       This section summarizes further analyses we undertook to determine whether our

basic findings are robust.

       Alternative Proxies for Public Market Signals. Our analysis used Q and the IPO

activity of venture capital-backed firms as proxies for public market signals.        We

expanded our IPO activity measure to include all IPOs, not just those that were venture

capital backed. The two measures are highly correlated (0.81) since both measures

include venture-backed IPOs. Not surprisingly, the results were not appreciably altered.

We also considered several other market based measures, including the earnings to price

ratio, market to book ratio and historical industry returns. All of these measures led to

similar results to those presented.

       Alternative Success Measures. Our primary outcome measure codes all mergers

and acquisitions as successes. To validate this choice, we further researched the 3,650

outcomes that Venture Economics recorded as mergers or acquisitions using the Factiva

database and the SDC mergers and acquisitions database, finding values for 1,263

companies. Of the 508 merged or acquired companies for which Venture Economics had

information on the total amount invested in the company and for which we found

valuation information, 431 companies (94%) had merger or acquisition values greater

than the total amount invested in the company, with a median sale price of seven times

the amount of money invested.         This supports our thesis that merged or acquired




                                            18
companies are likely to have been high-return investments for venture capital firms.

However, one must be cautious in this interpretation since we were unable to find

information on the majority of the mergers and acquisitions, either because they were

purchased by other private entities or purchased by public companies in deals that were

not accompanied by a press release (perhaps because of their small size). Making the

highly conservative assumption that all companies whose value we could not determine

were not successful, we then redefined a successful investment as one in which the

company went public, or was in registration for a public offering, or was in a merger or

acquisition for which we were able to find a value. The results were similar to those

presented.

        One Observation per Company. Since the dataset includes multiple observations

on the same portfolio companies, each outcome reflects not only a given venture capital

firm’s characteristics, but those of the other venture capitalists invested in the company.

As an additional robustness check to the relationship between experience, industry

experience, specialization, and success, we used a sample with one observation for each

portfolio company and the average levels of each variable of the venture capitalists

investing in the company.        In these specifications, both industry and non-industry

experience are positively associated with success, as is specialization, although the

coefficient on specialization is not significantly different than zero. In the absence of

more information about the specific roles that each venture capital organization plays in

the selection and development of the company, it is difficult to draw any conclusions

from the interaction of the different venture capitalists which invested in the company.

This is a rich topic for future research.




                                            19
4. Conclusions

         The venture capital industry is a highly volatile one, as dramatic fluctuations in

fundraising and investment activity over the past few years demonstrate. These

fluctuations seem to be related to changes in the public market valuations and activity.

Practitioner accounts and the academic literature suggest that it would be valuable to

understand the impact of this volatility on the success of venture capital investments: do

public market shifts lead venture capitalists to make poor investment choices, or rather do

they provide valuable information to investors? We address this question by examining

the determinants and success of investments by the venture industry as a whole, as well

as by subclasses of firms with different levels of experience and specialization.

         We analyze over forty thousand venture capital investment decisions over the past

two decades. We find that the greatest response to shifts in the public markets is not by

new or inexperienced groups, but rather by specialized organizations with considerable

industry experience. Not only do the investments of these organizations tend to be more

successful in general, but there is no appreciable degradation in their performance with

the changing conditions.

         Our results suggest that shifts in public markets provide information, whether

directly to the venture investors or else to individuals who then seek venture financing.

Not all venture groups, however, are able to take advantage of this information: the

critical factor appears to be human capital.4


4
 One might have thought that overall experience would also have been an important explanation for two
reasons. First, the most experienced venture capital firms tend to have the greatest access to financial
capital. They may already have raised large funds or they may have established reputations and networks
that enable them to raise easily additional capital. Second, firms with the most overall experience may have


                                                    20
         The greater investment sensitivity is associated with industry, but not non-

industry, investment experience. Whether that effect is from greater knowledge of the

industry or better networks that allow for recruitment of senior management, customers,

and strategic partners needs further exploration.

         A variety of open issues remain for future research. First, as we acknowledge

above, the precise mechanisms behind the relative performance of more specialized

organizations remain unclear. For instance, is it possible to disentangle the relative

importance of superior investment selection and ability to add value from the ability to

persuade entrepreneurs to accept ones’ capital? (While Kaplan and Stromberg (2004)

present an intriguing initial look at the venture capital decision-making process, many

open questions remain. Sorensen (2004) represents another important step in untangling

these issues.) Second, because we sought to examine investment outcomes, our analysis

only extends through 1998: we do not analyze the events of 1999 and 2000. While the

venture capital market has seen many cycles in the past, the magnitude of the boom and

bust during this period was second to none.                      Understanding whether the patterns

delineated above continued to hold during that most dramatic of cycles is an important

question for future researchers to examine.




access to a large pool of human capital that they can redeploy across sectors. That is, one might think of
venture capital firms as having an internal labor market to complement an internal capital market.
However, our finding that industry experience is the key driver of investment activity suggests that it is not
easy to redeploy venture capitalists across sectors. This would be the case if human capital in other
sectors—in the case of venture capitalists within an organization that specialize in a given industry, say
biotechnology—were unable or unwilling to shift focus to a different industry, e.g., the Internet. This
prediction is in line with the view that diversified firms have a difficult time redeploying capital into sectors
with more investment opportunities: see Scharfstein and Stein (2000), Scharfstein (1998), and Rajan,
Servaes, and Zingales (2000). Fulghieri and Sevilir (2004) model some of these issues in a venture capital
context.


                                                      21
References

Baker, Malcolm, Jeremy C. Stein, and Jeffrey Wurgler, When Does the Market Matter?
Stock Prices and the Investment of Equity-Dependent Firms, The Quarterly Journal of
Economics 118. 2003. 969-1005.

Cochrane, John H., The Risk and Return of Venture Capital, Journal of
Financial Economics 75. 2005. 3-52.

Fulghieri, Paolo, and Merih Sevilir, Size and Focus of Venture Capital Portfolios,
Unpublished University of North Carolina Working Paper. 2004.

Gompers, Paul A. and Josh Lerner, What Drives Venture Capital Fundraising?,
Brookings Proceedings on Microeconomic Activity 1998. 149-204.

Gompers, Paul A., and Josh Lerner, The Venture Capital Cycle. Cambridge and London:
MIT Press. 2004.

Gupta, Udayan, Done Deals: Venture Capitalists Tell Their Stories. Boston: Harvard
Business School Press. 2000.

Jeng, Leslie A., and Philippe C. Wells, The Determinants of Venture Capital Funding:
Evidence Across Countries, Journal of Corporate Finance, 6. 2000. 241-289.

Kaplan, Steven, and Antoinette Schoar, Private Equity Performance: Returns, Persistence
and Capital, Journal of Finance 2005. Forthcoming.

Kaplan, Steven N. and Per Stromberg, Characteristics, Contracts, and Actions: Evidence
from Venture Capitalist Analyses, Journal of Finance 59. 2004. 2177-2210.

Ljungqvist, Alexander, and Matthew P. Richardson, The Cash Flow, Return and Risk
Characteristics of Private Equity, Unpublished New York University Working Paper.
2003.

Loughran, Tim, and Jay Ritter, The New Issues Puzzle, Journal of Finance 50. 1995. 23-
51.

Pagano, Marco, Fabio Panetta, and Luigi Zingales. Why Do Companies Go Public? An
Empirical Analysis, Journal of Finance 53. 1998. 27-64.

Rajan, Raghuram G., Henri Servaes, and Luigi Zingales, The Cost of Diversity:
Diversification Discount and Inefficient Investment, Journal of Finance 55. 2000. 35-80.




                                          22
Ritter, Jay R., and Ivo Welch, A Review of IPO Activity, Pricing, and Allocations,
Journal of Finance 57. 2002. 1795-1828.

Scharfstein, David, The Dark Side of Internal Capital Markets II: Evidence from
Diversified Conglomerates, National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper
6352. 1998.

Scharfstein, David S. and Jeremy C. Stein, The Dark Side of Internal Capital Markets:
Divisional Rent-Seeking and Inefficient Investment, Journal of Finance 55. 2000. 2537-
64.

Sorensen, Morten, How Smart is Smart Money? An Empirical Two-Sided Matching
Model of Venture Capital, Unpublished University of Chicago Working Paper. 2004.




                                         23
Figure 1: IPOs and Number of Investments for Selected Industries
The graphs show years on the x-axis, the number of venture investments in the industry as a line calibrated on the left y-axis and the number of IPOs as bars
calibrated on the right y-axis.
                              IPOs and Number of Investments -- Internet and                                                             IPOs and Number of Investments -- Biotech and
                                              Computers                                                                                                  Healthcare

                           9000                                                                200                              1400                                                                          80
                           8000                                                                180
                                                                                                                                1200                                                                          70
                           7000                                                                160
                                                                                                                                                                                                              60
                                                                                               140                              1000
            Investments




                           6000




                                                                                                                 Investments
                                                                                               120                                                                                                            50
                           5000                                                                                                        800




                                                                                                     IPOs




                                                                                                                                                                                                                   IPOs
                                                                                               100                                                                                                            40
                           4000                                                                                                        600
                                                                                               80
                           3000                                                                                                                                                                               30
                                                                                               60                                      400
                           2000                                                                40
                                                                                                                                                                                                              20
                           1000                                                                20                                      200                                                                    10
                             0                                                                 0                                        0                                                                     0
                                  1975   1979    1983     1987    1991   1995    1999   2003                                                 1975   1979   1983      1987   1991   1995     1999    2003

                                                        Investments      IPOs                                                                                     Investments       IPOs


                                         IPOs and Number of Investments --                                                                     IPOs and Number of Investments -- Energy
                                                 Communications
                                                                                                                                       120                                                                30

                           3000                                                                70
                                                                                                                                       100                                                                25
                           2500                                                                60
                                                                                                                                        80                                                                20




                                                                                                                         Investments
                                                                                               50
                           2000
             Investments




                                                                                                                                                                                                               IPOs
                                                                                               40                                       60                                                                15
                                                                                                     IPOs




                           1500
                                                                                               30                                       40                                                                10
                           1000
                                                                                               20
                                                                                                                                        20                                                                5
                            500                                                                10
                                                                                                                                         0                                                                0
                              0                                                                0
                                                                                                                                             1975   1979   1983     1987    1991   1995    1999    2003
                                  1975    1979   1983      1987   1991   1995    1999   2003

                                                                                                                                                                  Investments      IPOs
                                                        Investments       IPOs




                                                                                                            24
Figure 2: Q and Number of Investments for Selected Industries
The graphs show years on the x-axis, the number of venture investments in the industry as a line calibrated on the left y-axis and Q as bars calibrated on the right
y-axis.
                                      Q and Number of Investments -- Internet and                                                                   Q and Number of Investments -- Biotech and
                                                     Computers                                                                                                    Healthcare

                         9000                                                                               7                           1400                                                                         4
                         8000                                                                               6                           1200                                                                         3.5
                         7000                                                                                                                                                                                        3
                                                                                                            5                           1000




                                                                                                                         Investments
           Investments




                         6000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2.5
                         5000                                                                               4                                 800
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Q
                                                                                                                Q
                         4000                                                                               3                                 600
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1.5
                         3000                                                                                                                 400
                                                                                                            2                                                                                                        1
                         2000
                                                                                                            1                                 200                                                                    0.5
                         1000
                                  0                                                                         0                                  0                                                                     0
                                      1975       1979    1983    1987    1991    1995     1999    2003                                              1975     1979   1983    1987    1991   1995    1999    2003


                                                                Investments        Q                                                                                       Investments       Q


                                      Q and Number of Investments -- Communications                                                                        Q and Number of Investments -- Energy

                                  3000                                                                5                                       120                                                                3
                                                                                                      4.5
                                  2500                                                                                                        100                                                                2.5
                                                                                                      4
                                                                                                      3.5
                                  2000                                                                                                         80                                                                2
                    Investments




                                                                                                                                Investments
                                                                                                      3
                                  1500                                                                2.5                                      60                                                                1.5
                                                                                                            Q




                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Q
                                                                                                      2
                                  1000                                                                                                         40                                                                1
                                                                                                      1.5
                                                                                                      1
                                   500                                                                                                         20                                                                0.5
                                                                                                      0.5
                                      0                                                               0                                         0                                                                0
                                          1975    1979   1983    1987   1991    1995    1999   2003                                                 1975     1979   1983    1987   1991    1995   1999    2003

                                                                Investments      Q                                                                                         Investments      Q




                                                                                                                    25
Table 1: Sample Characteristics
Panel A: Sample by Industry
Industry                                     Companies        Obs.
Internet and Computers                           4,679        14,785
Communications and Electronics                   2,555         8,525
Business / Industrial                            1,364         2,256
Consumer                                         2,285         4,156
Energy                                             573         1,137
Biotech and Healthcare                           2,745         8,780
Financial Services                                 606           952
Business Services                                  509           815
All other                                          824         1,153
   Total                                        16,354        42,559
 Panel B: Sample Characteristics
                              0.25         0.50        0.75            Mean        s.d.            N
 Sample
 General experience               11            20         45            36.26     44.99          71,874
 Industry Experience               0             1          4             4.08      8.85          71,874
 Specialization               0.00%         4.88%     16.67%           11.15%    15.56%           71,874
 Investors Only
 General experience               14           31        65.5            51.90     60.64          14,768
 Industry Experience               1            4          12             9.47     14.60          14,768
 Specialization               4.88%       15.38%      28.57%           19.75%    19.09%           14,768
 Sample
 1985
 General experience               10            18         38            30.16     33.40             347
 Industry Experience               0             1          3             3.20      6.42           3,111
 Specialization               0.00%         4.84%     16.67%           11.24%    15.49%            3,111
 1990
 General experience               11          21.5         46            37.35     42.28             478
 Industry Experience               0             1          5             4.31      8.55           4,254
 Specialization               0.00%         5.56%     17.24%           11.67%    15.61%            4,254
 1995
 General experience               11            23         56            44.12     53.97             498
 Industry Experience               0             1          5             5.13     10.59           4,398
 Specialization               0.00%         5.26%     17.65%           11.75%    16.12%            4,398

Panel A shows the distribution of the sample by industry which includes 16,354 unique companies
compiled by Venture Economics, and 42,559 unique VC- company pairs.

Panel B summarizes characteristics of venture capital funds in the sample including organization–years
only for years after which the organization has been observed making an investment, and ceasing in the
year after which the final investment is made. It excludes observations for years before VCs has made 5
investments and excludes VCs who invest in only one year of the sample. It also shows these
characteristics in three selected years. Statistics include investments from 1975 to 1998, inclusive, and
exclude the industry category all other. General experience is the number of investments made by the
venture capital fund previous to the date of its first investment in the portfolio company. Industry
Experience is the number of investments made by the venture capital fund previous to the date of its first
investment in the portfolio company in that industry. Specialization is Industry Experience divided by
General experience.
Table 2: Venture Capital Firm Characteristics
 Panel A: Characteristics by Quartile
                                               Number of                       Number of
                                              Investments                  Industry Investments            Specialization                 Success
                 N                          Mean          S.D                Mean        S.D              Mean         S.D                 Mean
 General experience Quartile
  1                     4,490                      0.46         0.61            0.16         0.41         35.13%        0.4655              50.9%
  2                     3,359                      3.07         1.63            1.08         1.31         34.84%        1.6337              52.0%
  3                     8,728                      9.76         5.08            3.24         3.45         33.00%        1.3107              52.1%
  4                   24,829                      82.35        78.14           20.26        24.04         25.82%        0.3729              55.7%
 Industry Experience Quartile
  1                     8,092                      6.84        15.08            0.00         0.00          0.00%        0.0000              49.9%
  2                     1,522                      6.21         7.99            1.10         0.30         42.57%        0.3444              52.8%
  3                     6,088                     13.53        15.59            2.27         1.43         34.85%        0.2973              54.0%
  4                   25,704                      77.62        79.21           20.23        23.48         32.37%        0.2224              57.0%
 Specialization Quartile
  1                     5,397                     10.27        17.51            0.00         0.02          0.00%        0.0009              49.9%
  2                     3,610                     64.81        67.56           10.75        14.05         15.92%        0.0737              56.1%
  3                   14,783                      83.81        87.37           21.03        27.21         25.11%        0.1315              56.7%
  4                   14,918                      41.15        55.09           12.46        15.98         45.61%        0.2948              53.3%

 Panel B: Correlations
 (N=38,708)                                         Industry
                                    Experience     Experience
 Experience                             1.0000
 Industry Experience                    0.7998            1.0000
 Specialization                        -0.1095            0.1994

Panel A shows the composition of the General Experience, Industry Experience and Specialization quartiles and mean values for selected characteristics of the
quartiles. Data are on a VC-company pair observation level. Quartiles were composed at the beginning of each calendar year based on the values at the end of
the previous year for each venture capital organization with investments in that year. Industry experience and specialization quartiles were calculated by
industry, so that industries with fewer investments would not be disproportionately sampled in lower quartiles. The first quartile represents the least experienced
or specialized, while the fourth is the highest.
Panel B details the simple correlations between General Experience, Industry Experience and Specialization.
Table 3: Impact of Public Market Signals

                                                                 Detrended
                             '
                             (1)            '
                                            (2)            (3)               (4)

 Lagged IPOs               0.2264                          0.3508
                           [4.25]    ***                   [6.08]    ***
 Lagged Q                                  0.4797                            0.3617
                                           [4.07]   ***                      [2.25]   **

 Industry Fixed Effects     Yes             Yes            No                No
 Year Fixed Effects         Yes             Yes            No                No
 Detrended                  No              No             Yes               Yes

 Adj. R-squared            92.37%          92.30%         16.27%             2.59%

 N                            192             192             192              192

The sample consists of yearly observations with one observation per industry year for 1975 to 1998,
inclusive, excluding the industry all other. The dependent variable is the is the log of the number of
investments made by all venture organizations in industry g in year t. Lagged IPOs is the log of the
number of initial public offerings (IPOs) of venture-backed companies in industry g in year t-1. Lagged Q
is the market to book ratio of companies in SIC codes mapping to the Venture Source industry g weighted
by the number of public venture backed IPOs in that SIC code and equal weighted by companies within
that SIC code in year t-1. Detrended regressions are the pooled regressions of the residuals of the
dependent and independent variables regressed against year, with a separate regression run for each
industry.
***, **, * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% level, respectively.
Table 4: Investment Patterns (No Interactions)
                               (1)               (2)               (3)               (4)               (5)               (6)               (7)
 PM Measure                   IPOs              IPOs              IPOs              IPOs              IPOs                Q                 Q

 PM Measure                   0.0389            0.0392            0.0308            0.0371            0.0373            0.0297            0.0452
                             [12.88]    ***    [12.97]    ***    [11.09]    ***    [12.77]    ***    [12.86]    ***     [3.81]    ***     [5.57]    ***
 Experience                                     0.1271                                                0.1288                              0.1288
                                               [16.53]    ***                                        [17.14]    ***                      [17.13]    ***
 Industry Experience                                              0.2029                                                0.2031
                                                                 [29.80]    ***                                        [29.81]    ***
 Non-Industry Experience                                         -0.0051                                               -0.0053
                                                                  [0.97]                                                [1.01]
 Specialization                                                                      0.8661              0.8792                             0.8799
                                                                                    [22.75] *** [23.47] ***                                [23.44] ***
  Fixed Effects:              Industry           Industry         Industry         Industry            Industry         Industry          Industry
                                Year               Year             Year             Year                Year             Year              Year
  Adj. R-squared               14.87%             20.62%           27.85%           20.23%              26.14%           27.78%            26.05%
  N                             71,874             71,874           71,874           71,874              71,874           71,874            71,874
 The sample consists of aggregated investments by industry by year for 1,775 VCs in 8 industries from 1975 to 1998, inclusive, as compiled by Venture
Economics. Observations includes VC organization–years only for years after which the organization has been observed making an investment, and cease in the
year after which the final investment is made. It excludes observations for years before VCs has made 5 investments and excludes VCs who invest in only one
year of the sample.
The dependent variable is the log of the number of investments made by venture organization f in industry g in year t. The public market measure (PM Measure)
is either Lagged IPOs, the log of the number of initial public offerings (IPOs) of venture-backed companies in industry g in year t-1 or Lagged Q, the market to
book ratio of companies in SIC codes mapping to the Venture Source industry g weighted by the number of public venture backed IPOs in that SIC code and
equal weighted by companies within that SIC code in year t-1. Experiencet is the difference between the log of the number of investments made by venture
capital organization f prior to year t and the average in year t of the number of investments made by all organizations prior to year t. Industry Experiencet is the
difference between the log of the number of investments made by venture capital organization f in industry g prior to year t and the average in year t of the
number of investments made by all organizations in industry g prior to year y. Non-Industry Experience is the difference between the log of the number of
investments made by venture capital organization f in industries other than g (~g) prior to year t and the average in year t of the number of investments made by
all organizations in all industries other than g (~g) prior to year t. Specializationt is the difference between the number of investments made by venture capital
organization f in industry g divided by the number of investments made by the venture organization in total prior to year t and the average of the same figure for
all organizations in year t. Industry and year fixed effects are including. T-statistics in italics below coefficient estimates are based on robust errors allowing for
data clustering by venture capital organization.
***, **, * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% level, respectively.
Table 5: Investment Patterns (Includes Interactions of IPOs)
                                  (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)              (5)              (6)              (7)              (8)
 PM Measure                      IPOs             IPOs             IPOs             IPOs             IPOs             IPOs               Q                Q

 PM Measure                     -0.0424           0.0112          -0.0062           0.0203           0.0380          -0.0433           0.0053           0.0134
                                 [6.56]    ***    [4.14]    ***    [0.88]           [3.87]    ***   [12.89]    ***    [7.07]    ***    [0.68]           [1.65]    *
 Experience                     -0.0275                                                                              -0.0259                           -0.0001
                                 [2.94]    ***                                                                        [2.93]    ***                     [0.01]
 Industry Experience                              0.0413                            0.0319                                             0.0338
                                                  [3.75]    ***                     [2.90]    ***                                      [3.12]    ***
 Non-Industry Experience                                           0.0023           0.0182                                             0.0066
                                                                   [0.25]           [2.49]    **                                       [1.13]
 Specialization                                                                                      0.3784           0.3911                            0.3890
                                                                                                     [4.02]    ***    [4.47]    ***                     [4.50]    ***
 Experience * PM Measure         0.0604                                                                               0.0603                            0.0502
                                [12.18]    ***                                                                       [12.93]    ***                    [14.01]    ***
 Industry Experience * PM
 Measure                                          0.0541                            0.0583                                             0.0574
                                                 [12.17]    ***                    [13.63]    ***                                     [13.54]    ***
 Non-Industry Experience * PM
 Measure                                                           0.0348          -0.0080                                            -0.0035
                                                                   [6.51]    ***    [2.15]    **                                       [1.24]
 Specialization * PM Measure                                                                         0.1529           0.1522    ***                     0.1526    ***
                                                                                                     [5.10]    ***    [5.63]                            [5.69]

 Controls:                      Industry         Industry         Industry         Industry         Industry         Industry         Industry         Industry
                                  Year             Year             Year             Year             Year             Year             Year             Year

 Adj. R-
 squared                        22.16%           28.74%           18.66%           28.76%           20.35%           27.77%           28.73%           27.65%

 N                               71,874           71,874           71,874           71,874           71,874           71,874           71,874           71,874
The sample consists of aggregated investments by industry by year for 1,775 VCs in 8 industries from 1975 to 1998, inclusive, as compiled by Venture
Economics. Observations includes VC organization–years only for years after which the organization has been observed making an investment, and cease in the
year after which the final investment is made. It excludes observations for years before VCs has made 5 investments and excludes VCs who invest in only one
year of the sample. The dependent variable is the log of the number of investments made by venture organization f in industry g in year t. The public market
measure (PM Measure) is either Lagged IPOs, the log of the number of initial public offerings (IPOs) of venture-backed companies in industry g in year t-1 or
Lagged Q, the market to book ratio of companies in SIC codes mapping to the Venture Source industry g weighted by the number of public venture backed IPOs
in that SIC code and equal weighted by companies within that SIC code in year t-1. Experience is the difference between the log of the number of investments
made by venture capital organization f prior to year t and the average in year t of the number of investments made by all organizations prior to year t. Industry
Experience is the difference between the log of the number of investments made by venture capital organization f in industry g prior to year t and the average in
year t of the number of investments made by all organizations in industry g prior to year t. Non Industry Experience is the difference between the log of the
number of investments made by venture capital organization f in industries other than g (~g) prior to year t and the average in year t of the number of investments
made by all organizations in all industries other than g (~g) prior to year t. Specialization is the difference between the number of investments made by venture
capital organization f in industry g divided by the number of investments made by the venture organization in total prior to year t and the average of the same
figure for all organizations in year t. Controls include industry and year fixed effects. T-statistics in italics below coefficient estimates are based on robust
standard errors allowing for data clustering by venture capital organization.
***, **, * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% level, respectively.
Table 6: Investment Patterns for Organizations That Made Investments In that Industry In that Year

                                 (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)              (5)              (6)              (7)              (8)
 PM Measure                     IPOs             IPOs             IPOs             IPOs             IPOs             IPOs               Q                Q

 PM Measure                     0.0226           0.0446           0.0651           0.0571           0.0785           0.0062           0.1005           0.1026
                                [1.91]    *      [6.37]    ***    [5.42]    ***    [5.71]    ***   [10.85]    ***    [0.56]           [8.10]    ***    [7.66]    ***
 Experience                     0.0150                                                                               0.0126                            0.0241
                                [0.85]                                                                               [0.72]                            [1.74]    *
 Industry Experience                             0.0603                            0.0519                                             0.0600
                                                 [3.23]    ***                     [3.01]    ***                                      [3.56]    ***
 Non-Industry Experience                                          0.0379           0.0181                                            -0.0053
                                                                  [2.15]    **     [1.24]                                             [0.43]
 Specialization                                                                                     0.4627           0.4810                            0.5232
                                                                                                    [3.76]    ***    [4.20]    ***                     [4.52]    ***
 Experience * PM Measure        0.0357                                                                               0.0409                            0.0371
                                [5.54]    ***                                                                        [6.50]    ***                     [8.08]    ***
 Industry Experience * PM
 Measure                                         0.0342                            0.0404                                             0.0374
                                                 [5.61]    ***                     [7.17]    ***                                      [6.83]    ***
 Non-Industry Experience *
 PM Measure                                                       0.0138          -0.0114                                            -0.0035
                                                                  [2.14]    **     [2.33]    **                                       [0.90]
 Specialization * PM Measure                                                                        0.0222           0.0489                            0.0354
                                                                                                    [0.60]           [1.43]                            [1.04]

 Fixed Effects:                Industry         Industry         Industry         Industry         Industry         Industry         Industry         Industry
                                 Year             Year             Year             Year             Year             Year             Year             Year

 Adj. R-
 squared                       20.63%           26.57%           16.95%           26.71%           17.14%           25.75%           26.81%           26.03%

 N                              14,768           14,768           14,768           14,768           14,768           14,768           14,768           14,768
The sample consists of aggregated investments by industry by year for 1,775 VCs in 8 industries from 1975 to 1998, inclusive, as compiled by Venture
Economics. Observations include VC organization–years only for years in which the organization has made an investment in that industry. It excludes
observations for years before VCs has made 5 investments and excludes VCs who invest in only one year of the sample. The dependent variable is the log of the
number of investments made by venture organization f in industry g in year t. The public market measure (PM Measure) is either Lagged IPOs, the log of the
number of initial public offerings (IPOs) of venture-backed companies in industry g in year t-1 or Lagged Q, the market to book ratio of companies in SIC codes
mapping to the Venture Source industry g weighted by the number of public venture backed IPOs in that SIC code and equal weighted by companies within that
SIC code in year t-1. Experience is the difference between the log of the number of investments made by venture capital organization f prior to year t and the
average in year t of the number of investments made by all organizations prior to year t. Industry Experience is the difference between the log of the number of
investments made by venture capital organization f in industry g prior to year t and the average in year t of the number of investments made by all organizations
in industry g prior to year t. Non Industry Experience is the difference between the log of the number of investments made by venture capital organization f in
industries other than g (~g) prior to year t and the average in year t of the number of investments made by all organizations in all industries other than g (~g)
prior to year t. Specialization is the difference between the number of investments made by venture capital organization f in industry g divided by the number of
investments made by the venture organization in total prior to year t and the average of the same figure for all organizations in year t. Controls include industry
and year fixed effects. T-statistics in italics below coefficient estimates are based on robust standard errors allowing for data clustering by venture capital
organization.
***, **, * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% level, respectively.
Table 7: Success
                        (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)              (5)              (6)             (7)              (8)              (9)
 PM Measure            IPOs            IPOs            IPOs            IPOs             IPOs             IPOs            IPOs               Q                Q

 PM Measure           -0.0054         -0.0142         -0.0143         -0.0158          -0.0159          -0.0153         -0.0160          -0.0260          -0.0239
                       [0.54]          [1.22]          [1.23]          [1.36]           [1.36]           [1.30]          [1.35]           [1.32]           [1.20]
 Experience                                            0.0145                                                            0.0185                            0.0186
                                                       [8.02]   ***                                                      [8.62]    ***                     [8.63]    ***
 Industry
 Experience                                                            0.0210           0.0215                                            0.0215
                                                                       [8.84]    ***    [5.73]    ***                                     [5.72]    ***
 Non-Industry
 Experience                                                                            -0.0005
                                                                                        [0.20]
 Specialization                                                                                          0.0273          0.0502                            0.0500
                                                                                                         [2.22]    **    [3.92]    ***                     [3.90]    ***

 Fixed Effects:      Industry        Industry        Industry         Industry         Industry         Industry        Industry         Industry         Industry
                      Stage           Stage           Stage            Stage            Stage            Stage           Stage            Stage            Stage
                      Round           Round           Round            Round            Round            Round           Round            Round            Round
                       Year            Year            Year             Year             Year             Year            Year             Year             Year

 Adj. R-
 squared               7.47%           9.39%           9.57%           9.63%             9.63%           9.00%           9.53%            9.63%            9.53%

 N                    15,518           41,406          41,406          41,406           41,406           38,708          38,708           41,406           38,708


The sample consists of outcomes for investments made by 2,988 VCs in 15,518 companies from 1975 to 1998, inclusive, as compiled by Venture Economics.
The first specification includes only one observation per company. The remainder of the specifications includes one observation per unique VC-company pair.
The dependent variable is Success a binary variable =1 if the portfolio company was acquired, merged, in registration for an IPO (as of the date we collected the
Venture Economics data), or went public, and =0 otherwise. The dependent variable is the log of the number of investments made by venture organization f in
industry g in year t. The public market measure (PM Measure) is either Lagged IPOs, the log of the number of initial public offerings (IPOs) of venture-backed
companies in industry g in year t-1 or Lagged Q, the market to book ratio of companies in SIC codes mapping to the Venture Source industry g weighted by the
number of public venture backed IPOs in that SIC code and equal weighted by companies within that SIC code in year t-1. Experience is the difference between
the log of the number of investments made by venture capital organization f prior to year t and the average in year t of the number of investments made by all
organizations prior to year t. Industry Experience is the difference between the log of the number of investments made by venture capital organization f in
industry g prior to year t and the average in year t of the number of investments made by all organizations in industry g prior to year t. Non Industry Experience
is the difference between the log of the number of investments made by venture capital organization f in industries other than g (~g) prior to year t and the
average in year t of the number of investments made by all organizations in all industries other than g (~g) prior to year t. Specialization is the difference
between the number of investments made by venture capital organization f in industry g divided by the number of investments made by the venture organization
in total prior to year t and the average of the same figure for all organizations in year t. Controls include industry and year fixed effects. T-statistics in italics
below coefficient estimates are based on robust standard errors allowing for data clustering by venture capital organization.
***, **, * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% level, respectively.
Table 8: Success (Includes Interactions)

                                      (1)        (2)        (3)             (4)        (5)              (6)             (7)
 PM Measure                          IPOs       IPOs       IPOs            IPOs       IPOs               Q               Q

 PM Measure                         -0.0174    -0.0197    -0.0187         -0.0168    -0.0270          -0.0311         -0.0298
                                     [1.46]     [1.64]     [1.55]          [1.41]     [2.16]    **     [1.56]          [1.48]
 Experience                          0.0064                                          -0.0004                           0.0062
                                     [1.03]                                           [0.05]                           [0.83]
 Industry Experience                            0.0060    -0.0085                                     -0.0086
                                                [0.59]     [0.61]                                      [0.62]
 Non-Industry Experience                                   0.0150                                      0.0172
                                                           [1.76]    *                                 [2.00]    **
 Specialization                                                           -0.0352    -0.0418                          -0.0244
                                                                           [0.61]     [0.71]                           [0.42]
 Experience * PM Measure             0.0026                                           0.0059                           0.0039
                                     [1.36]                                           [2.62]    ***                    [1.74]    *
 Industry Experience * PM Measure               0.0045     0.0094                                      0.0095
                                                [1.52]     [2.27]    **                                [2.33]    **
 Non-Industry Experience * PM
 Measure                                                  -0.0052                                     -0.0059
                                                           [1.95]    *                                 [2.20]    **
 Specialization * PM Measure                                               0.0187     0.0279                           0.0224
                                                                           [1.14]     [1.65]    *                      [1.33]

 Controls:                          Industry   Industry   Industry        Industry   Industry         Industry        Industry
                                    Stage      Stage      Stage           Stage      Stage            Stage           Stage
                                    Round      Round      Round           Round      Round            Round           Round
                                    Year       Year       Year            Year       Year             Year            Year

 Adj. R-squared                      9.58%      9.64%      9.65%           9.32%      9.56%            9.65%           9.54%

 N                                   41,406     41,406     41,406          38,708     38,708           41,406          38,708
The sample consists of outcomes for investments made by 2,988 VCs in 15,518 companies from 1975 to 1998, inclusive, as compiled by Venture Economics.
The first specification includes only one observation per company. The remainder of the specifications includes one observation per unique VC-company pair.
The dependent variable is Success a binary variable =1 if the portfolio company was acquired, merged, in registration for an IPO (as of the date we collected the
Venture Economics data), or went public, and =0 otherwise. The public market measure (PM Measure) is either Lagged IPOs, the log of the number of initial
public offerings (IPOs) of venture-backed companies in industry g in year t-1 or Lagged Q, the market to book ratio of companies in SIC codes mapping to the
Venture Source industry g weighted by the number of public venture backed IPOs in that SIC code and equal weighted by companies within that SIC code in
year t-1. Experience is the difference between the log of the number of investments made by venture capital organization f prior to year t and the average in year t
of the number of investments made by all organizations prior to year t. Industry Experience is the difference between the log of the number of investments made
by venture capital organization f in industry g prior to year t and the average in year t of the number of investments made by all organizations in industry g prior
to year t. Non Industry Experience is the difference between the log of the number of investments made by venture capital organization f in industries other than
g (~g) prior to year t and the average in year t of the number of investments made by all organizations in all industries other than g (~g) prior to year t.
Specialization is the difference between the number of investments made by venture capital organization f in industry g divided by the number of investments
made by the venture organization in total prior to year t and the average of the same figure for all organizations in year t. Controls include industry and year
fixed effects. T-statistics in italics below coefficient estimates are based on robust standard errors allowing for data clustering by venture capital organization.
***, **, * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% level, respectively.
                 Table 9: Robustness Checks

                                                  (1)             (2)            (3)               (4)              (5)              (6)
Ever Invested in That Industry In the Past
N                                               46,650
Experience * Lagged IPOs                        0.0568                                                                              0.0676
                                                [9.14]    ***                                                                      [11.32]   ***
Industry Experience * Lagged IPOs                                0.0992                           0.1110
                                                                [14.52]   ***                    [16.92]    ***
Non-Industry Experience * Lagged IPOs                                           0.0308           -0.0196
                                                                                [4.94]   ***      [4.19]    ***
Specialization * Lagged IPOs                                                                                       0.3698           0.3652
                                                                                                                  [11.04]   ***    [11.07]   ***
Ever Invested in That Industry In the Sample
N                                            53,594
Experience * Lagged IPOs                     0.0563                                                                                 0.0596
                                             [9.73]       ***                                                                      [10.86]   ***
Industry Experience * Lagged IPOs                                0.0618                           0.0653
                                                                [11.31]   ***                    [12.49]
Non-Industry Experience * Lagged IPOs                                           0.0326           -0.0072
                                                                                [5.49]   ***      [1.65]    *
Specialization * Lagged IPOs                                                                                      0.2206           0.2026
                                                                                                                  [7.36]    ***    [7.09]    ***

                 The sample varies to include only venture capital firms who have ever invested in the industry in the past or
                 have ever made an investment in that industry in the sample (past or future). It excludes observations for
                 years before VCs has made 5 investments and excludes VCs who invest in only one year of the sample.
                 The dependent variable is the log of the number of investments made by venture organization f in industry
                 g in year t. The public market measure (PM Measure) is Lagged IPOs, the log of the number of initial
                 public offerings (IPOs) of venture-backed companies in industry g in year t-1. Experience is the difference
                 between the log of the number of investments made by venture capital organization f prior to year t and the
                 average in year t of the number of investments made by all organizations prior to year t. Industry
                 Experience is the difference between the log of the number of investments made by venture capital
                 organization f in industry g prior to year t and the average in year t of the number of investments made by
                 all organizations in industry g prior to year t. Non Industry Experience is the difference between the log of
                 the number of investments made by venture capital organization f in industries other than g (~g) prior to
                 year t and the average in year t of the number of investments made by all organizations in all industries
                 other than g (~g) prior to year t. Specialization is the difference between the number of investments made
                 by venture capital organization f in industry g divided by the number of investments made by the venture
                 organization in total prior to year t and the average of the same figure for all organizations in year t.
                 Controls include industry and year fixed effects. T-statistics in italics below coefficient estimates are based
                 on robust standard errors allowing for data clustering by venture capital organization.
                 ***, **, * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% level, respectively.
