NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

GROWTH OR GLAMOUR?
FUNDAMENTALS AND SYSTEMATIC RISK IN STOCK RETURNS
John Y. Campbell
Christopher Polk
Tuomo Vuolteenaho
Working Paper 11389
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11389
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2005

This material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant No. 0214061
to Campbell. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by John Y. Campbell, Christopher Polk, and Tuomo Vuolteenaho. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Growth or Glamour? Fundamentals and Systematic Risk in Stock Returns
John Y. Campbell, Christopher Polk, and Tuomo Vuolteenaho
NBER Working Paper No. 11389
June 2005
JEL No. G12, G14, N22
ABSTRACT
The cash flows of growth stocks are particularly sensitive to temporary movements in aggregate
stock prices (driven by movements in the equity risk premium), while the cash flows of value stocks
are particularly sensitive to permanent movements in aggregate stock prices (driven by market-wide
shocks to cash flows.) Thus the high betas of growth stocks with the market's discount-rate shocks,
and of value stocks with the market's cash-flow shocks, are determined by the cash-flow
fundamentals of growth and value companies. Growth stocks are not merely "glamour stocks" whose
systematic risks are purely driven by investor sentiment. More generally, accounting measures of
firm-level risk have predictive power for firms' betas with market-wide cash flows, and this
predictive power arises from the behavior of firms' cash flows. The systematic risks of stocks with
similar accounting characteristics are primarily driven by the systematic risks of their fundamentals.
John Y. Campbell
Department of Economics
Littauer Center 213
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
john_campbell@harvard.edu
Christopher Polk
Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
c-polk@kellogg.northwestern.edu

Tuomo Vuolteenaho
Harvard University
Department of Economics
Littauer Center
Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER
tvuolteenaho@arrowstreetcapital.com

1

Introduction

Why do stock prices move together? If stocks are priced by discounting their cash
ßows at a rate which is constant over time, although possibly varying across stocks,
then movements in stock prices are driven by news about cash ßows. In this case
common variation in prices must be attributable to common variation in cash ßows.
If discount rates vary over time, however, then groups of stocks can move together
because of common shocks to discount rates rather than fundamentals. For example,
a change in the market discount rate will have a particularly large eﬀect on the
prices of stocks whose cash ßows occur in the distant future (Cornell 1999, Dechow,
Sloan, and Soliman 2004). In the extreme, irrational investor sentiment can cause
common variation in stock prices that is entirely unrelated to the characteristics of
cash ßows; Barberis, Shleifer, and Wurgler (2005) and Greenwood (2005) suggest that
this explains the common movement of stocks that are included in the S&P 500 and
Nikkei indexes.
Common variation in stock prices is particularly important when it aﬀects the measures of systematic risk that rational investors use to evaluate stocks. In the Capital
Asset Pricing Model (CAPM), the risk of each stock is measured by its beta with the
market portfolio, and it is natural to ask whether betas are determined by shocks to
cash ßows or discount rates (Campbell and Mei 1993). Recently, Campbell (1993,
1996) and Campbell and Vuolteenaho (2004) have proposed a version of Merton’s
(1973) Intertemporal Capital Asset Pricing Model (ICAPM), in which investors care
more about permanent cash-ßow-driven movements than about temporary discountrate-driven movements in the aggregate stock market. In their two-beta model, the
required return on a stock is determined not by its overall beta with the market, but
by its “bad beta” with market cash-ßow shocks that earns a high premium and its
“good beta” with market discount rates that earns a low premium. Campbell and
Vuolteenaho (2004) Þnd empirically that value stocks have relatively high bad betas
while growth stocks have relatively high good betas. The high average return on
value stocks, which is anomalous in the CAPM (Ball 1978, Basu 1977, 1983, Rosenberg, Reid, and Lanstein 1985, Fama and French 1992), is predicted by the two-beta
model.
This paper asks whether stocks’ bad betas and good betas are determined by
the characteristics of their cash ßows, or whether instead they arise from the discount
rates, possibly driven by sentiment, that investors apply to those cash ßows. We Þrst

1

study the common variation of growth and value stocks, and then we examine other
common movements in stock returns that can be predicted using Þrm-level equity
market and accounting data.
At least since the inßuential work of Fama and French (1993), it has been understood that value stocks and growth stocks tend to move together, so that an investor
who holds them (and/or shorts growth stocks) takes on a common source of risk. An
open question is what drives these common movements. One view is that value and
growth stocks are exposed to diﬀerent cash-ßow risks. Fama and French (1996), for
example, argue that value stocks are companies that are in Þnancial distress and vulnerable to bankruptcy. Campbell and Vuolteenaho (2004) suggest that growth stocks
might have speculative investment opportunities that will be proÞtable only if equity
Þnancing is available on suﬃciently good terms; thus they are equity-dependent companies of the sort modeled by Baker, Stein, and Wurgler (2003). According to this
fundamentals view, growth stocks move together with other growth stocks and value
stocks with other value stocks because of the fundamental characteristics of their cash
ßows, as would be implied by a simple model of stock valuation in which discount
rates are constant.
The empirical literature contains some tantalizing evidence in support of the fundamentals view. Fama and French (1995) document common variation in the profitability of value and growth stocks, Cohen, Polk, and Vuolteenaho (2004) Þnd that
value stocks’ proÞtability covaries more strongly with market-wide proÞtability than
does growth stocks’ proÞtability, and Liew and Vassalou (2000) show that valueminus-growth returns covary with future macroeconomic fundamentals. Bansal,
Dittmar, and Lundblad (2003, 2005) and Hansen, Heaton, and Li (2004) use econometric methods similar to those in this paper to show that value stocks’ cash ßows
have a higher long-run sensitivity to aggregate consumption growth than do growth
stocks’ cash ßows.
An alternative view is that the stock market simply prices value and growth
stocks diﬀerently at diﬀerent times. Cornell (1999), for example, argues that growth
stock proÞts accrue further in the future than value stock proÞts, so growth stocks
are longer-duration assets whose values are more sensitive to changes in the market
discount rate. Barberis and Shleifer (2003) and Barberis, Shleifer, and Wurgler (2005)
argue that value stocks lack common fundamentals but are merely those stocks that
are currently out of favor with investors, while growth stocks are merely “glamour
stocks” that are currently favored by investors. According to this view, changes in
2

the market’s mood or sentiment create correlated movements in the pricing of stocks
that investors favor or disfavor.
This paper sets up direct tests of the fundamentals view against the sentiment
view, using several alternative approaches. In a Þrst test, we estimate a VAR in
the manner of Campbell (1991), Campbell and Mei (1993), and Vuolteenaho (2002)
to break Þrm-level stock returns into components driven by cash-ßow shocks and
discount-rate shocks. We aggregate the estimated Þrm-level shocks for those stocks
that are included in value and growth portfolios, and regress portfolio-level cash-ßow
and discount-rate news on the market’s cash-ßow and discount-rate news to Þnd out
whether fundamentals or sentiment drive the systematic risks of value and growth
stocks. According to our results, the bad beta of value stocks and the good beta of
growth stocks are both determined primarily by their cash-ßow characteristics.
In a second test, we regress the accounting proÞtability of value and growth portfolios, measured by portfolio-level return on equity (ROE), on the two components
of the market return estimated by Campbell and Vuolteenaho (2004), lengthening
the horizon to emphasize longer-term trends rather than short-term ßuctuations in
proÞtability. We Þnd that the ROE of value stocks is more sensitive to the market’s
cash-ßow news than is the ROE of growth stocks, consistent with the Þndings of
Cohen, Polk, and Vuolteenaho. More importantly, we are able to refute the puresentiment story by showing that the ROE of growth stocks is more sensitive to the
market’s discount-rate news than is the ROE of value stocks. We obtain similar
results when we replace the VAR-based news terms with simple proxies at the market
level also.
In a third test, we run cross-sectional regressions of realized Þrm-level betas onto
Þrms’ book-market ratios. We Þnd that a Þrm’s book-market ratio predicts its bad
beta positively and its good beta negatively, consistent with the results of Campbell
and Vuolteenaho (2004). When we decompose each Þrm’s bad and good beta into
components driven by the Þrm’s cash-ßow news and discount-rate news, we Þnd that
the book-market ratio primarily predicts the cash ßow component of the bad beta,
not the discount-rate component.
All three approaches tell us that the systematic risks of value and growth stocks
are determined by the properties of their cash ßows. These results have important
implications for our understanding of the value-growth eﬀect. While formal models
are notably lacking in this area, any structural model of the value-growth eﬀect must
relate to the underlying cash-ßow risks of value and growth companies. Growth
3

stocks are not merely glamour stocks whose comovement is driven purely by correlated
sentiment. Our results show that there’s more to growth than just “glamour.”
While Campbell and Vuolteenaho (2004) concentrate on value and growth portfolios, their two-beta model has broader application. In the second part of this paper
we use cross-sectional stock-level regressions to identify characteristics of common
stocks that predict their bad and good betas. We look at market-based historical
risk measures, the lagged beta and volatility of stock returns; at accounting-based
historical risk measures, the lagged beta and volatility of a Þrm’s return on assets
(ROA); and at accounting-based measures of a Þrm’s Þnancial status, including its
ROA, debt-asset ratio, and capital investment-asset ratio.
Accounting measures of stock-level risk are not emphasized in contemporary academic research, but were sometimes used to evaluate business risk and estimate the
cost of capital for regulated industries in the period before the development of the
CAPM (e.g. Bickley 1959). Recently, Morningstar Inc. has used accounting data to
calculate costs of capital for individual stocks in the Morningstar stock rating system.
Morningstar explicitly rejects the use of the CAPM and argues that accounting data
may reveal information about long-run risk, very much in the spirit of Campbell and
Vuolteenaho’s “bad beta”:
In deciding the rate to discount future cash ßows, we ignore stockprice volatility (which drives most estimates of beta) because we welcome
volatility if it oﬀers opportunities to buy a stock at a discount to its fair
value. Instead, we focus on the fundamental risks facing a company’s
business. Ideally, we’d like our discount rates to reßect the risk of permanent capital loss to the investor. When assigning a cost of equity to
a stock, our analysts score a company in the following areas: Financial
leverage - the lower the debt the better. Cyclicality - the less cyclical the
Þrm, the better. Size - we penalize very small Þrms. Free cash ßows the higher as a percentage of sales and the more sustainable, the better.
(Morningstar 2004.)
Even in the CAPM, accounting data may be relevant if they help one predict the
future market beta of a stock. This point has been emphasized by Myers and Turnbull
(1977) among others, and has inßuenced the development of industry risk models.
Our cross-sectional regressions show that accounting data do predict market betas.
4

Importantly, however, some accounting variables have disproportionate predictive
power for bad betas, while lagged market betas and volatilities of stock returns have
disproportionate predictive power for good betas. This result implies that accounting
data are more important determinants of a Þrm’s systematic risk and cost of capital
in the two-beta model than in the CAPM.
Finally, we use the cross-sectional regression approach in combination with our
Þrm-level VAR methodology to predict the components of a Þrm’s bad and good beta
that are determined by its cash ßows and its discount rates. We Þnd that stocklevel characteristics generally predict the cash-ßow components of a Þrm’s bad and
good beta, not the discount-rate components. The systematic risks of stocks with
similar accounting characteristics are primarily driven by the systematic risks of their
fundamentals, an important extension of our Þnding for growth and value stocks.
Both our portfolio analysis and our Þrm-level analysis are driven by a desire to understand the risk characteristics of publicly traded companies. It is important to note
that those risks cannot be measured from the risk characteristics of dividend streams
to dynamic trading strategies. The dividends paid by a dynamically rebalanced portfolio strategy may vary because the dividends of the Þrms in the portfolio change, but
they may also vary if the stocks sold have systematically diﬀerent dividend yields than
stocks bought at the rebalance. For example, consider a dynamic strategy that buys
non-dividend-paying stocks in recessions and dividend-paying stocks in booms. The
dividends earned by this dynamic trading strategy will have a strong business-cycle
component even if the dividends of all underlying companies do not.
Therefore, any sensible attempt to measure the risks of Þrms’ cash ßows at a
portfolio level must use a “three-dimensional” data set, in which portfolios are formed
each year and then those portfolios are followed into the future for a number of
years without rebalancing. Such three-dimensional data sets have been used by
Fama and French (1995) and Cohen, Polk, and Vuolteenaho (2003, 2004). We follow
this methodology, and perform all our tests either at the Þrm level or using threedimensional data sets that follow the cash ßows of a particular portfolio through time
without rebalancing.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 motivates our
empirical tests. Section 3 describes our aggregate and Þrm-level data, and section 4
presents aggregate and Þrm-level VAR estimates. Section 5 presents our empirical
results on growth and value portfolios, section 6 discusses cross-sectional regressions
using Þrm-level characteristics to predict good and bad betas, and section 7 concludes.
5

2
2.1

A Decomposition of Stock Returns
Two components of the stock return

The price of any asset can be written as a sum of its expected future cash ßows,
discounted to the present using a set of discount rates. The price of the asset changes
when expected cash ßows change, or when discount rates change. This holds true for
any expectations about cash ßows, whether or not those expectations are rational, but
Þnancial economists are particularly interested in rationally expected cash ßows and
the associated discount rates. Even if some investors have irrational expectations,
there should be other investors with rational expectations, and it is important to
understand asset price behavior from the perspective of these investors.
There are at least two reasons why it is interesting to distinguish between asset
price movements driven by rationally expected cash ßows, and movements driven
by discount rates. First, investor sentiment can directly aﬀect discount rates, but
cannot directly aﬀect cash ßows. Price movements that are associated with changing
rational forecasts of cash ßows may ultimately be driven by investor sentiment, but
the mechanism must be an indirect one, for example working through the availability
of new Þnancing for Þrms’ investment projects. (See Subrahmanyam and Titman,
2001, for an example of a model that incorporates such indirect eﬀects.) Thus by
distinguishing cash-ßow and discount-rate movements we can shrink the set of possible
explanations for asset price ßuctuations.
Second, conservative long-term investors should view returns due to changes in
discount rates diﬀerently from those due to changes in expected cash ßows. A loss of
current wealth caused by an increase in the discount rate is partially compensated by
improved future investment opportunities, while a loss of wealth caused by a reduction
in expected cash ßows has no such compensation. The diﬀerence is easiest to see
if one considers a portfolio of corporate bonds. The portfolio may lose value today
because interest rates increase, or because some of the bonds default. A short-horizon
investor who must sell the portfolio today cares only about current value, but a longhorizon investor loses more from default than from high interest rates. Campbell
(1993, 1996) and Campbell and Vuolteenaho (2004) use this insight to develop an
empirical implementation of Merton’s (1973) ICAPM, in which investors with risk
aversion greater than one demand a greater reward for bearing cash-ßow risk than
for bearing discount-rate risk.
6

Campbell and Shiller (1988a) provide a convenient framework for analyzing cashßow and discount-rate shocks. They develop a loglinear approximate present-value
relation that allows for time-varying discount rates. Linearity is achieved by approximating the deÞnition of log return on a dividend-paying asset, rt+1 ≡ log(Pt+1 +
Dt+1 )−log(Pt ), around the mean log dividend-price ratio, (dt − pt ), using a Þrst-order
Taylor expansion. Above, P denotes price, D dividend, and lower-case letters log
transforms. The resulting approximation is rt+1 ≈ k + ρpt+1 ±¡
+ (1 − ρ)dt+1 − pt ,where
¢
ρ and k are parameters of linearization deÞned by ρ ≡ 1 1 + exp(dt − pt ) and
k ≡ − log(ρ) − (1 − ρ) log(1/ρ − 1). When the dividend-price ratio is constant, then
ρ = P/(P + D), the ratio of the ex-dividend to the cum-dividend stock price. The
approximation here replaces the log sum of price and dividend with a weighted average of log price and log dividend, where the weights are determined by the average
relative magnitudes of these two variables.
Solving forward iteratively, imposing the “no-inÞnite-bubbles” terminal condition
that limj→∞ ρj (dt+j − pt+j ) = 0, taking expectations, and subtracting the current
dividend, one gets
∞
X
k
pt − dt =
+ Et
ρj [∆dt+1+j − rt+1+j ] ,
1−ρ
j=0

(1)

where ∆d denotes log dividend growth. This equation says that the log price-dividend
ratio is high when dividends are expected to grow rapidly, or when stock returns are
expected to be low. The equation should be thought of as an accounting identity
rather than a behavioral model; it has been obtained merely by approximating an
identity, solving forward subject to a terminal condition, and taking expectations.
Intuitively, if the stock price is high today, then from the deÞnition of the return
and the terminal condition that the dividend-price ratio is non-explosive, there must
either be high dividends or low stock returns in the future. Investors must then expect
some combination of high dividends and low stock returns if their expectations are
to be consistent with the observed price.
Campbell (1991) extends the loglinear present-value approach to obtain a decomposition of returns. Substituting (1) into the approximate return equation gives
rt+1 − Et rt+1 = (Et+1 − Et )

∞
X
j=0

ρj ∆dt+1+j − (Et+1 − Et )

= NCF,t+1 − NDR,t+1 ,
7

∞
X
j=1

ρj rt+1+j

(2)

where NCF denotes news about future cash ßows (i.e., dividends or consumption), and
NDR denotes news about future discount rates (i.e., expected returns). This equation
says that unexpected stock returns must be associated with changes in expectations
of future cash ßows or discount rates. An increase in expected future cash ßows is
associated with a capital gain today, while an increase in discount rates is associated
with a capital loss today. The reason is that with a given dividend stream, higher
future returns can only be generated by future price appreciation from a lower current
price.
If the decomposition is applied to the returns on the investor’s portfolio, these
return components can also be interpreted as permanent and transitory shocks to the
investor’s wealth. Returns generated by cash-ßow news are never reversed subsequently, whereas returns generated by discount-rate news are oﬀset by lower returns
in the future. From this perspective it should not be surprising that conservative
long-term investors are more averse to cash-ßow risk than to discount-rate risk.

2.2

Measuring the components of returns

An important issue is how to measure the shocks to cash ßows and to discount rates.
One approach, introduced by Campbell (1991), is to estimate the cash-ßow-news and
discount-rate-news series using a vector autoregressive (VAR)
This VAR
P∞model.
j
methodology Þrst estimates the terms Et rt+1 and (Et+1 − Et ) j=1 ρ rt+1+j and then
uses realization of rt+1 and equation (2) to back out the cash-ßow news. This practice
has an important advantage — one does not necessarily have to understand the shortrun dynamics of dividends. Understanding the dynamics of expected returns is
enough.
When extracting the news terms in our empirical tests, we assume that the data
are generated by a Þrst-order VAR model
zt+1 = a + Γzt + ut+1 ,

(3)

where zt+1 is a m-by-1 state vector with rt+1 as its Þrst element, a and Γ are m-by-1
vector and m-by-m matrix of constant parameters, and ut+1 an i.i.d. m-by-1 vector
of shocks. Of course, this formulation also allows for higher-order VAR models via a
simple redeÞnition of the state vector to include lagged values.
Provided that the process in equation (3) generates the data, t + 1 cash-ßow and
8

discount-rate news are linear functions of the t + 1 shock vector:
NDR,t+1 = e10 λut+1 ,
NCF,t+1 = (e10 + e10 λ) ut+1 .

(4)

Above, e1 is a vector with Þrst element equal to unity and the remaining elements
equal to zeros. The VAR shocks are mapped to news by λ, deÞned as λ ≡ ρΓ(I −
ρΓ)−1 . e10 λ captures the long-run signiÞcance of each individual VAR shock to
discount-rate expectations. The greater the absolute value of a variable’s coeﬃcient in the return prediction equation (the top row of Γ), the greater the weight the
variable receives in the discount-rate-news formula. More persistent variables should
also receive more weight, which is captured by the term (I − ρΓ)−1 .

2.3

Decomposing betas

Previous empirical work uses Campbell’s (1991) return decomposition to investigate
betas in several diﬀerent ways. Campbell and Mei (1993) break the returns on
stock portfolios, sorted by size or industry, into cash-ßow and discount-rate components. They ask whether the betas of these portfolios with the return on the
market portfolio are determined primarily by their cash-ßow news or their discountrate news. That is, for portfolio i they measure the cash-ßow news Ni,CF,t+1 and the
(negtive of) discount-rate news −Ni,DR,t+1 , and calculate Cov(Ni,CF,t+1 , rM,t+1 ) and
Cov(−Ni,DR,t+1 , rM,t+1 ). Campbell and Mei deÞne two beta components

β CF i,M ≡
and
β DRi,M ≡

Covt (Ni,CF,t+1 , rM,t+1 )
¡
¢
Vart rM,t+1

Covt (−Ni,DR,t+1 , rM,t+1 )
¡
¢
,
Vart rM,t+1

(5)

(6)

which add up to the traditional market beta of the CAPM,
β i,M = β CF i,M + β DRi,M .

(7)

In their empirical implementation, Campbell and Mei assume that the conditional
variances and covariances in (5) and (6) are constant. However, they do not look
separately at the cash-ßow and discount-rate shocks to the market portfolio.
9

Campbell and Vuolteenaho (2004), by contrast, break the market return into cashßow and (negative of) discount-rate news NM,CF,t+1 and −NM,DR,t+1 . They measure
covariances Cov(ri,t+1 , NM,CF,t+1 ) and Cov(ri,t+1 , −NM,DR,t+1 ) and use these to deÞne
cash-ßow and discount-rate betas,

β i,CF M ≡
and

Covt (ri,t+1 , NM,CF,t+1 )
¡
¢
Vart rM,t+1

Covt (ri,t+1 , −NM,DR,t+1 )
¡
¢
,
Vart rM,t+1

β i,DRM ≡

(8)

(9)

which again add up to the traditional market beta of the CAPM,
β i,M = β i,CF M + β i,DRM .

(10)

Campbell and Vuolteenaho (2004) show that the ICAPM implies a price of risk
for β i,DRM equal to the variance of the return on the market portfolio, and a price
of risk for β i,CF M that is γ times higher, where γ is the coeﬃcient of relative risk
aversion of a representative investor. This leads them to call β i,DRM the “good” beta
and β i,CF M the “bad” beta, where the latter is of primary concern to conservative
long-term investors. Empirically, Campbell and Vuolteenaho Þnd that value stocks
have always had a considerably higher bad beta than growth stocks. This Þnding is
surprising, since in the post-1963 sample value stocks have had a lower CAPM beta
than growth stocks. The higher CAPM beta of growth stocks in the post-1963 sample
is due to their disproportionately high good beta. Campbell and Vuolteenaho also
Þnd that these properties of growth and value stock betas can explain the relative
average returns on growth and value during this period.
In this paper we combine the asset-speciÞc beta decomposition of Campbell and
Mei (1993) with the market-level beta decomposition of Campbell and Vuolteenaho
(2004). We measure four covariances and deÞne

β CF i,CF M ≡
β DRi,CF M ≡

Covt (Ni,CF,t+1 , NM,CF,t+1 )
¡
¢
,
Vart rM,t+1

Covt (−Ni,DR,t+1 , NM,CF,t+1 )
¡
¢
,
Vart rM,t+1
10

(11)
(12)

β CF i,DRM ≡
and
β DRi,DRM ≡

Covt (Ni,CF,t+1 , −NM,DR,t+1 )
¡
¢
,
Vart rM,t+1

Covt (−Ni,DR,t+1 , −NM,DR,t+1 )
¡
¢
.
Vart rM,t+1

(13)

(14)

These four beta components add up to the overall market beta,

β i,M = β CF i,CF M + β DRi,CF M + β CF i,DRM + β DRi,DRM .

(15)

The bad beta of Campbell and Vuolteenaho can be written as
β i,CF M = β CF i,CF M + β DRi,CF M ,

(16)

while the good beta can be written as
β i,DRM = β CF i,DRM + β DRi,DRM .

(17)

This four-way decomposition of beta allows us to ask whether the high bad beta of
value stocks and the high good beta of growth stocks are attributable to their cash
ßows or to their discount rates.
An interesting early paper that explores a similar decomposition of beta is Pettit
and WesterÞeld (1972). Pettit and WesterÞeld use earnings growth as a proxy for
cash-ßow news, and the change in the price-earnings ratio as a proxy for discountrate news. They argue that stock-level cash-ßow news should be correlated with
market-wide cash-ßow news, and that stock-level discount-rate news should be correlated with market-wide discount-rate news, but they assume zero cross-correlations
between stock-level cash ßows and market-wide discount rates, and between stocklevel discount rates and market-wide cash ßows. That is, they assume β DRi,CF M =
β CF i,DRM = 0 and work with an empirical two-way decomposition: β i,M = β CF i,CF M +
β DRi,DRM . Comparing value and growth stocks, our subsequent empirical analysis
shows that there is interesting cross-sectional variation in β CF i,DRM .
A very recent paper that explores the four-way decomposition of beta, written subsequent to the Þrst draft of this paper, is Koubouros, Malliaropulos, and Panopoulou
(KMP, 2004). KMP estimates separate risk prices for each of the four components of
beta. Consistent with the asset pricing theory of Campbell and Vuolteenaho (2004),
KMP Þnds that risk prices are sensitive to the use of cash-ßow or discount-rate news
at the market level, but not at the Þrm or portfolio level.
11

3

Data

3.1

Aggregate VAR data

In specifying the aggregate VAR, we follow Campbell and Vuolteenaho (2004) by
choosing the same four state variables. However, unlike Campbell and Vuolteenaho,
we implement the VAR using annual data in order to correspond to our estimation of
the Þrm-level VAR, which is more naturally implemented using annual observations.
The aggregate-VAR state variables are deÞned as follows. First, the excess log
e
) is the diﬀerence between the annual log return on the
return on the market (rM
CRSP value-weighted stock index (rM ) and the annual log riskfree rate, constructed
by CRSP as the return from rolling over Treasury bills with approximately three
months to maturity. We take the excess return series from Professor Kenneth French’s
website.
The term yield spread (T Y ) is provided by Global Financial Data and is computed
as the yield diﬀerence between ten-year constant-maturity taxable bonds and shortterm taxable notes, in percentage points. Keim and Stambaugh (1986) and Campbell
(1987) point out that T Y predicts excess returns on long-term bonds. These papers
argue that since stocks are also long-term assets, T Y should also forecast excess stock
returns, if the expected returns of long-term assets move together. Fama and French
(1989) show that T Y tracks the business cycle, so this variable may also capture
cyclical variation in the equity premium.
We construct our third variable, the smoothed price-earnings ratio (P E), as the
price of the S&P 500 index divided by a ten-year trailing moving average of aggregate earnings of companies in the index. Following Graham and Dodd (1934),
Campbell and Shiller (1988b, 1998) and Shiller (2000) advocate averaging earnings
over several years to avoid temporary spikes in the price-earnings ratio caused by
cyclical declines in earnings. This variable must predict low stock returns over the
long run if smoothed earnings growth is close to unpredictable. As in Campbell and
Vuolteenaho (2004), we construct the earnings series to avoid any forward-looking
interpolation of earnings, ensuring all components of the time t earnings-price ratio
are contemporaneously observable. Finally, we log transform the simple ratio.
Fourth, we compute the small-stock value spread (V S) using the data made avail-

12

able by Professor Kenneth French on his web site. The portfolios, which are constructed at the end of each June, are the intersections of two portfolios formed on
size (market equity, ME) and three portfolios formed on the ratio of book equity
to market equity (BE/ME). The size breakpoint for year t is the median NYSE
market equity at the end of June of year t. BE/ME for June of year t is the book
equity for the last Þscal year end in t − 1 divided by ME for December of t − 1.
The BE/ME breakpoints are the 30th and 70th NYSE percentiles. At the end of
June of year t, we construct the small-stock value spread as the diﬀerence between
the log(BE/ME) of the small high-book-to-market portfolio and the log(BE/ME)
of the small low-book-to-market portfolio, where BE and ME are measured at the
end of December of year t − 1.
We include V S because of the evidence in Brennan, Wang, and Xia (2001), Campbell and Vuolteenaho (2004), and Eleswarapu and Reinganum (2004) that relatively
high returns for small growth stocks predict low returns on the market as a whole.
This variable can be motivated by the ICAPM itself. If small growth stocks have
low and small value stocks have high expected returns, and this return diﬀerential
is not explained by the static CAPM, the ICAPM requires that the excess return
of small growth stocks over small value stocks be correlated with innovations in expected future market returns. There are other more direct stories that also suggest
the small-stock value spread should be related to market-wide discount rates. One
possibility is that small growth stocks generate cash ßows in the more distant future and therefore their prices are more sensitive to changes in discount rates, just
as coupon bonds with a high duration are more sensitive to interest-rate movements
than are bonds with a low duration (Cornell 1999). Another possibility is that small
growth companies are particularly dependent on external Þnancing and thus are sensitive to equity market and broader Þnancial conditions (Ng, Engle, and Rothschild
1992, Perez-Quiros and Timmermann 2000). Finally, it is possible that episodes of
irrational investor optimism (Shiller 2000) have a particularly powerful eﬀect on small
growth stocks.
To ensure consistency with Campbell and Vuolteenaho’s (2004) study, we follow exactly their data construction steps. Consequently, our annual series of T Y ,
P E, and V S are exactly equal to corresponding end-of-May values in Campbell and
Vuolteenaho’s data set. We estimate the VAR over the period 1928-2001, with 74
annual observations.

13

3.2

Firm-level VAR data

The raw Þrm-level data come from the merger of three databases. The Þrst of these,
the Center for Research in Securities Prices (CRSP) monthly stock Þle, provides
monthly prices; shares outstanding; dividends; and returns for NYSE, AMEX, and
NASDAQ stocks. The second database, the COMPUSTAT annual research Þle,
contains the relevant accounting information for most publicly traded U.S. stocks.
When using COMPUSTAT as our source of accounting information, we require that
the Þrm must be on COMPUSTAT for two years. This requirement alleviates most of
the potential survivor bias due to COMPUSTAT backÞlling data. The COMPUSTAT
accounting information is supplemented by the third database, Moody’s book equity
information for industrial Þrms as collected by Davis, Fama, and French (2000). This
database enables us to estimate the Þrm-level VAR over the period 1929-2001.
We implement the main speciÞcation of our Þrm-level VAR with the following
three state variables. First, the log Þrm-level return (ri ) is the annual log valueweight return on a Þrm’s common stock equity. Annual returns are compounded
from monthly returns, recorded from the beginning of June to the end of May. We
substitute zeros for missing monthly returns. Delisting returns are included when
available. For missing delisting returns where the delisting is performance-related,
we assume a -30 percent delisting return, following Shumway (1997). Otherwise,
we assume a zero delisting return. The log transformations of a Þrm’s stock return
may turn extreme values into inßuential observations. We avoid this problem by
unlevering the stock by 10 percent, that is, we deÞne the stock return as a portfolio
consisting of 90 percent of the Þrm’s common stock and a 10 percent investment in
Treasury Bills.2
Our second Þrm-level state variable is the log book-to-market equity ratio (we
denote the transformed quantity by BM in contrast to simple book-to-market that
is denoted by BE/ME) as of the end of May in year t. We include BM in the
state vector to capture the well-known value eﬀect in the cross section of average
stock returns (Graham and Dodd, 1934). In particular, we choose book-to-market as
our scaled price measure based on the evidence in Fama and French (1992) that this
variable subsumes the information in many other scaled price measures concerning
future relative returns.

2

We measure BE for the Þscal year ending in calendar year t − 1, and ME (market
See Vuolteenaho (2002) for additional details and justiÞcation.

14

value of equity) at the end of May of year t.3 We require each Þrm-year observation
to have a valid past BE/ME ratio that must be positive in value. Moreover, in
order to eliminate likely data errors, we censor the BE/ME variables of these Þrms
to the range (.01,100) by adjusting the book value. To avoid inßuential observations
created by the log transform, we Þrst shrink the BE/ME towards one by deÞning
BM ≡ log[(.9BE + .1ME)/ME].
Third, we calculate long-term proÞtability, ROE, as the Þrm’s average proÞtability
over the last one to Þve years, depending on data availability. We generate our
earnings series using the clean-surplus relation. In that relation, earnings, dividends,
and book equity satisfy
BEt − BEt−1 = Xt − Dtnet :
book value today equals book value last year plus clean-surplus earnings (Xt ) less
(net) dividends. This approach is dictated by necessity (the early data consist of
book-equity series but do not contain earnings). Note that in our data set, we
construct clean-surplus earnings with an appropriate adjustment for equity oﬀerings
so that
¸
(1 + Rt )MEt−1 − Dt
Xt =
× BEt − BEt−1 + Dt ,
MEt
∙

where Dt is gross dividends, computed from CRSP. We deÞne ROE as the trailing
Þve-year average earnings divided by the trailing Þve-year average of (.9BE + .1ME).
We choose ROE as the Þnal element of our Þrm-level state vector to capture the evidence that Þrms with higher proÞtability (controlling for their book-to-market ratios)
have earned higher average stock returns (Haugen and Baker 1996, Kovtunenko and
Sosner 2003). Vuolteenaho (2002) uses just the previous year’s proÞtability in his
3
Following Fama and French, we deÞne BE as stockholders’ equity, plus balance sheet deferred
taxes (COMPUSTAT data item 74) and investment tax credit (data item 208) (if available), plus
post-retirement beneÞt liabilities (data item 330) (if available), minus the book value of preferred
stock. Depending on availability, we use redemption (data item 56), liquidation (data item 10),
or par value (data item 130) (in that order) for the book value of preferred stock. We calculate
stockholders’ equity used in the above formula as follows. We prefer the stockholders’ equity number
reported by Moody’s, or COMPUSTAT (data item 216). If neither one is available, we measure
stockholders’ equity as the book value of common equity (data item 60), plus the book value of
preferred stock. (Note that the preferred stock is added at this stage, because it is later subtracted
in the book equity formula.) If common equity is not available, we compute stockholders’ equity as
the book value of assets (data item 6) minus total liabilities (data item 181), all from COMPUSTAT.

15

Þrm-level VAR. We instead average over as many as Þve years of past proÞtability data due to the fact that unlike Vuolteenaho, we use much noisier clean-surplus
earnings instead of GAAP earnings.

4
4.1

VAR Estimation
Aggregate VAR

Table 1 reports the VAR model parameters, estimated using OLS. Each row of the
table corresponds to a diﬀerent equation of the VAR. The Þrst Þve columns report
coeﬃcients on the Þve explanatory variables: a constant, and lags of the excess market
return, term yield spread, price-earnings ratio, and small-stock value spread. OLS
standard errors are reported in parenthese below the coeﬃcients.
The Þrst row of Table 1 shows that three out of our four VAR state variables have
some ability to predict annual excess returns on the aggregate stock market. Unlike
in the monthly data which exhibits some degree of momentum, annual market returns
display a modest degree of reversal; the coeﬃcient on the lagged excess market return
is a statistically insigniÞcant -.0354 with a t-statistic of -.3. The regression coeﬃcient
on past values of the term yield spread is positive, consistent with the Þndings of Keim
and Stambaugh (1986), Campbell (1987), and Fama and French (1989), though the
associated t-statistic of 1.4 is somewhat modest. The smoothed price-earnings ratio
negatively predicts the return with a t-statistic of 2.6, consistent with the Þnding
that various scaled-price variables forecast aggregate returns (Campbell and Shiller,
1988ab, 1998; Rozeﬀ 1984; Fama and French 1988, 1989). Finally, the small-stock
value spread negatively predicts the return with a t-statistic of 2.1, consistent with
Brennan, Wang, and Xia (2001) and Eleswarapu and Reinganum (2004). In summary, the estimated coeﬃcients, both in terms of signs and t-statistics, are generally
consistent with our prior beliefs and Þndings in previous research.
The remaining rows of Table 1 summarize the dynamics of the explanatory variables. The term spread can be predicted with its own lagged value and the lagged
small-stock value spread. The price-earnings ratio is highly persistent, and approximately an AR(1) process. Finally, the small-stock value spread is also a highly
persistent AR(1) process.

16

The sixth column of Table 1 computes the coeﬃcients of the linear function that
maps the VAR shocks to discount-rate news, e10 λ. We deÞne λ ≡ ρΓ(I −ρΓ)−1 , where
Γ is the estimated VAR transition matrix from Table 1. Following Campbell and
Vuolteenaho (2004), we set ρ equal to .95 throughout the paper. Interestingly, the
coeﬃcients of e10 λ are very similar to those estimated by Campbell and Vuolteenaho
from monthly data, with the exception of the coeﬃcient on stock-return shock, which
is larger in absolute value in the function computed from annual VAR parameter
estimates. As a further robustness check, we compared our annual news terms to
corresponding twelve-month sums of Campbell and Vuolteenaho’s news terms and
observed a high degree of consistency (a correlation of .98 for NDR and .88 for NCF ).
The persistence of the VAR explanatory variables raises some diﬃcult statistical
issues. It is well known that estimates of persistent AR(1) coeﬃcients are biased
downwards in Þnite samples, and that this causes bias in the estimates of predictive
regressions for returns if return innovations are highly correlated with innovations in
predictor variables (Stambaugh 1999). There is an active debate about the eﬀect
of this on the strength of the evidence for return predictability (Ang and Bekaert
2003, Campbell and Yogo 2005, Lewellen 2004, Polk, Thompson, and Vuolteenaho
2005, Torous, Valkanov, and Yan 2005). Our interpretation of the Þndings in this
literature is that there is some statistical evidence of return predictability based on
variables similar to ours. However, an additional complication is that the statistical
signiÞcance of the one-period return-prediction equation does not guarantee that our
news terms are not materially aﬀected by the above-mentioned small-sample bias
and sampling uncertainty. This is because the news terms are computed using a
complicated nonlinear transformation of the VAR parameter estimates.4 With these
caveats, we proceed with news terms extracted using the point estimates reported in
Table 1.
Figure 1 plots centered three-year moving averages of −NM,DR (line with squares)
and NM,CF (thick solid line). Both moving-average series are normalized to have a
unit standard deviation. The Þgure shows stock prices declining because of discountrate news in the early 1930’s, late 40’s, late 60’s, mid 70’s, and early 80’s. Aggregate
stock prices increased because of discount-rate news in the late 1930’s, early and mid
60’s, and for a long period from the mid 1980’s to late 90’s. Good cash-ßow news were
experienced in the period from the mid 1940’s to late 50’s, late 60’s, late 70’s, and
4

The appendix to Campbell and Vuolteenaho (2004),
available online at
http://kuznets.fas.harvard.edu/~campbell/papers/BBGBAppendix20040624.pdf,
presents evidence that there is little Þnite-sample bias in the estimated news terms used in that paper.

17

90’s, while bad cash-ßow news dominate the 1930’s, early 70’s, and 80’s. Since we are
interested in separating the eﬀects of discount-rate and cash-ßow news, the 1950’s, late
70’s, and the period from the late 1980’s to early 90’s are all inßuental observations
during which the two news terms pushed stock prices in opposite directions.
Table 2 puts these extracted news terms to work. In this table, we estimate
the good discount-rate betas (β i,DR ) and bad cash-ßow betas (β i,CF ) for portfolios of
value and growth stocks. Each year, we form quintile value-weighted portfolios based
on Þrms’ book-to-market ratios, and denote the extreme growth portfolio with 1 and
the extreme value portfolio with 5. When forming the portfolios we allocate an equal
amount of market capitalization to each portfolio, in order to ensure that all the portfolios are economically meaningful.5 We regress these portfolios’ simple returns on the
e
e
scaled news series NM,DR ×Var (rM
) /Var(NM,DR ) and NM,CF ×Var (rM
) /Var(NM,CF ).
The scaling normalizes the regression coeﬃcients to correspond to our deÞnitions of
β i,DR and β i,CF , which add up to the CAPM beta.
The point estimates in the second panel of Table 2 show that value stocks have
higher cash-ßow betas than growth stocks in the full sample as well as in both subperiods. The estimated diﬀerence between the extreme growth and value portfolios’
cash-ßow betas is -.13, and this diﬀerence is stable across subperiods. In contrast,
the pattern in discount-rate betas changes from one subperiod to another. Growth
stocks’ discount-rate betas are signiÞcantly below one in the early subperiod and very
close to one in the later subperiod. More striking is that value stocks’ discount-rate
betas decline from 1.18 in the Þrst subsample to .48 in the second subsample. Overall,
the return betas estimated from the annual data are consistent with those estimated
from monthly data by Campbell and Vuolteenaho (2004).
The full-period estimates of bad and good beta for the market portfolio sum up to
approximately one. Curiously, however, the sum of estimated bad and good betas is
above one for the Þrst subperiod and below one for the second subperiod. The fact
that these subperiod betas deviate from one is caused by our practice of removing
the conditional expectation from the market’s return (NM,CF − NM,DR equals the
unexpected return) but not from the test asset’s return. Because the aggregate
VAR is estimated from the full sample, in the subsamples there is no guarantee that
the estimated conditional expected return is exactly uncorrelated with unexpected
5

The typical approach allocates an equal number of Þrms to each portfolio. Since growth Þrms
are typically much larger than value Þrms, this approach generates value portfolios that contain only
a small fraction of the capitalization of the market.

18

returns. Thus, in the subsamples, the expected test-asset return may contribute to
the beta, moving it away from unity.
The standard errors in Table 2, as well as the standard errors in all subsequent
tables that use estimated news terms, require a caveat. We present the simple OLS
standard errors from the regressions, which do not take into account the estimation
uncertainty in the news terms. Thus, while the t-statistics in Table 2 are generally
high in absolute value, the true statistical precision of these estimates is likely to be
lower.

4.2

Firm-level VAR

The Þrm-level VAR generates market-adjusted cash-ßow and discount-rate news for
each Þrm each year. Since relatively few Þrms survive the full time period; since
conditioning on survival may bias our coeﬃcient estimates; and since the average
number of Þrms we consider is greater than the number of annual observations, we
assume that the VAR transition matrix is equal for all Þrms and estimate the VAR
parameters with pooled regressions.
We remove year-speciÞc means from the state variables by subtracting rM,t from
ri,t and cross-sectional means from BMi,t and ROE i,t . Instead of subtracting the
equal-weight cross-sectional mean from ri,t , we subtract the log value-weight CRSP
index return instead, because this will allow us to undo the market adjustment simply
by adding back the cash-ßow and discount-rate news extracted from the aggregate
VAR.
After cross-sectionally demeaning the data, we estimate the coeﬃcients of the Þrmlevel VAR using WLS. SpeciÞcally, we multiply each observation by the inverse of
the number of cross-sectional observation that year, thus weighing each cross-section
equally. This ensures that our estimates are not dominated by the large cross sections
near the end of the sample period. We impose zero intercepts on all state variables,
even though the market-adjusted returns do not necessarily have a zero mean in each
sample. Allowing for a free intercept does not alter any of our results in a measurable
way.
Parameter estimates, presented in Table 3, imply that expected returns are high
when past one-year return, the book-to-market ratio, and proÞtability are high.
19

Book-to-market is the statistically most signiÞcant predictor, while the Þrm’s own
stock return is the statistically least signiÞcant predictor. Expected proÞtability is
high when past stock return and past proÞtability are high and the book-to-market
ratio is low. The expected future book-to-market ratio is mostly aﬀected by the past
book-to-market ratio.
These VAR parameter estimates translate into a function e10 λ that has positive
weights on all state-variable shocks. The t-statistics on the coeﬃcients in e10 λ are
2.1 for past return, 2.6 for book-to-market, and 1.8 for proÞtability. Contrasting the
Þrm-level e10 λ estimates to those obtained from the aggregate VAR of Table 1, it is
interesting to note that the partial relation between expected-return news and stock
return is positive at the Þrm level and negative at the market level. The positive
Þrm-level eﬀect is consistent with the literature on momentum in the cross-section of
stock returns.
Table 3 also reports a variance decomposition for Þrm-level market-adjusted stock
returns. The total variance of the return is the sum of the variance of expectedreturn news (0.0048, corresponding to a standard deviation of 7%), the variance of
cash-ßow news (0.1411, corresponding to a standard deviation of 38%), and twice the
covariance between them (0.0046, corresponding to a correlation of 0.18). The total
return variance is 0.1551, corresponding to a return standard deviation of almost 40%.
Thus the Þrm-level VAR attributes 97% of the variance of Þrm-level market-adjusted
returns to cash-ßow news, and only 3% to discount-rate news. If one adds back the
aggregate market return to construct a variance decomposition for total Þrm-level
returns, cash-ßow news accounts for 80% of the variance and discount-rate news for
20%. This result, due originally to Vuolteenaho (2002), is consistent with a much
lower share of cash-ßow news in the aggregate VAR because most Þrm-level cash-ßow
news is idiosyncratic, so it averages out at the market level.
The high share of cash-ßow news implied by the Þrm-level VAR results in part
from the 1929-2001 sample period over which the VAR is estimated. In the online
Appendix to this paper, Campbell, Polk, and Vuolteenaho (2005), we report Þrm-level
VAR estimates for the period 1963-2001. Over this period the VAR explanatory variables are stronger predictors of market-adjusted Þrm-level stock returns. The implied
variance of expected-return news is 0.025, corresponding to a standard deviation of
almost 16%, and the variance of cash-ßow news is 0.166, corresponding to a standard
deviation of 41%. Although expected-return news is more volatile in the 1963-2001
period, the beta patterns we discuss later in the paper are very similar.
20

We construct cash-ßow and discount-rate news for our BE/ME-sorted portfolios
as follows. We Þrst take the market-adjusted news terms extracted using the Þrmlevel VAR in Table 3 and add back the market’s news terms for the corresponding
period. This add-back procedure scales our subsequent beta estimates, but does not
aﬀect the diﬀerences in betas between stocks. Then, each year we form portfolio-level
news as the value-weighted average of the Þrms’ news. The portfolios are constructed
by sorting Þrms into Þve portfolios on their BE/ME’s each year. As before, we set
BE/ME breakpoints so that an equal amount of market capitalization is in each
quintile each year. As a result, we have series that closely approximate the cash-ßow
and discount-rate news on these quintile portfolios.

5

5.1

Beta Decomposition for Growth and Value Portfolios
VAR-based beta decomposition

Table 4 uses the portfolio-level and market-level news terms to decompose the CAPM
beta into four components: β CF i,CF M , β DRi,CF M , β CF i,DRM , and β DRi,DRM . For each
portfolio, we run four simple regressions, the portfolio-level news on scaled series
e
e
NM,DR × Var (rM
) /Var(NM,DR ) and NM,CF × Var (rM
) /Var(NM,CF ). The portfolio
i = 1 is the extreme growth portfolio (low BE/ME) and i = 5 the extreme value
portfolio (high BE/ME). In the table, “1-5” denotes the diﬀerence between extreme
growth (1) and value (5) portfolios.
Table 4 shows that the cross-sectional beta patterns visible in Table 2 are entirely
due to cross-sectional variation in Þrms’ β CF i,CF M and β CF i,DRM . In other words,
although the components β DRi,CF M and β DRi,DRM are important determinants of
the overall level of betas, they are approximately constant across value and growth
portfolios.
A caveat about the standard errors is in order. All standard errors in tables that
use estimated news terms ignore the estimation uncertainty in extraction of the news
terms. Thus, the generally high t-statistics in Table 4 and the subsequent tables
may be overstated.

21

While the simple regressions of Table 4 neatly correspond to the beta decomposition of economically interesting betas from the asset-pricing perspective, multiple
regressions may be more appropriate in understanding the sources of these sensitivities. Suppose that the technology employed by value and growth Þrms is such that
Þrms’ cash ßows are determined by a constant linear function of the market-wide
discount-rate and cash-ßow news, plus an error term. Then, the simple regression coeﬃcients (and thus our beta decomposition) may be subject to change as the
correlation between the market’s news terms changes. In particular, the in-sample
correlation of NM,CF,t+1 and −NM,DR,t+1 is positive in the early subsample but slightly
negative in the modern subsample.
To examine the partial sensitivity of Þrms’ cash ßows to the market’s discount-rate
and cash-ßow news, the left-hand panel of Table 5 regresses the portfolio-level cashßow news on the estimated −NM,DR,t+1 and NM,CF,t+1 in a multiple regression. We
show results for three portfolios (1, 3, and 5) to save space. The multiple regressions
tell an interesting story. In the full-period regressions, growth stocks’ cash-ßow news
is more sensitive to −NM,DR,t+1 and less sensitive to NM,CF,t+1 than that of value
stocks.
In the subperiod analysis, the sensitivities of growth and value stocks’ cash-ßow
news to the market’s cash-ßow news appears to be roughly constant. (This is in
contrast with the simple regression results, which are inßuenced by the sample-speciÞc
correlation of the market’s news terms.) The extreme growth stocks’ cash-ßow news
has a .07 loading on the market’s cash-ßow news in the early subsample and .03 in the
second subsample, while the extreme value stocks’ cash-ßow news has a .13 loading on
the market’s cash-ßow news in the early subsample and .15 in the second subsample.
Thus, the partial sensitivities to the market’s cash-ßow news seem to be relatively
stable over time, with value stocks’ sensitivity at a higher level than that of growth
stocks.
The sensitivities of growth and value stocks’ cash-ßow news to the market’s (negative) discount-rate news appear to have changed across samples. In the early sample,
value stocks’ cash ßows seem to be slightly more sensitive to the market’s valuation
levels than growth stocks’ cash ßows (1-5 diﬀerence -.11, t-stat -2.0). In the modern subsample, this pattern is reversed: Growth stocks now have a higher multipleregression coeﬃcient on −NM,DR,t+1 than value stocks (1-5 diﬀerence .44, t-stat 4.1).
All these results are based on a Þrm-level VAR that is estimated over the whole
sample period 1929-2001. The Appendix, Campbell, Polk, and Vuolteenaho (2005),
22

reports similar beta patterns in the modern subsample 1963-2001 when the VAR is
estimated just over that subsample.

5.2

An alternative to the VAR approach

The VAR methodology used in the above tests relies on speciÞc assumptions about the
data-generating process. In this section, we show that our main result — that growth
stocks’ cash ßows are more sensitive to the market’s discount rates than value stocks’
cash ßows — can also be veriÞed with much simpler although less elegant methods.
Regressions of direct cash-ßow measures on discount-rate and cash-ßow news
Our VAR-based results show that the good discount-rate beta of growth stocks
and the bad cash-ßow beta of value stocks arise from covariances of aggregate factors with value and growth stocks’ cash-ßow news. To demonstrate the robustness
of this Þnding, we regress direct cash-ßow measures on the market’s cash-ßow and
discount-rate news. Consistent with the VAR results, we Þnd that value stocks’ cash
ßows covary with the market’s cash-ßow news and growth stocks’ cash ßows with the
market’s discount rates.
We use portfolio-level accounting return on equity (ROE) as our direct cash-ßow
measure. Vuolteenaho (2002) and Cohen, Polk, and Vuolteenaho (2003, 2004) have
argued for the use of the discounted sum of ROE as a good measure of Þrm-level
cash-ßow fundamentals. Thus, our ROE-based proxy for portfolio-level cash-ßow
news is the following:

Ni,CF,t+1 ≈

K
X

ρk−1 roei,t,t+k ,

(18)

k=1

where roe = ln(1+ROE)−log(1+yt+k ), where ROEi,t,t+k is the year t+k clean-surplus
return on book equity (for portfolio i sorted at t) and y the Treasury-bill return. The
subscripts denote the portfolio number (one for growth and Þve for value), the year
of sort and portfolio formation, and the year of measurement. This direct proxy of
cash ßows is regressed on contemporanous multi-year discounted sums of the market’s
news terms extracted from the VAR. We emphasize longer-term trends rather than
23

short-term ßuctuations in proÞtability by examining horizons (K) from two years up
to Þve years out.
As in the previous VAR approach, each year we form quintile portfolios based on
Þrm’s BE/ME. In contrast to the VAR implementation, however, after portfolio
formation we follow the portfolios for Þve years while holding the portfolio deÞnitions
constant. The long horizon is necessary since over the course of the Þrst postformation year the market learns about not only the unexpected component of that
year’s cash-ßow realizations but also updates expectations concerning future cash
ßows. Because we perform a new sort every year, our Þnal annual data set is three
dimensional: the number of portfolios formed in each sort times the number of years
we follow the portfolios times the time dimension of our panel.6
The right-hand panels of Table 5 show the multiple regression coeﬃcients for
three portfolios (1, 3, and 5). Despite the fact that the dependent variables are
now constructed using simple accounting measures, the patterns in these panels are
virtually identical to those in the left panel that uses cash-ßow news extracted from
a Þrm-level VAR. In summary, this evidence refutes the pure-sentiment story by
showing that growth stocks’ ROE is more sensitive to the market’s discount-rate
news than that of value stocks. The point estimates also indicate that value stocks’
ROE is more sensitive to the market’s cash-ßow news than that of growth stocks.
Thus, our ROE regressions are consistent with the VAR results.
Regressions of direct cash-ßow measures on alternative proxies for discount-rate
and cash-ßow news
To further examine the robustness of our results, we replace the market’s news
terms with simple and transparent proxies:

NM,CF,t+1 ≈
6

K
X

k−1

ρ

roeM,t+k and NM,DR,t+1

k=1

K
X
≈−
[ρk−1 ∆t+k ln(P/E)M ].

(19)

k=1

In the portfolio approach, missing data are treated as follows. If a stock was included in a
portfolio but its book equity is temporarily unavailable at the end of some future year t, we assume
that the Þrm’s book-to-market ratio has not changed from t − 1 and compute the book-equity
proxy from the last period’s book-to-market and this period’s market equity. We treat Þrm-level
observations with negative or zero book-equity values as missing. We then use the portfolio-level
dividend and book-equity Þgures in computing clean-surplus earnings at the portfolio level.

24

Since Campbell and Shiller (1988a, 1988b) and others document that discount-rate
news dominates cash-ßow news in aggregate returns and price volatility, we use annual increments in ln(P/E)M as a natural proxy for −NM,DR,t+1 . The market’s log
proÞtability provides a natural direct proxy for the market’s cash-ßow news.
In the online Appendix to this paper, Campbell, Polk and Vuolteenaho (2005),
we report multiple regression coeﬃcients from regressions of the discounted ROE
sum on our two proxies for aggregate discount news and cash-ßow news deÞned in
equation (19). Again we restrict our focus to three of the BE/ME-sorted portfolios
(1, 3, and 5). Now both our dependent and independent variables use only simple
accounting measures to test the pure-sentiment story. We Þnd that in the modern
period, the three-year, discounted ROE sum of growth stocks has a statistically significant regression coeﬃcient on the three-year discounted sum of annual increments in
ln(P/E) of .24 (t statistic of 2.6). This is in contrast to the corresponding coeﬃcient
for value stocks; that estimate is -.09 with an associated t statistic of -4.5. As one
would expect, the diﬀerence between these two coeﬃcients (.33) is quite statistically
signiÞcant, with a t statistic of 3.9.
We estimate similar coeﬃcients for four-year and Þve-year discounted ROE sums.
Though we Þnd similar patterns for our two-year discounted ROE sum regressions,
the diﬀerence is only half as large and is not statistically signiÞcant at usual levels of
signiÞcance. However, one would expect that sums of only two years of accounting
ROE would be a poorer proxy for cash-ßow news. Thus the evidence in the Appendix again conÞrms that the reason growth stocks are more sensitive to changes in
aggregate discount rates is because their cash-ßow fundamentals are more sensitive
to these movements.
As a Þnal robustness check, the Appendix also reports the results from additional
speciÞcations where the independent variable continues to be the direct cash ßows of
value-growth portfolios. These speciÞcations adddress the concern that our results
may be driven by predictable components in our discounted ROE sums. One reason
there may be predictable components is purely mechanical. We compute cleansurplus ROE in the Þrst year after the sort by using the change in BE from t − 1 to
t. But that initial book equity is known many months before the actual sort occurs
in May of year t. Thus a portion of the cashßows we are using to proxy for cash
ßow news are known as of the time of the sort and cannot be news. In response to
this problem, our discounted ROE sums start with ROE in year t + 2 instead of year
t + 1.
25

More generally it is possible that the level of our left-hand side variable is naturally
forecastable. We can include an additional independent variable to make sure that
this forecastability does not drive our results. As a Þrm’s level of proÞtability is
quite persistent, a natural control is the diﬀerence in past year t ROE for the Þrms
currently in the extreme growth and extreme value portfolios.
We have implemented these two robustness checks both for regressions of discounted ROE sums on the market’s cash-ßow and discount-rate news as deÞned by
the aggregate VAR, and on regressions of discounted ROE sums on proxies for these
news terms. The results are consistent with those throughout the paper, again
rejecting the pure-sentiment story.

6

Bad Beta, Good Beta, and Stock-Level Characteristics

In this section we run regressions predicting both the bad and good beta components
of a Þrm’s market beta using annual observations of Þrm characteristics as of the end
of May each year. Our Þrst approach takes advantage of the fact that estimating
covariances is generally easier with higher frequency data. SpeciÞcally, we average
the cross products of each Þrm’s monthly simple returns with contemporaneous and
one-month lagged monthly market news terms over all months within the year in
question. The use of lagged monthly news terms, following Scholes and Williams
(1977), captures sluggish responses of some stocks to market movements. Campbell
and Vuolteenaho (2004) Þnd that this is important in estimating bad and good betas,
particularly for smaller stocks. Our regressions can be written as a system:
⎤
(NM,CF,t,j − NM,DR,t,j + NM,CF,t,j−1 − NM,DR,t,j−1 ) ∗ Ri,t,j
⎣
⎦ = Xi,t−1 B + εi,t ,
(NM,CF,t,j + NCF,t,j−1 ) ∗ Ri,t,j
j=1
(−NDR,t,j − NDR,t,j−1 ) ∗ Ri,t,j
(20)
where t indexes years, j indexes months, i indexes Þrms, and the dependent variables
in the three rows are Þrm- and year-speciÞc ex post market beta, bad beta, and good
beta respectively.
12
X

⎡

In order to further split betas into components that are attributable to Þrm26

speciÞc cash-ßow and discount-rate news, we are forced to turn to annual returns, as
the Þrm-speciÞc return decomposition relies on the annual Þrm-level VAR. In this
case we estimate
⎡
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎣

(NM,CF,t − NM,DR,t ) ∗ (Ni,CF,t − Ni,DR,t )
(NM,CF,t ) ∗ (Ni,CF,t − Ni,DR,t )
(−NM,DR,t ) ∗ (Ni,CF,t − NiDR,t )
(NM,CF,t ) ∗ (Ni,CF,t )
(−NM,DR,t ) ∗ (Ni,CF,t )
(NM,CF,t ) ∗ (−NiDR,t )
(−NM,DR,t ) ∗ (−Ni,DR,t )

⎤

⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥ = Xi,t−1 B + εi,t
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎦

(21)

In either approach, we estimate simple regressions linking the components of Þrms’
risks to each characteristic as well as multiple regression speciÞcations using all variables. We remove year-speciÞc means from both the dependent and independent
variables. After cross-sectionally demeaning the data, we then normalize each independent variable to have unit variance. We then estimate regression coeﬃcients
in equations (20) and (21) using WLS. SpeciÞcally, we multiply each observation
by the inverse of the number of cross-sectional observations that year, weighing each
cross-section equally. This ensures that our estimates are not dominated by the large
cross sections near the end of the sample period. Finally, we report every regression
coeﬃcient after dividing by the estimated market return variance. As a result, each
coeﬃcient represents the change, in units of beta, of a one standard deviation change
in an independent variable. The sample period for all regressions is the Compustat
data period, 1963—2000.

6.1

The value eﬀect in stock-level regressions

As a Þrst empirical exercise, we use stock-level regressions to reconÞrm the results
on value and growth stocks reported in the previous section. Table 6 shows the
coeﬃcients of simple regressions of annual cross-products onto market capitalization,
book-market ratios, and lagged market betas. The Þrst column shows the eﬀect
of explanatory variables on market beta, the second and third columns break this
down into the eﬀect on bad and good beta, and the remaining four columns show the
four-way decomposition into cash-ßow- and discount-rate-driven bad and good beta.
27

Table 7 summarizes these results in a diﬀerent way. For the same regressions,
the Þrst column reports the share of each variable’s eﬀect on market beta that is
attributed to its eﬀect on bad beta with the market’s cash ßows; the second column
shows the share of each variable’s eﬀect on bad beta that is estimated to work through
Þrm-speciÞc cash ßows; and the third column shows the share of each variable’s eﬀect
on good beta that is estimated to work through Þrm-speciÞc cash ßows.
The Þrst three columns of Table 6 reconÞrm the Þndings of Campbell and Vuolteenaho
(2004). Large stocks typically have lower betas, and about 30% of the beta diﬀerence
is attributed to bad beta. Value stocks have lower betas than growth stocks in this
sample period, but this is entirely due to their lower discount-rate betas; value stocks
actually have slightly higher bad betas with market cash ßows. Stocks with high past
betas have higher future betas, but this beta diﬀerence is entirely due to a diﬀerence
in good beta, not bad beta. These patterns were used by Campbell and Vuolteenaho
to account for the size and value eﬀects, and the excessively ßat security market line,
in recent decades.
The last four columns of Table 6 show that these beta patterns are driven by the
cash-ßow behavior of stocks sorted by size, value, and past beta. These characteristics
have very little ability to forecast the discount-rate behavior of stocks. Accordingly,
Table 7 reports cash-ßow shares close to one when decomposing good and bad beta
into components driven by the cash-ßow and discount-rate behavior of individual
stocks. Thus the cross-sectional regression approach conÞrms the portfolio results
that we reported in the previous section.
The Appendix, Campbell, Polk, and Vuolteenaho (2005), reports similar results for
multiple regressions that include size, book-market, and lagged betas simultaneously.
The results are generally comparable to those in simple regressions.

6.2

Firm-level determinants of systematic risk

Within the cross-sectional regression approach, there is no reason to conÞne our
attention to Þrm characteristics such as value, size, and beta that have been found
to predict average stock returns. Instead, we can consider variables that have been
proposed as indicators of risk at the Þrm level. We Þrst run monthly regressions
in Table 8. These regressions give us relatively precise estimates but only allow us
to decompose market betas into their bad and good components. We then go on
28

to run annual regressions which allow us to calculate four-way beta decompositions.
Table 9 reports regression results and Table 10 shows the implied beta shares. All
these tables use multiple regressions; the Appendix reports the corresponding simple
regression results.
In each of these tables we consider variables that intuitively might be linked to
cross-sectional variation in systematic risk exposures. Rolling Þrm-level monthly
market-model regressions are one obvious source of such characteristics, providing
two measures. The Þrst measure of risk from this regression is estimated market
bi,t . We estimate betas using at least one and up to three years of monthly
beta, β
returns in an OLS regression on a constant and the contemporaneous return on the
value-weight NYSE-AMEX-NASDAQ portfolio. We skip those months in which a
Þrm is missing returns. However, we require all observations to occur within a fouryear window. As we sometimes estimate beta using only twelve returns, we censor
each Þrm’s individual monthly return to the range (-50%,100%) to limit the inßuence
of extreme Þrm-speciÞc outliers. The residual standard deviation from these marketmodel regressions, σ
bi,t , provides our second measure of risk.

We also generate intuitive measures of risk from a Þrm’s cash ßows, in particular
from the history of a Þrm’s return on assets, ROAi . We construct this measure
as earnings before extraordinary items (COMPUSTAT data item 18) over the book
value of assets (COMPUSTAT data item 6). First and most simply, we use a Þrm’s
most current ROAi as our measure of Þrm proÞtability. We then measure the degree
of systematic risk in a Þrm’s cash ßows by averaging the product of a Þrm’s crosssectionally demeaned ROA with the marketwide (asset-weighted) ROA over the last
Þve years. We call this average cross product β ROA . Our Þnal proÞtability measure
captures not only systematic but also idiosyncratic risk and is the time-series volatility
of each Þrm’s ROA over the past Þve years, σ i (ROAi ).
Capital expenditure and book leverage round out the characteristics we use to
predict Þrm risks. We measure investment as net capital expenditure–capital expenditure (COMPUSTAT data item 128) minus depreciation (COMPUSTAT data
item 14)–scaled by book assets, CAP Xi /Ai . Book leverage is the sum of short- and
long-term debt over total assets, Debti /Ai . Short-term debt is COMPUSTAT data
item 34 while long-term debt is COMPUSTAT data item 9.
Table 8 shows that lagged market beta and idiosyncratic risk have strong predictive power for a Þrm’s future market beta. Only 10% of this predictive power,
however, is attributable to bad beta. Thus sorting stocks on past equity market risk
29

measures does not generate a wide spread in bad beta. If the two-beta model of
Campbell and Vuolteenaho (2004) is correct, this popular approach will not generate
accurate measures of the cost of capital at the Þrm level.
Accounting variables can also be used to predict market betas at the Þrm level.
Some of these variables, such as the volatility of ROA, behave like market-based risk
measures in that they primarily predict good beta. Others, however, do have strong
explanatory power for bad beta. Around 40% of the predictive power of leverage and
investment for market beta is attributed to the ability of these variables to predict
bad beta. ProÞtable companies with high ROA tend to have low market betas, and
over two-thirds of this eﬀect is attributed to the fact that these companies have low
bad betas.
Table 9 and Table 10 repeat these results using annual regressions that allow a
four-way decomposition of beta. The main results are consistent with Table 8, although with higher standard errors. Equity market risk measures primarily predict
good beta, while proÞtability and leverage have substantial predictive power for bad
beta. The new Þnding in these tables is that all these eﬀects are attributed to the
systematic risks in company cash ßows, rather than the systematic risk in company
discount rates. The cash-ßow shares in the right two columns of Table 10 are consistently close to one. Systematic risks, as measured by Þrm-level accounting data,
seem to be driven primarily by fundamentals.

7

Conclusion

This paper explores the economic origins of systematic risks for value and growth
stocks. The question about the sources of systematic risks is part of a broader
debate, going back at least to LeRoy and Porter (1981) and Shiller (1981), about the
economic forces that determine the volatility of stock prices.
The Þrst systematic risk pattern we analyze is the Þnding of Campbell and
Vuolteenaho (2004) that growth stocks’ cash ßows are particularly sensitive to temporary movements in aggregate stock prices (driven by movements in the equity risk
premium), while value stocks’ cash ßows are particularly sensitive to permanent movements (driven by market-wide shocks to cash ßows.)
In a Þrst test, we break Þrm-level returns of value and growth stocks into compo30

nents driven by cash-ßow shocks and discount-rate shocks. We then aggregate these
components for value and growth portfolios. We regress portfolio-level cash-ßow
and discount-rate news on the market’s cash-ßow and discount-rate news to Þnd out
whether sentiment or cash-ßow fundamentals drive the systematic risks of value and
growth stocks. In a second test, we regress the accounting proÞtability of value and
growth portfolios on the market’s cash-ßow and discount-rate news, estimated from
a VAR or using simpler earnings-based proxies, lengthening the horizon to emphasize
longer-term trends rather than short-term ßuctuations in proÞtability. In a third
test, we run cross-sectional Þrm-level regressions of ex post beta components onto the
book-market ratio.
All of these approaches give a similar answer: The high betas of growth stocks
with the market’s discount-rate shocks, and of value stocks with the market’s cash-ßow
shocks, are determined by the cash-ßow fundamentals of growth and value companies.
Thus, growth stocks are not merely “glamour stocks” whose systematic risks are
purely driven by investor sentiment.
This paper also begins a broader exploration of Þrm-level characteristics that
predict Þrms’ sensitivities to market cash-ßow and discount-rate shocks. We Þnd
that historical return betas and return volatilities strongly predict Þrms’ sensitivities
to market discount rates, but are much less useful for predicting sensitivities to market
cash ßows. Accounting data, however, particularly the return on assets and the debtasset ratio, are important predictors of Þrms’ sensitivities to market cash ßows. This
Þnding implies that accounting data should play a more important role in determining
a Þrm’s cost of capital in a two-beta model like that of Campbell and Vuolteenaho
(2004), which stresses the importance of cash-ßow sensitivity, than in the traditional
CAPM.
Finally, we show that these eﬀects of Þrm characteristics on Þrm sensitivities to
market cash ßows and discount rates operate primarily through Þrm-level cash ßows
rather than through Þrm-level discount rates. This result generalizes our Þnding for
growth and value stocks, and suggests that fundamentals have a dominant inßuence
on cross-sectional patterns of systematic risk in the stock market.

31

References
Ang, Andrew and Geert Bekaert, 2003, Stock return predictability: Is it there?,
unpublished paper, Columbia University.
Baker, Malcolm, Jeremy C. Stein, and Jeﬀrey Wurgler, 2003, When does the stock
market matter? Stock prices and the investment of equity-dependent Þrms,
Quarterly Journal of Economics 118, 969—1006.
Baker, Malcolm and Jeﬀrey Wurgler, 2004, Investor sentiment and the cross-section
of stock returns, unpublished paper, Harvard Business School and New York
University.
Ball, Ray, 1978, Anomalies in relationships between securities’ yields and yieldsurrogates, Journal of Financial Economics 6, 103—126.
Bansal, Ravi, Robert F. Dittmar, and Christian T. Lundblad, 2003, Interpreting
risk premia across size, value, and industry portfolios, unpublished paper, Duke
University and Indiana University.
Bansal, Ravi, Robert F. Dittmar, and Christian T. Lundblad, 2005, Consumption,
dividends, and the cross-section of equity returns, forthcoming Journal of Finance.
Barberis, Nicholas and Andrei Shleifer, 2003, Style investing, Journal of Financial
Economics 68, 161—199.
Barberis, Nicholas, Andrei Shleifer, and Jeﬀrey Wurgler, 2005, Comovement, Journal
of Financial Economics 75, 283—317.
Basu, Sanjoy, 1977, Investment performance of common stocks in relation to their
price-earnings ratios: A test of the eﬃcient market hypothesis, Journal of Finance 32, 663—682.
Basu, Sanjoy, 1983, The relationship between earnings yield, market value, and
return for NYSE common stocks: Further evidence, Journal of Financial Economics 12, 129—156.
Bickley, John H., 1959, Public utility stability and risk, Journal of Insurance 26,
35—58.
32

Brennan, Michael J., Ashley Wang, and Yihong Xia, 2001, A simple model of intertemporal capital asset pricing and its implications for the Fama-French three
factor model, unpublished paper, Anderson Graduate School of Management,
UCLA.
Campbell, John Y., Stock returns and the term structure, Journal of Financial
Economics 18, 373—399.
Campbell, John Y., 1991, A variance decomposition for stock returns, Economic
Journal 101, 157—179.
Campbell, John Y., 1993, Intertemporal asset pricing without consumption data,
American Economic Review 83, 487—512.
Campbell, John Y., 1996, Understanding risk and return, Journal of Political Economy 104, 298—345.
Campbell, John Y. and Jianping Mei, 1993, Where do betas come from? Asset
price dynamics and the sources of systematic risk, Review of Financial Studies
6, 567—592.
Campbell, John Y., Christopher Polk, and Tuomo O. Vuolteenaho, 2005, Growth
or glamour? Fundamentals and systematic risk in stock returns: Appendix,
available online at http://kuznets.fas.harvard.edu/~campbell/papers.html.
Campbell, John Y. and Robert J. Shiller, 1988a, The dividend-price ratio and expectations of future dividends and discount factors, Review of Financial Studies
1, 195—228.
Campbell, John Y. and Robert J. Shiller, 1988b, Stock prices, earnings, and expected
dividends, Journal of Finance 43, 661—676.
Campbell, John Y. and Robert J. Shiller, 2003, The long-run outlook for the US
stock market: An update, forthcoming in Nicholas Barberis and Richard Thaler
eds., Advances in Behavioral Finance Vol. II, Russell Sage Foundation, New
York, NY.
Campbell, John Y. and Tuomo Vuolteenaho, 2004, Bad beta, good beta, American
Economic Review 94, 1249—1275.
Campbell, John Y. and Motohiro Yogo, 2005, Eﬃcient tests of stock return predictability, unpublished paper, Harvard University.
33

Cohen, Randolph B., Christopher Polk, and Tuomo Vuolteenaho, 2003, The value
spread, Journal of Finance 58, 609—641.
Cohen, Randolph B., Christopher Polk, and Tuomo Vuolteenaho, 2004, The price is
(almost) right, unpublished paper, Harvard University and Northwestern University.
Cornell, Bradford, 1999, Risk, duration, and capital budgeting: New evidence on
some old questions, Journal of Business 72, 183—200.
Davis, James L., Eugene F. Fama, and Kenneth R. French, 2000, Characteristics,
covariances, and average returns: 1929 to 1997, Journal of Finance 55, 389-406.
Dechow, Patricia M., Richard G. Sloan, and Mark T. Soliman, 2004, Implied equity
duration: A new measure of equity risk, Review of Accounting Studies 9, 197—
228.
Eleswarapu, Venkat R. and Marc R. Reinganum, 2004, The predictability of aggregate stock market returns: Evidence based on glamour stocks, Journal of
Business 77, 275—294.
Fama, Eugene F. and Kenneth R. French, 1989, Business conditions and expected
returns on stocks and bonds, Journal of Financial Economics 25, 23—49.
Fama, Eugene F. and Kenneth R. French, 1992, The cross-section of expected stock
returns, Journal of Finance 47, 427—465.
Fama, Eugene F. and Kenneth R. French, 1993, Common risk factors in the returns
on stocks and bonds, Journal of Financial Economics 33, 3—56.
Fama, Eugene F. and Kenneth R. French, 1995, Size and book-to-market factors in
earnings and returns, Journal of Finance 50, 131—155.
Fama, Eugene F. and Kenneth R. French, 1996, Multifactor explanations of asset
pricing anomalies, Journal of Finance 51, 55—84.
Graham, Benjamin and David L. Dodd, 1934, Security Analysis, Þrst edition, McGraw Hill, New York.
Greenwood, Robin, 2005, Short- and long-term demand curves for stocks: Theory
and evidence on the dynamics of arbitrage, Journal of Financial Economics 75,
607—649.
34

Hansen, Lars Peter, John C. Heaton, and Nan Li, 2004, Intangible risk?, unpublished
paper, University of Chicago.
Haugen, Robert A. and Nardin L. Baker, 1996, Commonality in the determinants
of expected stock returns, Journal of Financial Economics 41, 401-439.
Keim, Donald and Robert Stambaugh, 1986, Predicting returns in the stock and
bond markets, Journal of Financial Economics 17, 357-390.
Koubouros, Michail, Dimitrios Malliaropulos, and Ekaterini Panopoulou, 2004, Longrun cash-ßow and discount-rate risks in the cross-section of US returns, unpublished paper, University of Peloponnese and University of Piraeus.
Kovtunenko, Boris and Nathan Sosner, 2003, Sources of institutional performance,
unpublished paper, Harvard University.
LeRoy, Stephen and Richard Porter, 1981, The present value relation: Tests based
on variance bounds, Econometrica 49, 555—577.
Lettau, Martin and Sydney Ludvigson, 2001, Resurrecting the (C)CAPM: A crosssectional test when risk premia are time-varying, Journal of Political Economy
109, 1238—1287.
Lewellen, Jonathan, 2004, Predicting returns with Þnancial ratios, Journal of Financial Economics 74, 209—235.
Liew, Jimmy and Maria Vassalou, 2000, Can book-to-market, size, and momentum
be risk factors that predict economic growth?, Journal of Financial Economics
57, 221—245.
Merton, Robert C., 1973, An intertemporal capital asset pricing model, Econometrica 41, 867—87.
Morningstar, 2004, Morningstar equity research methodology, Morningstar Research
Report, http://quicktake.morningstar.com/err/erm/researchmethod.pdf.
Myers, Stewart and Stuart Turnbull, 1977, Capital budgeting and the capital asset
pricing model: Good news and bad news, Journal of Finance 32, 321—333.
Ng, Victor, Robert F. Engle, and Michael Rothschild, 1992, A multi-dynamic-factor
model for stock returns, Journal of Econometrics 52, 245266.
35

Perez-Quiros, Gabriel and Allan Timmermann, 2000, Firm size and cyclical variations in stock returns, Journal of Finance 55, 1229-1262
Pettit, R. Richardson and Randolph WesterÞeld, 1972, A model of capital asset risk,
Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 7, 1649—1668.
Polk, Christopher, Samuel Thompson, and Tuomo Vuolteenaho, 2005, Cross-sectional
forecasts of the equity premium, unpublished paper, Northwestern University
and Harvard University.
Rosenberg, Barr, Kenneth Reid, and Ronald Lanstein, 1985, Persuasive evidence of
market ineﬃciency, Journal of Portfolio Management 11, 9—17.
Rozeﬀ, Michael, 1984, Dividend yields are equity premiums, Journal of Portfolio
Management 11, 68-75.
Scholes, Myron and Joseph Williams, 1977, Estimating betas from nonsynchronous
data, Journal of Financial Economics 5, 309-327.
Shiller, Robert J., 1981, Do stock prices move too much to be justiÞed by subsequent
changes in dividends?, American Economic Review 71, 421—436.
Shiller, Robert J., 2000, Irrational Exuberance, Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.
Shumway, Tyler, 1997, The delisting bias in CRSP data, Journal of Finance 52,
327—340.
Subrahmanyam, Avanidhar, and Sheridan Titman, 2001, Feedback from stock prices
to cash ßows, Journal of Finance 56, 2389—2413.
Torous, Walter, Rossen Valkanov, and Shu Yan, 2005, On predicting stock returns
with nearly integrated explanatory variables, Journal of Business 78.
Vassalou, Maria, 2003, News related to future GDP growth as a risk factor in equity
returns, Journal of Financial Economics 68, 47—73.
Vuolteenaho, Tuomo, 2002, What drives Þrm-level stock returns, Journal of Finance
57, 233-264.
Zhang, Lu and Ralitsa Petkova, 2005, Is value riskier than growth?, forthcoming
Journal of Financial Economics.
36

Table 1: Aggregate VAR parameter estimates
The table shows the OLS parameter estimates for a Þrst-order aggregate VAR model
e
including a constant, the log excess market return (rM
), term yield spread (T Y ),
price-earnings ratio (P E), and small-stock value spread (V S). Each set of two
rows corresponds to a diﬀerent dependent variable. The Þrst Þve columns report
coeﬃcients on the Þve explanatory variables, and the last column shows λ-estimates,
computed from the point estimates using the formula λ ≡ ρΓ(I −ρΓ)−1 . The market’s
NDR is computed as e10 λu and NCF as (e10 + e10 λ)u where u is the matrix of residuals
from the VAR. Standard errors are in parentheses. Sample period for the dependent
variables is 1928-2001, 74 annual data points.

e
rM,t+1

T Yt+1
P Et+1
V St+1

constant
.8967
(.2982)
-.0479
(.7059)
.6345
(.2715)
.3166
(.2164)

e
rM,t
-.0354
(.1142)
.0250
(.2778)
.0810
(.1066)
.0291
(.0856)

T Yt
.0643
(.0456)
.3437
(.1095)
.0478
(.0419)
-.0429
(.0335)

37

P Et
-.2133
(.0811)
-.1303
(.1945)
.8354
(.0750)
-.0515
(.0599)

V St
-.1642
(.0778)
.5173
(.1874)
-.1149
(.0750)
.9133
(.0574)

e10 λ
-.1010
(.0322)
.0372
(.0259)
-.8530
(.1264)
-.2178
(.1481)

Table 2: “Bad” cash-ßow and “good” discount-rate betas of value and growth stocks
The table reports the “good” discount-rate betas (top panel) and “bad” cash-ßow
betas (bottom panel) of quintile portfolios formed each year by sorting Þrms on yeart BE/ME. We allocate 20% of the market value to each portfolio. The portfolio
i = 1 is the extreme growth portfolio (low BE/ME) and i = 5 the extreme value
portfolio (high BE/ME). “1-5” denotes the diﬀerence between extreme growth and
value portfolios. Portfolios are value-weighted. BE/ME used in sorts is computed
as year t − 1 BE divided by May-year-t ME. The market’s NDR and NCF are factors
extracted using the VAR of Table 1. The t-statistics (in parentheses) do not account
for the estimation uncertainty in extraction of the market’s news terms.
Growth and value returns on the market’s −Ndr
1
2
3
4
5
1-5
1929-2000 0.86 0.88 0.84 0.82 0.97 -0.11
(13.6) (11.2) (10.8) (9.6) (8.3) (-1.1)
1929-1962 0.78 0.90 0.91 0.92 1.18 -0.40
(10.0) (8.3) (8.9) (8.2) (7.4) (-3.1)
1963-2000 1.06 0.83 0.68 0.58 0.48 0.58
(8.6) (7.6) (6.1) (4.8) (3.8) (4.0)
Growth and value returns on the market’s Ncf
1
2
3
4
5
1-5
1929-2000 0.07 0.11 0.13 0.16 0.20 -0.13
(1.6) (2.4) (3.0) (3.8) (3.5) (-3.5)
1929-1962 0.16 0.18 0.20 0.22 0.27 -0.11
(3.2) (2.8) (3.2) (3.6) (3.2) (-2.1)
1963-2000 -0.15 -0.08 -0.05 -0.00 -0.01 -0.14
(-2.2) (-1.3) (-0.9) (-0.0) (-0.1) (-2.6)

38

Table 3: Firm-level VAR parameter estimates
The table shows the pooled-WLS parameter estimates for a Þrst-order Þrm-level VAR
model. The model state vector includes the log stock return (r), log book-to-market
(BM), and Þve-year average proÞtability (ROE). All three variables are market
adjusted, r by subtracting rM and BM and ROE by removing the respective yearspeciÞc cross-section means. Rows corresponds to dependent variables and columns
to independent (lagged dependent) variables. The Þrst three columns report coefÞcients on the three explanatory variables, and the last column shows λ-estimates,
computed from the point estimates using the formula λ ≡ ρΓ(I − ρΓ)−1 . Ni,DR is
computed as e10 λui and Ni,CF as (e10 + e10 λ)ui where ui is the Þrm-speciÞc matrix
of residuals from the VAR. These news terms imply a variance decomposition of
Þrm-level returns. Standard errors (in parentheses) take into accounting clustering
in each cross section. Sample period for the dependent variables is 1929-2001, 72
annual cross-sections and 158,878 Þrm-years.
ri,t
ri,t+1
.0655
(.0375)
BMi,t+1
.0454
(.0278)
ROE i,t+1
.0217
(.0045)
Variance Decomposition
Nr
Expected-return news (Nr) 0.0048
(0.0037)
Cash-ßow news (Ncf)
0.0022
(0.0080)

39

BMi,t
.0410
(.0156)
.8631
(.0238)
-.0249
(.0033)
Ncf
0.0044
(0.0080)
0.1411
(.0191)

ROE i,t
.0817
(.0443)
-.0499
(.0517)
.6639
(.0306)

e10 λ
.0803
(.0381)
.2075
(.0807)
.2004
(.1112)

Table 4: Firm-level and the market’s cash-ßow and discount-rate news
The table reports the “good” discount-rate betas and “bad” cash-ßow betas of the
BE/ME-sorted portfolios described in Table 2. Portfolio i = 1 is the extreme growth
portfolio (low BE/ME) and i = 5 is the extreme value portfolio (high BE/ME). “15” denotes the diﬀerence between extreme growth (1) and value (5) portfolios. The
market’s NDR and NCF are extracted using the VAR of Table 1. To construct the
portfolio news terms, the Þrm-level Ni,DR and Ni,CF are Þrst extracted from a marketadjusted Þrm-level panel VAR of Table 3 and the corresponding market-wide news
term is added back to these market-adjusted news terms. Portfolio news terms are
then computed as a value-weight average of Þrms’ news terms. The t-statistics (in
parentheses) do not account for the estimation uncertainty in extraction of the news
terms.
1
2
3
4
5
1-5
β DRi,DRM : Growth and value −NDR on the market’s −NDR
1929-2000
.74
.77
.77
.80
.80
-.06
(60)
(78)
(85)
(74)
(98)
(-5.7)
1929-1962
.66
.69
.69
.72
.73
-.07
(45)
(69)
(78)
(53)
(88)
(-5.3)
1963-2000
.94
.95
.95
.97
.97
-.03
(68)
(103) (114)
(93)
(91)
(-1.8)
β CF i,DRM : Growth and value NCF on the market’s −NDR
1929-2000
.03
-.00
-.04
-.09
.01
.02
(.86)
(-.06) (-.99) (-1.8) (.18)
(.34)
1929-1962
.00
.03
.01
-.03
.16
-.16
(-.02)
(.63)
(.29) (-.42) (2.3)
(-2.7)
1963-2000
.13
-.05
-.15
-.24
-.35
.48
(1.92) (-.89) (-2.4) (-2.6) (-3.6)
(4.0)
β DRi,CF M : Growth and value −NDR on the market’s NCF
1929-2000
.04
.04
.04
.05
.05
-.01
(1.2) (91.2) (1.3)
(1.4)
(1.5)
(-3.1)
1929-1962
.08
.08
.08
.08
.09
-.02
(1.8)
(1.7)
(1.9)
(1.8)
(2.0)
(-2.7)
1963-2000
-.04
-.04
-.04
-.04
-.04
-.00
(-.80) (-.78) (-.72) (-.71) (-.69) (-.87)
β CF i,CF M : Growth and value NCF on the market’s NCF
1929-2000
.06
.08
.10
.12
.14
-.09
(4.8)
(11)
(11)
(10)
(11)
(-4.1)
1929-1962
.06
.07
.08
.09
.13
-.07
(4.9)
(7.0)
(6.8)
(6.3)
(8.7)
(-3.3)
1963-2000
.03
.09
.12
.17
.16
-.13
(1.2)
(8.8)
(10)
(9.3)
(5.8)
(-3.0)

40

Table 5: Value and growth stocks’ fundamentals on the market’s news terms
The table reports the betas from multiple regressions of cash-ßow-news proxies for the
BE/ME-sorted portfolios described in Table 2 on the market’s discount-rate and cashßow news . In the "News" panel, a portfolio’s cash-ßow news is proxied by the valueweight average of Þrms’ news terms from the Þrm-level panel VAR of Table 3. In that
panel, the market’s NM,DR and NM,CF are extracted using the VAR of Table 1. In the
P
k−1
other panels ("K=3", etc.), portfolio cash-ßow news is proxied by K
roei,t,t+k ]
k=1 [ρ
with roei,t,t+k deÞned as log(1 + ROEi,t,t+k ) − log(1 + yt+k ), where ROEi,t,t+k is the
year t + k clean-surplus return on book equity (for portfolio
sorted at t) and y the
P i k−1
Treasury-bill return. In those panels, market news, K
[ρ
(−NM,DR,t+k )] and
k=1
PK k−1
NM,CF,t+k ], is discounted and summed in a corresponding fashion.
k=1 [ρ
News

i
1
3
5
1-5

i
1
3
5
1-5

i
1
3
5
1-5

K=3

R2
23%

β DR
.01
(.21)
-.09
(-3.9)
-.05
(-1.5)
.06
(1.1)

β CF
.06
(4.7)
.10
(12.7)
.15
(10.7)
-.09
(-4.3)

β DR
-.06
(-1.7)
-.06
(-1.9)
.05
(1.2)
-.11
(-2.0)

β CF
.07
(5.4)
.09
(7.3)
.13
(8.0)
-.06
(-2.6)

R2 %
45%

β DR
.14
(2.1)
-.11
(-3.9)
-.30
(-4.6)
.44
(4.1)

β CF
.03
(1.5)
.11
(11.8)
.15
(6.7)
-.11
(-3.1)

R2 %
10%

70%
62%
19%

61%
70%
29%

82%
66%
43%

β DR
.14
(3.0)
.01
(.4)
-.02
(.5)
.16
(2.9)

β CF
.29
(1.7)
.59
(5.8)
.76
(6.2)
-.48
(-3.4)

β DR
.04
(.5)
.04
(.8)
.00
(.0)
.04
(.5)

β CF
.22
(.9)
.57
(3.8)
.83
(4.7)
-.61
(-3.2)

β DR
.26
(5.7)
.01
(.3)
-.04
(-1.6)
.29
(6.7)

β CF
.46
(2.0)
.28
(1.5)
.53
(4.3)
-.07
(-.3)

K=4

1929-2000:
R2
β DR
11%
.17
(3.0)
43%
.02
(.4)
59%
-.01
(-.2)
17%
.17
(2.8)
1929-1962:
R2 % β DR
0%
.03
(.2)
49%
.09
(1.2)
62%
.05
(.6)
17%
-.02
(-.2)
1963-2000:
R2 % β DR
41%
.26
(6.9)
2%
-.01
(-.2)
32%
-.03
(-1.0)
39%
.29
(10.8)

41

β CF
.35
(1.6)
.65
(5.6)
.79
(5.9)
-.44
(-2.4)

K=5

R2
16%
50%
64%
21%

β CF
.24
(.7)
.62
(3.6)
.89
(4.7)
-.66
(-2.6)

R2 %
0%

β CF
.41
(1.7)
.38
(2.1)
.53
(6.1)
-.11
(-.5)

R2 %
44%

54%
68%
29%

7%
32%
44%

R2
27%

β DR
.15
(2.6)
-.01
(-.2)
-.02
(-.64)
.18
(2.6)

β CF
.52
(3.2)
.71
(6.5)
.83
(6.6)
-.31
(-2.2)

β DR
-.02
(-.1)
.07
(.9)
.05
(.7)
-.07
(-.5)

β CF
.39
(1.4)
.64
(3.9)
.94
(5.5)
-.55
(-3.2)

R2 %
10%

β DR
.24
(5.7)
-.05
(-.8)
-.05
(-1.9)
.30
(11.3)

β CF
.54
(1.8)
.68
(3.3)
.67
(6.3)
-.14
(-.6)

R2 %
49%

58%
72%
18%

58%
74%
23%

27%
52%
54%

Table 6: “Bad” cash-ßow and “good” discount-rate betas’ components: Þrm-level
regressions, annual returns
The table shows pooled-WLS parameter estimates of Þrm-level simple regressions
forecasting the annual cross products (NDR +NCF )∗(NCF,i +NDR,i ), (NCF )∗(NCF,i +
NDR,i ), (NDR ) ∗ (NCF,i + NDR,i ), (NCF ) ∗ (NCF,i ), (NDR ) ∗ (NCF,i ), (NCF ) ∗ (NDR,i ),
(NDR )∗(NDR,i ). The market’s NDR and NCF are extracted using the VAR of Table 1.
All variables are market adjusted by removing the corresponding year-speciÞc crosssection mean. Independent variables, described in the text, are normalized to have
unit variance. Regression coeﬃcients are divided by the estimated market annual
return variance. All t-statistics (in parentheses) take into accounting clustering in
each cross section but do not account for the estimation uncertainty in extraction of
the market’s news terms.

MEi

BEi /MEi

Betai

β

β CF M

β DRM

β CF i,CF M

β CF i,DRM

β DRi,CF M

β DRi,DRM

-0.130
(-1.54)
0.39%
-0.075
(-1.86)
0.14%
0.174
(2.21)
0.71%

-0.040
(-1.91)
0.30%
0.008
(0.81)
0.01%
0.000
(-0.02)
0.00%

-0.090
(-1.23)
0.20%
-0.083
(-2.27)
0.18%
0.174
(2.45)
0.76%

-0.039
(-2.05)
0.34%
0.009
(0.99)
0.02%
-0.001
(-0.05)
0.00%

-0.077
(-1.18)
0.17%
-0.085
(-2.31)
0.22%
0.151
(2.40)
0.66%

0.000
(-0.10)
0.00%
-0.001
(-0.89)
0.01%
0.000
(0.19)
0.00%

-0.013
(-1.23)
0.14%
0.002
(0.42)
0.00%
0.024
(2.55)
0.44%

42

Table 7: “Bad” cash-ßow and “good” discount-rate betas’: implied shares
This table reports the bad beta share, the CF bad beta share, and the CF good beta
share implied by the previous table. Standard errors (in braces) are calculated using
the delta method and take into accounting clustering in each cross section but do not
account for the estimation uncertainty in extraction of the market’s news terms.

MEi
BEi /MEi
Betai

β CF M
β

β CF i,CF M
β CF M

β CF i,DRM
β DRM

0.306
[0.16]
-0.107
[0.17]
-0.003
[0.11]

0.993
[0.07]
1.178
[0.33]
1.775
[36.01]

0.851
[0.08]
1.028
[0.07]
0.865
[0.02]

43

Table 8: “Bad” cash-ßow and “good” discount-rate betas: Þrm-level regressions,
monthly covariances
The table shows pooled-WLS parameter estimates of Þrm-level multiple regressions
annually forecasting the subsequent average monthly cross products (NDR,t + NCF,t +
NDR,t−1 +NCF,t−1 )∗(Ri,t ), (NCF,t +NCF,t−1 )∗(Ri,t ), and (NDR,t +NDR,t−1 )∗(Ri,t ). The
market’s NDR and NCF are the monthly news terms from Campbell and Vuolteenaho
(2004). All variables are market adjusted by removing the corresponding year-speciÞc
cross-section mean. Independent variables, described in the text, are scaled to have
unit variance. Regression coeﬃcients are divided by the estimated market monthly
return variance. All t-statistics (in parentheses) and standard errors (in braces) take
into accounting clustering in each cross section but do not account for the estimation
uncertainty in extraction of the market’s news terms.
β
Betai
σ i (ri )
β ROA
i
σ i (ROAi )
ROAi
Debti /Ai
CAP Xi /Ai

0.1212
0.1207
-0.0060
0.0579
-0.0316
0.0197
-0.0154
3.89%

β CF M
(4.37)
(3.70)
(-0.32)
(5.44)
(-1.90)
(1.63)
(-1.89)

0.0117
0.0040
0.0036
0.0099
-0.0216
0.0073
-0.0060
0.60%

β CF M
β

β DRM
(1.85)
(0.46)
(1.16)
(2.82)
(-3.95)
(2.03)
(-2.00)

44

0.1095
0.1167
-0.0096
0.0479
-0.0100
0.0125
-0.0095
3.33%

(4.26)
(4.24)
(-0.47)
(4.48)
(-0.51)
(1.17)
(-1.36)

0.10
0.03
-0.60
0.17
0.68
0.37
0.39

[0.05]
[0.07]
[1.67]
[0.06]
[0.46]
[0.20]
[0.19]

Table 9: “Bad” cash-ßow and “good” discount-rate betas: Þrm-level tests, annual
returns
The table shows pooled-WLS parameter estimates of Þrm-level multiple regressions
forecasting the annual cross products (NDR +NCF )∗(NCF,i +NDR,i ), (NCF )∗(NCF,i +
NDR,i ), (NDR ) ∗ (NCF,i + NDR,i ), (NCF ) ∗ (NCF,i ), (NDR ) ∗ (NCF,i ), (NCF ) ∗ (NDR,i ),
(NDR ) ∗ (NDR,i ). The market’s NDR and NCF are extracted using the VAR of Table
1. All variables are market adjusted by removing the corresponding year-speciÞc
cross-section mean. Independent variables, described in the text, are normalized to
have unit variance. Regression coeﬃcients are scaled by an estimate of the market’s
variance. All t-statistics (in parentheses) take into accounting clustering in each cross
section but do not account for the estimation uncertainty in extraction of the market’s
news terms.

Betai
σ i (ri )
BetaROA
i
σ i (ROAi )
ROAi
Debti /Ai
CAP Xi /Ai

β

β CF M

β DRM

β CF i,CF M

β CF i,DRM

β DRi,CF M

β DRi,DRM

0.092
(3.05)
0.090
(1.45)
0.003
(0.10)
0.045
(2.20)
0.021
(1.02)
0.015
(0.70)
-0.009
(-0.48)
1.36%

-0.002
(-0.21)
0.012
(1.27)
-0.002
(-0.57)
0.003
(0.35)
0.011
(1.69)
0.007
(1.18)
-0.001
(-0.16)
0.21%

0.093
(3.23)
0.077
(1.39)
0.005
(0.20)
0.042
(2.22)
0.009
(0.55)
0.008
(0.43)
-0.009
(-0.47)
1.22%

-0.002
(-0.30)
0.011
(1.25)
0.000
(-0.08)
0.004
(0.58)
0.016
(2.18)
0.005
(0.82)
-0.001
(-0.28)
0.27%

0.078
(3.17)
0.075
(1.41)
0.014
(0.64)
0.041
(2.21)
0.011
(0.61)
0.007
(0.39)
-0.008
(-0.49)
1.18%

0.001
(0.42)
0.001
(0.79)
-0.002
(-1.72)
-0.002
(-1.99)
-0.004
(-1.52)
0.002
(1.79)
0.000
(0.92)
0.21%

0.015
(2.67)
0.003
(0.67)
-0.009
(-1.35)
0.002
(0.69)
-0.002
(-0.19)
0.001
(0.25)
0.000
(-0.21)
0.60%

45

Table 10: “Bad” cash-ßow and “good” discount-rate betas: Þrm-level tests
This table reports the bad beta share, the CF bad beta share, and the CF good beta
share implied by the multiple regressions in the previous table. Standard errors (in
braces) are calculated using the delta method and take into accounting clustering in
each cross section but do not account for the estimation uncertainty in extraction of
the market’s news terms.

Betai
σ i (ri )
BetaROA
i
σ i (ROAi )
ROAi
Debti /Ai
CAP Xi /Ai

β CF M
β

β CF i,CF M
β CF M

β CF i,DRM
β DRM

-0.020
[0.10]
0.135
[0.08]
-0.859
[9.31]
0.060
[0.16]
0.549
[0.42]
0.488
[0.54]
0.080
[0.47]

1.277
[1.88]
0.927
[0.08]
0.148
[1.49]
1.574
[1.80]
1.372
[0.34]
0.663
[0.29]
1.643
[4.59]

0.840
[0.04]
0.964
[0.04]
2.584
[8.78]
0.961
[0.05]
1.161
[0.91]
0.889
[0.46]
0.950
[0.17]

46

2

1

0

-1

-2

-3

1930

1940

1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

Figure 1: The Þgure plots three-year centered moving averages of −NM,DR (line with
squares) and NM,CF (thick solid line). The news terms are extracted from the VAR
model of Table 1. Both moving-average series are normalized to have a unit standard
deviation.

47

