                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            THE FORWARD EXCHANGE MARKET, SPECULATION,
                 AND EXCHANGE MARKET INTERVENTION



                          Jonathan Eaton
                       Stephen J. Turnovsky



                      Working Paper No. 1138




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge MA 02138


                           June 1983




We wish to thank the referees for helpful comments on an earlier
draft of this paper. The research reported here is part of the
NBER's research program in International Studies. Any opinions
expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                 NBER Working Paper   #1138
                                                      June 1983

             The   Forward Exchange Market, Speculation, and
                       Exchange Market Intervention

                                 ABSTRACT


    This   paper develops a stochastic equilibrium model of an open

economy incorporating speculation in the forward exchange market. The

model is used to examine two issues. The first is the role of specu-

lation in stabilizing the economy against stochastic disturbances.

Much risk averse speculation stabilizes domestic income against

disturbances in the domestic bond market and forward exchange market

but exacerbates the effect of foreign disturbances. Speculation may

dampen or augment the effect of money market and output supply dis-

turbances depending upon the share of foreign bonds in total wealth

and the interest elasticity of bond demand. The second issue that the

model addresses is the role of the forward market in stabilization

policy. Forward market intervention (or its equivalent in this model,

sterilized spot market intervention) does not provide monetary

authorities additional leverage in stabilizing income beyond unsteril-

ized spot market intervention. Intervention rules based on reactions

to both the forward and the spot exchange rates, however, can outper-

form intervention policies responding to the spot rate alone,

regardless of the market in which intervention occurs.


Jonathan Eaton                      Stephen J.   Turnovsky
Economic Growth Center              Department   of Economics
Yale University                     University   of Illinois
New Haven, Connecticut 06520        1206 South   Sixth Street
                                    Champaign,   Illinois 61820

(203)436—8414                       (217)333—2354
                           I. INTRODUCTION

          On several occasions economists have argued that intervention

in the forward market for foreign exchange can provide central banks

with an additional means of achieving their policy objectives. In a

Treatise on Money, Keynes (1930) proposed that intervention take place

on three fronts: "I conceive of (Central Banks) as fixing week by week

not only their official rate of discount, but also the terms on which

they are prepared to buy or sell forward exchange on one or two leading

foreign exchange centres and the terms on which they are prepared to

buy or sell gold points." (Page 327). Much more recently, Spraos (1959)

argued that "the forward rate should not only be supported, as a defense

against speculative attack, but should be actually pegged." (Page 21).

          Both Keynes and Spraos formulated their proposals for central

bank intervention in the forward market under the assumption that the spot

rate is fixed, or at least maintained within bands. With the advent of

increased flexibility of the spot exchange rate after the demise of the

gold standard and Bretton Woods, forward exchange markets have become a

much more important phenomenon, with markets existing between most major

currencies. But despite this development and Keynes' early recognition

of the role of forward market intervention, and despite some experiments

with forward market intervention by the Bank of England and the Deutsches

Bundesbank (see Spraos (1959) and Day (1976)),   there has been little

subsequent discussion about the desirability of forward market interven-

tion or the formulation of optimal intervention rules in the forward

market

          By contrast, there has been considerable discussion about the

optimal management of the spot exchange rate via intervention in the spot
                                   —2—


market. Most of the literature has addressed this issue in terms   of   the

choice between perfectly fixed and perfectly flexible exchange rates. How-

ever, recently, several authors have treated the degree of intervention as

a policy parameter and have derived optimal intervention rules in stochastic

open economy models; see, e.g., Boyer (1978), Buiter (1979), Bilson (1978),

Roper and Turnovsky (1980), Turnovsky (1983), Buiter and Eaton (l980).'

          In this paper we develop a stochastic macroeconomic model of a

small, open economy which incorporates both a spot and a forward market in

foreign exchange.1 An important parameter linking the forward and spot rates

is the elasticity of the aggregative speculative position with respect to

the differential between the forward and expected future spot rate. The

common procedure adopted in the literature of equating the forward rate to

the expected future spot rate is equivalent to assuming that this elasticity

is infinite and hence emerges as a special case of our analysis.

          We use the model to focus on two issues. First, we consider the

effects of private speculation through the forward market on the stability

of the domestic economy in the absence of any intervention. This issue of

whether or not speculative capital flows are stabilizing is an old one and

was central to the early debates on fixed versus flexible rates. It has,

however, been neglected in the more recent formal analyses of exchange markets.

We find that the effect of more elastic speculation is to provide greater

insulation for the domestic price level from speculative disturbances; but

to increase its sensitivity to foreign disturbances. The effect of more elastic

speculation on the sensitivity of the price level to domestic output supply and

money demand shocks depends upon the share of domestic bonds in domestic wealth

and the interest elasticity of bond demand with respect to the real interest rate.

When domestic bonds are a small component of total bond demand, and bond demand

is interest inelastic, then speculation stabilizes the domestic economy against

these shocks. In the opposite case, speculation is destabilizing.
                                       —3—


          Second, we consider how central bank intervention can be used to

stabilize domestic income. Introducing the forward market increases the scope

for intervention in two ways. First, the central bank may intervene directly

in the forward market by taking a position in that market. Second, it may use

the forward rate in determining its position in either the spot or forward

market. Indeed, as we show below, the response to the forward rate is a

crucial part of the optimal intervention policy in stabilizing the economy

against foreign disturbances.

          While we focus on forward exchange market intervention as a policy

instrument, our analysis is open to another interpretation. Elsewhere (Eaton

and Turnovsky (1983)) we show that when covered interest parity obtains, for-

ward market intervention is equivalent in its effects to sterilized spot mar-

ket intervention. Since our analysis is in fact based upon this interest

parity assumption, our results on optimal forward market intervention can be

interpreted equally as applying to optimal sterilized spot market interven-

tion, while the spot market intervention we consider in this paper is unsterilized.

          Section El sets forth the basic model. In Section III the model is

solved for the case where there is no intervention, so that the exchange rate

is perfectly flexible. Here we consider the effects of the elasticity of

speculation on exchange rate, price, and output stability. Section IV intro-

duces central bank intervention into the model, while Section V discusses the

effects of intervention on the stability of output.


  II. THE    FORWARD   EXCHANGE MARKET IN A MODEL OF FLEXIBLE EXCHANGE RATES

            In this section we shall assume that the exchange rate is perfectly

flexible, so that the domestic monetary authorities abstain from any form of

intervention. The model we develop is a simple one, enabling us to focus on

the main issues without undue complication. Specifically, we assume that there
                                                    —4—


is a single traded commodity, whose price in terms of foreign currency is

given. Also, we shall assume that the domestic bond is a perfect substitute

for a traded world bond when fully covered against exchange rate risk. Thus

purchasing power parity (PPP) and covered interest parity (CIP) are assumed

to hold. In the concluding section we note how our results extend to the

more general case where domestic and foreign bonds are imperfect substitutes.

Our analysis focuses on a small economy which takes the foreign price level

and interest rate as given.

               Our model can be summarized by the following set of equations:


(la)



(lb)               n1 — Pt =          — c2r +

(lc)


                                      +
(ld)                     h =              2rt — 3t+1,t -                      +
                                                                                  Ut
                                                                      3>O 82 83>0
(1)                              =   (S         —   e    '    + u5
                                     't+l,t             t'


(if)                     ht —   (1 — 1.1)(b —                = lIst     0 <   u<   1


(ig)                             =        —                   +
                                                                  u     8 .   0

where

        p =   domestic price level
       p* =   foreign   price level

       eS =   current spot exchange rate (measured in terms of units of
              domestic currency per unit of foreign currency)

       e = forward    exchange rate (measured in terms of units of domestic
              currency per unit of foreign currency)
                                               —5—

        m = domestic nominal money supply

        y = domestic real output

        r = domestic nominal interest rate

       r* =     foreign    nominal interest rate

        h =     domestic demand for bonds
        b =     domestic nominal supply of bonds
        s =     speculative     demand for foreign exchange forward

       urn =    stochastic     disturbance in demand for money

      ub = stochastic          disturbance in bond market

      u5 =      stochastic disturbance in speculators' demand for foreign
                exchange forward

      u = stochastic           disturbance in output supply

x           =   expectation   of x
    t+s,t        .
                          x = p,e5.
                                   t+s conditional on information available at
                time t,


All   variables       except r and r* are expressed as logarithmic deviations from

steady state levels; r and r* are deviations in natural units. The subscript

refers to the time dimension.
                 .,_._______                               _ 1__4L.
                                  __1 purLLLiL puwe pr-LLy LU
                 4UL.WLL11iaj'. uCLALUe                          —
                                                              LULLLL1111L LeLxn;

the domestic price of a freely traded commodity equals the price abroad multi-

plied by the exchange rate. The domestic demand for money is of the usual

form and equilibrium in the domestic money market is described by (ib). We

assume that all domestic money is held by domestic residents, who in turn

hold no foreign money. Equation (ic) specifies covered interest parity and

embodies the assumption that domestic bonds and covered foreign bonds are

perfect substitutes.

                 Condition (id) specifies the domestic demand for bonds. Because

bond market interacts in a crucial way with the forward market we depart
                                                 —6—


from the standard practice of specifying a commodity market equilibrium, a

savings or absorption equation, and suppressing the bond market equilibrium

condition. Instead, we explicitly include the bond market and leave savings

to be defined residually from conditions for money market and bond market

equilibrium. This specification is also the most convenient in a log—linear

framework and is frequently invoked in such models; see, e.g., Lucas (1975).

We postulate, in general, that the demand for bonds depends upon real income,

the domestic nominal interest rate, and the anticipated rate of inflation.

While an increase in income is likely to raise the total demand for financial

assets, it will shift the composition of demand toward money. The net effect

on bond demand, and hence the sign of l' is ambiguous. The positive coeffi-

cient on the interest rate, 2' and the negative coefficient on the expected

rate of inflation, -.8, together with the additional restriction                  —       >0
are readily derived if one assumes that (i) money and bonds are gross substitutes

and (ii) the demand for bonds is more sensitive to its own real rate of return

(rt
                  —        than to the real rate of return on money                   —




             The specification of the forward market is given in equations (le)

and (lf) and can be derived from intertemporal portfolio maximization; see,

e.g., Solnik (1973), Kouri (1976), Fama and Farber (1979), Eaton and Turnovsky

(1981). In our model, this market has two functions. First, it provides

holders of foreign bonds a means of eliminating exchange risk by selling the

foreign currency proceeds of their bonds forward. Such sales constitute

arbitrage activity on this market. Second, the forward market provides a

means of speculating on exchange rate niovements.' A first order approximation

to the rate of return on a forward purchase of one unit of foreign currency

is given by e+i —         e.     In equation (le) we postulate that the supply of

foreign exchange for speculation, s, is an increasing function of the
                                          —7—


 expected difference (e+i —       e).     When speculators are risk neutral, or when

 exchange risk is absent, the speculation coefficient will tend to infinity.

 In the absence of any official intervention in the forward exchange market,

 equilibrium in the forward exchange market requires that the excess demands

for forward exchange for these two purposes sum to zero. This condition is

described by (lf). Because of the assumption that domestic and foreign bonds

are perfect substitutes, there is in fact only a single demand function for

total bonds, h; the demand for foreign bonds is simply the difference between

the aggregate national demand and the supply from domestic sources; that isa'


(2)



where H is the total real bond demand, B is the domestic nominal bond supply,

P is the domestic price, and    H     denotes the level of the real demand for foreign

bonds, all expressed in levels. To express this relationship using variables

defined as logarithmic deviations from steady state, we approximate (2) by

                                                f
                      = (1 —          —     +              u<1
(2 )
                 ht            u)(b                  0 <


where lower case letters denote the logarithmic deviations from steady state

of the corresponding upper case variables and the parameter i. =          is   the

average holdings of foreign bonds divided by total bond deinand.-" Since

foreign bonds are covered, forward market equilibrium requires that      s =
and equation (lf) follows.

          The supply of domestic output is specified by (ig). This relation-

ship postulates that the deviation in output from some fixed capacity level

depends upon the unanticipated component of the current price of domestic

output. This formulation resembles a Lucas (1973) supply function, although

as Flood (1979) has argued, with both international and intranational trading,
                                             —8—


this rationale is inappropriate. Rather, it may be justified in terms of

the wage determination model of Gray (1976) and Fischer (1977a).
                                                 m b
                                                   s
                 Finally, the disturbances Ut, Ut, Ut and y
                                                          u are assumed to have

zero means and finite second moments and to be identically and independently

distributed. The same assumptions are made about the disturbances in the

foreign price level and foreign interest rate, p and r, respectively.2-"


      III. THE ROLE OF SPECULATION UNDER PERFECTLY FLEXIBLE EXCHANGE RATES

                 We now solve the model outlined in equations (la)—(lg) under the

assumption that there is no government intervention. We therefore set

      =        = 0 for all t, so that domestic nominal money and bond supplies remain
          bt
at their constant, steady state levels. Taking conditional expectations of

the system (1) at time t for time t+i (i > 1), we can easily establish that

the rational expectations of future spot exchange rates satisfy the first

order difference equation


                     =   12 + i.iy(1+a2) + t:2(l_11+351                  S           =
(3)                                                                                      1,   2
                L                          Jet+i,t
Given the above parameter restrictions, the coefficient                      exceeds unity and
accordingly,       the expected exchange rate at time t+i remains bounded as -                    if

and   only if


(4)
                               =   0   for I =   1.   2, ...   , and   for all t


Otherwise, expectations become unbounded and this in turn implies that the

asymptotic variances of the spot rate (and the forward rate) will become

infinite. In order to rule this possibility out, we therefore focus on the

bounded solution given by (4).-" In particular, setting i                       1 in (4) and

noting the PPP condition, we obtain the relevant expectations
                                                 —9—


                          e+i =                   =0             for all t

           Thus setting e+1 =                             = 0 in (1) implies the following unique

 solutions for domestic output, the price level, and the spot and forward prices

of foreign exchange, in terms of contemporaneous domestic disturbances and

foreign price and interest rate shocks:


 (5a)                   + iy)Ou + [82 + (1 + a2)iy + 2(1 - + 83)Ju

                                   + 28 + ct2ktye                 (p   + r) }l

(5b)       Pt =   {—(82
                          + py)u' —
                                            F2u + c2u +           c2i.ty(p
                                                                              +

(5c) e =   {(82   + uy)u —
                               F2u + 2u - [82 +                        +
                                                                           2(l
                                                                                  -     +         +
                                                                                            83)       r2e]p
                                            +


(5d) e =   {(l      —
                        8 ÷ 83 + 818)u —                         — (l -      + 8) + F1]u + (1 +
                                                                                                              2   +
                                                      —
                                                          [82 +         —     +
                                                                                  8) + r1eJ(p + r)}tT1
where

                                   .L           i•Z        Zl
                                        r2      r1 +


                                                                   +
                          + (1 +                + 2(1 —
                                                                       8) +   r2e

                                        f        b           s
                                                      + uut


In general, r1, r2, and      are ambiguous in sign. The indeterminacy arises if

    the income elasticity of the demand for bonds is strongly negative. For

simplicity, and not implausibly, we will assume that if                               is negative it is

sufficiently close to zero to ensure that r1, r2 and                          all remain positive.
                                                                    —10—


                     Equations (5a)—(5d) summarize how the various disturbances impinge

on the domestic economy. Many of these effects are familiar, and we shall

restrict our remarks to those which relate to the existence of the forward

market and to the nature of speculative behavior.2-"


The Effects of Domestic Disturbance

                    We begin by considering the response of the spot and forward exchange

rates to the three domestic disturbances. An increase in money or bond demand,

or in output, all act to lower the spot rate, while an increase in the

speculative demand for foreign exchange forward has the opposite effect.

Bond demand and speculative disturbances (as reflected in the composite

disturbance u) affect the forward rate in the same direction and in much

greater magnitude, while money demand and output supply shocks have an

ambiguous effect on the forward rate.

                    The reason why the spot rate reacts to these disturbances as it

does is straightforward, as is the reason why the forward rises in response

to a forward market disturbance. Less obvious is why the direction of the

1. = 0 fr'SJLLOC   '.1cS LLLC .1. 'IL WaA. ¼L   -,-.,+-
                                                i. Ct LC÷.,-
                                                         L'.J IL&'JIflJ                      ,.,-.= O.LPFSJ u.i.S .-
                                                                          -.&t&LSS aLat. '.1 L&               .44   Lt34.   ULLLC
is ambiguous. The reason is that these disturbances affect the spot exchange

rate and the price level in ways that create opposing effects on the demand

for foreign bonds and hence on the forward rate. A positive money demand

or output supply shock, by lowering the price level, raises the real supply

of domestic bonds. By lowering the spot exchange rate, however, these shocks

act, via CIP, to raise the nominal interest rate and hence the total demand

for bonds. The net effect on foreign bond demand is therefore ambiguous.

When the share of domestic bonds in total bonds held (1 —                                              p) is    large and
                                                                                      —
the interest rate response of bond demand
                                                                                          3)      is small, the supply
                                      —11—


effect is more likely to dominate: positive money demand and output supply

shocks, by reducing the demand for foreign bonds, reduce the supply of foreign

exchange forward as forward cover. The forward rate is consequently higher.

Conversely when the interest response of bond demand (82 — 83)     is   large

relative to the share of domestic bonds in total bonds held (1 —    ji). In
the case 81     0, the sign of either response is given by (1 — 1.1 — 8) where
        —
8
            83) can be interpreted as the semi—elasticity of the demand
for bonds with respect to the nominal interest rate, given a constant real

interest rate)&" An implication of these results is that, if the share of

domestic bonds is large and bond demand is interest inelastic (in this

sense), the forward rate may react in the opposite direction from the spot

rate to a shock in the domestic money demand or output supply. Of course,

in the extreme case in which speculation is perfectly elastic (y -      a'),   the

forward rate equals the expected future spot rate (shown previously to be

zero) and is unaffected by any current, temporary disturbances.

            Because of PPP the effect of domestic disturbances on the price

level is the same as that on the spot rate. The sign of the effect on output

is also the same with respect to money demand and forward market disturbances,

while the effect of output supply disturbances is reversed.


The Effects of Foreign Disturbances

            As with domestic shocks, when speculation is perfectly elastic the

forward rate is unaffected by current foreign shocks. So is domestic output

and the domestic price level when the demand for money is interest inelastic

(ci2 = 0). In general, an increase in the foreign price level p* will, via

PPP, lower the spot rate, thereby increasing the domestic interest rate.

If this has no effect on the demand for money (a2 = 0), e will move to of f—

set completely the effect of the change in p on p. Otherwise, the demand
                                   —12—


for money will fall, raising Pt and y to maintain money market equilibrium.

An increase in the foreign interest rate r*t will, via CIP, raise the domestic

interest rate. If a2 = 0 there are no further effects on e,          or
Otherwise, the induced increase in the demand for money will cause these

three variables to increase.


The Role of Speculation

          Another issue we consider is how the stability of the small economy

is affected by speculative behavior. To do this we analyze how the magnitudes

of the responses of the endogenous variablesto changes in the exogenous random

variables are affected by changes in the coefficient y, which measures the

elasticity of speculation with respect to the risk premium. In effect, this

involves examining the cross partial derivatives



                  3Iz/axI/y, z =                   e, e;
                                    =    Y
                                         u,
                                              in
                                              U, u,
                                                      *
                                                           r
                                                           *



          From (5a)—(5d) several qualitative propositions follow:


          Proposition 1: An increase in the elasticity of speculation

          stabilizes the forward exchange rate against all random

          disturbances.


          As speculation becomes more elastic, the forward rate becomes more

closely tied to the spot rate expected to prevail in the subsequent period

and less responsive to current shocks.


          Proposition 2: An increase in the elasticity of speculation

          stabilizes the spot exchange rate against forward market

          disturbances and foreign price disturbances. It destabilizes
                                    —13—


           the spot rate against foreign interest rate disturbances.

           More elastic speculation stabilizes or destabilizes the

           spot rate against domestic money demand and output supply

          disturbances according to whether these disturbances have

          a negative or positive effect on the forward rate. In

           the case of a monetary disturbance, the relevant condition is


 (6)
                              l—i—+OO
          in the case of a supply disturbance, it is given by


(7)                  a1(1 —    —   — (1    + a2)1 0

          Thus more elastic speculation is more likely to stabilize against

domestic monetary and supply disturbances when bond demand is interest

elastic and the share of domestic bonds held is small. The converse applies

when bond demand is interest inelastic and the share of domestic bonds is

large.

          To interpret these results we consider first the domestic disturbances.

As speculation becomes more elastic, the disturbance u, which impinges on

forward market equilibrium, is accommodated by offsetting speculation. As y

approaches infinity, the condition for forward market equilibrium reduces to

e =    e+1,   so that u becomes irrelevant. The case of monetary and supply

disturbances is more complicated. Positive money demand and output supply

disturbances initially create an excess demand for money. A lower spot rate

restores equilibrium by: Ci) lowering the price level via PPP, thereby rais-

ing the real money supply; (ii) lowering real output via the supply function;

and (iii) raising the nominal interest rate via CIP. To the extent that

speculation ties the forward rate to the future spot rate, the forward
                                    —14—


rate changes by less in response to a current shock. If a positive money

demand or output supply shock raises the forward rate then a smaller change

in the spot rate is required to restore equilibrium, since the higher forward

rate raises, via CIP, the interest rate and lowers money demand. Speculation,

by tying the forward rate more to the future, reduces the amount by which the

forward rate rises. Consequently a larger change in the spot rate is needed.

Speculation therefore destabilizes. Conversely, when these shocks act to

lower the forward rate the excess supply of money is exacerbated. A larger

spot rate change is needed to equilibrate the money market. Speculation

now stabilizes by tying down the forward rate, preventing it from falling

as far as before.ii

          Consider now the case of foreign disturbances. A rise in the

foreign price level p raises the domestic price level via PPP, thereby

creating an excess demand for money (both because the real money supply falls

and income rises). A fall in the spot rate restores equilibrium for the three

reasons given above. The forward rate falls in response to a positive value

of p. The less the forward rate falls in response to the rise in p the

more a given fall in the spot rate raises the interest rate, via CI?. Con-

sequently, the more speculation ties the forward rate to the expected future

spot rate the more responsive is the nominal interest rate to the spot rate. A

smaller change in e is thus required to restore money market equilibrium.

A rise in the foreign interest rate r also affects money market equilibrium,

in this case through CIP. Now, however, a change in e acts to dampen the

effect on money demand, since it offsets the effects of the change in r on

the domestic interest rate. As y rises, e is less sensitive, so that now

a larger change in e is required.
                                   —15-

           Proposition 3: An increase In the elasticity of specula-

           tion stabilizes the domestic price level against forward

          market disturbances but destabilizes it against foreign

          interest rate and price level disturbances. More elastic

          speculation stabilizes or destabilizes the price level

          against domestic money demand disturbances according to

          condition (6) and against domestic output supply dis-

          turbances according to condition (7).


          To the extent that speculation stabilizes the spot rate, through

PPP it stabilizes the domestic price level given the foreign price level.

Hence, the responses of Pt and e to all shqcks except p are affected by

speculation in the same direction. In the case of foreign price level shocks,
                       S    . .             . . .   S
however, movements in e stabilize p. By stabilizing e against p an increase
in the elasticity of speculation destabilizes
                                                Pt.

          Proposition 4: An Increase in the elasticity of speculation

          stabilizes domestic output against forward market dis-

          turbances but destabilizes it against foreign interest

          rate and foreign price level disturbances. More elastic

          speculation stabilizes or destabilizes output against money

          demand disturbances according to condition (6) and against

          domestic output supply disturbances according to the converse

          of condition (7).


          Except for domestic supply disturbances, any effect which an increased

elasticity of speculation has on income is qualitatively the same as its effect

on the domestic price level. The exception arises because of an increase in

u acts to raise the demand for money, lowering p. The drop in Pt dampens
                                      —16—


the increase in y originating from the disturbance u. When speculation

reduces the responsiveness of Pt to u, it diminishes this dampening effect,

and conversely.


                          IV. INTERVENTION POLICIES

            We now relax the assumption of a perfectly flexible exchange rate

and assume instead that the domestic monetary authorities continually inter-

vene in both the spot and forward exchange markets. In specifying the inter-

vention rules it is important to observe that the term b can be interpreted

either as a percentage change in the nominal bond supply or as government

sales of foreign exchange forward as a percentage of government debt. To

see this equivalence note that, expressed in terms of levels, forward mar-

ket equilibrium is described by


                               H -    =S
                                             +
where G denotes government purchases of foreign exchange forward. Define the

parameter g as the nominal value in domestic currency units of these commitments,

expressed as a share of outstanding bonds, i.e.,


                                  g     EG/B


Substituting gB for EG in the forward market equilibrium condition and taking a

log linear approximation, as before, gives

                                                   —
(le')                  h =     + (1 —
                                        11)(b +

In   deriving (le') we assume that the share      is sufficiently small to allow

the approximation ln(l +      =       The terms b and g enter only equation (le')

additively and nowhere else in the model. Accordingly, variations in the bond

supply and in the government's forward market position do not have linearly

independent effects on the economy. For concreteness we focus on the forward

market position      as a policy instrument, setting b =   O'
                                           —17—


           To incorporate official intervention into the analysis requires only

 a modest modification to the basic model (la)—(lg). Specifically, we replace

 the forward market equilibrium condition (le) by (le') and append policy rules

 describing the intervention in the spot and forward markets, with all other

 relationships remaining unchanged. The rules we consider are hypothesized to

be of the form


 (lh)
                                       S      f
                                m = alet ÷ a2et
                                     =
 (ii)
                                         b1e +      b2e
These are direct generalizations of the types of rules specified in the current

intervention literature, which typically postulate policies that make                the
                                                                           13/
domestic money supply vary with the current spot exchange rate.— Here we

assume that the intensity of intervention in both the spot and forward markets

depends upon both the spot and forward exchange rates and are described by the

parameters a1, a2, b1, b2. We may note from these intervention rules that a

fixed exchange rate may be attained either by letting a1 -             — or   b1 -
          The solution of the system for given arbitrary intervention parameters

can be obtained by first substituting the intervention rules (lh) and (li) into

the system (la)—(lg) (with (le') replacing (le)) and then following the procedure

outlined in the previous section. As before, by taking conditional expectations

of the modified system we find that the expectations of future spot exchange

rates satisfy a first order difference equation analogous to (3), namely

(3')                           e*           =
                                t+i+1,t             t+i,t

The coefficient '   is   a function of the intervention parameters
                                                                           a1, a2, b1, b2 as
well as the parameters describing private sector behavior. Indeed in the

absence of any intervention q'       4. In the case that f4'J > 1, then as before,

the only bounded solution is for                =   0.    However, with active intervention

it is now possible for        < 1.       Such a case will arise, for example, if
                                         —18—


a1
     1 +
           2,   b1 = 1 —   2I(l — u). Under     these conditions, the requirement that

expectations be bounded and the equivalent restriction that the asymptotic

variance of the spot rate be finite imposes no restriction on                 The
solutions for e+i and therefore for e are non—unique and other, stronger

criteria are required to determine the solution.

            One procedure, suggested by Taylor (1977), involves imposing the

requirement that the arbitrary constantin the solution to (3') be chosen to

minimize the asymptotic variance of e. However, this procedure is essentially

arbitrary since there is no obvious mechanism to ensure that the variance will

be minimized in this way. Also, the value of the constant that minimizes the

asymptotic variance of the spot exchange rate is not the same as the one that

minimizes the asymptotic variance of the price level. The question of which

variance (if any) rational expectations do actually minimize is not clear)-'

            In the present analysis we shall adopt a simpler (but equally arbitrary)

argument to determine e+1. We shall simply assume that irrespective of

whether            1, the rational expectations generates a solution for e which

is based on the minimum amount of information. It can be shown that if

           0 and       <1   the stochastic process determining e depends upon

an infinite distributed lag of past disturbances; for            > 1 it depends only
upon current disturbances. Applying the minimum information argument requires

us to set e÷j = 0 for all 4',       in   which case e depends only upon current

disturbances. This approach also has the related advantage of ensuring the

continuity of the optimal policy about the point where J'         =1   and avoiding

some of the complications associated with the minimum variance criterion

noted in footnote 14. Thus setting all expectations to zero in the modified

system, the solutions for the endogenous variables can be obtained in a form

directly analogous to (5a)—(Sd).
                                                —19—


                             V.       OPTIMAL INTERVENTION

            We turn now to the question of the optimal degree of interven-

tion. The typical approach to this problem is to minimize some objective

function expressed in terms of the asymptotic variances of the endogenous

variables in the economy. The objective function most frequently

postulated, and the one we shall adopt, is the stabilization of income.

            The solution for income derived in the previous section is given by


       y = (—8[2 + iy — b2(l—M)ju + O(a2+a2)u
                +[(a2+a2)[3 —         2    + (l—.i)(l—b1)]    + (l+a2—a1)[2 ÷ 111 — b2(l—ii)]}u
(8)
                + O[cx2[py — b2(l—i.i)] —
                                                 a221r
                + O[(ct2—a1)[i.iy     + 2 — b2(l—ii)]     —
                                                              (cL2+a2)[2 + b1(l—i.i)]]p}

where D E                         +        —
            (l+6a1+a2—a1)[].Ly                 b(l—u)1
               + (a2+a2)[3 —           +        + (l—i.i)(1—b1)]

In principle, the optimal degrees of intervention a1, a2, b1, b2, can be

obtained by first calculating the variance of y,                    say, and then minimizing

   with respect to these four parameters. This yields four independent values

for the intervention parameters which are functions of the random variables

and their covariances. Given the complexity of y, to determine the optimal

policies in this way turns out to be extremely cumbersome and not very

enlightening. In addition, tractability would require that all the parameters

of the model be treated as constants. We have shown elsewhere (see Eaton

and Turnovsky (1981)) that the elasticity of speculation depends, among

other things, on the variance of the spot exchange rate. Since different

intervention rules imply different asymptotic variances of the exchange

rate, -y is implicitly a function of the intervention parameters. Strictly

speaking, this dependence needs to be taken into account in the derivation of

the optimum.
                                          —20--


           Thus, rather than pursuing an explicit optimization, we focus on the

optimal intervention with respect to the different random variables, taken

individually, and also grouped as domestic and foreign disturbances. This

approach enables us to determine the extent to which (sets of) disturbances

may be eliminated and does not require us to treat y as a constant.

           To facilitate the economic understanding of the optimal policies we

shall obtain, it is convenient to summarize the system (7b), (la)—(ld), (le'),

(lf)—(li) in the following way.


(9a)
                s
           aie + a2et
                        f —
                              (p
                                     s
                                   + e) lTt —      2[r + e   f   —    s
                                                                     e}   + m

(9b)     lt +       2[r + e — e] + 3(p+e) = —uye + (lj.)[(b1l)e5 + b2e — p] +
(9c)                                 =
                                         e(q+e)   +
                                                      u
where we have substituted the intervention rules (lh), (ii) into the appropriate

market clearing conditions, and used PPP to eliminate the price level. Follow—

ing the argument of Section IV, the expectations variables e+i, 1,t-1. have

been set to zero. These three equations thus describe money market equilibrium,

forward exchange market equilibrium, and the domestic output supply function,

respectively.

           We now discuss how intervention can be used to eliminate disturbances

of different types:

5.1. Domestic Monetary and Speculative Disturbances

           Suppose that the only random disturbance is in the domestic demand for

money, u. Then from (8) it can be seen that output                   can be stabilized exactly

in any one of the following four ways' (i) a1 --             —; (ii)       a2 --

(iii)   b1 —; (iv)       b2 =   (2+y)/(l—i.i).    Setting either a1 --     — or    b1 ÷   —

leads to fixing the spot rate. Given purchasing power parity, the domestic
price level is fixed and given that there are no disturbances impinging on

supply, domestic output must be fixed as well; see (9c). Suppose on the other
                                     —21—


hand that the monetary authority intervenes with infinite intensity in the

spot market in response to the forward rate, setting a2 -     — This       will fix

the forward rate e. It then follows that the spot rate e and output y are

jointly determined by the forward market (9b) and the domestic stability func-

tion (9c). Since both these relationships are independent of the monetary

disturbance both e and y are therefore fixed; in particular, output is

stabilized perfectly as before. Finally, we may note that if b2 =
                                                                           (2+i.iy)/(l)
the effects of the forward rate are eliminated from the forward market equilibrium

(9b). Substituting this value of b2 into (9b), it is seen from (9b) and (9c)

that e is now fixed and again output is stabilized perfectly.

          Disturbances in speculation u can be stabilized analogously by

setting either (i) a1 -   —, (ii) a2 2' (iii) b1 —; (iv)           b2 --   — and a
similar explanation can be given.

          Note that all policies which eliiainate these two disturbances involve,

directly or indirectly, fixing e. Thus the established result that fixed

exchange rates isolate the domestic economy from domestic monetary shocks (see,

e.g., Boyer (1978), Turnovsky (1983), Buiter and Eaton (1980)) extends to

speculative shocks as well. The central bank can, however, stabilize e by

forward market intervention (or sterilized spot market intervention) as well as

by direct (unsterilized) intervention in the spot market. Furthermore, when

e5 is fixed, y is likely to be large which, from proposition (iv) above, rein-

forces the stabilizing effects of intervention when shocks are speculative.

5.2. Domestic Supply Disturbances

          To stabilize disturbances originating in the supply of domestic ouput

it a little more complicated. This requires setting the coefficient of u in (8)

to zero. Any combination of coefficients a1, a2, b1, b2 satisfying the relationship


           (2+a2) (83—82+(l—) (1—b1)) = (l+a2—a1) (2-h.iy—b2(l--.i))
                                     —22—


with the exception of b2 =                   and a2 =         will do. This special
                             (2+iiy)I(l_u)              cz2

case eliminates the forward rate e from both the money market and forward

market equilibrium conditions. In effect, the spot rate e is required to

equilibrate both markets and the system is overdeterinined. Two simple inter—

vention rules which do succeed in stabilizing income exactly against this

type of disturbance are:    (1) a1   1 + a2, a2 =
                                                    —a2; (ii) a1 =
                                                                   1    + a2,
b1 = 1 +   (83—2)/(1—p).   The first of these policies involves intervening in the spot

market alone; by increasing the domestic money supply appropriately in response

to a depreciation in the spot rate and decreasing it appropriately in response

to a depreciation in the forward rate, e, e and the random influences they

embody can be eliminated from the money market, thereby stabilizing income

exactly. The second policy rules require intervention in both the spot and for-

ward exchange markets; the domestic money supply should again be increased

appropriately in response to a depreciation of the spot rate, although this

should now be accompanied by an adjustment (which may be either positive or

negative) in the domestic monetary authority's holdings of forward exchange.

In economic terms, setting a1 = 1 eliminates the spot rate from the money

demand function, while setting b1 = 1 + (3—82)/(l_.1) eliminates the spot

rate from the foreign exchange market. Thus output and the forward rate become

jointly determined by the money market and forward market equilibrium condi-

tions. Since these are free of stochastic disturbances output and the forward

rate remain fixed, pegging output at zero.

           In the case of domestic monetary or speculative disturbances, income

can be stabilized perfectly by adopting the traditional form of intervention, namely

unsterilized intervention through the money market in response to the spot rate

alone. With respect to domestic supply shocks this is no longer true. Complete

stabilization requires either: (i) an appropriate response to the forward rate

either through money market or forward market intervention; or (ii) an appropriate

response to the spot rate through forward market intervention.
                                           —23—


 5.3. Domestic Disturbances as a Group

                 Next we consider the question of whether or not it is possible to

 stabilize domestic income exactly against all the domestic disturbances

 simultaneously. Given that there are only three disturbances and that there

are four policy parameters to be chosen this might seem possible. But in fact

it is infeasible. Let us consider the alternatives. First, we must eliminate

u and u. One possibility would appear to be to set b2 =
     =            But as we have noted in connection with the supply disturbance u
a2       —a2.

this combination of intervention parameters involves the elimination of the

forward exchange rate from both the money market and forward exchange market

and leads to an inconsistency. The only alternatives are therefore to eliminate

these random variables by pegging the exchange rate by setting either a1 -

or   b1 ÷   -. In either case, this yields
                                          yt =

so that domestic supply disturbances are fully reflected in domestic output. In

effect, the introduction of a fixed exchange rate means that the possibility of

stabilization through the forward market is lost. Alternatively, the policies

which may eliminate u will not succeed in eliminating both u and u simultaneously.

By choosing a1 = 1 + a2, a2 =       —a2   it is possible to stabilize both u and

but it is not possible to stabilize exactly for u1 and u taken together. In

short, there is no way of stabilizing against all three domestic random dis-

turbances simultaneously. It is possible to stabilize against u, u and u, u

pairwise, but this cannot be achieved for the remaining pair ut and u.

5.4. Foreign Disturbances

                We turn now to the foreign disturbances, which impinge on the domestic

economy through the foreign price level and interest rate. From (8) it is seen

that any combination of intervention parameters satisfying the pair of equations
                                            —24--


 (lOa)                               —              —          = 0
                                         b2(1—j)}       a282

 (lOb)           + 1.11— b2(l—.1)](cL2—a1) —                   + b1(l—p)] = 0
                                                 (a2+a2)[2
 will stabilize domestic output exactly. There are an infinite number of com-

 binations which will achieve this, although in all cases the intervention rule

must respond to the forward rate; see (lOa). 1n important result worth high-

 lighting is that perfect stabilization can be attained by intervening in either

 the forward market or the spot market alone. The optimal intervention parameters

 in these two cases are respectively


 (ila)                 a1 = a2 =   0; b1 = 0, b2 =

 (llb)                   b1 = b2 =   0;   a1 =    0, a2 =

In   either case, the intervention rule involves accommodating the forward rate;

the movement of the spot rate is irrelevant.

             To understand the economic intuition underlying these policy rules,

let us substitute (lla) into the system described by (9a)—(9c) at the same time

setting all domestic disturbances to zero, to yield


(9a')                      —(p+e) = a1y —           c2(r+e—e)
(9b')                + 2[r + e —         ej   + [3 + (l—)}(p+e) =         0


(9c')                              y =


Inspecting    (9a')—(9c'), it is evident that if the intervention is through the

forward market in accordance with (ha), the equilibrium conditions for the

domestic economy reduce to r + e —
                                              e     0, p + e = 0,         =   0.   In particular,

any random increase in the foreign price level must be exactly offset by an

equivalent appreciation of the domestic spot rate, leaving real output fixed.

           When intervention takes place through the spot market in accordance

with (llb), the system becomes
                                          —25--



(9a )
     I,                 f    — (p+e)
                                         s =                   f s
                                                       — a2(r+e_e)

(9b")             +
                      2[r + e   —
                                    e]    +
                                               [3 + (1-i.i)](p-4-e) =   —liye

(9c')                                    = 0
                                               (p+e)
In   this case the intervention rule offsets the effect of movements in the

domestic nominal interest rate on money demand. Again the proportionality of

domestic output and the domestic price level ensures that output must remain

fixed.


                            VI. CONCLUDING COMMENTS

            In this paper we have developed a stochastic model of a small open

economy having both a forward and a spot market for foreign exchange. Two main

issues have been addressed. These are (i) to determine the extent to which

speculation is stabilizing; (ii) to characterize income stabilizing interven-

tion rules in the spot and forward markets.

            Whether or not speculation is stabilizing depends upon the origin of

the random disturbances and certain characteristics of the bond market. Specula—

-4,i         1r          ar-i1it', fncf fI-ira ,4t-,—1-.
                                                  —  '.._                I_LLL

initially   on the bond and forward markets. By contrast, it tends to destabilize

domestic income and the domestic price level against those disturbances originat-

ing from abroad. Whether or not speculation stabilizes the economy against

shocks in domestic money demand or output supply depends largely on the share of

foreign bonds in total bond holdings, as well as on the interest sensitivity

of aggregate domestic bond demand. If the foreign bond share is large and

bond demand is highly elastic, speculation is likely to stabilize the price

level against both types of shocks. Conversely, if domestic bonds dominate

and bond demand is interest inelastic, speculation is likely to destabilize

the price level against these shocks as well.
                                   —26—


          In analyzing intervention in the foreign exchange market, we have

not found it fruitful to derive explicit optimal policies for the general

case, although in principle this could be done. Rather we have focused on

the separate disturbances, both individually and in groups, and considered

policies which may insulate domestic real income against them. We have

shown how real income can be stabilized against any single domestic random

disturbance in a variety of ways, although despite the fact that we are free

to choose four independent intervention parameters, it is impossible to

stabilize against all three domestic random variables simultaneously. In some

but not all cases, pairs of these random disturbances can be stabilized per

fectly. By contrast, an infinite range of intervention policies exist for

stabilizing the foreign disturbances. In all cases, the intervention rule

must take account of the forward exchange rate, thus highlighting the importance

of the forward market in stabilization. However, although the rule must be

responsive to the forward rate, the intervention itself may take place either

through the spot market or through the forward market. Equivalently, SpOt

market intervention may be sterilized or unsterilized.

          Finally, we may note that for analytical convenience we have con-

ducted our analysis for the limiting case where domestic bonds and foreign

covered bonds are perfect substitutes. It is straightforward to relax this

assumption and allow them to be imperfect substitutes. En that case it can

be shown that the general propositions obtained in this paper, and which we

have just summarized, continue to hold.
                                   FOOTNOTES

1.    Important exceptions are the papers by Tsiang (1959) and Day (1976,
      1977). Both authors consider intervention in the partial equilibrium
      context of the foreign exchange market. They do not consider inter-
      vention as a tool of stabilization policy, wñich is our purpose here.

2. The more recent formal analyses of the relative stability of fixed
    versus flexible exchange rates (e.g., Turnovsky (1976), Fisher (1977b),
    Flood (1979)) abstract entirely from speculative capital movements.

3. Bilson (1978) does incorporate a forward market into his analysis, but
    does not consider intervention in this market. Furthermore, he assumes
    that speculation in the forward market brings the forward rate into
    equality with the expectation of the spot rate prevailing when the
    forward contract matures. Optimal speculative behavior derived from
    portfolio maximization models implies that this assumption is generally
    valid only when agents are risk neutral or when there is no exchange
    risk; see, for example, Solnik (1973), Kouri (1976), Adler and Dumas
    (1977), Eaton (1978), Eaton and Turnovsky (1980).

4. We find it analytically convenient to separate forward market participa-
    tion into pure speculation and pure arbitrage. We implicitly treat the
    acquisition of an amount x of uncovered foreign bonds as combining a
    covered investment of x in foreign bonds and a speculative purchase of
    foreign currency forward in amount x. In a portfolio model of foreign
    investment we identify a third motive for participating in the forward
    market as hedging against domestic inflation. Forward positions for
    hedging purposes depend upon the relative variability of the domestic
    and foreign price levels and do not respond to the variables we are
    concerned with here. We may thus treat the forward position due to
    hedging as a constant absorbed in St; see Eaton and Turnovsky (1981).

5.   The domestic bond market equilibrium condition is based on the assumption
     that foreigners hold zero stocks of domestic bonds. In Eaton and Turnovsky
     (1981) we show that this is more likely to arise when the domestic price
     level is more sensitive to the exchange rate than is the foreign price
     level. Note we assume (i) that money and bonds are both outside assets
     and (ii) that the money and bonds of each country are denominated in the
     currency of that country. Frankel (1979) discusses the relevance of these
     assumptions for our specification.

6. This approximation is obtained as follows



                         ___ - rB cT-I I ci
                         (Ht

                                   L'Y Jj/[
                                   +      -
     Now, for any variable K,


                   __          l xi1           —
                          1nl + -——---- = ln X/X =   x   -
                                                             —
                                                             x
                    x          L   x]
                                                    —F2—


    where x =    in    X. Thus we may write

                                 ht =   (b-p) + (l-)h
 7. A more complete analysis would derive the foreign disturbances r and
          as they impinge upon the small country we consider here, from under-
     lying money market, bond market, and output disturbances abroad. To do
     so requires that we specify a model of the rest of the world which may
     be used to relate r and p to these underlying disturbances abroad. Since
     ttiiS approach introduces a number of complications which do not
     illuminate the issues we consider here, we do not pursue it. See
     Turnovsky (1983) for a model of optimal intervention that does follow
     this textendedu small country approach.

8. This requirement that the asymptotic variance be finite may be justi-
    fied by appealing to some appropriate transversality condition for a
    corresponding model derived from optimizing behavior. Under appropriate
    conditions this requirement also imposes boundedness on price expectations.

9. The effects of various exogenous stochastic disturbances on the domestic
    economy and how these are influenced by the degree of speculative
    behavior are also considered by Driskill and McCafferty (1980, 1982)
    and Turnovsky and Bhandari (1982). These models differ in many critical
    respects from the analysis presented here. For example, the Driskill—
    McCafferty model is much more partial equilibrium, while the Turnovsky—
    Bhandari analysis does not formulate the forward market explicitly.

10. The reason    and    and hence   are semi—elasticities is that r and
            — p   are in percentage change terms, while the demand for bonds
    is exresse in logarithms. To see the interpretation of      write the
    bond demand function in the form

                  =         +
                                (2-3)rt + 3[r - t+l,tt1                            +
                                                                                       u
    Note that the function can also be written as

         ht =         +   23      t+l,t -           Pt'    ÷ 2k        - (-r)] +
    in which case   has an analogous interpretation with respect to infla-
    tionary expectations.

11. The following more formal argument may be given. Substituting for p and
        in the money market equilibrium and noting (4), we can easily shoi
                                            s                      f
                                        ae          —       aet               m        y
                (1 +       +
                               a2) •• •••• — a
                                        t                     3x
                                                                   t
                                                                          —
                                                                        x —
                                                                              u,   Ut

    where ae/3x < 0 and ae/ax 0. Ifae/x > 0, then
                                        f                                                  s

    Proposition 1 implies          -----
                                                <   0     nd hence we obtain --                <   0.   It thus

    follows that increased speculation causes the fall in the spot rate to increase
    and hence is destabilizing. The argument is reversed if ae/ax > 0.
                                     —F3—

12. The consequences of forward market intervention for the consolidated
     balance sheet of the fiscal authority and central bank are discussed
     in the Appendix.

13. See, e.g., Cox (1980) and Roper and Turnovsky (1980), for example.

14. Elsewhere, in a related analysis, Turnovsky (1980) has applied this
     procedure for determining the stochastic process, with the minimization
     of the one—period variance of the spot rate as the criterion. This turns
     out to make the subsequent determination of the optimal intervention policy
     rather complicated. Essentially one has to consider the two cases:
     (i)     > 1, (ii) 14'J < 1 separately, and ensure that the optimal policy
     in each case is consistent with the restrictions applicable to that case.
     The overall optimum is obtained by taking the superior of these two
     cases and also involves a consideration of the boundary cases.

15.   Since as noted above, y is in principle a function of the intervention
      parameters, we must have y = y(a1, a2, b ,
                                                 b2). Thus in case (iv) the
      complete specification of the optimum inervention is described by
      a =  a2
              =    = 0, b =    = y(0, 0, 0, b2). The same comment applies to
               b1
      oher cases where te optimum policy involves relating an optimal inter-
      vention parameter to y.
                                       APPENDIX

               BALANCE SHEET CONSTRAINTS ON CENTRAL BANK INTERVENTION IN
                        THE SPOT AND FORWARD EXCHANGE MARKETS

                In Sections IV and V of the text we allow the central bank to
establish       a money supply and a forward market position in response to the

spot and forward exchange rates. In this appendix we state the balance

sheet constraint incumbent on the central bank in engaging in these

activities and then state the assumptions about central bank actions

implicit in our equations (lh) and (ii).

                The central bank, we assume, holds as assets government bonds and

foreign reserves and issues, as liabilities, money. By making forward market

commitments the central bank also earns capital gains and losses which it

may   finance    by monetary issue or by varying its holdings of foreign reserves

or government bonds. Let Gt_l denote central bank purchases (in natural

units) of foreign exchange forward in period t—l. This purchase has no

implications for the central bank's balance sheet in period t—l. In period

t, however, if, say, E >        E1   and Gtl < 0, the central bank must deliver

an amount G1 of foreign currency at a cost—EG_1. In exchange it receives

—E    .,
           G    of domestic money. If it buys G •      in   the spot market for foreign exchange

then there is a net increase in the money supply of —(E —
                                                                      Ei)Gti.         Instead

it could buy only _ElGt_l in the spat market and reduce its reserve holdings by

—(E — E_i)Gt...i, thereby not affecting the domestic money supply. Alternatively,
                                                                                              in
it could sterilize the effect on the money supply by selling —(E —                  Ei)Gt_i
government bonds. The overall constraint binding the central bank is that


(4.1)          (E -   Ei)Gi + (M - M1)       -
                                                 E(R   -
                                                           Ri)   -
                                                                     (B   -
                                                                              B1)   = 0


where Rt denotes the central banks holdings of foreign reserves in period t,

B its holdings of government bonds, and M its outstanding monetary liabilities,

all measured in natural units.
                                             -A2 -



          The change in the total money stock held by the public is

                                     =       —        —
(A.2)                  Mt —   Mt_i       M       M1       (R   R1)
where    denotes the foreign central bank's reserve holdings. En equations

(lh) and (ii) we assume that the central bank sets a money stock and establishes

a forward market position independently. Implicit is the assumption that the

central bank finances money supply changes and forward market gains and

losses by varying its reserve holdings or its holdings of government bonds.

The effect of changes in the foreign central bank's reserve holdings is

offset by the same means.

          We assume that the consequences of any central bank action for

the bond supply are offset by appropriate taxes and transfers by the

domestic fiscal authority. Since we consider a small economy we may ignore

the effects of changes in domestic reserve holdings for the foreign money

supply. Alternatively we could assume that these changes are offset by

appropriate taxes and transfers abroad.

          Finally, the behavioral relationships we postulate assume implicitly

that private agents, in their own behavior, are not affected by the central

bank's portfolio position. For instance, a private individual does not

include the central bank's reserve holding as a component of his own wealth.
                                REFERENCES

Adler, M. and B. Dumas, 'The Microeconomics of the Firm in an Open Economy,"
          American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, LXVII (1977),
          180—189.

Bilson, J. F. 0., "Rational Expectations and the Exchange Rate," in J. A.
          Frenkel and H. G. Johnson eds., The Economics of Exchange Rates,
          (Reading, Mass: Addison—Wesley, 1978).

Boyer, R. S., "Optimal Foreign Exchange Market Intervention," Journal of
          Political Economy, LXXXVI (1978), 1045—1056.

Buiter, W., "Optimal Foreign Exchange Market Intervention with Rational
          Expectations," in J. Martin and A. Smith eds., Trade and
          Payments Adjustment under Flexible Exchange Rates, (London:
          Macmillan, 1979).

Buiter, W. and J. Eaton, "Policy Decentralization and Exchange Rate Manage-
          ment in Interdependent Economies," NBER Working Paper 531, 1980.

Cox, W. M., "Unanticipated Money, Output and Prices in the Small Economy,"
          Journal of Monetary Economics, VI (1980), 359—384.

Day, W. H. L., "The Advantages of Exclusive Forward Exchange Rate Support,"
          IMF Staff Papers, XXIII (1976), 137—163.

____________   "Flexible Exchange Rates: A Case for Official Intervention,"
          IMP Staff Papers, XXIV (1977), 330—343.

Driskill, R. and S. McCafferty, "Exchange Rate—Variability, Real and Monetary
          Shocks, and the Degree of Capital Mobility under Rational Expecta-
          tions," Quarterly Journal of Economics, XCV (1980), 577—586.

_____________ and _____, "Spot and Forward Rates in a Stochastic Model of the Foreign
          Exchange Market," Journal of International Economics, XII (1982),
          313—331.

Eaton, J., "A Stochastic Exchange Rate Determination and Monetary Policy
          with Rational Expectations," mimeo 1978.

_____________ and S. J. Turnovsky, "Exchange Risk, Political Risk and Macro-
          economic Equilibrium," Discussion Paper No. 388, Economic Growth
          Center, Yale University, September 1981.

              and _____, "Exchange Risk, Political Risk and Macroeconomic Equilibrium,"
          American Economic Review, LXXIII (1983), 183—189.

Fama, E. and A. Farber, "Money, Bonds, and Foreign Exchange," American Economic
          Review, LXIX (1979), 639—649.

Fischer, S., "Wage Indexation and Macroeconomic Stability," in K. Brunner and
          A. Meltzer, eds., Stabiliaation of the Domestic and International
          Economy, (Amsterdam: North—Holland, l977a).

______________ "Stability  and Exchange Rate Systems in a Monetarist Model of
           the Balance of Payments," in R. Aliber, ed., The Political Economy
           of Monetary Refoin, (Montclair, N.J.: Allanheld, Osmun and Co., 1977b).
                                   -R2-


Flood, R., "Capital Mobility and the Choice of Exchange Rate System,"
          International Economic Review, XX (1979), 405—416.

Frankel, J. A., "The Diversifiability of Exchange Risk," Journal of Inter-
          national Economics, IX (1979), 378—393.

Gray, J., "Wage Indexation: A Macroeconomic Approach," Journal of Monetary
          Economics, II (1976), 221—235.

Keynes, J. M., A Treatise on Money, Vol. 2, (London: MacMillan, 1930).

Kouri, P. J. K., "The Determinants of the Forward Premium," Institute for
          International Economic Studies Ppaer No. 62, 1976.

Lucas, R. E., Jr., "Some International Evidence on Output—Inflation Tradeoffs,"
          American Economic Review, LXIII (1973), 326—334.

_____________ "An Equilibrium Model of the Business Cycle," Journal of
          Political Economy, LXXXIII (1975), 1113—1144.

Roper, D. E. and S. J. Turnovsky, "Optimal Exchange Market Intervention in
          a Simple Stochastic Macro Model," Canadian Journal of Economics,
          XIII (1980), 296—309.

Solnik, B. H., European Capital Markets, (Lexington, Mass: D. C. Heath, 1973).

Spraos, J., 'Speculation, Arbitrage and Ster1ing,' Economic Journal, LXV
          (1959),   1—21.

Taylor, J., "Conditions for Unique Solutions in Stochastic Macroeconomic
          Models with Rational Expectations," Econometrica, XLV (1977),
          1377—1385.

Tsiang, S. C., "The Theory of Forward Exchange and the Effects of Government
          Intervention on the Forward Exchange Market," IMF Staff Papers,
          VI (1959), 75—106.

Turnovsky, S. J., "The Relative Stability of Alternative Exchange Rate Systems
          in the Presence of Random Disturbances," Journal of Money, Credit,
          and Banking, VIII (1976), 29—50.

_____________ 'Exchange Market Intervention Policies in a Small Open Economy,"
          in J. Bhandari and B. H. Putnam, eds., Interdependence
          and Flexible Exchange Rates, (Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press, 1983).

_____________ and J. S. Bhandari, "The Degree of Capital Mobility and the
          Stability of an Open Economy under Rational Expectations,"
          Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, XIV (1982), 303—326.
