                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                  URBAN COLOSSUS:
                      WHY IS NEW YORK AMERICA’S LARGEST CITY?

                                           Edward L. Glaeser

                                         Working Paper 11398
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w11398


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       June 2005




Glaeser thanks the Taubman Center for State and Local Government. Joshua Samuelson provided excellent
research assistance. Stanley Engerman provided guidance on sugar. The views expressed herein are those
of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by Edward L. Glaeser. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Urban Colossus: Why is New York America’s Largest City?
Edward L. Glaeser
NBER Working Paper No. 11398
June 2005
JEL No. N0

                                           ABSTRACT

New York has been remarkably successful relative to any other large city outside of the sunbelt and

it remains the nation's premier metropolis. What accounts for New York's rise and continuing

success? The rise of New York in the early nineteenth century is the result of technological changes

that moved ocean shipping from a point-to-point system to a hub and spoke system; New York's

geography made it the natural hub of this system. Manufacturing then centered in New York because

the hub of a transport system is, in many cases, the ideal place to transform raw materials into

finished goods. This initial dominance was entrenched by New York's role as the hub for

immigration. In the late 20th century, New York's survival is based almost entirely on finance and

business services, which are also legacies of the port. In this period, New York's role as a hub still

matters, but it is far less important than the edge that density and agglomeration give to the

acquisition of knowledge.

Edward L. Glaeser
Department of Economics
315A Littauer Center
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
eglaeser@harvard.edu
   I.      Introduction


For 200 years, New York City has been the largest city in the nation, and it continues to
outperform most cities that were once its competitors. In the 1990s, the city’s population
grew by 9 percent and finally passed the eight million mark. New York is the only one of
the 16 largest cities in the northeastern or mid-western United States with a higher
population today than it had 50 years ago. New York’s economy remains robust.
Payroll per employee is more than $80,000 per year in Manhattan’s largest industry and
almost $200,000 per year in Manhattan’s second largest industry.


All cities, even New York, go through periods of crisis and seeming rebirth, and New
York certainly went through a real crisis in the 1970s. But while the dark periods for
Boston, Chicago or Washington D.C. lasted for thirty or fifty years, New York’s worst
period lasted for less than a decade. While Boston’s history is one of ongoing crises and
reinvention (Glaeser, 2005), New York’s history is one of almost unbroken triumph. The
remarkable thing about New York is its ability to thrive despite the massive technological
changes that challenged every other dense city that was built around public
transportation.


What explains New York’s ongoing ability to dominate America’s urban landscape? In
this essay, I explore the economic history of the city and argue that there are really three
themes that emerge. First, New York’s emergence as the nation’s premier port was not
the result of happenstance followed by lemming-like agglomeration. While there are
limits to geographic determinism, the clear superiority of New York’s port both in its
initial depth, the Hudson River and its location, and then the additional superiority added
by the water-borne connection to the Great Lakes ensured that this would be America’s
port. In this case, geography really was destiny and the significance of trade and
immigration to the early republic ensured that New York would dominate.




                                              2
The second lesson from New York’s history is the importance of simple transportation
cost and scale economies. The rise of New York’s three great manufacturing industries
in the 19th century, sugar refining, publishing and the garment trade, depended on New
York’s place at the center of a transport hub. In all three cases, manufacturing
transformed products from outside of the U.S. into finished goods that would be sold
within the country. Since New York was a hub and products were dispersed throughout
the country and the world after entry into that hub, it made perfect sense to do the
manufacturing in the city.


The tendency of people to attract more people is the central idea of urban economics, and
nowhere is that more obvious than in the case of America’s largest city. An initial
advantage as a port then attracted manufacturing and services to cater to the mercantile
firms and to take advantage of their low shipping costs. The traditional model of this
phenomenon (Krugman, 1991) emphasizes that scale matters because it allows
manufacturers to save on costs in supplying goods to residents of the city. But the story
of New York suggests that this was less important than the advantage of producing in a
central location for export elsewhere. Obviously, scale economies were also important
because otherwise, there would be no incentive to centralize manufacturing


New York’s growth in the early 19th century was driven by the rise of manufacturing in
the city which itself depended on the city’s primacy as a port. New York’s growth in the
late 19th century owed at least as much to its role as the entryway for immigrants into the
U.S. Indeed, the basic industrial structure of New York remained remarkably consistent
between 1860 and 1910 while the scale increased enormously. Immigrants stayed in
New York in port for “consumption” reasons. Ethnic neighborhoods made the transition
to the new world easier and New York as a city acquired over time a remarkable capacity
to cater to immigrant needs. However, the immigrants also stayed because the traditional
New York industries (especially the garment industry) were able to increase in scale to
accommodate extra labor without a huge drop in wages.




                                             3
In the middle 20th century a large number of technological changes challenged cities
throughout the United States. Declining transport costs reduced the advantages of access
to waterways. The air conditioner helped move citizens west and south. The automobile
and the truck enabled the population to disperse from city centers to outlying areas.
Almost all of America’s biggest cities declined, and sometimes declined precipitously
over the past 50 years in response to the shock. Table 1 shows that eight of the ten
largest cities in the U.S. in 1930 have a lower population today than they did then. New
York and Los Angeles are the two exceptions.


New York’s remarkable survival is a result of its dominance in the fields of finance,
business services and corporate management. Forty years ago, Chinitz (1961) described
New York as a model of diversity in comparison with industrial Pittsburgh. New York in
2005 doesn’t look nearly as diverse. 28 percent of Manhattan’s payroll goes to workers in
a single three-digit industry. 56 percent of Manhattan’s payroll goes to workers in four
three-digit industries. New York’s 20th century success primarily reflects its ability to
attract and retain a single industry, and its future appears related to a continuing ability to
hold that industry.


The attraction of finance and business services to New York reflects the advantages of
the city in facilitating face-to-face contact and the spread of information. Transportation
costs for goods have declined by 95 percent over the 20th century (Glaeser and Kohlhase,
2004), but there is no comparable reduction in the cost of moving people. After all, the
primary cost involved in the movement of people is the opportunity cost of time, which
rises with wages. For this reason, cities, which represent the elimination of physical
distance between people, still excel in delivering services. In addition, as the demand for
timely information rises, the proximity which facilitates that flow of that information
continues to be critical. The success of finance and business services on the island of
Manhattan hinges critically on the advantage that the island has in bringing people
together and speeding the flow of knowledge.




                                               4
These advantages are the result of scale and density which are themselves the result of
New York’s unique history. The vast number of people crammed together on a narrow
island is what makes Manhattan an information hub. The flow of ideas has been
exacerbated by the tendency of highly skilled people and industries to locate in the city,
which is natural, given that density and idea flows appear to complement one another.
The most visible result of New York’s strength as a conduit for information is its
penchant for information-intensive industries, like finance or publishing, to locate in the
city.


While New York’s ability to weather past challenges has been remarkable, we cannot be
certain that its future success will remain assured. New York’s importance as a port is
long past. Declining transport costs for moving goods indicates that the scale advantages
remain important only in services. Even in this area, technological changes may reduce
New York’s transportation cost advantages. In the long run, New York City’s success
depends upon its advantage in transmitting knowledge quickly. This advantage may also
be eroded by changes in information technology, but in the short run, information
technology may increase the value of face-to-face interaction and make New York
stronger, not weaker (Gaspar and Glaeser, 1998).


    II.    The Early City: 1624-1790


The traditional story of New York’s origin is that in 1626, the island of Manhattan was
bought by Peter Minuit from the Lenapes for “sixty guilders worth of trade goods”
(Burrows and Wallace, 1999, p. 23). New Amsterdam was founded by the Dutch West
India Company as a trading post oriented towards the lucrative fur trade. As Burrows
and Wallace (1999, p. 23) explain, the fur trade involved two exchanges: “In the first,
European traders and coastal Algonkians exchanged manufactured goods for wampum; in
the second, European traders used wampum (and manufactured goods) to obtain first at
Fort Orange [Albany].” Manhattan’s location—a deep-water port at the heart of the
Hudson—made it an ideal center for commerce, connecting Europeans, coastal native
Americans who dealt in Wampum and upriver native Americans who had access to furs.



                                             5
Manufacturing had a place in New York, from its inception. An essential part of the
trade with the natives was the production of manufactured goods and these were cheaper
to produce in New Amsterdam than to import from the Netherlands. Agglomeration in a
city was natural both because of the gains from centralized commerce and also because
there was substantial risk from ongoing battles with natives. A significant advantage of
lower Manhattan was that because it was surrounded on three sides by water, it was
easier to defend.


The Dutch colonies of New Netherlands were not solely fur trading outposts. Land was
abundant and a steady stream of settlers acquired land (sometimes vast tracts of it like
Rensselaerswyck) and began producing basic agricultural products like bread, corn and
meat. The density of settlers was much lower than in Massachusetts, but gradually the
New Amsterdam area also developed an agricultural hinterland that could both feed the
traders and seamen in the city and also begin to export basic foodstuff to more colonies
that exported cash crops.


In 1664, the town was conquered by the English and renamed New York. The city was
conquered, but the English were only able to keep the city by giving the Dutch West
India Company the more lucrative colony of Surinam. The integration of New York with
the English colonies increased the potential for trading opportunities and the population
of the city surged to approximately 3,000 in 1680 (Burrows and Wallace, 1999) and
5,000 in 1698 (Kantrowitz, 1995). While many Dutch merchants continued to trade with
the Netherlands and the Dutch colonies, a growing group of English merchants and
laborers came to the city as well.


During this period, New York’s trade became primarily oriented towards the West Indies.
The primary exports of the port were bread and flour, made from wheat grown in the
farms of New York, Connecticut and New Jersey. This model of selling foodstuffs to the
colonies which had cash crops that could be sold back in Europe had been pioneered by
Bostonians in the late 1630s, but New Yorkers (and Philadelphians) had several



                                             6
significant advantages over the Boston merchants. The land in New York and
Pennsylvania was better than the land in Massachusetts. The Hudson and Delaware
rivers were longer, bigger rivers than the Charles. Indeed, the one long river in New
England, the Connecticut, suffered from heavy silt that formed a sandbar near its mouth.
New York’s Dutch heritage gave it an advantage over Philadelphia in dealing with the
Dutch colonies in the Caribbean.


New York also offered one more striking advantage over Boston: its ethnic heterogeneity
and religious tolerance. Boston’s puritan heritage carried both advantages and
disadvantages. The strong religious community invested in education and generally
proved able to organize the city and provide basic public goods. Quaker Philadelphia
may have been more tolerant than Puritan Boston but it was still fundamentally a faith-
based colony. By contrast, New York was irreligious from the start, and there were fewer
barriers against Jewish or Catholic immigrants. Commercial interests ensured that New
York City was unusually tolerant both relative to other colonies and relative to England,
itself. New York’s place as a haven for America’s ethnically heterogeneous immigrants
made the city a magnet for immigrants from its earliest years.


Despite these advantages, the growth of New York during its first 130 years was
relatively modest. Generally, New York was America’s third or fourth busiest port. In
tonnage, it lagged behind Boston and Charleston in the early 18th century and behind
Boston and Philadelphia in the late colonial period. Boston had a stronger maritime
tradition; Philadelphia had a more developed hinterland. As of 1753, Manhattan had
13,000 inhabitants making it one of the colonies bigger cities, but hardly a dominant
metropolis.


The French and Indian War ended the French presence in Canada and increased the
relative value of New York’s access through the Hudson to the north. The Revolutionary
War had an even more remarkable impact on New York City. The port was the only
large city that remained in British hands throughout the war. While combat was certainly
disruptive, the port’s activity also expanded as it provided entry and exit for military men



                                             7
and material. Perhaps just as importantly, Boston and Philadelphia’s long term
reputations as centers of revolution meant that New York would end up being the
preferred delivery point for British goods coming into the new republic.


As of 1786, Manhattan had 23,614 residents. In the first American census, the city of
New York had 33,131 residents. Over the entire 1698-1786 period, the population of
Manhattan had grown by 1.8 percent annually. This increase is impressive, but
ultimately far less impressive than the growth of Philadelphia over the same time period.
Even though New York was larger than Philadelphia in 1790, Philadelphia was a newer
city and it had been bigger than New York for many years during the 18th century.
When the constitution was signed is 1789, New York was an important port, but its rise
to dominance was still ahead.


   III.    The Rise to Dominance: 1790-1860


If the growth of New York City prior to 1790 was impressive, the growth over the
seventy years after that date was nothing short of spectacular. Figure 1 shows the growth
of New York City’s population since 1790 and the growth of Manhattan’s population
since 1900. Figure 2 shows the growth of New York City and Manhattan as a share of
the U.S. population. Between 1790 and 1860, New York City’s population rose from
33,131 to 813,669. The annual rate of increase rose from 1.8 percent to 4.7 percent.
Figure 3 shows the time path of the decadal growth rates of New York City. During
every decade, except that war-torn period between 1810 and 1820, New York grew by
more than 50 percent per decade. Except for the period when New York’s population
soared due to the incorporation of Brooklyn, it would never grow by comparable rates
again.


By 1860, New York was far and away the biggest and most important city in the United
States with almost 250,000 residents more than Philadelphia. Over the 140 years since
that date, New York’s preeminence among American cities has never been challenged.




                                            8
In a sense, the key to understanding New York’s tremendous success lies in
understanding this seventy year period.


There are two distinct, but closely related growth processes that occurred over this time
period. First, the port of New York came to completely dominate American shipping and
immigration. Second, New York exploded as a manufacturing town as industries like
sugar, publishing and most importantly the garment trade clustered around the port. The
growth of New York City’s port seems like an almost inevitable result of New York’s
clear geographic advantages (especially when nature was helped along by the Erie
Canal). The growth of manufacturing in the city informs us about the nature of
agglomeration economies and transportation costs.


Albion (1970) describes the increased use of New York City as a dumping ground for
European goods. The Napoleonic wars (and the War of 1812) had severely curtailed
trade between the United States and the United Kingdom. As soon as peace was
declared, British merchantmen with millions of dollars of goods hastened to America to
finally sell these wares. The merchantmen packed large ships and came to New York to
drop their wares, which were then shipped throughout the republic. This basic pattern
was to be the model for trade with Europe over the 19th and early 20th centuries.


At the end of the colonial period, Boston, not New York, was America’s premier port.
Between 1790 and1820, New York came to supercede Boston and ultimately attracted a
large number of Boston merchants and sailors into its harbor. From 1820 to 1860, New
York completely surpassed its northern competition in terms of trade. Figure 4 shows the
time path of annual imports measured in dollars between 1821 and 1860. At the start of
the period, New York’s exports were 13 million dollars and Boston’s were 12 million
dollars. By the end of the period, New York’s exports were 145 million dollars and
Boston’s exports were 17 million dollars. As the figure shows, it was New Orleans, not
Boston or Philadelphia, that rivaled New York City by the middle of the 19th century.




                                             9
What changed? Why had the harbors of Boston and Philadelphia been good enough to be
the leading port of the colonial era, but not enough to maintain their strength over the 19th
century? There are actually two different sets of answers to this question. First, there are
the technical facts that make New York a somewhat superior port. Second, there are the
economic factors that translated this modest geographic superiority into complete
mercantile dominance. I start with New York’s geographic advantages.


A first advantage is New York’s central location. While Boston is at the northern edge of
the United States, New York is in the center. For ships from England and elsewhere that
were trying to make a single delivery to the colonies, New York offered a better location
since it would be cheaper to ship goods from New York to the southern colonies or
Philadelphia than from Boston. One of the great advantages of the Constitution over the
Articles of Confederation is that the Constitution greatly reduced the barriers to interstate
trade. As these barriers fell, the possibility for interstate trade increased and the
advantage of being located near the center of the colonies increased.


A second advantage was that New York had a large river that facilitated shipping deep
into the American continent. The Charles River quickly becomes narrow and shallow
and is less than 100 miles long. The Hudson is longer than 300 miles and is extremely
navigable. The Erie Canal connects the Hudson to the Great Lake system, which enables
goods to travel from the American heartland to Europe completely by water. In an age
where water-borne transport was far cheaper than transport by land, New York’s access
to canals, lakes and rivers gave it a significant edge relative to most of its competitors.


Philadelphia shared some of New York’s advantages of centrality and water access to the
interior. Of course, Philadelphia’s connection with Pittsburgh and the west used both rail
and water and as such was decidedly more difficult than New York’s pure water
connection. Moreover, New York enjoys a third advantage which Philadelphia does not
have: direct access to the ocean. The port of Philadelphia is more than 100 miles from
the Atlantic whereas the port of New York is less than 20 miles from the ocean. As such,
a European ship looking to save time and money would naturally be attracted to New



                                              10
York. The ports along the Chesapeake Bay, such as Baltimore, also suffered from a
greater distance to the ocean.


Finally, New York’s port is also superb in its combination of depth, shelter and freedom
from ice. New York harbor is protected from the ocean by Staten Island and the
Brooklyn peninsula. It is much deeper than the harbor of Boston or Philadelphia and this
became increasingly important as ship tonnage increased starting in the 1790s. Finally,
New York harbor is less prone to ice than either Boston or Philadelphia. The advantage
over Philadelphia occurs because despite Philadelphia’s more southern locale, its location
on a river means that its water freezes more readily.


These advantages were significant, but they only implied that New York would be the
first among equals. The remarkable dominance that the city had over America’s exports
needs more explanation. Why did New York end up having five or six times the exports
of Boston in 1860 and 25 times the exports of Philadelphia in the same year? This
question lies at the essence of the agglomeration economies that lie behind cities.


The rise of New York City as the dominant port can be seen as an early example of a
hub-and-spoke transportation network. In the earliest period of colonial history, the
dominant form of transportation between the new world and the old consisted of point-to-
point transport where bales of tobacco were picked up in Virginia and transported to
England. But point-to-point transport was plagued with the problem that the exporting
areas did not import anywhere near enough goods from England to fill the ships on their
voyage to the Americas. First, the southern plantation owners generally maintained a
large current account surplus which was offset either by capital accumulation or by
paying debts on the purchase of land and slaves. Second, the manufactured goods that
were important from the old world used much less space than the tobacco or cotton that
was exported. Third, the southern plantation owners found it increasingly efficient to buy
from new world producers of manufactured goods or food and avoid the lengthy Atlantic
trip.




                                            11
The lack of southern imports is illustrated in Figure 5, which shows imports and exports
out of New York and New Orleans. Throughout the 1821-1860 period, the New York
harbor imported more than it exported. This pattern reflected the general tendency of
America to run a current account deficit which was offset by shipments of bullion back to
the old world. Throughout the same time period, New Orleans maintained a staggering
current account surplus. By 1860, New Orleans exported 107 million dollars worth of
goods and imported 22 million dollars worth of goods. In a sense, this lack of balance
made it somewhat amazing that New Orleans’ port could thrive as an export market,
despite the enormous advantage of being at the mouth of the Mississippi.


This lack of coincidence of wants was solved in the 18th century, by the early triangle
trade where manufactured goods in England were brought to Africa and traded for slaves,
which were in turn brought to the Caribbean and the South. The ships reloaded with
plantation produce which was then brought to England. But this triangle could hardly
survive the elimination of the slave trade in 1808. Moreover, the elimination of the slave
trade coincided with an enormous increase in the production of cotton following Eli
Whitney’s invention of the cotton gin in 1794. At the same time as the South had more
and more to export, importation of slaves became illegal.


The “cotton triangle” in New York City solved this problem. Cotton was shipped to New
York and was transferred from coastal ships to transatlantic lines. Manufactured goods,
often made in the city went south. Ships coming to New York were filled with imported
goods from the old world. Ships leaving New York were filled with cotton and other
basic commodities being shipped east. While the New York port of the 18th century had
focused on shipping flour grown in the vicinity of the harbor, the port of the 19th century
became a conduit through which a large amount of the entire colonies trade would pass.


The “cotton triangle” is just one example of New York becoming a hub connecting two
spokes. Obviously, New York also connected the river, lake and canal traffic from the
west with the transatlantic ships to the New World. Tobacco products from the South
came to New York from Baltimore and other more southern ports. More surprisingly,



                                            12
New York also served as a hub for goods from Philadelphia and even Boston. For
example, Boston textile producers would often ship their wares to New York to be sold in
that large entrepot to buyers from across the country. Similarly, Philadelphia shipped
coal from the Pennsylvania anthracite mines up to Manhattan.


The increasing attractiveness of hub-and-spoke shipping owed much to changes in
shipping technology. Two large changes occurred, which both added advantages to
having a focal port. First, transatlantic ships became increasingly large over the early
19th century. For example, Albion (1970, p. 398) reports that in 1834, 1950 vessels
entered into New York harbor carrying 465 thousand tons of cargo. In 1860, 3982
vessels entered into the harbor carrying 1983 thousand tons of cargo. The average
tonnage per ship entering into the harbor increased from 238 tons of cargo to 498 tons of
cargo over that 26 year period. The rise in ship size is particularly clear when
considering the packet lines that provided regular service from New York to Liverpool.
In the early 1820s, these ships typically carried between 300 and 400 tons. By 1838, 1000
tons became normal and the Amazon carried 1771 tons in 1854 (Albion, 1970).


These large ships provided great scale economies in that they required smaller crews per
ton. Furthermore, they were generally safer and faster than their smaller predecessors.
However, this large ship created an indivisibility which makes the gains from a
centralized port obvious. While small ships can readily go point-to-point, dropping their
small cargoes at disparate locations, larger ships needed a market that could accept its
larger cargoes. This created a centralizing tendency, just as scale economies and
indivisibilities do in standard models of economic geography (Krugman, 1991). This
effect is exactly parallel to the tendency to use the largest planes only for travel between
the biggest airports. These bigger ships also increased the advantage inherent in New
York’s deeper harbor. Philadelphia could readily compete in handling the shallow draft
ships of the 18th century, however, the Delaware is simply not deep enough to handle
regular commerce with the largest ships of the 19th century.




                                             13
The second large change of the 19th century was increased specialized shipping, which
was in itself a by-product of the increased use of large ships for transatlantic crossings.
In a small ship world, the ships that plied the coastal trade and the ships that crossed the
ocean were not all that different. However, the rise of big ships meant that it became
efficient to use different ships to carry goods up and down the American coast and to
carry goods across the Atlantic. Small ships are far more appropriate to pick up smaller
cargoes and carry them on shallower waters. Big ships had more of a risk of running
aground and could not be used to pick up the smaller cargoes being shipped to and from
the disparate settlements of young republic. Instead, it increasingly made sense to use
smaller ships, such as schooners, to ply the coastal trade. These ships would then bring
their cargoes to New York and then be consolidated into larger cargoes carried in big
ships for the transatlantic crossing.


These technological advantages were further abetted by learning-by-doing, specialized
investment in port-related infrastructure and the agglomeration of manufacturing
(described in the next section). There is little doubt that New York gradually acquired an
unequal set of skills and institutions that supported large scale trade. Its auction houses
and insurance system became the largest in the Americas. New York invested in its
wharves which further enhanced its port. Indeed, the Erie Canal should be also seen as a
form of port-related investment that further exacerbated its initial advantages. As trade
became more intricate and as financial transactions became larger, gains to specialization
increased. As such, the initial advantage that New York had because of its deep harbor
and central location ultimately translated into massive dominance as a port.


The rise of the New York port is not an illustration of random accident leading to
geographic concentration. New York was the best port in the United States and it should
have been the largest. However, its rise does show the conditions under which an initial
advantage, which might have been slight, translates into vast scale. Probably the most
important reason for centralization was the mismatch between supply and demand
especially in the southern colonies. This mismatch in New York’s case, as in most cases,
led to the advantages of a large market which eliminate the need for bilateral commodity



                                             14
transactions. A secondary fact was changes in technology that create larger boats and
benefit from specialization. These also created scale economies in the port. Finally,
these advantages were further advanced by trade-specific infrastructure and trade-specific
human capital which became increasingly important in the more complicated world of the
19th century.


The Rise of the Manufacturing City


While the rise of New York City as a port is a striking example of agglomeration
economies at work, the majority of New York’s burgeoning population was not involved
either directly in commerce or in the maritime trades. While Boston specialized in
seafaring men, New York’s population increasingly engaged in manufacturing. As early
as the 1820, New York had 9,523 workers in manufacturing and 3,142 people in
commerce. By 1850, there were 43,340 people in manufacturing and 11,360 in
commerce. New York’s port may have been the catalyst for the city’s rise, but New
Yorkers were far more likely to be involved in producing manufactured goods than in
working on the ships themselves.


Drennan and Matson (1995) include data from the census of manufacturers in various
decades. The dominant industries (measured by value) are generally sugar refining,
printing and publishing and the garment industry. In the 1810 economic census, sugar
refining was the largest industry and it was responsible for more than one-third of the
value of total manufactured products in the city. In 1870, sugar would be the second
largest industry (by value) in New York City and the largest industry in Kings County
(Brooklyn). Even in 1900, sugar was the second largest industry in New York City.
Needless to say, sugar’s dominance did not continue into the 20th century.


The sugar industry began in New York in the 18th century when Nicholas Bayard opened
the first sugar refinery in the city in 1730. Several other refineries followed and in the
19th century, the Havemeyers began refining in Brooklyn. Sugar refining was, certainly




                                             15
relative to the garment industry, highly capital intensive for its days. These refineries
were large industrial undertakings that produced vast returns for early industrialists.


New York’s dominant role in the sugar industry resulted from its trade with the West
Indies which increasingly specialized in sugar production in the 1750s and 1760s.
During this period, New York flour was shipped down to the Caribbean and raw sugar
was one of the commodities that returned in the holds of the ships. This raw sugar would
then be refined in New York and then consumed in the city, or shipped elsewhere. This
pattern would continue after the Revolutionary War where New York’s central role as the
hub of a trading network meant that sugar passed through the city on its way both to
Europe and to markets within the United States. .


But why was New York the natural place to refine sugar? In principle, sugar could have
been refined in either the West Indies at the final point of consumption. In the case of
some commodities, processing removes so much weight that it is generally efficient to
engage in this processing at source. Indeed, even in the case of sugar, it would have been
madness to ship untouched sugar cane up to New York for processing without first
turning the sugar cane into raw sugar. The excess weight would have badly
compromised profits, and even more importantly, unprocessed sugar cane rots quickly.


While initial processing must be done soon after the cane is cut to avoid rot and close to
the sugar plantation to avoid carrying excess weight, sugar refining occurs “close to
where the sugar is to be consumed” (Galloway, 1989, p.17). Galloway (1998) writes “the
fundamental reason for the separation of the final stage in the manufacture of sugar –
refining – from the cane fields, a separation that in the western world dates back several
hundred years, lies in the fact that crystals of sugar coalesce during the human conditions
of a long sea voyage, and so any imported refined sugar would have had to have been
reworked if customers were to have received the top quality.” Galloway also emphasizes
the lack of cheap fuel for refining in the tropics and he might have also stressed the high
cost of labor in the tropics that was skilled enough to run refineries.




                                             16
Sugar refining occurred in North America rather than in the Caribbean because of high
transport costs, but sugar refining occurred in New York rather than in small towns
throughout the country because of scale economies. By the standards of early 19th
century industry, sugar refining involved large infrastructure investment and significant
fixed costs. Sugar refineries were among the largest factories of this early period. These
scale economies meant that it was impractical to spread sugar refineries throughout the
colonies in every town or village. The technology of sugar production almost dictated
that sugar refining occur in a central location close to most centers of consumption, and
New York City was an ideal central location.


The strength of the sugar industry in New York therefore owes everything to New York’s
role as a shipping hub connecting Caribbean ports both with the American hinterland and
with European final consumers. There are strong enough scale economies in sugar
refining that it makes sense to centralize, and centralized production is most efficient if it
occurs in the port through which the sugar is passing anyway. The growth of sugar
manufacturing shows a basic pattern for the growth of New York as a manufacturing
center. Trade brought raw commodities through the city. In cases where manufacturing
in the initial agricultural area was inefficient, but where it made sense to manufacture in a
single place, then this gateway city was the natural place to create finished products.


While the sugar refining industry produced a great deal of value, it generally only
included a modest number of New Yorkers. For example, in 1860, the economic census
of manufacturers reports that there were 1,494 employees in sugar refining in New York
City producing more than $19 million dollars worth of products. By contrast, the
garment industry employed 26,857 workers in that same year and produced $22,320,769
worth of products. From the mid-19th century through to 1970, the garment trade had
remained New York City’s dominant manufacturing industry, at least in terms of total
employment. In 1860, almost 30 percent of the employment in New York City
manufacturing was in the garment industry. In 1900, 19 percent of New York’s
manufacturing employment was in that sector. In 1940 and 1967, 27 percent of
manufacturing employment was in garments.



                                              17
New York was generally a diversified economy, but to the extent that one industry has
dominated the city for a century, it was the garment trade. The basic economics of the
19th century New York garment industry are not so different than the economics of the
sugar refining industry. The essence of this industry is turning cloth into clothing. Cloth
was generally produced in textile mills, either in England or later in the textile mills of
New England. As was the case with sugar, cloth and silk came through Manhattan.
Similarly, there was a strong economic rationale to have manufacturing centered at the
port of entry.


The starting point for the textile trade was England’s commercial dominance as an
exporter of wool and cotton cloth. This dominance was historical, but at the end of the
18th century, early industrialization gave English producers a huge advantage in the
production of textiles. This advantage, and the general importance of clothing in budgets,
meant that in the first half of the nineteenth century, “textiles amounted to nearly 60
percent of England’s domestic exports and about one-third of the imports of the United
States” (Albion, 1970, p. 58). This trade increasingly came through New York with the
city’s dominance of transatlantic shipping. In 1860, more than 80 percent of the nation’s
textiles entered through New York. In the same year, wool, cotton and silk goods
accounted for 37 percent of the imports coming into the harbor.


England was the only producer sending textiles into America through New York harbor.
The city was also the entryway for silks from France and even China. As New England
mills began production and competed with English producers even they found themselves
shipping cloth to Manhattan to take advantage of this central market. The vast flow of
cloth into Manhattan was the natural result of New York’s dominance as a port and
textile’s dominance as an item of trade.


In the early part of the 19th century, this trade did not create a garment industry. In the
1810 economic census, New York City had significant tanneries and hatteries, but not a
significant garment trade. Fifty years later, the garment industry had become the city’s



                                              18
largest industry. The big change occurred because of the rise of the ready-to-wear
industry. In 1810, cloth was turned into clothing by tailors, seamstresses and by the end
users themselves. There weren’t factories for the production of clothes. When clothes
where made-to-measure, there was no place for centralized production of garments. At
the start of the 19th century, therefore, New York’s garment industry consisted mainly of
tailors catering to the local population.


Over the 19th century, there were both changes in demand and production technology that
turned New York into a center of ready-to-wear clothes. On the demand side, the rising
slave population of the south had a demand for extremely cheap, ready-to-wear clothing.
George Opdyke began the manufacture of ready-to-wear clothing in New York in 1831,
catering to the market in New Orleans. The changes in production technology included
the development of the factory system and even more importantly, Elias Howe’s
invention of the sewing machine in 1846. Mechanization greatly decreased the costs of
mass production relative to custom tailoring and furthered the rise of the ready-to-wear
garment industry.


Once such an industry existed, and given that there were substantial scale economies in
the production of clothes due to machinery and specialized human capital, it is hardly
surprising that this industry centered in New York City. Given that the cloth came into
that city, there was no reason to wait until the cloth reached its final destination before
transforming it into shirts and pants. There would be few advantages of making ready-to-
made clothes in disparate locations rather than in one centralized locale.


As in the case of sugar, we must ask why manufacturing didn’t occur in the place where
the raw material was first produced, which in this case would be England. First, while
England had a long history of cloth production, it had no history of producing ready-to-
make clothes. No place did in 1830. As a result, England had no natural advantage in
this form of manufacturing. New York manufacturers had the advantage of better
knowledge of local demand, and could therefore cater to local tastes. They had access to
relatively inexpensive labor from the increasing immigrant populations. In short, there



                                              19
were probably only mild advantages for centralizing ready-to-make clothing in New
York rather than in London, but these small advantages were enough for this industry to
be located on the American side of the Atlantic.


Another important point about the garment trade, which helps to explain its 100 year
dominance in New York, is that among manufacturing industries its need for physical
space and power was quite mild. Textile mills themselves were more efficient on a grand
scale and in the first part of the 19th century, the mills needed water power. As a result,
they were generally located away from urban areas along the banks of rivers like the
Merrimack. By contrast, the garment trade involved human beings and relatively small
sewing machines. In many cases, working women could contract work to be done in
their own apartments. This was the ideal industry for a city where land was expensive.


Over the decades, New York developed an increasing human and physical infrastructure
that supported the continuing presence of the garment trade even after the port’s primacy
had passed. Factories were built to cater to this trade. Singer came to New York to
popularize his adaptation of the Howe sewing machine. An entire section of the city (the
Garment District) became oriented towards clothing production and a network of
spatially proximate suppliers catered to this industry. Perhaps even more importantly, the
city’s industry attracted skilled workers who created a powerful agglomerating force that
trained new workers and that attracted entrepreneurs. There was an initial comparative
advantage in manufacturing garments that came from New York’s port, but this
comparative advantage produced an agglomeration that kept the industry in the city.


The third largest manufacturing industry in the city in 1860 was printing and publishing.
As late as the 1960s, publishing would be a distant second to garment manufacturing in
its share of New York employment. Only in the past 30 years has publishing passed
garment manufacturing to become New York’s largest manufacturing industry. Still,
value added per worker was generally much higher in this industry than in the garment
trade. Moreover, the rise of New York publishing suggests the increasing role of New
York as a city centered around the transfer of ideas.



                                             20
Somewhat surprisingly, the early development of New York’s publishing trade was also
connected to New York’s role as a port connecting America with the old world. In the
early nineteenth century “the big money, however, came from pirated copies of English
authors (who didn’t yet have to be paid royalties because the United States government
refused to as yet to recognize foreign copyrights)” (Burrows and Wallace, 1999, p. 441).
As such, there was a huge advantage in this industry to being the first printer with a copy
of the latest London sensation and “printers and book dealers in New York and
Philadelphia competed furiously to bring out the first American editions of new English
novels” (Burrows and Wallace, 1999, p. 441).


In this competitive atmosphere being at the center of the transatlantic trade offered a
crucial advantage. New York printers would have been capable of receiving new novels
from England more quickly and regularly than their Philadelphia competitors because of
the more frequent sea traffic between New York and Liverpool. The closer connections
between New York and England also ensured a steadier infusion of information about the
latest books. New York’s production advantages were complemented by their
advantages in distributing to western consumers via the Erie Canal.


As in the case of the garment trade, this initial advantage stuck because of specialized
human capital and the advantages that came from local agglomeration economies. New
York attracted networks of suppliers and tradesmen who catered to the book producers.
Book sellers from around the country would come to New York for book fairs to get
access to the latest novels. Eventually, the combination of high costs of land and low
transport costs would push the printing presses themselves off of Manhattan, but to this
day, there is a strong community of publishing houses in Manhattan connecting with
authors and potential customers.


While publishing English novels was one part of the early success of Manhattan
publishing, the news industry was the other cornerstone of this industry. Information
extremely valuable to the growing mercantile economy and most of the early papers



                                             21
focused on providing this information. Scale economies in this industry also meant that
New York had a disproportionate number of newspapers. As the news became
entertainment, and even entertainment for the masses, scale economies and New York’s
large population ensured that the city would remain a center for newspaper production.


The central lesson of the rise of New York in the early 19th century is that manufacturing
congregated around a port. Changes in transportation technologies turned New York into
the pre-eminent port of the United States. This meant that raw inputs, including sugar,
cloth and even English novels, came first into the city. The first manufacturing industries
were based on these raw inputs. As scale economies rose with industrialization,
production was increasingly centralized in the one place which welcomed the nation’s
imports of these inputs.


   IV.     The Immigrant City: 1860-1920


While New York City was the largest city in the country in 1860, it would continue to
grow significantly over the next ninety years. Over this period, the population of the city
increased from 813 thousand to 7.9 million. Much of this increase reflected the
incorporation of the outer boroughs into New York City, but even Manhattan’s
population continued to grow until 1920. As shown in Figure 2, New York reached its
peak relative to U.S. population as a whole in 1940 when 5.6 percent of the U.S.
population lived in the city. Manhattan was at its largest relative to the nation in 1910
when almost three percent of the U.S. population lived in the island.


During this amazing period, the basic structure of the New York economy was
remarkably static. The city remained primarily oriented towards manufacturing. In
1910, there were 873,497 employees in manufacturing, 40 percent of New York’s total.
Trade and transportation had slightly more than 500,000 employees and domestic service
included more than 330,000 workers. The primary export industries were manufactured
goods and the transportation sector. New York’s port remained the biggest in the nation
during this era.



                                             22
Even more remarkably, the composition of manufacturing employment remained
remarkably constant across industries. The garment trade declined somewhat as a share
of overall employment, but it remained New York’s dominant industry. Sugar refining,
printing, tobacco and bread all remained big products. In the first half of the 19th century,
New York’s population explosion was connected with a radical restructuring of the city
economy and the rise of manufacturing. In the second half of the 19th century, New
York’s continuing population increases continued despite the fact that the basic structure
of production remained remarkably constant.


Still, there were trends that supported the growth of New York’s industries, particularly
the garment trade, during this period. Demand for finished clothing rose steadily as
population and incomes rose in the country as a whole. Input prices dropped
significantly over the 1870-1890 period. For example, the Warren and Pearson index of
the wholesale cost of textiles shows a twenty percent decline relative to the Bureau of
Labor Statistics Consumer Price Index during these years. As the South recovered from
the Civil War, cotton particularly got cheaper and the cost per pound of raw cotton fell
from 29 cents per pound in 1869 to 11 cents per pound in 1890. Wool dropped from 90
cents per pound in 1870 to less than 40 cents per pound in the mid 1890s.


Despite the continuing strengths of New York City’s industries, it would be a mistake to
ignore the explosion of immigration to America from Europe. Figure 6 shows the levels
of immigration into the United States by decadal frequencies between 1820 and 1970.
Prior to 1841, annual immigration had always been below 90,000. Except for the five
years between 1849 and 1854, immigration never passed 250,000 people per year until
1865.


After the Civil War, as the figure shows, immigration began to soar. There were almost
400,000 thousand immigrants in 1870. There were 450,000 immigrants in 1880, 1890
and 1900 and between 1903 and 1914, there were almost 12 million immigrants. The
overwhelming share of these immigrants entered the United States through the port of



                                             23
New York City. Again, New York’s dominance as a port meant that it was the center for
the import of America’s most important economic input: its labor force.


The rise in immigration is probably best seen as the result of declining transportation
costs in transatlantic passenger travel. Just as improvements in shipping ensured that
New York captured a larger share of the goods shipped into the U.S. in the early 19th
century, continuing improvements in sea travel meant that New York was able to keep a
hold on an increasingly large group of immigrants. These reductions in travel costs were
accompanied by political problems in European countries like Russia that terrorized their
Jewish citizens with Pogroms and by a continuing gap between high American wages and
worse economic prospects in the poorer European countries. Accompanying these
factors was the phenomenon of chain migration, where an initial group of immigrants
made it socially more comfortable for later immigrants to follow.


The vast number of immigrants that stayed in New York, and that continue to settle (at
least temporarily) in the city can be understood as the result of four different factors.
First, transportation costs for internal transport within the U.S. were still high enough so
that it was cheaper to just stay in New York. This factor would have been particularly
important for immigrants from poorer countries such as Italy, Austria-Hungary and
Russia, who were frequently stretched to their financial limits by the transatlantic journey
itself. After making the long and costly trip across the ocean, many immigrants simply
did not want to spend the time and money to travel further.


Second, New York’s economy may have kept its basic structure over this time period, but
it still showed a remarkable ability to increase its scale with the influx of new labor. The
rising American population meant that demand for garments continued to rise and there
was nothing intrinsic to the production process that limited even more production within
the city. The garment industry was also special in that it relied on skills that were more
prevalent among immigrants than the skills required in more advanced industries.




                                              24
Third, improvements in transportation technologies for within city transport increasingly
made the development out of the boroughs feasible. New York began its omnibus routes
in the 1820s. Streetcars and the subway line soon followed. The introduction of the
automobile was soon accompanied by the introduction of the bus. Public transportation
made it possible for new immigrants to occupy the outlying boroughs and commute into
the city.


Fourth, and perhaps most importantly, the city itself acquired considerable immigrant-
specific social and political infrastructure that made New York (and continues to make
the city) a magnet for immigration. The most important form of this infrastructure may
be large communities of immigrants from specific countries. These communities allowed
new immigrants to come to New York but continue to speak their own language. In these
areas, suppliers provided commodities that were closer to those that the immigrants had
consumed in their home countries. It was certainly easier for a Jewish orthodox
immigrant to keep Kosher in the lower east side of Manhattan than in rural Minnesota.


Immigrants provided the voting base for Tammany Hall during this time period and as a
result city services were oriented towards immigrant needs. This meant that judges were
quick to approve naturalization and that the city machine stood ready to provide
patronage and emergency supplies to new arrivals. Churches and synagogues were built
to cater to the growing immigrant population. Indeed, New York had been an immigrant
town long before the Civil War, so there was a long tradition of providing economic
services and employment to new arrivals.


Did the flow of immigrants in the late 19th century mean that New York City’s labor
supply was outstripping labor demand? Long time series on wages for New York City
are not available, so Figure 7 shows the time path of average wages for production
workers in manufacturing for New York State and the nation as a whole. The wages in
the figure are all in 2005 dollars. If New York’s growth reflects primarily labor supply,
we should expect wages in New York to be falling relative to wages in the nation as a




                                            25
whole. If New York’s growth reflects labor demand we should expect wages in New
York to be increasing.


Figure 7 shows that from 1870 to 1890, manufacturing wages were rising in the U.S. as a
whole and New York State wage premium increased from seven percent to thirteen
percent. Labor supply may have been increasing during this period, but labor demand in
both New York and the nation was increasing even faster. From 1890 to 1914, real
manufacturing wages in New York State declined and the New York State wage
premium fall back to only three percent. This period of declining real wages in the state
corresponds with the period where immigration truly exploded. These figures suggest
hat during the first 25 years after the Civil War, labor demand increases outpaced labor
supply, especially in New York, perhaps as a result of declining costs of inputs and rising
demand in the country as a whole. Changes in transportation technology made it
increasingly possible for manufacturers to locate in the city and sell their wares
throughout the world. New industrial technologies and products also strengthened the
local economy. New York remained innovative and this helped to ensure that rising
population levels didn’t push wages down precipitously.


But between 1890 and 1914, the growth of the city had more to do with the immigrant
shock to labor supply than with increases in labor demand. Nonetheless, the driving
force behind the rise of New York City population, and the continuing growth of the
city’s economy, was the steady influx of immigrants between 1890 and 1920. These
immigrants came to America because of higher wages, safety and cheaper ocean travel.
They stayed in New York for the same reasons that cotton and sugar were processed in
the city, to save transportation costs and because New York specialized in dealing with
imports.


   V.      The Rise of the Information City: 1920-2000


New York’s immigrant boom ended with the national restriction on immigration in 1921.
The quota law drove immigration down significantly and ended the pre-war explosion of



                                             26
immigration into the island of Manhattan. For the first time in decades, the foreign born
would represent a declining share of New York’s population.


This negative shock was accompanied by a pair of technological shocks that would hurt
almost all of America’s larger cities. First, the rise of the automobile made cities, like
New York, that had been built around older transportation technologies somewhat
obsolete. Cars, at least in low density car-oriented areas, are much faster means of
transportation than public transportation. The average commute by car is 23 minutes in
the U.S. The average commute by public transportation is 47 minutes. New York and
other cities had built at higher densities to take advantage of public transportation and to
allow travelers to walk from public transport stops to their final destination. Car-based
communities are built at much lower densities to allow cars to drive without congestion
and to allow consumers to consume more land.


Second, the rise of the truck led to a spectacular decline in transportation costs and a
decline in the need for high density work environments. Glaeser and Kohlhase (2004)
estimate that the real cost of transportation declined by 95 percent over the 20th century.
As such, cities like New York that were built to take advantage of transportation
technologies lost this comparative advantage. Moreover, the truck doesn’t require the
same centralized infrastructure as the older form of shipping technology. This meant that
manufacturing no longer needed to cluster around a port or a train station. Over the 20th
century, manufacturing left large cities and is now generally located in medium density
countries (Glaeser, 2005). Figure 8 shows a long time series of the share of national
manufacturing employment that was located in New York State. Figure 9 shows the
decline over manufacturing in New York City as a whole and in Manhattan after 1949.


These shocks impacted New York City just as they hit all of America’s major cities.
Table 1 shows the time path of population levels (after 1950) for the ten largest cities in
the United States in 1930. Every city but Los Angeles lost population in the 1950s and
the 1970s. Every city but New York and Los Angeles lost population in the 1960s.
Every city but New York, Boston and Los Angeles lost population in the 1980s. In the



                                             27
1990s, New York, Chicago, Boston and Los Angeles all managed to lose population.
These figures show the generally declining period that all major cities had after the
Second World War as transportation technologies made high density living in traditional
manufacturing towns relatively much less attractive.


Table 1 makes it clear that the remarkable thing about New York City is not its post-war
decline, but rather its success relative to other older cities. Only in the 1970s did New
York lose more than one percent of its population. Even in that decade, it lost the least
population of any of these cities (again except for Los Angeles). New York oriented
writers often focus on the big problems of the city during the 1970s, but such a focus
ignores the fact that almost every other traditional city did far worse during this period.
The era of Lindsay and Beam may have had its problems, but New York was in much
better shape than either Detroit or Philadelphia during the same time period.


After the Second World War, New York had many of the same problems that plagued the
other large cities. Crime skyrocketed between 1960 and 1975, and the increase in crime
made wider social problems more visible. Bad urban governance, which in most cases
had been going on for decades, became more obvious during a period of urban decline
when steadily increasing tax receipts couldn’t hide waste and mismanagement.
Furthermore, decaying infrastructure also made the city seem grungy.


But New York survived these problems better than its peers mainly because its economy
remained more robust.     While the economies of Philadelphia, Detroit and Pittsburgh
never truly survived the collapse of local manufacturing, New York (like Boston) has
reinvented itself over the last 80 years as a service city that has become increasingly
oriented around finance and corporate management. New York continues to boom
through this day primarily because of finance and business services.


Table 2a shows the distribution of employment in Manhattan in 2002. 28 percent of the
payroll of the city is in a single three digit industry: security, commodity contracts and
like activity. This level of concentration is higher even than the commitment of the city



                                             28
to the garment trade during the height of that industry. Another 28.5 percent of total
payroll is in three other industries: business, scientific and services (mostly lawyers and
accountants), credit intermediation and company management. Together, these four
industries account for 56.6 percent of total payroll in the isle of Manhattan. When
Benjamin Chinitz (1961) compared agglomeration in New York and Pittsburgh, he
emphasized the remarkably diverse nature of the New York economy. This is no longer
the case. Manhattan employment is remarkably depended on finance, business
management and business services.


This is not true in the outlying boroughs that are primarily in non-traded service sectors.
Tables 2b and 2c show the importance of health care, for example, in the economies of
Queens and Brooklyn. Both boroughs also have export sectors, such as Queens’ airport
industry, but these are both much smaller economic areas and are much more oriented
towards providing services towards the residents of the greater New York area.


New York’s move into finance and management is not really paralleled by any of the
other older cities. Perhaps the closest parallel to New York is Chicago which, during the
last decade, has somewhat remade itself around business services. Boston’s post-1980
renaissance is completely different and should be seen as the result of small scale
entrepreneurship in a number of disparate, high human capital sectors. The other large
cities are still in decline and cannot be said to have found any meaningful replacement for
the manufacturing firms that once employed thousands of their citizens.


The success of New York as a financial city suggests three questions. How did New
York become the financial capital of the world? Why has New York’s dominance
managed to expand in the modern era? Will New York manage to continue to survive on
the basis of its financial industries?


Unsurprisingly, the origins of New York’s financial community lie in its role as a port.
The financial sector on Wall Street has its origins as an organization designed around
sharing risk on sea voyages. This financial community branched into government



                                             29
securities in the 1790s. In the early 19th century, New York was a close rival to
Philadelphia as a center for trading stocks and bonds.


Eventually, New York replaced Philadelphia for at least three reasons. New York’s
greater connection to England became increasingly important in the late 19th century as
English capital financed American development. New York’s greater size meant that
there were more companies in New York which had a direct, local market for financing.
Finally, the great incentive to agglomerate in finance comes from the desire for the latest
information. In no other industry are the returns to knowing the latest fact greater, this
meant that once New York had a slight edge, this slight edge turned into a complete
preponderance as the financial community came to the city to get access to the latest
information.


The rise to world dominance for New York’s financial community was a 20th century
phenomenon that followed the decline of New York as a port. Instead, there are two
major agglomeration economies at work. First, the role of the dense city as a center for
idea flows. The high value of knowledge meant that being in the city was particularly
valuable. It may even be that New York’s high density levels, which ended up being
unattractive for most manufacturing firms, helped New York finance continue to thrive
because those high density levels are particularly conducive to chance meetings, regular
exchanges of new ideas and the general flow of information.


Figure 10 shows the rising share of U.S. and New York City employment in Finance,
Insurance and Real Estate. The concentration of New York City in this sector is much
less than the concentration of Manhattan in this sector, and the concentration of
employment is much less than the concentration by payroll. Nonetheless, the city has
much more of its employment in this area than the U.S. did as a whole. Furthermore,
both the city and national data show that this sector is becoming increasing employment.
Somewhat surprisingly, the decade in which the share of NYC employment in this sector
increased the most was the 1970s. In 1970, 7.4 percent of the city’s employment was in
this sector and by 1980, 12 percent of employment was in this sector. This change



                                             30
reflected both the increase of finance and the decline of other industries, like
manufacturing. As such, it may make sense to date New York’s dependence on this
sector to 1980.


New York’s high density levels and massive scale drove its success as a center of
business services. The costs of delivering manufactured goods depends only on
transportation technology, but the cost of delivering services depends both on technology
and on the value of the time involved by the participants in the transaction. Because
services are by definition face-to-face, during an era of rising wages, there is an increased
incentive to agglomerate these activities. This simple argument can explain why New
York was able to thrive at the same time its manufacturing base was fleeing. Services
replaced manufacturing because of the transportation cost advantages of locating in a
large, dense city.


The flow of information and the ability to buy and sell business services are the reasons
why Manhattan has survived as the center of world finance. But if finance had remained
at its 1940 level, this would have had no effect on the long run fortunes of New York.
The city’s great fortune was that at the same time that it was suffering from an exodus of
the garment trade, the international financial sector boomed. Individuals saved and
invested more. Improvements in communication technology and changes in regulation
made it increasingly attractive for people to get involved in New York’s formal economic
markets. Firms had an ongoing demand for financing. The industry soared and New
York was its center.


However, it is less obvious that this trend will continue. New York City is still the
epicenter for the transmission of new ideas in finance, but the past 15 years has seen a
remarkable growth of cutting edge financial institutions in the car-oriented edge cities
surrounding the metropolis. Some of the more famous and infamous financial market
participants have been located far away from Manhattan (Warren Buffett in Omaha, Peter
Lynch in Boston, Michael Milken in Los Angeles). As important as face-to-face contact




                                             31
appears to be, information technologies have made major inroads and the continuing
economic vitality of New York City is less obvious than it was 15 years ago.


The one final point on the future of New York which is worthwhile emphasizing is that
the city has recently made remarkable progress in changing itself from a relatively
unattractive to a relatively attractive place to live. In 1970, real wages in New York were
quite high and this was necessary to compensate workers for crime and other problems
associated with the city. In 2000, real wages are much lower. Nominal wages have risen,
reflecting in part the continuing vitality of the financial sector, but prices have risen even
more. This rise in real wages relates to the increasing demand for New York as a
consumer city. If the city is able to continue to attract financial professionals who want
the excitement of New York, then it can thrive from labor supply just as it did during the
period of immigration during the late 19th century.


   VI.     Conclusion


In Glaeser (2005), I argued that the long term success of Boston reflects a process of
continual reinvention where smart entrepreneurs react to a continuing set of crises by
discovering new ways to turn a profit and still live in that city. New York’s history is far
more continuous, more stable and more triumphant. The city’s rise to dominance occurs
during the early 19th century and is driven primarily by its advantages as a port.
Manufacturing, immigration and even finance followed from maritime supremacy. The
ultimate success of New York comes from its role as the center of the global trading
network.


There are several lessons for urban and regional economics from the economic history of
New York City. First, there is something to be said for geographic determinism. New
York City should have had the biggest harbor and it did. But we cannot understand the
full extent of New York’s dominance without understanding that agglomeration
economies and New York’s rise to dominance as a port are connected to the increasing
scale of ships and the benefits of specialization.



                                              32
A second lesson of New York is that transportation costs really matter. The city’s port
status obviously came about in large part because of these advantages, but its role as a
center for immigration and as a sugar refinery also came in large part because of costs
savings that were the result of reducing transportation costs. This point may be less
relevant today in the manufacturing sector, but the continuing importance of
transportation costs in business services helps to explain New York’s continuing strength
in that area.


A third lesson is the obvious importance of what Henderson (1977) calls localization
economies. Generally speaking, every industry has some form of very specific industry
related needs which were met by agglomerating New York. Indeed, even the
concentration of immigrants tends to suggest a benefit from very particular groups of
immigrants locating near one another. These agglomeration economies helped ensure
that initial transportation cost based agglomerations didn’t disappear as transportation
costs fell.


A fourth and final lesson is that New York’s success for centuries has been connected to
its edge as an idea city. Publishing centered in New York because people could read the
latest books from England more quickly there. Sugar refining and the garment trade were
located in New York, as opposed to the places that produced primary products, in part
because of information gains from locating in New York. Finally, and most
spectacularly, for almost 200 years, the success of the New York financial sector owes a
great deal to the ability of New York to be a place where the latest news can be picked up
quickly.




                                            33
References


Albion, R. (1970) The Rise of New York Port 1815-1860. New York: Scribners.
Burrows, E. and M. Wallace (1999) Gotham: A History of New York City to 1898. New
   York: Oxford University Press.
Chinitz, B. (1961) “Contrasts in Agglomeration: New York and Pittsburgh” American
   Economic Review 51(2): 279-289.
Drennan, M. and C. Matson (1995) “Economy” pp. 358-362 in K. Jackson, Ed. The
   Encyclopedia of New York City. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Galloway, J. H. (1989) The Sugar Cane Industry: An historical geography from its
   origins to 1914. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Gaspar, J. and E. Glaeser (1998) “Information Technology and the Future of Cities,”
   Journal of Urban Economics 43(1): 136-156.
Glaeser, E. (2005) “Reinventing Boston: 1620-2003” Journal of Economic Geography
   5(2): 119-153.
Glaeser, E. and J. Kohlhase (2004) “Cities, Regions and the Decline of Transport Costs”
   Papers in Regional Science 83(1): 197-228.
Henderson, J. V. (1977) Economic Theory and the Cities. New York: Academic Press.
Kantrowitz (1995) “Population” pp. 920-924 in K. Jackson, Ed. The Encyclopedia of New
   York City. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Krugman, P. (1991) “Increasing Returns and Economic Geography” Journal of Political
   Economy 99(3): 483-499.




                                          34
                     NYC Population                         Manhattan Population

  8.0e+06




  6.0e+06




  4.0e+06




  2.0e+06




        0
              1800               1850                1900            1950              2000
                                                    Year
             Figure 1: New York City and Manhattan Population

Source: For City Population 1790-1990: http://www.census.gov/population/www/documentation/twps0027.html.
For Borough Population 1900-1990: http://www.census.gov/population/cencounts/ny190090.txt.

                     NYC Population/US Population           Manhattan Relative Population

       .06




       .04




       .02




        0
              1800               1850                1900            1950              2000
                                                    Year
             Figure 2: New York City and Manhattan Population

Source: United States Census of Population.




                                                       35
                             1.5

                                                                                                          1900
Growth in NYC Population




                                 1

                                      1800


                                                           1830          1850
                                             1810                               1860
                                                                  1840
                                 .5
                                                                                                                 1910

                                                    1820                                      1880 1890
                                                                                                                               1930
                                                                                       1870                             1920

                                                                                                                                      1940 1950                               2000
                                                                                                                                                         1970          1990
                                 0                                                                                                                1960
                                                                                                                                                                1980


                                      1800                           1850                             1900                               1950                             2000
                                                                                                      Year
                                  Figure 3: Growth Rates of New York City by Decade

Source: United States Census of Population
http://www.census.gov/population/www/documentation/twps0027.html.


                                                NYC Exports                                                               Boston Exports
                                                Phil. Exports                                                             N. Orleans Exports

                           150




                           100




                            50




                             0
                                  1820                             1830                              1840                                1850                             1860
                                                                                                     Year
                                      Figure 4: Exports from Principal Ports 1821-1860

Source: Historical Statistics of the United States.




                                                                                                            36
                                          NYC Exports                   N. Orleans Exports
                                          NYC Imports                   N. Orleans Imports

                        300




                        200




                        100




                          0
                              1820                1830          1840           1850          1860
                                                                Year
                          Figure 5: Exports and Imports New York and New Orleans

Source: Historical Statistics of the United States.
.




                       1.0e+06
Number of Immigrants




                       500000




                              0
                                  1800              1850        1900            1950         2000
                                                                Year
                                         Figure 6: Immigration to the United States

Source: Historical Statistics of the United States.




                                                                   37
                                                Real Manufacturing Wage U.S.                   Real Manufact. Wage NY State

                              20000




                              15000




                              10000




                              5000
                                      1850                                         1900                                         1950
                                                                                   Year
                                  Figure 7: Manufacturing Wages in NY State and the U.S.

Source: United States Census of Population.



                                             1850
                                       .2                         1880
                                                                         1890

                                                    1860
NY Employment/US Employment




                                                           1870

                                                                                1900
                                                                                  1904                           1949
                                                                                     1909
                                                                                        1914
                                      .15
                                                                                            1919
                                                                                                   1929
                                                                                                          1939
                                                                                                                        1958

                                       .1
                                                                                                                               1967



                                                                                                                                      1977

                                                                                                                                             1987

                                      .05                                                                                                           1997


                                             1850                               1900                             1950                               2000
                                                                                               Year
                   Figure 8: NY State Manufacturing Employment Relative to the U.S.
Source: United States Census of Population and United States Manufacturing Census.




                                                                                       38
                    Manufacturing Emp. NYC                 Manufacturing Emp. Manhattan

  1.0e+06




   800000




   600000




   400000




   200000
            1940                    1960                    1980                     2000
                                                  Year
               Figure 9: Manufacturing Employment over Time

Source: Statistical Abstracts of the United States, years 1949, 1956, 1967, 1977, 1983, 1994, 2000.



                    FIRE as a share of USA Emp.            FIRE as a share of NYC Emp.

       15




       10




        5




        0
            1940                    1960                    1980                     2000
                                                  Year
   Figure 10: Finance, Insurance and Real Estate in NYC and the US

Source: United States Census of Population.




                                                     39
Table 1 – Growth in Top 10 Cities by 1930 Population
City name               Population                        Percent growth in population                     Population



                               1930    1950-1960       1960-1970    1970-1980    1980-1990    1990-2000           2000
New York City, NY         6,930,446         -0.01            0.01        -0.10         0.04         0.09     8,008,278
Chicago, IL               3,376,438         -0.02           -0.05        -0.11        -0.07         0.04     2,896,016
Philadelphia, PA          1,950,961         -0.03           -0.03        -0.13        -0.06        -0.04     1,517,550
Detroit, MI               1,568,662         -0.10           -0.09        -0.20        -0.15        -0.07       951,270
Los Angeles, CA           1,238,048          0.26            0.14         0.05         0.17         0.06     3,694,820
Cleveland, OH               900,429         -0.04           -0.14        -0.24        -0.12        -0.05       478,403
St. Louis, MO               821,960         -0.12           -0.17        -0.27        -0.12        -0.12       348,189
Baltimore, MD               804,874         -0.01           -0.04        -0.13        -0.06        -0.12       651,154
Boston, MA                  781,188         -0.13           -0.08        -0.12         0.02         0.03       589,141
Pittsburgh, PA              669,817         -0.11           -0.14        -0.17        -0.13        -0.10       334,563
United States           151,325,798          0.19            0.13         0.11         0.09         0.13   281,421,906

Note: All data comes from U.S. Census of Population.




                                                            40
Table 2a: Employment in Manhattan 2002
Three Digit Industry Name           Employment     Share of         Payroll      Share of        Payroll/
                                                   Total            ($1,000)     Total           Worker
                                                   (1.99 million)                (150 Billion)

Professional, Scientific and
Technical Services (541)              261,157            0.131      21,389,318       0.143       81,902
Security, Commodity Contracts
and like activity
(523)                                 210,960            0.106      42,107,893       0.281       199,601

Administrative and Support
Services (561)                        142,796            0.072      5,521,745        0.037       38,669

Food Services and Drinking
Places(722)                           107,778            0.054      2,208,254        0.015       20,489


Educational Services (611)             94,945            0.048      3,764,351        0.025       39,648

Credit Intermediation and Related
Activites (522)                        90,105            0.045      11,191,706       0.075       124,207

Management of Companies and
Enterprises (551)                      84,821            0.043      10,059,521       0.067       118,597


Hospitals (622)                        73,230            0.037      4,320,883        0.029       59,004
Religious, Grantmaking, Civil,
Professional and like Activities
(813)                                  67,823            0.034      2,955,000        0.020       43,569

Ambulatory Health Care Services
(621)                                   67,399          0.034       2,660,933        0.018       39,480
Source: 2002 County Business Patterns for New York, NY.
http://www.census.gov/epcd/cbp/map/02data/36/061.txt




                                                    41
Table 2b: Employment in Brooklyn 2002
 Three Digit Industry Name         Employment     Share of    Payroll      Share of         Payroll/
                                                  Total       ($1,000)     Total            Worker
                                                  (435,948)                (13.9 Billion)

 Ambulatory and Health Care
 Services (621)                         54,537      0.125      1,682,173       0.121           30,845


 Hospitals (622)                        45,098      0.103      2,315,354       0.166           51,341


 Social Assistance (624)                21,891      0.050       498,796        0.036           22,785


 Educational Services (611)             21,145      0.049       500,278        0.036           23,659

 Food Services and Drinking
 Places (722)                           18,395      0.042       261,438        0.019           14,212

 Administrative and Support
 Services (561)                         17,997      0.041       434,805        0.031           24,160

 Nursing and Residential Care
 Facilities (623)                       16,849      0.038       542,854        0.039           32,219

 Special Trade Contractors (235)        14,976      0.034       613,787        0.044           40,985

 Wholesale Trade, Nondurable
 Goods (422)                            14,852      0.034       492,365        0.035           33,151

 Professional, Scientific &
 Technical Services (541)               14,474       0.033      497,593        0.036           34,378
Source: 2002 County Business Patterns for Kings, NY
http://www.census.gov/epcd/cbp/map/02data/36/081.txt




                                                   42
Table 2c: Employment in Queens 2002
Three Digit Industry Name         Employment      Share of           Payroll      Share of         Payroll/
                                                  Total              ($1,000)     Total            Worker
                                                  (468,585)                       (16.8 Billion)

Ambulatory and Health Care
Services (621)                        37,272                 0.080    1,146,772       0.068332          30,768

Special Trade Contractors (235)       29,330                 0.063    1,541,310       0.091841          52,551


Air Transportation (481)              27,502                 0.059    1,448,255       0.086296          52,660

Food Services and Drinking
Places (722)                          26,680                 0.057     401,915        0.023949          15,064


Hospitals (622)                       24,729                 0.053    1,288,459       0.076774          52,103

Administrative and Support
Services (561)                        21,818                 0.047     506,225        0.030164          23,202

Nursing and Residential Care
Facilities (623)                      16,215                 0.035     537,169        0.032008          33,128

Professional, Scientific &
Technical Services (541)              14,329                 0.031     477,570         0.028457         33,329

Wholesale Trade, Durable
Goods (421)                           13,661                 0.029     601,030        0.035813          43,996


Educational Services (611)            13,513                 0.029     389,995        0.023238          28,861
Source: 2002 County Business Patterns for Queens, NY.
http://www.census.gov/epcd/cbp/map/02data/36/081.txt




                                                        43
