                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         CORRUPTION, INEQUALITY AND FAIRNESS

                                          Alberto Alesina
                                      George-Marios Angeletos

                                         Working Paper 11399
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w11399


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       June 2005




We are grateful to Robert King (the editor), an anonymus referee, Marco Bassetto and Rafael Di Tella for
detailed comments and feedback. We also thank Vasia Panousi and Janina Matzuseski for excellent research
assistance and Emily Gallagher for excellent editorial assistance. The views expressed herein are those of
the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by Alberto Alesina and George-Marios Angeletos. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Corruption, Inequality and Fairness
Alberto Alesina and George-Marios Angeletos
NBER Working Paper No. 11399
June 2005
JEL No. D31, E62, H2, P16

                                           ABSTRACT

Bigger governments raise the possibilities for corruption; more corruption may in turn raise the

support for redistributive policies that intend to correct the inequality and injustice generated by

corruption. We formalize these insights in a simple dynamic model. A positive feedback from past

to current levels of taxation and corruption arises either when wealth originating in corruption and

rent seeking is considered unfair, or when the ability to engage in corruption is unevenly distributed

in the population. This feedback introduces persistence in the size of the government and the levels

of corruption and inequality. Multiple steady states exist in some cases.

Alberto Alesina
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
aalesina@harvard.edu

George-Marios Angeletos
Department of Economics
MIT
50 Memorial Drive, E51-251
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
angelet@mit.edu
1        Introduction

Market economies generate large diﬀerences in income and wealth. The poor are always likely
to demand redistributive policies, but have a much stronger moral justification for doing so when
inequality stems from corruption and rent seeking. Yet, often these same measures that are intended
to correct the eﬀect of unfair inequality — such as progressive income taxation, extensive regulation,
and large public projects — create more scope for corruption and rent seeking. Think, for example,
of tax loopholes, corruption in the allocation of public projects, or regulations justified on the basis
of the greater good but tailored to the interest of particular lobbies. What is more, those who
benefit from corruption may prefer higher taxation and more regulation, not for the sake of the
poor, but because bigger governments increase the rents they can extract. As a result, high levels
of government intervention, corruption, and rent seeking may be self-sustaining.
        We formalize these insights in a simple dynamic model based on three key ideas. The first is
that bigger governments increase the private gains from corruption, lobbying, and other forms of
rent seeking. The second is that the distribution of these gains is uneven in the population. The
third is that societies consider inequality originating in corruption and rent seeking more unfair
than inequality originating from productive eﬀort and market competition.
        Our main result is that the combination of the first ingredient with either of the other two
ingredients introduces a complementarity between current and past politico-economic outcomes —
there can exist multiple steady states in the level of inequality, redistribution, and corruption.
        The first building block of our model is that the larger the resources controlled by the govern-
ment, or the more extensive the regulation of the market, the larger the scope for corruption and
rent seeking. While we model corruption strictly as private appropriation of tax revenues outside
the law (i.e. outside of sanctioned redistributive schemes), we intend to capture a broader set of
activities that favor various groups of privileged insiders, these would include industrialists receiv-
ing favorable regulations, public employees receiving high salaries, job security and perks, certain
localities being favored by political entrepreneurs, and so on.1 The second ingredient is also quite
plausible: not all individuals have the same political connections, access to the bureaucracy, or
moral hesitation in becoming corrupt. More novel is the third element, the concern for fairness.
        In our model, individual income originates from two sources: a standard productive activity, and
    1
    For a discussion of the use of public employment for patronage and redisitribution, see Alesina, Baqir and Easterly
(2000) for US cities, and Alesina, Denninger and Rostagno (2001) for Italian regions.


                                                          1
a non-market, rent-seeking activity. Inequality generated by the productive activity is considered
fair; inequality generated by the rent-seeking activity is unfair. Ceteris paribus, the optimal level
of redistribution increases with the ratio of unfair to fair inequality.2
    This concept of fairness, which we introduced in Alesina and Angeletos (2005), is supported by
a variety of experimental and empirical evidence that shows that people are more willing to accept
inequality of outcomes generated by what is perceived as eﬀort or ability than luck or connections.3
Using the World Values Survey, Alesina, Glaeser and Sacerdote (2002) and Alesina and Angeletos
(2005) find that countries or individuals who believe that wealth and success are mostly the outcome
of “luck and connections” rather than of hard work and eﬀort tend to prefer more leftist policies.
Alesina and La Ferrara (2005) find a similar pattern using the General Social Survey for the United
States.
    In the presence of such a fairness concern, a history of big governments and extensive corruption
means that wealth distribution is rather “unfair” in the present, which in turn implies stronger
support for redistribution for any given level of inequality. But even when there is no fairness
concern, if the gains from corruption are unevenly distributed in the population, a history of bigger
governments and higher levels of corruption in the past implies a higher overall level of inequality
in the present, which in turn may raise the support for redistribution. In either case, multiplicity
relies on the endogeneity of corruption: if the size of the government did not aﬀect the scope for
corruption, the steady state would have been unique.
    The two steady states can easily be ranked in terms of aggregate income, which is higher in the
low-tax steady state, but cannot be Pareto ranked. First, individuals who have a suﬃciently high
advantage in rent seeking prefer the regime with the bigger government. Second, the poor benefit
from redistribution and may therefore prefer the high-tax steady state even at the cost of more
government resources dissipated by corruption. This eﬀect may underlay the political economy
of various populist regimes in Latin America, which are supported by a prima-facie paradoxical
coalition between the poor, who benefit from redistribution, and rich insiders, who benefit from
corruption.4
    These points are consistent with Glaeser and Shleifer (2003), who view the rise of the regulatory
   2
     Along with this altruistic motive for redistribution, there is a standard selfish motive as in Meltzer and Richard
(1981).
   3
     For a review of relevant experimental evidence on fairness, see Fehr and Schmidt (2001); see also Section 2 of
Alesina and Angeletos (2005).
   4
     For a related discussion of populism in Latin America, see Dornbusch and Edwards (1991).


                                                          2
state in the United States as a response to the “wild capitalism” and the “robber barons” of the
late nineteenth century (Josephson, 1934). For some the American regulatory state had gone too
far, becoming a source of favoritisms and capture (Stigler, 1971). Focusing on developing countries,
Di Tella and Mc Culloch (2003) argue that people who perceive corruption as a major problem
vote for left-wing parties which favor policies that intend to tax the corrupt capitalists. Djankov
et al. (2002) similarly find that regulation of entry is more intrusive in countries where corruption
is higher. Finally, using a variety of historical and current examples, Rajan and Zingales (2003)
show how a perception that capitalism is corrupt undermines market reform and supports heavy
interventionism. Our interpretation of these facts is that government intervention is often invoked
in an attempt to fight social injustices, but also that government intervention fosters corruption
and injustice. Welfare programs in developing countries often do not reach the poor and instead
create a vast array of favored groups.
      The idea that corruption is a by-product of government activities that are motivated by benev-
olent goals — in our case reducing income inequality — is best formalized in Banerjee (1997), who
explicitly models bureaucracy and corruption. We instead take the usual shortcut of modeling
corruption as a simple rent-seeking activity.5
      Multiple equilibria (or steady states) in the level of redistribution appear also in Piketty (1995)
and Benabou and Tirole (2005). The multiplicity there is due to distortions in beliefs about the
sources of inequality, whereas in our model beliefs perfectly reflect the truth; moreover, neither of
these papers examines the role of corruption. Andvig and Moene (1991) and Johnson, Kaufman and
Shleifer (1997) obtain multiple equilibria in the level of corruption or tax evasion, but the source of
multiplicity is again very diﬀerent. In Andvig and Moene (1991), the complementarity originates
in the interaction between the profitability of corruption and the number of corrupt oﬃcials; in
Johnson, Kaufman and Shleifer (1997), multiplicity emerges because the larger the unoﬃcial sector,
the smaller the tax base, the lower the amount of public goods provided by the government to the
oﬃcial sector, and hence the lower the incentive of firms to operate in the oﬃcial sector.
      The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces the model. Section 3 examines
the interaction between past and current politico-economic outcomes. Section 4 characterizes the
equilibrium policy for a given history. Section 5 analyzes the steady state(s). Section 6 further
discusses the implications of our results and Section 7 concludes. All proofs are in the Appendix.
  5
      See, for example, Baumol (1990), Murphy, Shleifer and Vishny (1993), and Angeletos and Kollintzas (1999).


                                                         3
2        The Model

We consider a non-overlapping-generations model. Each generation consists of a large number of
agents (a measure-one mass, indexed by i and distributed uniformly over [0, 1]). Agents live only for
one period and are connected to past and future generations via intergenerational wealth transfers
and parental investment (bequests, education, status, etc.). During their lives, agents engage in
two types of economic activity: a productive activity (work, invest, etc.) and a rent-seeking one
(corruption, lobbying etc.). Preferences for redistribution originate from two sources: a selfish
motive and an altruistic demand for fairness.
        Production and corruption. Wealth net of taxes, transfers, and rent seeking is the product
of innate ability, eﬀort, and parental investment. For agent i in generation t, this is given by


                                               wit = Ait eit + kit−1 ,                                              (1)


where Ait denotes the agent’s innate ability, eit denotes his eﬀort, and kit−1 the his parents’ invest-
ment or bequest.
        We let redistribution be the only reason for the existence of a government. Following Romer
(1975) and Meltzer and Richard (1981), we assume that the government imposes a flat tax on
individual wealth in order to finance a lump-sum transfer across all agents (or some sort of redis-
tributive public good). Unlike earlier work, however, we introduce corruption by letting a fraction
of government resources be up for grabs.
        In particular, denoting with Gt the size of the government in period t, Rt the resources that are
up for grabs, and Tt the resources that remain for lump-sum redistribution, we let


                                     Tt = (1 − φ)Gt         and        Rt = φGt ,                                   (2)


where φ ∈ [0, 1] parametrizes the extent of corruption.6 Rt in turn is split among the agents on the
basis of their rent-seeking activity: agent i receives a portion zit /Zt of the total pie,

                                                            zit
                                                    rit =       Rt ,                                                (3)
                                                            Zt
    6
    Olken (2003) collected data on a redistributive program for rice in Indonesian villages and found that between 20
and 40 per cent of the rice collected for redistribution disappeared in the process, obviously stolen by various village
administrators and their friends.


                                                            4
where Zt is the aggregate, and zit is his own, level of rent seeking. The latter is given by zit = Bit xit ,
where xit is the eﬀort agent i allocates to rent seeking and Bit is his eﬃciency in corruption (the
extent of his political connections, his negotiation power vis-à-vis bureaucrats, or his indiﬀerence
towards the ethics of his business life). Note that rent seeking is a zero-sum game: it aﬀects only
the distribution of the pie that is up for grabs, not its size.
    Disposable wealth is then given by the sum of after-tax wealth, lump-sum transfers from the
government, and proceeds from rent seeking:


                                        yit = (1 − τ t )wit + Tt + rit .                                   (4)


This is spent on private consumption, which we denote with cit , and parental investment, kit . The
agent’s budget is thus:
                                               cit + kit = yit .                                           (5)

    The government budget, on the other hand, is given by


                                     Gt = λτ t Wt + (1 − λ) τ t−1 Wt−1 ,                                   (6)


where Wt is aggregate wealth in period t, τ t is the tax rate in that period, and λ ∈ [0, 1]. We
allow λ < 1 for various reasons. First, this captures the idea that the size of the government
and the pie that is up for grabs in one period is not a function of contemporaneous tax revenues
alone.7 Second, we could interpret λ < 1 as a time-to-build assumption: welfare programs and
other redistributive schemes set in place by one generation partly extend to future generations.
Finally, and most importantly, λ parametrizes the extent to which generation t internalizes the
eﬀect that bigger governments lead to more corruption: the higher λ, the higher the same-period
increase in corruption that results from a given increase in tax revenues.
    Individual preferences. Agents’ preferences are given by


                                            Uit = uit − γ it Ωt ,                                          (7)


where uit measures the private utility from own consumption, bequests, and eﬀort choices, and Ωt
  7
P∞Note that, as long as we focusPon  ∞
                                        steady states, (6) is equivalent to the more general specification Gt =
 j=0 λj τ t+j Wt+j , with λ0 = λ and j=1 λj = 1 − λ.




                                                       5
represents a common disutility generated by unfair social outcomes (to be defined below). The
parameter γ it measures the strength of the demand for fairness and is allowed to diﬀer across
individuals.8
       For tractability, we assume quadratic eﬀort costs and a Cobb-Douglas aggregator over consump-
tion and bequests:

                                                                                              £                 ¤
                  uit = u(cit , kit , eit , xit ) =       1
                                                      (1−δ)1−δ δδ
                                                                    (cit )1−δ (kit )δ −   1
                                                                                          2    (eit )2 + (xit )2 ,     (8)


where δ ∈ (0, 1). The first term represents the utility from own consumption and bequests, the
second the disutility of eﬀort. The Cobb-Douglas specification implies that optimal consumption
and parental investment satisfy


                                        cit = (1 − δ)yit            and      kit = δyit ,                              (9)


so that δ represents the fraction of wealth allocated to parental investment (equivalently, the
strength of intergenerational linkages).
       Fairness. The concept of fairness we adopt is based upon the distinction between two types
of inequality: “justifiable” inequality induced by variation in talent and eﬀort, and “unjustifiable”
inequality induced by variation in corruption and rent seeking.
       Since wealth is transmitted from one generation to another through parental investment, we
need to keep track of this distinction along each agent’s entire family tree. We assume that parental
investment is considered fair only to the extent that it reflects income from eﬀort and talent — not
income from corruption and rent seeking. We thus define the fair levels of consumption, bequests,
and wealth as


                    ĉit = (1 − δ)ŷit ,      k̂it = δ ŷit ,       and     ŷit = ŵit = Ait eit + k̂it−1 .         (10)


(Throughout, fair levels are indicated by a hat.) Our measure of social injustice is then the average
   8
    An interesting possibility is that γ it is inversely related to Bit , in which case individuals who are most proficient
at being corrupt are also those least oﬀended by it.




                                                                6
distance between actual and fair utilities:

                                                             R
                                                         Ωt = (uit − ûit )2 ,                                   (11)
                                                                 i


where uit = u(cit , kit , ei , xi ) and ûit = u(ĉit , k̂it , ei , xi ).9
    By conditions (8) and (9), utility is quasi-linear in disposable wealth, implying that uit − ûit =
                                       R
yit − ŷit for all i and therefore Ωt = i (yit − ŷit )2 . As we will see later in more detail, ŷit reflects
the cumulative contribution of talent and eﬀort throughout the individual’s family history, while
yit also includes the cumulative contribution of corruption and rent-seeking. Ωt thus takes into
account the intergenerational propagation of unjustifiable income.
       The political process. We assume an unstructured model of political choice which is repre-
sented by the maximization of the following social welfare function:

                                                                     R
                                                            Ut =         Uit dπ i .                              (12)


π : [0, 1] → [0, 1] is a probability measure capturing the distribution of political power. When π i
assigns measure one to the median of the population, this specification essentially nests the median-
voter paradigm. When instead π i is the identity function, the policy maximizes utility behind the
veil of ignorance. Alternatively, π i may assign more weight to the rich or the agents with political
connections (i.e., agents with relatively high Bit ).
       Equilibrium. Let αit ≡ A2it and β it ≡ Bit2 . To simplify, we assume that (αit , β it ) are in-
dependent of each other and that (αit , β it , γ it ) are i.i.d. across agents but fully persistent over
time. A “dynasty” is thus identified with a particular draw (αi , β i , γ i ) . Finally, for any parameter
                          R              R
θ ∈ {α, β, γ}, we let θ̄ = θi di and θ̃ = θi dπ i denote the simple and politically-weighted popu-
lation averages, ∆θ = θ − θ̃ the distance between the two, and σ 2θ = V ar(θi ) the variance in the
cross-section of the population. We will see that a suﬃcient statistic for the characteristics of the
economy turns out to be the parameter vector


                                            E = (φ, γ̃, ∆α , ∆β , σ α , σ β ; ᾱ, β̄, α̃, β̃, δ).


∆α and ∆β play a role similar to the gap between the median and the mean of the wealth distribution
   9
       An alternative definition of fair utility that gives similar results is ûit = u(ĉit , k̂it , ei , 0).


                                                                         7
in Meltzer and Richard (1981). σ α and σ β , on the other hand, parametrize the exogenous variation
in the fair and unfair sources of wealth, respectively, and aﬀect outcomes only when there is a
demand for fairness (γ̃ > 0). We finally define

Definition        An equilibrium for economy E is a sequence of policies {τ t , Gt }∞
                                                                                    t=0 and allocations

{(eit , xit , cit , kit )i∈[0,1] }∞
                                  t=0 such that:

    (i) Given policy (τ t , Gt ) and endowment kit−1 , the bundle (eit , xit , cit , kit , yit ) maximizes Uit
subject to (1) and (4)-(5), for all i and t.
    (ii) Given history of policies and allocations {τ s , Gs , (eis , xis , cis , kis )i∈[0,1] }t−1
                                                                                                s=0 , the policy (τ t , Gt )

in period t maximizes (12), for all t.


3     The interaction of corruption, inequality, and fairness

We start by analyzing how inequality, fairness and corruption aﬀect optimal policy choices and how
policies in turn aﬀect the equilibrium levels of inequality, fairness and corruption.
    Using equations (4) and (10), the gap between actual and fair income can be decomposed into
four terms:
                            yit − ŷit = (1 − τ t ) (wit − ŵit ) − τ t ŵit + Gt + (rit − Rt ) .                     (13)

The first term implies that a higher tax rate corrects more for the unfairness generated by unjus-
tifiable inherited wealth, whereas the second term implies that a higher tax rate also deprives the
individual of some of her fair wealth. Therefore, to the extent that wit−1 6= ŵit−1 for a positive
measure of agents, society faces a trade oﬀ in choosing the size of the government that is optimal
from a fairness perspective. The last term, on the other hand, captures the net gain or loss of the
agent from his participation in the zero-sum game of corruption, which also depends on the size of
the government.
    The trade-oﬀ introduced by fairness becomes clear once we use (13) to express Ωt as a weighted
average of the variance decomposition of wealth inequality:


                       Ωt = τ 2t V ar(ŵit ) + (1 − τ t )2 V ar(wit − ŵit ) + V ar(rit ) + covst ,                   (14)


where V ar(.) denotes variance in the cross-section of agents and covst includes constants and
covariance terms (see Appendix for the derivation and the exact formula). When (τ t , Gt ) = 0, the

                                                             8
above reduces to Ωt = V ar(wit − ŵit ), thus measuring how unfair the wealth distribution would be
in the absence of government intervention; when instead (τ t , Gt ) > 0, the above incorporates the
eﬀect of redistribution and corruption.
    To gain further intuition, ignore for a moment the covariance terms in equation (14) and suppose
that minimizing Ωt is the only policy goal, taxation is not distortionary, and the wealth distribution
is exogenous. The optimal tax rate is then given by

                                           1−τ      V ar(ŵit )
                                               =                   .                                         (15)
                                            τ    V ar(wit − ŵit )

The right-hand side represents the signal-to-noise ratio in the wealth distribution: the signal is the
fair component of wealth, the cumulative eﬀect of talent and eﬀort; the noise is the unfair compo-
nent, the cumulative eﬀect of corruption and rent seeking. The optimal tax rate is decreasing in
this signal-to-noise ratio, reflecting the desire to correct for the inequality generated by corruption.
    The wealth distribution, however, is endogenous in equilibrium; as we show next, the signal-to-
noise ratio itself depends on current and past tax policies.
    Consider the equilibrium allocations for a given policy. Household i in generation t is born with
a given kit−1 and chooses (cit , kti , eit , xit ) so as to maximize his utility subject to his budget constraint,
taking (τ t , Gt ) and Ωt as given. The optimal levels of consumption and parental investment are
given by condition (9). Utility then reduces to uit = yit − e2it /2 − x2it /2, implying that the optimal
levels of eﬀort devoted to production and rent seeking are, respectively,


                                eit = (1 − τ t )Ait     and    xit = Bit φGt /Zt .                           (16)


The equilibrium level of corruption is thus increasing in the fraction of government resources up
for grabs:
                                                      q
                                                  Zt = β̄φGt .                                               (17)

Combining (16) and (17), we infer that


                             Ait eit = (1 − τ t ) αit    and     rit = (β it /β̄)φGt .                       (18)


To simplify the notation, we henceforth normalize β̄ = 1.



                                                         9
                      Qt
    Let τ̄ ts ≡ 1 −     j=s (1 − τ j )   denote the cumulative rate of taxation between periods s and t,
with the convention τ̄ ts = 0 when s > t. As we show in the Appendix, iterating on (1), (4) and (9)
implies that, in equilibrium, actual wealth is wit = Ait eit + kit−1 , with

                                 P           ¡           ¢
                      kit−1 =           δ t−s 1 − τ̄ t−1
                                                     s+1 [(1 − τ s ) Ais eis + Gs + (ris − Rs )] .       (19)
                                s≤t−1


In contrast, fair wealth is ŵit = Ait eit + k̂it−1 , with

                                                           P
                                               k̂it−1 =              δ t−s Ait eit .                     (20)
                                                          s≤t−1


Combining the above with (18), we infer that heterogeneity in Ait generates variation in the fair level
of wealth (the signal ŵit ), whereas heterogeneity in Bit generates variation in the unfair component
of wealth (the noise wit − ŵit ).
    The relative contribution of the two types of inequality depends on past policies: the period-t
equilibrium signal-to-noise ratio reduces to
                                                                P
                                                            [         δ t−s (1 − τ s ) ]2 σ 2α
            V ar(ŵit )                       s≤t
                           = P t−s t−1                      P t−s ¡           ¢       2 2,               (21)
         V ar(wit − ŵit )  [  δ τ̄ s (1 − τ s )]2 σ 2α + [   δ    1 − τ̄ t−1
                                                                          s+1 (φGs ) ] σ β
                                  s≤t−1                                        s≤t−1

                                                                ¡         ¢
where σ 2α = V ar (αi ) , σ 2β = V ar (β i ) , and (αi , β i ) ≡ A2i , Bi2 . This ratio tends to decrease with
Gs for every s ≤ t − 1, because a history of big governments means that corruption has played a
major role in shaping the wealth distribution. The impact of τ s , on the other hand, is generally
non-monotonic. When there has been no corruption in the past, a higher tax in the past means
a less fair wealth distribution today; but when there has been corruption in the distant past, a
higher tax in the more recent past may have already corrected for the unfairness of the earlier
corruption. Notwithstanding the latter eﬀect, a society that has a history of high tax distortions,
big governments, and pervasive corruption will tend to inherit an unfair wealth distribution, which
in turn may raise the “altruistic” demand for redistribution in the present.
    Moreover, if the variation in rent-seeking abilities across the population (σ β ) is high, an economy
with a history of high taxation and high corruption may also inherit a high overall level of inequality.
This may raise the “selfish” demand for redistribution.
    We conclude that the interaction of corruption with either the fairness concern or the selfish


                                                                10
motive introduces a complementarity between past and current political choices: the equilibrium
tax today may be an increasing function of the tax yesterday.


4    Equilibrium policy

In this section we characterize the equilibrium policy τ t for a given history {τ s }s≤t−1 . We focus
on stationary histories and begin by examining how a particular individual ranks diﬀerent policy
alternatives in equilibrium.

Proposition 1 Suppose τ s = τ ∈ [0, 1] for all s < t. The utility of agent i in period t is


                                      Uit = V (τ t , τ ; αi , β i ) − γ i Ω(τ t , τ )                   (22)


where


                V (τ t , τ ; α, β) ≡ −[ 12 ατ 2t + 12 βφGt (τ t , τ ) +      1−λ
                                                                              λ G (τ t , τ )]           (23)

                                        +τ t (1 − τ t )(ᾱ − α)
                                                δ               2
                                        +τ t 1−δ(1−τ ) [(1 − τ ) (ᾱ − α) + φG (τ , τ ) (1 − β)]

                                        +φG(τ t , τ )(β i − 1)
                                                                                  2
                                                                   δ(1−τ )              δ(1−τ ) 2 2
                      Ω(τ t , τ ) ≡ [−τ t (1 − τ t ) + (1 − τ t ) 1−δ(1−τ  ) −           1−δ ] σ α      (24)
                                                                      δ                2 2 2
                                        +[G(τ t , τ ) + (1 − τ t ) 1−δ(1−τ ) G(τ , τ )] φ σ β
                                            1−λ
                                        +[ (1−δ)λ (G(τ t , τ ) − G(τ , τ ))]2
                                         1
                      G(τ t , τ ) ≡     1−δ [λτ t (1 − (1 − δ)τ t      − δτ ) + (1 − λ) τ (1 − τ )]ᾱ   (25)


    This defines i’s preferences over τ t ; the expressions in equations (25)-(22) are complicated, but
their interpretation is simple.
    Condition (24) gives the equilibrium level of social injustice. The first term represents the
injustice generated when a positive tax reallocates income from more worthy (i.e., more talented,
hard-working) to less worthy agents. This term is positive only if σ α > 0, that is, only if there
is justifiable inequality. The second term represents the injustice generated by corruption and
rent seeking. This term is positive only if φ > 0 and σ β > 0, that is, only if there is corruption
and unjustifiable inequality. Moreover, this term is non-monotonic in τ t : a bigger government

                                                           11
corrects more for the corruption in the past but also opens the door to more corruption today.
Both terms depend on the past level of τ , as the size of the government in the past has determined
the distribution of kit−1 inherited today.10
         Condition (23), on the other hand, gives the private utility an agent enjoys from his eﬀort
choices and wealth. The first term represents the distortionary costs of taxation and corruption;
the second and third terms capture the redistribution of contemporaneous income and inherited
bequests; the last term is the net transfer enjoyed from rent seeking activity.
         Finally, condition (25) gives the equilibrium size of the government. When δ = 0 and λ = 1, in
which case the model reduces to a static economy, (25) reduces to Gt = τ t (1 − τ t ). More generally,
(25) exhibits the usual Laﬀer-curve eﬀect: at very high levels of taxation, a further increase in τ t
distorts incentives and reduces income so much that tax revenues fall. At the same time, Gt is a
decreasing function of τ , for higher tax distortions in the past imply less aggregate income in the
past and therefore a lower tax base in the present.
         Consider now how τ t is chosen in equilibrium. By (22), individual utilities are linear in individual
characteristics (αi , β i , γ i ). The policy objective thus reduces to

                                          R
                                   Ut =       ui dπ i = V (τ t , τ ; α̃, β̃) − γ̃Ω(τ t , τ );


and since τ t maximizes Ut , we have the following result.11

Proposition 2 Suppose τ s = τ for all s < t. The equilibrium policy in period t is τ t = F (τ ; E),
where
                                F (τ ; E) ≡ arg max {V (τ 0 , τ ; α̃, β̃) − γ̃Ω(τ 0 , τ )}.                   (26)
                                                   τ 0 ∈[0,1]



5         Multiple steady states

The mapping F in (26) represents the best response of generation t to a stationary history. A
steady state is any fixed point of this mapping, that is, any τ ∗ such that τ ∗ = F (τ ∗ ; E).
         In order to gain intuition into the steady-state properties of the model, consider first φ = γ̃ = 0,
that is, disregard both corruption and fairness. To simplify, let also λ = 1. The mapping F then
    10
    The last term in equation (24) measures Y − Ŷ (see the Appendix).
    11
    Note that policy preferences in any given period depend only on realized past policies, not expectations about
future policies. This is due to the warm-glow specification of intergenerational altruism and rules out any form of
strategic interaction across generations.


                                                                12
                                                     1


                                                   0.8




                             current tax τt=FHτL
                                                   0.6


                                                   0.4


                                                   0.2


                                                     0
                                                         0        0.2       0.4         0.6      0.8      1
                                                                          historical   tax τ



Figure 1: The standard Meltzer-Richard eﬀect — unique steady state in the absence of corruption.


reduces to
                                                                                        δ(1−τ )2
                                                                              ∆α +     1−δ(1−τ ) ∆α
                                                             τ t = F (τ ) =                           ,       (27)
                                                                                    ᾱ + ∆α

where, recall, ∆α ≡ ᾱ − α̃. When δ = 0, meaning that there are no intergenerational links, the
above gives τ t = ∆α /(ᾱ + ∆α ). This result is identical to that in Meltzer and Richard (1981): the
optimal tax rate is increasing in ∆α , which can be interpreted as the distance between the mean
                                                                       £                    ¤
and the median of the population. When δ > 0, the additional term δ(1 − τ )2 /1 − δ(1 − τ ) ∆α
reflects the gain from redistributing inheritances: the higher the distance between the mean and
the median inheritance, the higher the gain from redistribution for the median agent.
      In the absence of corruption, a higher level of redistribution in the past implies less inequality in
inheritances and therefore a lower gain from redistribution today. The optimal τ t in (27) decreases
with τ and F intersects the 45-degree line only once, as illustrated by the solid line in Figure 1.12
This ensures that the steady state is unique.
      If we allow for a fairness concern (γ̃ > 0) but continue to assume no corruption (φ = 0),
the optimal level of redistribution is zero from a fairness perspective. The Meltzer-Richard eﬀect,
however, kicks in as long as ∆α > 0. All that fairness then does is to increase the cost of taxation, as
a higher tax increases the gap between fair and actual outcomes. The F curve thus shifts down, and
the optimal tax is lower than when γ̃ = 0, as illustrated by the dotted line in Figure 1. Nevertheless,
the steady state remains unique.
 12
      All numerical examples are only illustrative.



                                                                               13
                                                1


                                              0.8




                        current tax τt=FHτL
                                              0.6


                                              0.4


                                              0.2


                                                0
                                                    0   0.2     0.4         0.6    0.8   1
                                                              historical   tax τ



Figure 2: Self-sustained corruption — multiple steady states in the absence of both the standard
Meltzer-Richard eﬀect and the concern for fairness.

   Consider next the impact of corruption (φ > 0) in the absence of a fairness concern (γ̃ = 0). Also
let ∆α = 0 and ∆β > 0, that is, disregard the usual Meltzer-Richard eﬀect but allow for “skewness”
in the distribution of rent-seeking abilities. This introduces a novel motive for redistribution. If the
size of the government in the past is large, then the income from corruption and rent seeking in the
past is also high. With ∆β > 0 = ∆α , this implies that the “median” of the income distribution in
the present is poorer than the mean, not because his parents have been less productive, but because
his parents have been less eﬀective in rent seeking. Hence, inequality originating in corruption in
the past creates support for redistribution in the present. But as the optimal size of the government
today is positive, the level of corruption today is also positive, which tends to make high levels of
government and corruption self-sustaining.
   On the other hand, if a society starts with a history of no (or small) government and no (low)
corruption, there is no corruption-born inequality in the present, which together with the fact that
there is no (low) standard Meltzer-Richard eﬀect implies that the optimal size of government in the
present is zero (small). We conclude that multiple levels of corruption and redistribution can be
self-sustained even in the absence of any concern for fairness. Such a situation is illustrated by the
solid line in Figure 2: there are two stable steady states, one with τ = 0 and another with τ > 0,
as well as an intermediate unstable one, which we disregard.
   The coeﬃcient λ now plays an important role. The dotted line in Figure 2 illustrates the impact
of an increase in λ : once λ is suﬃciently high, the multiplicity of steady states may disappear. This


                                                                  14
                                                1


                                              0.8




                        current tax τt=FHτL
                                              0.6


                                              0.4


                                              0.2



                                                    0.2    0.4          0.6    0.8   1
                                                          historical   tax τ



Figure 3: The eﬀect of fairness — multiple steady states in the absence of any self-motivated
redistribution.

is because the attempt to redistribute from the high-β individuals to the low-β ones becomes self-
defeating when λ is very high, as then a large fraction of the tax revenue is up for grabs by the very
same high-β individuals whom taxation is supposed to target. In other words, the higher λ is, the
more the current generation internalizes the eﬀect that an increase in taxation and redistribution
leads to an increase in corruption.
   Finally, consider the interaction of corruption and fairness (φ > 0 and γ̃ > 0). To make the
argument sharper, let ∆α = ∆β = 0. If γ̃ were zero, taxation would have only costs and no
benefits, so that τ t = 0 would be both the unique equilibrium and the unique steady state. When
γ̃ > 0, F (0) = 0 and τ = 0 remains a steady state: a history of no taxation and no government
means also a history of no corruption, so that the wealth distribution is fair and there is no need
to redistribute for fairness reasons.
   If, however, the economy inherits a history of high taxes and big governments, this means also
a history in which corruption has played some role in determining the wealth distribution, in which
case there is necessarily a desire to redistribute. It is then possible that, together with τ = 0, there
also exists a steady state in which τ > 0. Such a possibility is illustrated by the solid line in Figure
3. The two extreme intersection points of F with the 45-degree line identify the two locally stable
steady states. The lower one corresponds to τ = 0, Z = 0, and Ω = 0 (low taxation, low corruption,
and fair outcomes), the higher one to τ > 0, Z > 0, and Ω > 0 (high taxation, high corruption,
and unfair outcomes).


                                                              15
                                              0.8

                                              0.7




                        current tax τt=FHτL
                                              0.6

                                              0.5

                                              0.4

                                              0.3

                                              0.2

                                              0.1


                                                    0.1   0.2   0.3     0.4  0.5   0.6   0.7   0.8
                                                                historical tax τ



Figure 4: The eﬀect of fairness combined with the Meltzer-Richard eﬀect — multiple steady states.


   The impact of λ is similar as in the earlier case of self-sustained corruption. As illustrated
by the dotted line in Figure 3, an increase in λ reduces the incentive to redistribute and limits
the possibility of multiple steady states. The only diﬀerence is that taxation now becomes self-
defeating, not because it increases the resources that are up for grabs by high-β individuals, but
rather because it increases the inequality induced by corruption.
   In the examples depicted in Figures 2 and 3, the lower steady state has a zero tax rate: if there
has been no taxation and no corruption in the past, no taxation is optimal today. This is an artefact,
however, of the absence of any other motive for taxation. If instead there were some exogenous
amount of government spending to be financed, the lower steady state could have a positive tax
rate. The same is true if the concern for fairness interacts with self-motivated redistribution (that
is, if we combine γ̃, σ α , σ β > 0 with ∆α > 0). This case is illustrated by Figure 4.
   Summarizing the above analysis, we have the main result of the paper.

Proposition 3 A steady state for economy E is any fixed point τ ∗ = F (τ ∗ , E).
   If there is no room for corruption (φ = 0), there exists a unique steady state.
   If instead there is room for corruption (φ > 0) coupled with either skewness in rent-seeking
abilities (∆β > 0) or a demand for fairness (γ̃ > 0), there robustly exist multiple steady states.




                                                                    16
6         Discussion

i. When there is no corruption, the steady state is unique, as in Meltzer and Richard (1981). In
this case, a demand for fairness aﬀects the level but not the determinacy of the steady state — it
merely introduces a trade-oﬀ between the private good of redistribution from the rich to the poor
and the public good of fairness.
         ii. When there is corruption, we may have a complementarity between past and current policies
for two reasons: either because more corruption in the past means more inequality in the present,
or because more corruption in the past means more unfairness in the present. Either one may lead
to multiple steady states — or, more generally, to persistence in politico-economic outcomes.
         iii. We could easily recast our main result in a static (one-generation) economy as multiple
self-fulfilling equilibria. We chose to focus on the dynamic version merely to emphasize the role of
history. Diﬀerent regimes are explained by diﬀerent historical experiences, not diﬀerent self-fulfilling
expectations.
         iv. A theoretical prediction shared by many models of redistribution is that more inequality
leads to more redistribution. There is plenty of evidence, however, that this prediction is rejected
by the data.13 Our model may help explain this puzzle in two ways. First, an economy with less
inequality may have more redistribution because more of that inequality is due to corruption and is
thus considered unfair, or because there is a stronger demand for fairness; in this case, the missing
variable is the level of corruption or the strength of concerns for fairness. Second, an economy with
less inequality may have more redistribution because it rests in a “higher” steady state; in this
case, the missing variable is history.
         v. A strong correlation displayed by the data is that corruption decreases with income per
capita (e.g., Mauro, 1995, Knack and Keefer, 1995). One could interpret these data in the context
of our model as suggesting that φ is higher in poorer countries. An alternative interpretation is
that poverty and corruption are both endogenous. In this case, certain countries may be stuck in
a corruption-induced poverty trap. Note that poorer countries tend to have smaller governments
as measured by the ratio of government spending over GDP; yet, government intrusiveness in the
economy rely also on regulations and other various sources of intervention that go beyond the share
    13
    See for example Perotti (1996). Alesina and Glaeser (2004) document in detail that there is both more pre-tax
inequality and less redistribution in the United States than in continental Europe. Di Tella and Mc Culloch (2003)
similarly find that more inequality often leads to the election of right-wing governments.



                                                       17
of spending over GDP and that tend to be higher in poorer economies.14
         vi. When there are multiple steady states, the one with bigger government (higher τ ) is inferior
in the sense that fewer resources are devoted to productive activities, while more resources are
wasted in the zero-sum game of rent seeking. However, in general the two equilibria cannot be
Pareto ranked for two reasons. First, those who are especially productive in rent seeking may prefer
the high corruption equilibrium. Second, the poor may prefer a high level of redistribution even at
the cost of high corruption. An interesting possibility is then that a large corrupt government may
draw support from an unlikely coalition of the very poor and the rich insiders. This is a coalition
of those who benefit from high redistribution per se and those who are hurt by taxation per se
but are close to the levers of power. This seems a pretty accurate description of several populist
governments in Latin America, as emphasized for instance by Dornbusch and Edwards (1991).
         vii. Fairness can be lower in the steady state with bigger government, for a larger proportion
on wealth can then be due to corruption. So, paradoxically, the attempt to correct the impact of
corruption and increase fairness may sustain a steady state which is less fair. This is the sort of
paradox emphasized by Di Tella and Mc Culloch (2003) when they ask, “why doesn’t capitalism flow
to poor countries?” The answer that our paper proposes is that the perception that capitalism is
corrupt and that government intervention is necessary can be self-sustaining; quite unfortunately,
attempts to reduce unfairness often result, not only in higher eﬃciency losses, but also in more
corruption and less fair outcomes.


7         Concluding remarks

The main message of our analysis is that redistributive and regulatory policies intended to reduce
inequality or improve the fairness of economic outcomes may bring about even more opportunities
for corruption. This creates a policy dilemma: a small government does not correct enough for
market inequalities and injustices; a large government increases corruption and rent-seeking.
         Many policy-makers and observers appear to be aware of this trade oﬀ. Especially in developing
countries, public spending toward the poor is often mis-targeted and creates pockets of corruption
and favoritism; and often certain lobbies come out as big winners at the expense of the truly needy.
    14
    Needless to say, there are many reasons — unrelated to the story highlighted in this paper — that explain the
growth of government as a function of per capita income. For a survey of the literature of the size of the government,
see Mueller (2003).



                                                         18
Nevertheless, even well-intended policy-makers would resist calls for cutting these programs because
they perceive the cost of corruption as worth paying — this is often the only way to at least partially
improve the condition of the poor.
   What is perhaps less understood is that the willingness to accommodate some corruption in the
present may lead to a vicious cycle where high levels of government intervention, market ineﬃciency,
and corruption are self-sustained in perpetuity. The failure to internalize this intergenerational
externality can jeopardize the long-run eﬀectiveness of well-intended policies.




Appendix
                                                                     ¡ ¢
Proof of Condition (14). From the familiar result that E X 2 = (EX)2 + V ar (X) , we have
    R                                                                   R
Ωt = i (yit − ŷit )2 = (Y − Ŷ )2 + V ar (yit − ŷit ) , where Y − Ŷ = i (yit − ŷit ). By the assumption
that αit and β it are independent, Cov (ŵit , rit ) = 0. (13) thus implies


  V ar (yit − ŷit ) = (1 − τ t )2 V ar(wit − ŵit ) + τ 2t V ar(ŵit ) + V ar(rit )+

                                         + 2(1 − τ t )τ t Cov(ŵit , wit − ŵit ) + 2 (1 − τ t ) Cov(rit , wit − ŵit )


Combining the above and letting


          covst = (Y − Ŷ )2 + 2(1 − τ t )τ t Cov(ŵit , wit − ŵit ) + 2 (1 − τ t ) Cov(rit , wit − ŵit )


proves (14). QED

Proof of Conditions (19), (18), and (21). To simplify notation, let qt ≡ δ (1 − τ t ) , Qtt =
        Q
1, Qts ≡ tj=s+1 qj for s ≤ t−1, π t ≡ δ [(1 − τ t ) At et + Tt + rt ] , and drop the index i. Note that qt ∈
(0, 1) and therefore Qts ∈ (0, 1) as well. We can then write kt = δyt = qt kt−1 + π t and therefore kt =
P        t                                  t     t−s
                                                      ¡           ¢
   s≤t Qs π s . Combining the latter with Qs = δ       1 − τ̄ ts+1 and π s = δ [(1 − τ s ) As es + Ts + rs ] ,
using Ts = Gs − Rt , and expressing the result for t − 1 instead of t, gives (19).
                                    ¡      ¢         ¡      ¢
    Next, by (16), zit = Bit xit = Bit2 /Zt Rt = Bit2 /Zt φGt . By implication, the equilibrium
                                  R       R             R
level of corruption satisfies Zt = i zit = i Bit xit = i Bit2 φGt /Zt . Solving for Zt gives (17) and

                                                          19
combining this with (16) gives the second part of (18). Finally, from (19), (20), and (18), the
assumption that αit = αi and β it = β i for all t, and the normalization β̄ = 1, we have:

                                P                                           t−1
             wit − ŵit =               δ t−s {−τ̄ t−1
                                                   s (1 − τ s )αi + (1 − τ̄ s+1 )(Gs + (β i − 1) φGs )},
                              s≤t−1
                              P t−s
                   ŵit =           δ     (1 − τ s )αi .
                              s≤t


Calculating the variances gives (21). QED

Proof of Proposition 1. Consider a stationary history, τ s = τ for all s ≤ t − 1, in which case
we also have τ̄ ts = 1 − (1 − τ )t−s+1 and Gs = G, Ws = W, Ys = Y, Ks = K, for all s ≤ t − 1. To
                                                            R
compute the stationary levels G, W, Y, and K, note that Y = i yi = (1 − τ ) W +G, which together
                                                                    R
with G = λτ W + (1 − λ) τ W = τ W gives Y = W, and therefore K = ki = δY = δW . Combining
                   R                                             1
this with W = i (Ais eis + kis−1 ) = (1 − τ ) ᾱ + K gives W = 1−δ (1 − τ ) ᾱ, and therefore G =
 1                             σ
1−δ τ   (1 − τ ) ᾱ and K =   1−δ   (1 − τ ) ᾱ.
   Now consider equilibrium outcomes in period t. Using Kt−1 = K, we now have

                                                               1
                          Wt = (1 − τ t ) ᾱ + Kt−1 =         1−δ   (1 − (1 − δ)τ t − δτ ) ᾱ                    (28)


which together with Gt = λτ t Wt + (1 − λ) τ W gives (25).
                                  P            ¡          ¢
   When τ s = τ for all s ≤ t − 1, s≤t−1 δ t−s 1 − τ̄ t−1
                                                      s+1 =
                                                                                δ
                                                                             1−δ(1−τ )   and therefore

                                                   δ                2
                     wit = (1 − τ t )αi +       1−δ(1−τ ) { (1 − τ ) αi   + (G + (β i − 1) φG) },                (29)

                                     δ
whereas ŵit = (1 − τ t ) αi +      1−δ (1   − τ )αi . It follows that


               yit − ŷit = (1 − τ t ) wit + Gt + (rit − Rt ) − ŵit

                         = { − τ t (1 − τ t ) +           δ
                                                       1−δ(1−τ )   (1 − τ t ) (1 − τ )2 −    δ
                                                                                            1−δ   (1 − τ ) }αi
                                                    δ
                               +{Gt + (1 − τ t ) 1−δ(1−τ ) G} (1 + φ (β i − 1))



Next, using (13) and wit − ŵit = kit−1 − k̂it−1 , we get Y − Ŷ = (Kt−1 − K̂t−1 ) + (Gt − τ t Wt ) . By the
expressions for Gt and G, Gt − τ t Wt = −( 1−λ
                                            λ ) (Gt − G) , while K − K̂ = δ(W − Ŵ ) = δ(Y − Ŷ ).




                                                            20
                             1−λ
It follows that Y − Ŷ =    (1−δ)λ   (Gt − G) and therefore


               Ωt = V ar (yit − ŷit ) + (Y − Ŷ )2 =

                   = { − τ t (1 − τ t ) +        δ
                                              1−δ(1−τ )   (1 − τ t ) (1 − τ )2 −    δ
                                                                                   1−δ   (1 − τ ) }2 σ 2α +

                         +{Gt +      δ
                                  1−δ(1−τ )   (1 − τ t ) G}2 φ2 σ 2β + { (1−δ)λ
                                                                          1−λ
                                                                                (Gt − G) }2 .


Substituting G = G (τ , τ ) and Gt = G (τ t , τ ) and rearranging gives (24).
    Finally, consider the private utility of agent i in period t. Since the history is stationary and
individual characteristics are fully persistent, we have that kis = ki (and similarly yis = yi , ris = wi ,
ris = wi ) for all s ≤ t − 1. From (8) and (16),


                          uit = 12 (1 − τ t )2 αi + (1 − τ t )ki + Gt + ( 12 β i − 1)φGt .                    (30)


Using the fact that Gt − τ t Wt = − 1−λ
                                     λ (Gt − G) and τ t Wt = τ t ((1 − τ t ) ᾱ + K) , and rearranging,

we get

                                                                2
                    uit = { 12 αi + ki +       1−λ       1
                                                λ G} − { 2 αi τ t    + 12 β i φGt +      1−λ
                                                                                          λ Gt } +            (31)

                               +τ t (1 − τ t ) (ᾱ − αi ) + τ t (K − ki ) + (β i − 1) φGt ,

                                     h                               i
Next, as in (29), ki =      δ
                         1−δ(1−τ )    (1 − τ )2 αi + G + (β i − 1) φG , and therefore

                                                   h                                    i
                         K − ki =         δ
                                       1−δ(1−τ )    (1 − τ )2 (ᾱ − αi ) + (1 − β i ) φG .                    (32)


That is, agent i has inherited more wealth than the mean if his αi and/or β i is suﬃciently high.
Combining the above with (31), and ignoring the term 12 αi + ki + 1−λ
                                                                   λ G which does not depend on

τ t , we get


                uit = −{ 12 αi τ 2t + 12 β i φGt +     1−λ
                                                        λ Gt }   + τ t (1 − τ t ) (ᾱ − αi ) +
                                  δ                2
                          +τ t 1−δ(1−τ ) { (1 − τ ) (ᾱ − αi ) + (1 − β i ) φG} + (β i − 1)φGt .



Using G = G (τ , τ ) and Gt = G (τ t , τ ) into the above gives (23) and concludes the proof. QED

Proof of Propositions 2 and 3. It follows from the analysis in the main text. QED

                                                           21
References

 [1] Alesina, A., Angeletos, G.M., 2005. Fairness and Redistribution. American Economic Review,
    forthcoming.

 [2] Alesina, A., Baqir, R. , Easterly, W., 2000. Redistributive Public Employment. Journal of
    Urban Economics 48, 219-41.

 [3] Alesina, A., Denninger, S., Rostagno, M., 2001. Redistribution through Public Employment:
    the Case of Italy. IMF Staﬀ Papers 48, 447-73.

 [4] Alesina, A., Glaeser, E., 2004. Fighting Poverty in the US and Europe: a World of Diﬀerence.
    Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK.

 [5] Alesina, A., Glaeser, E., Sacerdote, B., 2001. Why Doesn’t the United States Have a European-
    style Welfare State? Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2:2001.

 [6] Alesina, A., La Ferrara, E., 2005. Preferences for Redistribution in the Land of Opportunity.
    Journal of Public Economics, forthcoming.

 [7] Andvig, J., Moene, K., 1991. How Corruption May Corrupt. Journal of Economic Behavior
    and Organization 13, 63-76.

 [8] Angeletos, G.M., Kollintzas, T., 1999. Corruption, Rent Seeking and Growth. CEPR working
    paper 2464.

 [9] Banerjee, A., 1997. A Theory of Misgovernance. Quarterly Journal of Economics 112, 1289-
    1331.

[10] Baumol, W.J., 1990. Entrepreneurship: Productive, Unproductive, and Destructive. Journal
    of Political Economy 98, 893-921.

[11] Benabou, R., Tirole, J., 2005. Belief in a Just World and Redistributive Politics. NBER Work-
    ing Paper 11208.

[12] Di Tella, R., Mc Culloch, R., 2003. Why Doesn’t Capitalism Flow to Poor Countries? Unpub-
    lished.



                                                22
[13] Djaonkv S., Glaeser, E., La Porta, R., Lopez de Silanes, F., Shleifer, A., 2002. The Regulation
    of Entry. Quarterly Journal of Economics 117, 1-38.

[14] Dornbusch, R., Edwards, S. (Eds.), 1991. The Macroeconomics of Populism in Latin America.
    University of Chicago Press and NBER.

[15] Fehr, E., Schmidt, K., 2001. Theories of Fairness and Reciprocity — Evidence and Economic
    Applications. Prepared for the 8th World Congress of the Econometric Society.

[16] Glaeser, E., Shleifer, A., 2003. The Rise of the Regulatory State. Journal of Economic Litera-
    ture 41, 401-25.

[17] Johnson, S., Kaufman, D., Shleifer A., 1997. The Unoﬃcial Economy in Transition. Brookings
    Papers on Economic Activity 159-239.

[18] Josephson, M., 1934. The Robber Barons. Harcourt Brace and Co., New York.

[19] Knack, S., Keefer, P., 1995. Institutions and Economic Performance: Cross-country tests using
    alternative institutional measures. Economic and Politics 7, 207-27.

[20] Mauro, P., 1995. Corruption and Growth. Quarterly Journal of Economics 110, 681-712.

[21] Meltzer, A., Richard, S., 1981. A Rational Theory of the Size of Government. Journal of
    Political Economy 89, 914-27.

[22] Mueller, D., 2003. Public Choice. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.

[23] Murphy, K.M., Shleifer, A., Vishny, R.W., 1993. Why is Rent-Seeking so Costly to Growth?
    American Economic Review 83, 409-14.

[24] Olken, B., 2003. Corruption and the Costs of Redistribution. Unpublished.

[25] Perotti, R., 1996. Growth, Income Distribution and Democracy: What the Data Say. Journal
    of Economic Growth 1, 149-87.

[26] Perotti, R., 2002. Social Spending in Colombia: Analysis and Proposals. Working Paper
    FEDESARROLLO, Bogota, Colombia.




                                                23
[27] Piketty, T., 1995. Social Mobility and Redistributive Politics. Quarterly Journal of Economics
    110, 551—84.

[28] Rajan, R., and L. Zingales (2002), Saving Capitalism from Capitalists, Crown Publishing: New
    York.

[29] Romer, T., 1975. Individual Welfare, Majority Voting and the Properties of a Linear Income
    Tax. Journal of Public Economics 7, 163-88.

[30] Stigler, G., 1971. The Theory of Economic Regulation. Bell Journal of Economics 2, 137-46.




                                                24
