NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INVESTOR ATTENTION, OVERCONFIDENCE AND CATEGORY LEARNING
Lin Peng
Wei Xiong
Working Paper 11400
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11400
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2005

We are grateful to Nick Barberis, Patrick Bolton, Markus Brunnermeier, David Hirshleifer, Harrison Hong,
Ming Huang, Jose Scheinkman, Andrei Shleifer, Chris Sims, Jiang Wang, and especially an anonymous
referee, as well as the participants of several conferences and workshops for helpful discussion and
comments. Lin Peng also thanks the financial support from Eugene Lang Junior Faculty Research Fellowship
and PSC-CUNY Research Award. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by Lin Peng and Wei Xiong. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.

Investor Attention, Overconfidence and Category Learning
Lin Peng and Wei Xiong
NBER Working Paper No. 11400
June 2005
JEL No. G0, G1
ABSTRACT
Motivated by psychological evidence that attention is a scarce cognitive resource, we model
investors' attention allocation in learning and study the effects of this on asset-price dynamics. We
show that limited investor attention leads to ``category-learning" behavior, i.e., investors tend to
process more market and sector-wide information than firm-specific information. This endogenous
structure of information, when combined with investor overconfidence, generates important features
observed in return comovement that are otherwise difficult to explain with standard rational
expectations models. Our model also demonstrates new cross-sectional implications for return
predictability.
Lin Peng
Baruch College
City University of New York
New York, NY 10010
lin_peng@baruch.cuny.edu
Wei Xiong
Princeton University
Bendheim Center for Finance
26 Prospect Avenue
Princeton, NJ 08450
and NBER
wxiong@princeton.edu

1

Introduction

Standard asset-pricing models are typically based on the assumption that markets distill
new information with lightning speed and that they provide the best possible estimate of
all asset values. In reality, this distillation and estimation requires investors’ close attention
to processing information and to incorporating this knowledge into their decisions. Several
recent studies suggest that investor attention may play an important role in determining asset
prices. Important news or information is not reflected by prices until investors pay attention
to it.1 Despite the growing empirical evidence, there has been little formal analysis on this
issue. In this paper, we study the effects of investor attention on asset price dynamics.
We emphasize that attention is a scarce cognitive resource (Kahneman, 1973). Attention
to one task necessarily requires a substitution of cognitive resources from other tasks. When
it comes to investment decisions, given the vast amount of information available and the
inevitability of limited attention, investors have to be selective in information processing.
We consider a discrete-time model with an infinite number of periods. There are multiple
risky assets and one risk-free asset in the economy. The risk-free asset offers a constant rate
of return. The dividend payoff of each risky asset is determined by a linear combination of
three unobservable random factors with independent Gaussian distributions: market, sector,
and firm-specific.
We study the learning process of a representative investor who has limited attention.
Facing unobservable fundamental factors in her portfolio, the investor processes information
to infer their values. We view this representative investor as one of many retail investors in the
stock market who face similar uncertainty in their portfolios. They access similar information
sources, such as newspapers, analyst reports and media coverage. These investors are also
subject to similar attention constraints and behavioral biases in information processing.
We model the investor’s learning process as follows. The investor first generates a vector of
1

Huberman and Regev (2001) provide a vivid example: the publication of an article in the New York Times about
a new cancer curing drug from EntreMed attracted great public attention and generated a daily return of more than
300% in its stocks, even though the same story had already been published more than five months earlier in Nature
and other newspapers. Other studies, e.g., Hirshleifer, Hou, Teoh, and Zhang (2004), Hong, Walter, and Valkanov
(2003), Hou and Moskowitz (2003), and DellaVigna and Pollet (2003), provide evidence that stock prices do not fully
incorporate all information that appears in the public domain, such as the prices of other assets and certain variables
in firms’ financial statements.

signals through information processing. This process is affected by the investor’s attention
constraint and her attention allocation. We adopt the entropy concept from information
theory to measure information and impose the attention constraint as the maximum amount
of information that the investor can process each period. Given the multiple sources of
uncertainty, the investor optimally allocates her attention across them. As the investor
allocates more attention to a factor, she processes more information. After gathering the
signals, the investor then incorporates them into her beliefs through Bayesian updating.
To maximize her expected lifetime utility, the investor optimally makes her consumption
decisions based on her beliefs about fundamental factors. An exponential utility function
and Gaussian distributions for all variables allow a linear equilibrium, in which asset prices
are determined through the pricing kernel determined by the investor’s marginal utility of
consumption. In the equilibrium, the investor allocates attention across fundamental factors
to reduce the total uncertainty of her portfolio while asset prices fluctuate as the investor
updates her beliefs based on the processed information. In this way, the investor’s attention
allocation affects the asset-price dynamics.
Our model shows that limited attention leads to “category-learning” behavior: an attentionconstrained investor tends to allocate more attention to market- and sector-level factors than
to firm-specific factors. In severely constrained cases, the investor allocates all attention to
market- and sector-level information and ignores all the firm-specific data. For instance, during the internet bubble period, firms that had changed to dot.com names without any fundamental changes in strategies earned significant abnormal returns around their name-change
announcements (Cooper, Dimitrov, and Rau, 2001). This example shows how inattentive
investors could be to firm-specific information.
The endogenous information structure derived from investors’ attention allocation is particularly useful in studying the interaction between investors’ attention and their biased
reactions to information. Several recent studies suggest that biased reactions to information
provide helpful insights in understanding many empirical anomalies that have been discovered over the past two decades.2 Since biased reactions only occur when investors attend to
2

See Hirshleifer (2001) and Barberis and Thaler (2003) for recent reviews of this literature. For example, in explaining overreaction and underreaction of stock prices in different situations, Daniel, Hirshleifer, and Subrahmanyam
(1998) analyze overconfidence and self-attribution bias in investors’ responses to information, while Barberis, Shleifer,

2

certain pieces of information and/or ignore others, the attention allocation decisions studied
in our model determine the cross-sectional patterns of these biased reactions.
We give special consideration to one specific form of investor bias, overconfidence. Experimental studies have shown that the trait of overconfidence is particularly severe in those
faced with diffuse tasks that require difficult judgements but provide only noisy and delayed
feedback (see Einhorn, 1980). The fundamental valuation of financial securities is a good
example of this type of difficult tasks, one which becomes even more challenging when investors have limited attention. We model overconfidence as the investor’s exaggeration of
her information processing ability. As a result, the investor overestimates the precision of
her information, in a way consistent with other overconfidence models in the literature.3
Our model captures three features of asset return comovement observed by recent empirical studies. First, return correlations between firms can be higher than their fundamental
correlations. This result is generated by the interaction of the investor’s category learning
behavior (her tendency to processing more market- and sector-level information) to her overreaction to the processed information. This result is supported by the empirical studies of
Shiller (1989) and Pindyck and Rotemberg (1993) on the comovement between U.K. and
U.S. stock markets and the comovement of individual U.S. stocks.
Second, our model shows that across different sectors, there is a negative relation between
the average return correlation of firms in a sector and their stock price informativeness. For
a sector with a higher information-processing efficiency, rather than treating the sector as a
category, the investor allocates relatively more attention to firm-specific information. Consequently, these firms’ stock prices will be more informative about their future fundamentals,
and their returns will have relatively more firm-specific variation (or smaller correlations).
This result provides an explanation to the findings by Morck, Yeung, and Yu (2000) and
Durnev, Morck, Yeung, and Zarowin (2003) that stock returns are more informative about
changes in future earnings in industries or countries with less correlated stock returns.
Third, our model shows that as information technology advances over time, investors’
and Vishny (1998) consider investor representativeness and conservatism. Along another line, Hong and Stein (1999)
and Hirshleifer and Teoh (2004) analyze models in which some useful public information is either ignored or only
gradually recognized by investors.
3
See, for example, Kyle and Wang (1997), Daniel, Hirshleifer, and Subrahmanyam (1998), Odean (1998), Bernardo
and Welch (2001), Gervais and Odean (2001), and Scheinkman and Xiong (2003).

3

attention constraints become less binding and they can allocate relatively more attention
to firm-specific information, thereby reducing return correlations. This result explains the
finding of Campbell, Lettau, Malkiel, and Xu (2001), who document a decreasing trend in
the return correlation of U.S. stocks over the last thirty years.
It may appear that our model’s implications for return comovement can also be derived
from a rational expectations model of costly information acquisition. However, West (1988)
analyzes a rational expectations model and shows that improved information about future
cashflows actually decreases return volatility. The basic intuition is that more information
only allows a rational investor to resolve uncertainty earlier, but does not increase the level of
return variation. Thus, it is difficult for standard rational expectations models to explain the
empirical evidence on return comovement based on cross-sectional difference and time-trend
in information cost.
The investor’s attention allocation decisions also directly affect the cross-sectional patterns of asset-return predictability. When the investor allocates more attention to individual firms in a sector and processes more firm-specific information, there will be more pronounced overreaction-driven predictability in firm-specific returns. In the meantime, more
firm-specific information processed leaves an ignored public signal less valuable in predicting
firms’ future returns. Since the investor’s attention allocation to individual firms in a sector
is negatively related to the average return correlation in the sector, our model provides two
new testable implications: after controlling for the degree of investor overconfidence, firms in
a sector with a lower average return correlation tend to have more pronounced overreactiondriven return predictability (e.g., long-run price reversals and short-term price momentum);
on the other hand, an ignored public signal (such as certain variables in firms’ financial
statements) will have less predictive power for these firms’ returns.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews the related studies on attention.
We introduce the model and derive the equilibrium in Section 3. Section 4 discusses the
investor’s category learning behavior under attention constraints. In Section 5, we describe
the cross-sectional and time series implications of our model for asset return comovement.
Section 6 illustrates the implications of this on return predictability. Section 7 concludes.
The Appendix provides technical derivations and proofs.
4

2

Related studies on attention

There is a large body of psychological research on human attention. These studies suggest
that people’s ability to simultaneously perform different tasks depends on whether they
involve only perceptual analysis or more central cognitive analysis requiring memory retrieval
and action planning. Although it is possible for people to simultaneously handle multiple
perceptual tasks, such as typing while listening to music, psychological evidence shows that
overlap in the central cognitive operations of different tasks does not occur successfully,
except in a few special cases.
Pashler and Johnston (1998) summarize various supporting evidence that there is a limit
to the central cognitive processing capacity of the human brain. The operation of human
brains is intuitively described by psychologists as similar to that of a single-processor computers. Both deal with multiple tasks by working on one task at a time, alternating between
these tasks in order to respond to inputs in a timely fashion. The rate or efficiency of processing for each task depends on the processing time the computer allocates to the task.
This is the basic concept that we adopt to model information processing by investors.
Recent theoretical work in economics and finance has begun to explore some of the consequences of limited investor attention. Hirshleifer and Teoh (2003) analyze firms’ choices
between alternative methods for presenting information, and the effects of different presentations on market prices when investors have limited attention and processing power.
Hirshleifer, Lim, and Teoh (2003) address firms’ incentives to withhold information from
credulous and inattentive investors. Hirshleifer and Teoh (2004) provide a model of return
predictability based on inattentive investors’ negligence of current earnings, different earnings
components, or information in investment. Our model also addresses the effect of neglected
information on asset returns. In particular, we derive new cross-sectional implications linking
the strength of this effect to return correlation.
Sims (2003) adopts the concept of channel capacity from information theory to study
information processing constraints in a dynamic control problem without financial assets.
Peng (2005) studies an information capacity constraint in investors’ learning processes. Van
Nieuwerburgh and Veldkamp (2004) discuss portfolio under-diversification caused by in-

5

vestors’ learning constraints. We use an information measure shared by these studies, and
focus on investors’ category learning behavior and its relationship to return comovement and
predictability.
Psychological studies, as reviewed by Yantis (1998), suggest that attention can be directed
by people’s deliberate strategies and intentions. Gabaix and Laibson (2003) analyze a model
of directed attention of economic agents who allocate thinking time to choose a consumption
good from several alternatives, and Gabaix et al. (2003) provide some further experimental
evidence. Our model also focuses on the effects of actively controlled investor attention.4
Investors’ limited attention or computational capacity also motivates several recent studies of heuristics that simplifies problem-solving, e.g., Barberis and Shleifer (2003), Mullainathan (2002), and Hong and Stein (2003). In particular, Barberis and Shleifer analyze
the effects of investors’ style strategies, i.e., investors allocate investment based on exogenous
asset styles and simultaneously move in and out of a style depending on its recent performance, on excessive comovement among assets of the same style. In our model, investors
with limited attention form asset categories based on their fundamentals, and the excessive
comovement is driven by investors’ inattention to firm-specific information. This framework
allows us to draw explicit links between the dynamics of information flow and the dynamics
of return comovement and predictability.

3

The model

We develop a model with a infinite number of periods, t = 1, 2, 3, ..., ∞. There is a representative investor who invests in a portfolio of risky financial assets. We allow the investor
to borrow and lend at a constant risk-free rate of r. We view the representative investor in
our model as one of many retail investors in the stock market who face similar uncertainty
in their portfolios and who access similar information sources such as newspapers, analyst
reports, and media coverage. These investors are also subject to similar behavioral biases
and attention constraints in their learning processes.
4

Attention can sometimes be captured by an abrupt onset of stimulus and other salient events. Barber and Odean
(2003) examine the stock trading generated by investor attention that is driven by salient events.

6

3.1

Investor preference and factor structure of asset fundamentals

The investor has an exponential utility function of consumption:
1
u(c) = − e−γc
γ

(1)

where γ is her absolute risk-aversion coefficient. Each period, the investor chooses a consumption level to maximize her expected lifetime utility:
max Et

"∞
X

#

δ

s−t

u(cs ) .

(2)

s=t

δ ∈ (0, 1) is the time preference parameter, and cs is the consumption choice in period s.
The investor holds a portfolio that spans m sectors, with n firms in each sector. We
view a sector as an industry or nation. Each firm pays a dividend every period. We denote
the dividend from the j-th firm of the i-th sector in period t by di,j,t , and summarize the
dividends of all assets by a vector
Dmn×1 (t) = (d1,1,t , · · · , d1,n,t , · · · , di,j,t , · · · , dm,1,t , · · · , dm,n,t )T

(3)

where ‘T ’ is the transpose operator.
The dividends are linear combinations of random fundamental factors:
di,j,t = ht + fi,t + gi,j,t , i = 1, · · · , m, j = 1, · · · , n

(4)

where ht is a market factor, fi,t is the common factor for sector i, and gi,j,t is the firm-specific
factor for the j-th firm in the i-th sector. These factors are unobservable and independent
of each other. Their distributions are known to the investor. We assume that these factors
are identically and independently distributed across periods:
ht ∼ N (h̄, σh2 ),

(5)

fi,t ∼ N (f¯, σf2 ), i = 1, · · · , m

(6)

gi,j,t ∼ N (ḡ, σg2 ), i = 1, · · · , m, j = 1, · · · , n.

(7)

In this specification, the market factor has a Gaussian distribution with a mean of h̄ and a
variance of σ 2 ; all sector factors have the same Gaussian distribution with a mean of f¯ and
h

7

a variance of σf2 ; and all firm-specific factors have an identical Gaussian distribution with a
mean of ḡ and a variance of σg2 . While we make these specific assumptions to simplify our
analysis, they are not critical to our main results.
3.2

The learning process

Although the fundamental factors are unobservable, the investor is able to analyze them one
period before their realization in dividends.5 A more precise forecast of future dividends
benefits the investor by allowing her to make more efficient intertemporal consumption decisions.
We emphasize two important features in the investor’s learning process: limited attention
and overconfidence. The investor’s limited attention determines the maximum amount of
information she can process each period. We treat learning about each of the independent
fundamental factors as separate tasks, similar to the way that English and Mathematics are
studied separately in school. The investor allocates her attention across these tasks.
We use κ to represent the limit in attention. We denote the fraction of attention allocated
to the market factor ht by λh,t ∈ [0, 1], to a sector-wide factor fi by λf,i,t ∈ [0, 1], and to a
firm-specific factor gi,j by λg,i,j,t ∈ [0, 1]. We summarize the allocations in a vector:
Λt = (λh,t , λf,1,t , · · · , λf,m,t , λg,1,1,t , · · · , λg,i,j,t , · · · , λg,m,n,t )T .

(8)

The allocations should sum up to be less than or equal to one:
λh,t +

m
X
i=1

λf,i,t +

m X
n
X

λg,i,j,t ≤ 1.

(9)

i=1 j=1

The investor’s learning process involves first collecting firms’ information in the public
domain, such as news releases, media coverage, and analyst reports. Then she forms her
own views. To abstract from these complex activities involved in actual learning processes,
the investor in our model devotes her attention to processing information, extracts a noisy
signal about the underlying factor, and uses the signal to update her belief according to the
5
If we were to allow the investor to analyze future fundamental factors several periods ahead, doing so would add
more learning tasks to the investor’s attention allocation, since the investor can choose to analyze factors of future
periods. However, this extension should not affect the relative allocation across factors in a stationary equilibrium.

8

Bayes rule. We denote sh,t , sf,i,t and sg,i,j,t as the extracted signals for the market, sector,
and firm-specific factors, respectively:
sh,t = ht+1 + ²h,t ,

2
²h,t ∼ N (0, ηh,t
),

sf,i,t = fi,t+1 + ²f,i,t ,
sg,i,j,t = gi,j,t+1 + ²g,i,j,t ,

2
²f,i,t ∼ N (0, ηf,i,t
),

(10)
i = 1, · · · , m

2
²g,i,j,t ∼ N (0, ηg,i,j,t
),

i = 1, · · · , m, j = 1, · · · , n

(11)
(12)

where the signal noises ²h,t , ²f,i,t and ²g,i,j,t are assumed to have Gaussian distributions
2
2
2
and ηg,i,j,t
, respectively. The signal noises are
, ηf,i,t
with zero means and variances of ηh,t

independent of each other, since they are generated through separate tasks. Their variances
depend on the investor’s attention allocations. We summarize all the signals in a vector St .
If the investor devotes more attention to one factor, the extracted signal will become
more precise. Following Sims (2003), we use the concept of entropy from information theory
to measure the amount of information about the underlying factor contained in a signal.
Appendix A provides an introduction to the entropy measure. Basically, the entropy of a
random variable measures its uncertainty. In the case of the market factor ht+1 , which has
a Gaussian distribution N (0, σh2 ), its entropy, H, is determined by its variance σh2 :
H(ht+1 ) =

1
log σh2 + 0.5 log(2πe),
2

(13)

where π is Archimedes’ constant and e is Euler’s constant. This expression is intuitive, since
for a Gaussian distribution, more uncertainty is associated with a larger variance parameter.
Given the signal, sh,t , the investor updates her belief about the underlying factor, ht+1 ,
according to the Bayes rule and forms a posterior belief:
2
ht+1 |sh,t ∼ N (ĥt , ω̂h,t
),

(14)

2
is the conditional variance.
where ĥt is the conditional mean and ω̂h,t

Information theory defines the amount of information contained in sh,t about ht+1 , I(ht+1 ; sh,t ),
as the reduction in the entropy (uncertainty) of ht+1 due to the knowledge of sh,t :
I(ht+1 ; sh,t ) ≡ H(ht+1 ) − H(ht+1 |sh,t ) =

9

´
³
1
2
.
log σh2 /ω̂h,t
2

(15)

Since the signal sh,t is the output of the investor’s information processing, its information
content is determined by the investor’s attention input to generating the signal. We assume
a linear relation between these two variables:
1
I(ht+1 ; sh,t ) = θh κλh,t ,
2

(16)

where κλh,t is the amount of attention allocated to the market factor, and θh > 0 is an
information-efficiency parameter that measures the efficiency of the investor’s information
processing of the market factor. For a given value of θh , as the investor allocates more
attention to the factor, she processes more information about it.
We allow for the possibility that the investor is overconfident about her informationprocessing ability. We assume that the investor perceives that the amount of information in
her signal sh,t is not exactly given by equation (16), but by
ˆ t+1 ; sh,t ) = 1 φθh κλh,t ,
I(h
2

(17)

where she exaggerates the amount of information by an overconfidence parameter φ ≥ 1. If
φ > 1, the investor is overconfident about her information-processing ability. If φ is equal to
one, we obtain the unbiased case.
Equation (17) implies that the investor may underestimate the variance of her signal
2
2
noise as η̂h,t
, instead of ηh,t
. By combining equations (15) and (17) and applying the Bayes

rule that
2
2
1/ω̂h,t
= 1/σh2 + 1/η̂h,t
,

(18)

we obtain that
³

´

2
η̂h,t
= σh2 / eλh,t θh φκ − 1 .

(19)

This perceived variance is smaller than the actual variance,
³

´

2
= σh2 / eλh,t θh κ − 1 ,
ηh,t

(20)

which we obtain by combining equations (16) and (17) and applying the Bayes rule. Thus,
although we model overconfidence as the overestimation of one’s information processing
ability, our approach is consistent with earlier studies in the finance literature.
10

Given the extracted signal and its perceived informativeness, the investor updates her
belief of the market factor ht+1 based on the Bayes rule. The variance of her belief is
2
ω̂h,t
= σh2 e−λh,t θh φκ ,

(21)

and the mean of her belief is
ĥt = h̄ + (1 − e−λh,t θh φκ )(sh,t − h̄).

(22)

We note that (1 − e−λh,t θh φκ ), the responsiveness of ĥt to the signal, increases with φ. Therefore, overconfidence leads to an overreaction to the signal.
The investor also overestimates the information content of her signals for the sector and
ˆ i,t+1 ; sf,i,t ), the perceived information amount in the signal
firm-specific factors. We let I(f
about a sector factor fi,t+1 , be
ˆ i,t+1 ; sf,i,t ) = 1 φθi κλf,i,t ,
I(f
2

i = 1, · · · , m,

(23)

where κλf,i,t is the amount of attention the investor allocates to the factor, and θi > 0 is the
information-efficiency parameter of sector i.
A higher value of θi implies that the investor is able to process more information with
a given amount of attention. For example, a higher θi might correspond to greater analyst
coverage, a more transparent financial system and better disclosure, or less complicated
fundamentals in sector i. θi could be different from θh , the information-efficiency parameter
of the market factor, and is most likely smaller.
ˆ i,j,t+1 ; sg,i,j,t ), the investor’s perceived information amount in the signal for a
We let I(g
firm-specific factor gi,j,t+1 , be
ˆ i,j,t+1 ; sg,i,j,t ) = 1 φθi κλg,i,j,t ,
I(g
2

i = 1, · · · , m, j = 1, · · · , n,

(24)

where κλg,i,j,t is the amount of attention allocated to the factor, and θi is the informationefficiency parameter of sector i. To focus on the difference across various sectors, we let
firm-specific factors share the same information-efficiency parameter as their sectors. This
assumption is reasonable, since the efficiency of processing information about a firm is positively related to that of the firm’s sector.
11

For the sector and firm-specific factors, we can derive the investor’s belief-updating process by following a procedure similar to the one used for the market factor. We denote the
investor’s posterior belief of a sector factor by
2
fi,t+1 |sf,i,t ∼ N (fˆi,t , ω̂f,i,t
),

i = 1, 2, · · · , m,

(25)

fˆi,t = f¯ + (1 − e−λf,i,t θi φκ )(sf,i,t − f¯),

(26)

where the mean and variance are given by

2
ω̂f,i,t
= σf2 e−λf,i,t θi φκ .

(27)

The investor’s posterior belief in a firm-specific factor is
2
gi,j,t+1 |sg,i,j,t ∼ N (ĝi,j,t , ω̂g,i,j,t
),

i = 1, · · · , m, j = 1, · · · , n,

(28)

where the mean and variance are given by
ĝi,j,t = ḡ + (1 − e−λg,i,j,t θi φκ )(si,t − ḡ),
2
ω̂g,i,j,t
= σg2 e−λg,i,j,t θi φκ .

3.3

(29)
(30)

The equilibrium

We analyze an equilibrium in which the representative investor holds the net supplies of risky
assets according to the market clearing condition. To make an efficient intertemporal consumption decision, the investor allocates her limited attention to analyzing the fundamental
factors that affect her portfolio. Following Lucas (1978), we determine the equilibrium asset
prices as the shadow prices from the pricing kernel determined by the investor’s marginal
utility of consumption.
Since the asset fundamentals are independent across periods (no persistence) and the
investor has constant risk aversion, the investor’s cash holdings would be the only state
variable in her optimization problem. In period t, we rewrite her optimization problem in
equation (2) as a recursive Bellman equation:
Jt (Kt ) = max E{max u(ct ) + δEt [Jt+1 (Kt+1 )|St ]},
Λt

ct

12

(31)

where J is the investor’s value function, Kt is her cash holdings, and St is the vector of
signals processed by the investor in period t.
Equation (31) illustrates the investor’s two optimization decisions: first, she needs to
determine her attention allocation Λt in information processing, subject to the attention
constraint in equation (9); second, based on the processed information, she needs to determine her current period consumption ct , which trades off her next-period wealth. The
investor’s next-period cash holding, Kt+1 , is determined by her current cash holdings, her
consumption choice, and the dividends from her risky assets:
Kt+1 = (Kt − ct )(1 + r) +

m X
n
X

di,j,t+1 .

(32)

i=1 j=1

We denote the stock price of firm j in sector i at period t by pi,j,t , and summarize the
prices by a vector:
Pmn×1 (t) = (p1,1,t , · · · , p1,n,t , · · · , pi,j,t , · · · , pm,1,t , · · · , pm,n,t )T .

(33)

The asset prices are determined by the investor’s marginal utility of consumption:
#

"

u0 (ct+1 )
Pt = Et δ 0
(Pt+1 + Dt+1 ) .
u (ct )

(34)

We derive the investor’s optimization problem, solve the equilibrium price functions, and
verify the equilibrium conditions in Appendix B. The main results of this can be summarized
with the following theorem.
Theorem 1 The investor’s attention allocation problem is as follows:
¯ 
¯
¯

Vt = min V art
di,j,t+1 ¯¯ St  .
Λt
¯
i=1 j=1


m X
n
X

(35)

The equilibrium asset prices are given by
Pt =

1
[E(Dt+1 |St ) + Lt ],
1+r

where Lt is a deterministic vector.

13

(36)

Theorem 1 states that the objective of the investor’s attention allocation is to minimize
the variance of her belief about the next-period dividend payments to her portfolio. Minimizing future uncertainty allows the investor to make more efficient intertemporal consumption
choices. The objective of the investor’s attention allocation is independent of the level of
asset fundamentals, because these fundamentals are independent over time. In addition,
Theorem 1 shows that asset prices are determined by the investor’s conditional expectation
of the next period’s dividends, and therefore fluctuate with the processed information.
Given the linear factor structure in equation (4) and the variances of the investor’s conditional beliefs in equations (19), (27) and (30), we transform the investor’s attention allocation
problem in equation (35) into
Vt = min
Λt

m2 n2 σh2 e−λh,t θh φκ

+

m
X

n2 σf2 e−λf,i,t θi φκ

i=1

subject to λh,t +

m
X

σg2 e−λg,i,j,t θi φκ

(37)

i=1 j=1

λf,i,t +

i=1

+

m X
n
X

m X
n
X

λg,i,j,t ≤ 1,

(38)

i=1 j=1

λh,t ≥ 0, λf,i,t ≥ 0, λg,i,j,t ≥ 0, ∀ i ∈ {1, · · · , m}, j ∈ {1, · · · , n}. (39)
Inequality (38) imposes a constraint on the aggregate attention allocation, and inequalities
in (39) require that attention allocation to any factor cannot be negative. The following
theorem establishes the existence of a unique solution to this optimization problem. The
proof appears in Appendix C.1.
Theorem 2 There exists a unique solution to the investor’s attention allocation problem.
We solve the optimization problem using the Lagrange method:
L = m2 n2 σh2 e−λh,t θh φκ +


−µκ,t 1 − λh,t −

m
X

n2 σf2 e−λf,i,t θi φκ +

m X
n
X

i=1
m
X
i=1

λf,i,t −

σg2 e−λg,i,j,t θi φκ

(40)

i=1 j=1
m X
n
X



λg,i,j,t  − µh,t λh,t −

i=1 j=1

m
X
i=1

µf,i,t λf,i,t −

m X
n
X

µg,i,j,t λg,i,j,t

i=1 j=1

where µκ,t is the Lagrange multiplier associated with the net allocation constraint in (38),
and µh,t , µf,i,t and µg,i,j,t are the Lagrange multipliers associated with the non-negativity
constraints in (39) on the allocation to the market, sector and firm-specific factors, respectively.
14

We obtain the following first-order conditions:

2 2 2 −λh,t θh φκ

 µκ,t = θh φκ(m n σh )e

if λh,t > 0

2 2 2

 µκ,t > θh φκ(m n σh )

if λh,t = 0


2 2 −λf,i,t θi φκ

 µκ,t = θi φκ(n σf )e

if λf,i,t > 0

2 2

 µκ,t > θi φκ(n σf )

if λf,i,t = 0


 µκ,t = θi φκσg2 e−λg,i,j,t θi φκ

if λg,i,j,t > 0

 µ > θ φκσ 2
κ,t
i
g

if λg,i,j,t = 0

(41)

∀ i ∈ {1, · · · , m}

∀ i ∈ {1, · · · , m}, j ∈ {1, · · · , n}.

(42)

(43)

The multiplier µκ,t represents the opportunity cost of allocating a unit of attention in
period t, i.e., more attention to one factor decreases the attention available for processing
information about other factors. The first-order conditions in equations (41)-(43) show that
a factor will receive a positive amount of attention allocation if and only if its marginal
benefit can justify the opportunity cost.
3.4

Comments on the model

One might argue that an attention-constrained investor can choose to “free ride” upon the
information revealed through prices, rather than processing the information on her own.
However, learning from prices is not exactly free. It still requires attention and knowledge.
This learning channel requires knowledge of the market structure, including the presence and
risk preference of other traders, their information quality, and the intensity of liquidity trades
(Grossman and Stiglitz, 1980). These requirements for using price-based information make
this method especially challenging for a retail investor, who typically lacks the knowledge
of other market participants’ trading motives and cannot observe others’ trades in a timely
fashion. In addition to these technical difficulties, overconfidence can cause an investor to
ignore potentially useful information embedded in prices and to rely only on her own analysis.
For simplicity, we restrict the investor in our model from learning through prices.
We also emphasize that in reality retail investors are often exposed to similar information
sources, such as media coverage and analysts reports. Thus, even when investors process
information independently, their beliefs are likely to be influenced by noise in the common
15

information sources, causing the errors in their beliefs to be correlated. This correlation
prevents the cancellation of investors’ learning errors in aggregation.6 To simplify our exposition, we analyze the learning process of a representative retail investor. Our main results
would be viable as long as different investors share common information sources.
We analyze an equilibrium in which the representative investor holds the net supply of
the risky assets. It is possible that in a more general model with heterogeneous investors,
an individual investor might choose to hold a subset of assets so that she can concentrate
her limited attention on a smaller number of uncertain factors. By doing so, she trades
off portfolio diversification for learning efficiency. In this paper, we use the representativeinvestor equilibrium to focus on the effects of investors’ category-learning behavior, which
we believe is one of the key implications of limited investor attention, and is important for
financial markets. The interaction among attention-constrained investors is an interesting
issue in its own right. Due to the technical difficulty of incorporating this feature into our
current model, we will leave it for future research.
We do not explicitly analyze the reasons why professional investors fail to eliminate the
price effects generated by the attention constraints and behavioral biases of individual investors. Instead, we rely on results from earlier papers, e.g., Shleifer and Vishny (1997),
which conclude that deviations from efficient prices can be persistent in markets because arbitrage is limited. Arbitrageurs face great risk when trading against unpredictable investor
sentiment. At least in the short run, these biased reactions can become even more extreme,
moving stock prices further away from their fundamental values and causing losses to arbitrage positions. Since there have been extensive theoretical studies on the limits of arbitrage7
and because the empirical studies mentioned earlier also confirm that investors’ inattention
to public information could affect stock prices, we opt to focus on the implications that arise
from studying the learning processes of attention-constrained, overconfident investors.
6

Recent empirical studies, e.g., Barber, Odean and Zhu (2003) and Kumar and Lee (2003), confirm that the buysell activities of retail investors are correlated. However, Kaniel, Saar, and Titman (2004) noted that the investor
sentiment across stocks have low correlations.
7
Barberis and Thaler (2003) provide a review of these studies.

16

4

Category learning behavior

Limited investor attention can lead to category learning behavior, i.e., the investor tends to
focus more on the market and sector information and less on firm-specific information. Here,
we compare the investor’s attention allocation for common factors and firm-specific factors.
Here we consider the case in which the information-efficiency parameters for all factors
are identical and stay constant over time. The investor’s attention allocation is therefore
also constant over time. In addition, since all the sector factors are symmetric, with the
same prior variances and the same information-efficiency parameters, they receive identical
attention allocations. All firm-specific factors also receive identical attention allocations.
The following proposition compares the allocations given to different factors. Appendix C.2
provides the proof.
Proposition 1 If m2 σh2 > σf2 and n2 σf2 > σg2 , then the investor allocates more attention to the market factor than to a sector factor, and more attention to a sector factor
than to a firm-specific factor. When the investor is severely attention-constrained, i.e.,
κ<

m
φθ

³

´

log n2 σf2 /σg2 , she devotes attention only to the market and sector factors and pays

no attention to firm-specific factors.
Proposition 1 confirms that the investor tends to allocate more attention to common
factors, since it is more effective to concentrate on factors that generate more uncertainty in
the portfolio.8 The conditions that make it possible for this situation to occur, m2 σh2 > σf2
and n2 σf2 > σg2 , are realistic. Since there are usually a large number of sectors in the economy
and a large number of firms in a sector (n À 1 and m À 1), these conditions would hold
easily when the uncertainty in the common factors and firm-specific factors have comparable
magnitudes. In the extreme case when the investor’s attention is severely constrained, he
would focus exclusively on common factors and ignore all firm-specific information. Essentially, the investor treats all the stocks in a sector as a single category and only processes
information at the category level. He then makes all pricing and investment decisions based
purely on this information.
8

Overconfidence also affects the investor’s attention allocation. However, since overconfidence makes the investor
overestimate both the opportunity cost and the marginal productivity of her attention, the net effect is secondary
relative to the effect of uncertainty across factors.

17

The investor’s attention allocation in the severely constrained case dovetails with an
observation made by Barberis and Shleifer (2003), that investors often organize their investment decisions based on “style strategies”, i.e., they categorize securities into exogenous
style classes and shift investment in and out of these classes simultaneously. By analyzing
the composition of information processed by an attention-constrained investor, our model
allows a more general form of category behavior, i.e., the investor tends to focus more on
category-level information than on firm-specific information, and the degree of categorization
depends on her attention constraints. This generalization allows us to draw explicit links
between the dynamics of information flow and the dynamics of both return comovement and
predictability.
We base the categories in our model on asset fundamentals. Although categories are
sometimes created through non-fundamental factors, those that are based on fundamentals,
such as industries and countries, are certainly important in practice. Cooper, Dimitrov,
and Rau (2001) show that during the period 1998-1999, more than 100 companies tried to
associate themselves with the high-flying internet industry by changing their company names
to dot.com names. Stocks for these companies earned an average abnormal return of 74%, a
figure that includes those firms that only changed their names but did not adopt any specific
internet related investment or strategies. This example demonstrates that to a great extent,
internet stocks during the period were evaluated based solely on their investors’ beliefs of the
industry as a whole. It also demonstrates how inattentive investors can be to firm-specific
information.

5

Implications for return comovement

Information flow is widely regarded as an important source of asset return fluctuation, e.g.,
French and Roll (1986). Roll (1988) further links the comovement of asset returns to the
composition of market and firm-specific information. As more information flows into the
market, it seems intuitive that asset prices will become more informative about future fundamentals while asset returns will become more volatile. Furthermore, if there is more market
information relative to firm-specific information, asset returns should be more correlated.

18

5.1

Information flow and return variability

We first clarify the relation between the amount of information incorporated into prices and
the corresponding return variability. Here, we take the amount of information as given and
examine its impact on return variance.
We consider the excess return of firm j in sector i:
qi,j,t = pi,j,t + di,j,t − (1 + r)pi,j,t−1 .

(44)

By substituting the linear price function in Theorem 1 and the factor structure in equation
(4) into qi,j,t , we can decompose its return variance into three components:
µ

V ar(qi,j,t ) = V ar

¶

µ

1
1 ˆ
ĥt + ht − ĥt−1 + V ar
fi,t + fi,t − fˆi,t−1
1+r
1+r
µ
¶
1
+V ar
ĝi,j,t + gi,j,t − ĝi,j,t−1 .
1+r

¶

(45)

These components respectively correspond to the three fundamental factors: market, sector,
and firm-specific.
As an illustration, we consider the return variance component related to a sector factor
fi . Our discussion in this subsection applies equally to all the other factors. There are two
³
´
1 ˆ
1 ˆ
parts in the return fluctuation, V ar 1+r
fi,t + fi,t − fˆi,t−1 . The first part, 1+r
fi,t , represents
the fluctuation in price as the investor updates her belief (fˆi,t ) in response to information on
fi,t+1 , the value of the factor in the following period. The second part, fi,t − fˆi,t−1 , represents
the resolution of the remaining uncertainty in the value of fi,t through the realization of the
current-period dividend. The assumption that fundamental factors are independent across
periods implies that these two parts are independent. Thus, we can further decompose the
return variance component generated by fi as
µ

V ar

¶

1
1 ˆ
fi,t + fi,t − fˆi,t−1 =
V ar(fˆi,t ) + V ar(fi,t − fˆi,t−1 ).
1+r
(1 + r)2

(46)

The amount of information about fi affects the two return variance components in equation (46) differently. The joint effect depends on the investor’s overconfidence, and is summarized in Proposition 2 below. The proof appears in Appendix C.3.
When the investor responds to information correctly, as more information is processed,
more uncertainty is resolved and the investor’s belief updating increases the first part of
19

ar(fˆi,t ). On the other hand, more information processed decreases
the remaining uncertainty, thus the other return variance part, V ar(fi,t − fˆi,t−1 ), becomes
return variance,

1
V
(1+r)2

smaller. When the discount rate is zero, more information changes the timing of uncertainty
resolution without affecting the return variance. When the discount rate is positive, more
information actually decreases the return variance due to the discount factor

1
(1+r)2

in the

first part of the return variance. This result is given in Part A of Proposition 2, and it
confirms the intuition of Campbell et al. (2001) that “improved information about future
cash flows increases the volatility of the stock-price level, but it reduces the volatility of the
stock return because news arrives earlier, at a time when the cash flows in question are more
heavily discounted.” Also, we note that this result is not unique to our model specification.
West (1988) provides similar results with a more general ARMA-type dividend process.
It seems possible to use a static model with two periods to discuss the relation between
information and return variation. For example, in the first period, investors incorporate
information to update their beliefs, and determine the equilibrium asset prices; in the second period assets are liquidated. In such a static model, the return variation in the first
period reflects only uncertainty resolution through investors’ belief updating, while the return variation in the second period reflects only the resolution of the remaining fundamental
uncertainty through liquidation. Since both parts of uncertainty resolution are important
for understanding return variation, we analyze a dynamic model to avoid any potential confusion. Such a dynamic setup also allows us to discuss the time-series properties of return
comovement.
Proposition 2 The relation between information and return variability depends on the level
of the investor’s overconfidence.
A. When the investor uses perfect Bayesian updating (φ = 1), the return variance generated by a fundamental factor is independent of the amount of the information about the
factor if the discount rate for future cashflows is zero, and decreases with the amount of
information if the discount rate is positive.
B. If the investor is sufficiently overconfident:
φ>1+

(1 + r)2 − 1
,
(1 + r)2 + 1
20

(47)

with the amount of information below a threshold, the return variance increases with the
amount of information and the overconfidence parameter φ.
Part B of Proposition 2 shows that when the investor is overconfident, more information
can lead to a higher return variability. Overconfidence causes the investor to overreact to
the self-processed noisy signal, thus amplifying the effect of signal noise on prices. The
exact magnitude of the noise amplification effect depends on two forces. On the one hand,
as a signal becomes more precise, the investors’ overreaction to the signal gets stronger,
thus further amplifying noise. On the other hand, a more precise signal contains less noise.
The tradeoff between these two forces determines that when the investor’s overconfidence
parameter is sufficiently high and the amount of information in the signal is below the
threshold level, the noise amplification effect can dominate the discount rate effect that
we mentioned earlier. Thus, in the presence of investor overconfidence, more information
can lead to a higher return variance. We combine this result with the investor’s attention
allocation to analyze return comovement.
In Appendix D, we numerically illustrate values of the threshold on the amount of information, based on various parameter sets. These threshold values are high for individual
investors’ learning processes. We also show that the restriction on the overconfidence parameter in (47) is modest for reasonable values of the discount rate. Therefore, we focus the
rest of our analysis on cases in which the conditions in Proposition 2B are satisfied.
5.2

“Excess” comovement

The return correlation between two firms depends on the fraction of their return variances
that is driven by common sources. Here, we compare the correlations in firms’ returns with
the correlations in their fundamentals.
We define ρ as the return correlation between two firms from different sectors:
ρ ≡ Corr(qi,j,t , qk,l,t ), i 6= k.

(48)

Since these two firms are from different sectors, according to equation (45) the shared part

21

of their return variances can only be related to the market factor:
V ar

ρ= q

³

1
ĥ
1+r t

+ ht − ĥt−1

´

V ar(qi,j,t )V ar(qk,l,t )

.

(49)

We define ρi as the return correlation between any two firms in sector i:
ρi ≡ Corr(qi,j,t , qi,k,t ),

j 6= k.

(50)

According to equation (45), ρi depends on the return variances caused by the market factor
and the sector factor:
V ar
ρi =

³

1
ĥ
1+r t

µ

´

+ ht − ĥt−1 + V ar
q

fˆi,t
1+r

+ fi,t − fˆi,t−1

V ar(qi,j,t )V ar(qi,k,t )

¶

.

(51)

The following proposition compares the return correlations with the corresponding fundamental correlations. The proof appears in Appendix C.4.
Proposition 3 Under the conditions in Proposition 2B, and that m2 σh2 > σf2 , n2 σf2 > σg2 ,
the return correlation between any two firms is higher than their fundamental correlation.
Proposition 3 shows that limited attention and investor overconfidence can amplify the
return correlation between any two firms, either in the same sector or from different sectors,
so that the return correlation is higher than their fundamental correlation. This result is
a consequence of the investor’s category learning behavior. His tendency to process more
market than sector information and to process more sector than firm-specific information,
together with his overreaction to this processed information, creates more return variation
in common factors and therefore generates excessive comovement.
The result of excess comovement at the market level is supported by empirical evidence of
Shiller (1989) and Pindyck and Rotemberg (1993). Shiller finds that the comovement of real
stock prices between the U.K. and the U.S. appear too large to be accounted for in terms of
the comovement of real dividends between the two countries. Pindyck and Rotemberg show
a similar result for the comovement of individual stocks in U.S. markets. The result of excess
comovement at the sector level also complements the analysis of Barberis and Shleifer (2003)
22

and Barberis, Shleifer, and Wurgler (2005), who focus on excess comovement generated by
investors’ style strategies among assets with no fundamental correlation.9
5.3

Comovement and price informativeness

The degree to which the investor treats firms in a sector as a single category depends on the
information-efficiency parameter of the sector. We compare cross-sectoral differences in the
information-efficiency parameters with a focus on return correlation and price informativeness.
We capture a firm’s stock price informativeness through its inverse relationship to remaining uncertainty, which is to be resolved through the realization of dividends:
V ar(ht − ĥt−1 ) + V ar(fi,t − fˆi,t−1 ) + V ar(gi,j,t − ĝi,j,t−1 ).

(52)

The firm’s stock price informativeness depends on the amount of information about the firm
that the investor processes. For a given overconfidence parameter, Lemma 3 in Appendix
C.3 shows that as the investor processes more information, the stock price becomes more
informative and the remaining uncertainty is lower.
The following proposition compares the return correlation and price informativeness in
two sectors with different information-efficiency parameters. The proof is in Appendix C.5.
Proposition 4 Assume that m2 σh2 > σf2 and n2 σf2 > σg2 . Consider two sectors, 1 and
2, with different information-efficiency parameters, θ1 > θ2 . In sector 1, the investor not
only processes more sector and firm-specific information, but also processes relatively more
firm-specific information, treating firms in this sector less as a single category and more
as individual firms. If the conditions in Proposition 2B are satisfied and all factors receive
positive attention allocation, stock prices in sector 1 are more informative and the return
correlation between firms in sector 1 is lower.
Proposition 4 illustrates a negative cross-sectoral relation between return comovement
and stock price informativeness. Sector 1 has a higher information-efficiency parameter,
e.g., either a better disclosure system or a less complicated industry structure. As a result,
9

See also Boyer (2004) for a study of excessive comovement among stocks with similar book-to-market ratios.

23

it is effective for the investor to allocate more attention to all factors in sector 1, leading to
more informative prices in the sector. In this scenario, she would also allocate relatively more
attention to firm-specific factors in sector 1. This allows her to consider firms within this
higher efficiency sector individually rather than as members of a sector category, resulting
in lower average return correlation.
We can quantify price informativeness empirically by the power of stock returns in predicting future changes in firms’ earnings or other fundamental variables.10 We can also measure
the return correlation between firms in a sector by the average R2 statistic of regressing
individual stock returns in the sector onto the market return and the sector’s aggregate
return.
Proposition 4 is consistent with several recent empirical studies that examine the relation
between comovement and stock price informativeness. According to Morck, Yeung, and Yu
(2000), return synchronicity, as measured by the average R2 statistic, is high in those emerging countries having less developed legal and investor protection systems that discourage
information processing. Durnev et al. (2003) show that in industries with less synchronous
returns, stock prices are more informative. Wurgler (2000) finds that the efficiency of capital
allocation across countries is negatively correlated with the synchronicity in stock returns
of domestically traded firms, and Durnev, Morck, and Yeung (2004) show that U.S. firms
with higher firm-specific return variability make more value-enhancing investments. Overall,
these studies find broad evidence that a sector’s stock price informativeness is negatively
related to the return correlation of firms in the sector.
Proposition 4 also suggests that the degree to which the investor treats firms in a sector
as a single category is determined by her attention allocation to the sector factor relative to
firm-specific factors, and that this degree is inversely related to the average return correlation
of firms in the sector. Although it is difficult to directly measure the investor’s attention
allocations, we can use the average return correlation as an indirect measure. This is a useful
gauge for analyzing cross-sectional implications of investors’ attention.
10

Durnev, et al. (2003) provide a detailed discussion of the empirical measures.

24

5.4

Time trend in return correlation

Over the last 50 years, enormous developments in information technology have made it easier
for investors to collect and process information about the overall economy and to gain specific
knowledge about industries and firms. We capture these technological advances by allowing
an increasing time trend in the information-efficiency parameter. We assume that all factors
share the same information-efficiency parameter θ, which increases over time. The following
proposition describes the result. The proof appears in Appendix C.6.
Proposition 5 Suppose that m2 σh2 > σf2 , n2 σf2 > σg2 , and that the conditions of Proposition
2B are satisfied. As θ increases over time, the investor allocates relatively more attention
to firm-specific factors. Consequently, the firm-specific return volatility rises relative to the
sector-level volatility, and the return correlation between any two firms decreases.
Proposition 5 indicates that as information technology improves over time, the investor’s
attention constraints become less binding, giving her the capacity to process more information for all factors. There is a larger increase in the amount of information she processes
for firm-specific factors, and therefore a larger increase in assets’ return variances related
to firm-specific information. As a result, firm-specific volatility rises and return correlation
decreases.
This implication is supported by Campbell, Lettau, Malkiel, and Xu (2001), who find a
decreasing trend in the return correlation of U.S. stocks over the last 30 years: the average
correlation among individual stocks has fallen from 0.28 in the early 1960s to 0.08 in 1997,
and the average R2 statistics for individual stocks from a market model has declined in
tandem. They identify increased firm-specific volatility as the main cause of the decreasing
correlation in U.S. stock returns.
We note that the variation in information acquisition cost alone is not sufficient to explain either the cross-sectional or the time-serial properties of return comovement that our
model generates. As shown earlier, more information in a rational expectations model with a
positive discount rate reduces, rather than increases, return volatility. Without exploring investor behavior such as overconfidence and limited attention, standard rational expectations
models cannot reconcile these aforementioned empirical observations.
25

6

Cross-section of return predictability

Over the past two decades, researchers have discovered that they can use past stock prices and
other publicly available variables to predict stock returns.11 These findings have challenged
standard asset pricing models and motivated studies on the effects of investor biases.
We focus on two types of information related biases: investors’ overreaction to their
information, and their ignorance of useful public information. Investors’ attention allocation
could play important roles for both types of biases: biased reactions to information only occur
when investors attend to information; the predictive power of a piece of ignored information
depends on how much the investor already knows. Thus, the investor’s attention allocation
in our model provides cross-sectional implications for both types of return predictability.
6.1

Predictability by overreactions to information

Overconfidence causes the investor to overreact to her information, causing asset prices to
deviate from their fundamental levels. Since the overreactions will eventually be corrected
and asset prices will mean-revert to the fundamental levels in the long run, asset returns
become predictable. Such predictability is displayed through a negative autocovariance in
returns.12
Proposition 6 summarizes our results on overreaction driven predictability. We provide
the proof in Appendix C.7.
Proposition 6 If the investor is overconfident (φ > 1), the first-order autocovariance of any
firm’s stock return is negative. Under the condition of Proposition 2B, the autocovariance
in the firm-specific returns decreases with the amount of firm-specific information processed.
If the investor only attends to information on common factors, the negative autocovariance
is present in the common return components, but not in the firm-specific returns.
Proposition 6 shows that when the investor treats the sector more as a category in
itself and processes less firm-specific information, there is less overreaction-driven return
11

For example, the literature has identified the so-called “short-term momentum effect”, “long-term reversal effect”,
“post earnings announcement drift effect” and “accrual effect”, among others. See Hirshleifer (2001) and Barberis
and Thaler (2003) for reviews of these studies.
12
Lo and MacKinlay (1988) and Poterba and Summers (1988) find that U.S. stock returns over one year or longer
horizons have a negative autocovariance.

26

predictability at the firm level. In extreme cases where the investor treats all firms in the
sector identically as a category and pays no attention to firm-specific information, negative
autocovariances are present only in the common return components, such as market- and
sector-related returns. Even though stock prices in these cases could be inefficient, in that
they do not reflect firm-specific fundamentals, there is no overreaction-driven predictability
in the sector’s firm-specific returns.
Empirically, it is difficult to directly measure the degree to which the investor treats firms
in a sector as a category. However, our analysis in Section 5.3 shows that such a degree is
negatively related to the average return correlation of firms in the sector. Thus, our model
provides a new testable implication for overreaction-driven return predictability and return
comovement: we expect that after controlling for the degree of investor overconfidence, a
sector with a lower average return correlation to exhibit more pronounced firm-level return
predictability driven by investors’ overreaction, such as long-run reversals in asset prices.
Although our model only incorporates return predictability generated by investor overconfidence, we expect the cross-sectional patterns driven by investors’ attention allocation
to be applicable to other information-related biases. For example, Daniel, Hirshleifer, and
Subrahmanyam (1998) show that self-attribution bias can lead to price momentum. Selfattribution bias causes investors to attribute success to themselves but failure to external
forces. Thus, investors become more overconfident about their information-processing ability
after good performance, and react even more strongly to their information, creating price
momentum. Given investors’ attention allocation and the resulting information structure, an
extension of our model incorporating self-attribution bias could generate a negative relation
between momentum in firm-specific returns and average return correlation in a sector.
6.2

Predictive power of ignored information

Limited attention also causes the investor to ignore certain useful information in the public
domain. As a result, it is possible that this information can be used to predict future asset
returns. Here, we expand our model to discuss the cross-sectoral pattern in the return
predictive power of ignored information.

27

We consider a specific public signal, νi,j,t , that is ignored by the investor at time t:
νi,j,t = gi,j,t+1 + ²ν,i,j,t

(53)

where gi,j,t+1 is a firm’s fundamental factor and ²ν,i,j,t ∼ N (0, σν2 ) is an independent signal
noise. This signal could be the cashflow component of the firm’s earnings, which is often
ignored by investors and thus has the ability to predict future stock returns (see, for example,
Sloan, 1996 and Hirshleifer et al., 2003).
The information value of an ignored signal depends on how much information the investor
has already processed from other sources, which in turn is determined by the attention she
allocates to the firm. Take the EntreMed example (Huberman and Regev, 2001): while
investors may have missed the article in Nature about the company’s new cancer curing
drug, they could have obtained this same information if they had paid enough attention
to the company information available through other channels. The following proposition
explicitly describes such a relationship. We provide the proof in Appendix C.8.
Proposition 7 The return predictive power of an ignored signal about a firm decreases with
the amount of firm-specific information processed by the investor.
Proposition 7 confirms that an investor’s allocation of more attention to a firm and
processing of more information decreases the remaining uncertainty, which makes the ignored
signal less important. Although it can be difficult to measure the investor’s attention to an
individual firm, our analysis in Section 5.3 shows that the investor’s attention to individual
firms in a sector is negatively related to the average return correlation of firms in the sector.
Thus, our model provides another testable implication: in a sector with a higher average
return correlation, a variable that captures ignored firm information should have a higher
predictive power for firm-specific returns, after we control for the precision of the variable
and the degree of investor overconfidence.

7

Conclusion

In this paper, we provide a theoretical model for studying investors’ attention allocation in
learning about asset fundamentals. Our model shows that limited attention generates an
28

endogenous structure of information that reflects the investor’s category learning behavior,
i.e., the investor tends to focus more on market- and sector-level information than on firmspecific information. When we combine this endogenous information structure with investor
overconfidence, we generate several implications for asset return comovement. We show that
return correlation between firms is higher than their fundamental correlation; stock prices
in a sector with a lower average return correlation tend to be more informative; return
correlations decrease over time with the development of information technology. These
results are supported by recent empirical findings, which would otherwise be difficult to
explain using standard rational expectations models.
In addition, our model demonstrates new implications for the cross-sectional patterns of
return predictability: after controlling for the degree of investor overconfidence, firms in a
sector with a lower average return correlation tend to have more pronounced overreactiondriven return predictability, such as long-run price reversals and short-term price momentum;
on the other hand, ignored information in public domain, such as certain variables in firms’
financial statements, is less effective in predicting the future returns of these firms.

29

Appendix A

The entropy measure of information

This appendix provides a brief introduction to the entropy concept. According to information
theory, the uncertainty of a random variable ỹ with a continuous probability density function
f (y) can be measured by its entropy (Cover and Thomas, 1991, Chapter 2):
Z

H(ỹ) ≡ −E log[f (ỹ)] = −

(log f (y)) f (y)dy.

(A1)

Entropy provides a lower bound for the average number of bits needed to transmit the
random variable.
The entropy of a random variable that follows a Gaussian distribution, N (ȳ, σ 2 ), depends
only on its variance:
H(ỹ) =

1
log σ 2 + 0.5 log(2πe).
2

(A2)

This expression is intuitive, since, for a normally distributed random variable, more uncertainty is associated with a larger variance.
Information theory defines the conditional entropy of ỹ, given another random variable
s, as the expected value of the conditional distributions’ entropies, averaged over the conditioning random variable s. Let f (ỹ, s) be the joint probability density function of ỹ and s,
f (y|s) be the conditional distribution of ỹ conditional on s, and g(s) be the marginal density
function of s. The conditional entropy of ỹ given s is:
Z

H(ỹ|s) ≡

Z Z

H(ỹ|s)g(s)ds = −

(log f (y|s))f (y, s)dyds.

(A3)

The amount of information that s contains about ỹ is the amount of uncertainty reduction
in ỹ due to the knowledge of s:
Z Z

I(ỹ; s) ≡ H(ỹ) − H(ỹ|s) =

f (y, s) log

f (y, s)
dyds.
f (y)g(s)

(A4)

A property of this information measure is that it is invariant to any linear transformations
of ỹ and s:
Lemma 1 If we transform random variables ỹ and s by any non-zero constants a and b,
respectively, the amount of information contained in bs about aỹ is identical to the amount
of information contained in s about ỹ: I(aỹ; bs) = I(ỹ; s).
30

PROOF: Define ỹ 0 = aỹ and s0 = bs. The joint density function of ỹ 0 and s0 is
fỹ0 s0 (y 0 , s0 ) =

1
f (y 0 /a, s0 /b).
ab

(A5)

The marginal density functions of ỹ 0 and s0 are
1
fỹ0 (y 0 ) = f (y 0 /a),
a

1
fs0 (s0 ) = g(s0 /b).
b

(A6)

Then the amount of information of bs to aỹ is given by
Z Z

fỹ0 s0 (y 0 , s0 )
dy 0 ds0
fỹ0 (y 0 )gỹ0 (s0 )
Z Z
1
f (y 0 /a, s0 /b)
=
f (y 0 /a, s0 /b) log
dy 0 ds0
ab
f (y 0 /a)g(s0 /b)
Z Z
f (y, s)
=
f (y, s) log
dyds = I(ỹ; s).
f (y)g(s)

I(aỹ; bs) = I(ỹ 0 ; s0 ) =

fỹ0 s0 (y 0 , s0 ) log

(A7)

Q.E.D.
This property establishes entropy reduction as a measure of information that is independent of the scale of the underlying variables. Other measures of information have been
used in the related literature. For example, Verrecchia (1982) uses the precision (the inverse
of variance) of noisy signals with Gaussian distributions to measure information. However,
signal precision is not invariant to the scale of the underlying variable to be inferred.

Appendix B

The investor’s optimization problem and equilibrium
prices

We solve the investor’s optimization problem in equation (31) using backward induction. We
first derive the investor’s consumption decision given her information about the next-period
asset fundamentals, and the objective function of the investor’s attention allocation. We
then solve the equilibrium asset prices from the pricing kernel determined by the investor’s
marginal utility of consumption.
Given the investor’s belief about asset fundamentals, her optimization problem is a standard one, as in Merton (1971). Since the investor has an exponential utility and a Gaussian
wealth distribution, her value function takes the following form:
1
Jt (Kt ) = − e−at Kt −bt ,
γ
31

(B1)

where at and bt are deterministic coefficients. Given the investor’s signals St in period t, she
determines her consumption by solving the following optimization problem (inside the curly
bracket of equation 31):
Jt (Kt , St ) ≡ max u(ct ) + δEt [Jt+1 (Kt+1 )|St ]
ct


¯ 
·
¸
m P
n
¯ 
P



−at+1 (Kt −ct )(1+r)+
di,j,t+1 −bt+1 ¯¯


1 −γct δ
i=1 j=1
¯
max
−
e
−
E
S
e
t
¯ t
ct
γ
γ 

¯ 

¯ 

=

(B2)

where the last equation is derived by substituting in Jt+1 (Kt+1 ) from equation (B1) and Kt+1
from equation (32). The first-order condition is
0
(Kt+1 )|St ],
u0 (ct ) = δ(1 + r)Et [Jt+1

(B3)

or equivalently,
e−γct =

−(1+r)at+1 (Kt −ct )−bt+1 −at+1 Et

δ(1 + r)at+1
e
γ

µm n
PP

¶
di,j,t+1 |St +

i=1 j=1

a2
t+1
V
2

art

µm n
PP

¶
di,j,t+1 |St

i=1 j=1

(. B4)

From this equation, we can derive that


ct





m X
n

X
1

(1
+
r)a
=
di,j,t+1 |St 
t+1 Kt + bt+1 + at+1 Et
γ + (1 + r)at+1 
i=1 j=1







m X
n

X
a2
− t+1 V art 
di,j,t+1 |St  − ln[δ(1 + r)at+1 /γ] . (B5)
2
i=1 j=1

By substituting ct back to equation (B2), we obtain
Jt (Kt , St )










m X
n
X
γ + (1 + r)at+1
γ


= −
exp −
(1 + r)at+1 Kt + at+1 Et
di,j,t+1 |St 
γ(1 + r)at+1
γ + (1 + r)at+1
i=1 j=1




m X
n

X
V art 
di,j,t+1 |St  + bt+1 − ln[δ(1 + r)at+1 /γ] .
−
2
i=1 j=1

a2t+1

(B6)

From equation (31), the investor’s attention allocation is determined by solving the following optimization problem:
Jt (Kt ) = max E[Jt (Kt , St )].
Λt

32

(B7)

The expectation on the right-hand-side of equation (B7) is based on the investor’s prior
belief at t. Since the investor determines the attention allocation before she processes any
information about the next-period dividends, and because of the i.i.d assumption of dividends across periods, she chooses her attention allocation to maximize the unconditional
expectation of Jt (Kt , St ).
After substituting Jt (Kt , St ) from equation (B6) into equation (B7) and deriving the
expectation, the objective of the investor’s attention allocation is to


min V art 
Λt

m X
n
X



di,j,t+1 |St  .

(B8)

i=1 j=1

This term is the only one affected by the investor’s attention allocation on the right-hand-side
of equation (B7). Intuitively, the objective is to minimize the total uncertainty about the
next-period dividend payments in the investor’s portfolio. In achieving such an objective,
the investor is able to make an efficient intertemporal consumption decision.
The exact values of the coefficients at and bt are not critical for our discussion. They are
determined by a recursive Bellman equation. By substituting equations (B1) and (B6) into
the two sides of equation (B7), respectively, and by matching the corresponding terms, we
obtain two backward-induction equations that determine at and bt :
at =
e−bt =

γ(1 + r)at+1
,
γ + (1 + r)at+1

(B9)








γ
γ + (1 + r)at+1
E exp −


(1 + r)at+1
γ + (1 + r)at+1
−

a2t+1
2



V art 

m X
n
X
i=1 j=1



m X
n
X
at+1 Et 
di,j,t+1 |St  + bt+1
i=1 j=1



di,j,t+1 |St  − ln[δ(1 + r)at+1 /γ]
.



(B10)

Following Lucas (1978), the investor’s marginal utility of consumption determines the
asset prices:

"

#

u0 (ct+1 )
Pt = Et δ 0
(Pt+1 + Dt+1 )|St .
u (ct )

(B11)

Since the dividends are independent across periods, we conjecture the following linear price
function:
Pt =

1
[Et (Dt+1 |St ) + Lt ]
1+r
33

(B12)

where Lt is a deterministic vector. Lt can be determined through backward induction by
substituting equation (B12) into equation (B11):
½

·

¸

¾

1
[Et+1 (Dt+2 |St+1 ) + Lt+1 ] + Dt+1 |St
1+r
= δeγct {Et [e−γct+1 ](D̄ + Lt+1 )/(1 + r) + Et [e−γct+1 Dt+1 |St ]}
"
#
u0 (ct+1 )
= [(D̄ + Lt+1 )/(1 + r) + Et (Dt+1 ) − Covt (γct+1 , Dt+1 )]Et δ 0
.
u (ct )

Pt = δeγct Et e−γct+1

(B13)

The last equation uses Lemma 2, given below. The envelope condition implies that
Jt0 (Kt ) = u0 (ct ).

(B14)

Combining this condition with the first-order condition in equation (B3), we obtain
"

#

u0 (ct+1 )
1
Et δ 0
=
.
u (ct )
1+r

(B15)

By substituting this expression into equation (B13), we obtain a recursive equation that
determines the deterministic vector Lt :
Lt =

1
(D̄ + Lt+1 ) − Covt (γct+1 , Dt+1 ).
1+r

(B16)

Thus, the conjectured price function in equation (B12) holds in equilibrium.
Lemma 2 Let x and y be two normally distributed random variables. Then,
E[yex ] = [E(y) + Cov(x, y)]E(ex ).

(B17)

PROOF: Denote x ∼ N (x̄, σx2 ) and y ∼ N (ȳ, σy2 ), and their correlation as ρ. Then,
·
Z ∞ Z ∞

x−x̄ 2
−2ρ x−x̄
σx
σx

³

( )
( )
ye
√
e
2
2πσx σy 1 − ρ
−∞ −∞
³
´2
1 x−x̄ 2
Z ∞
y−ȳ
x−x̄
1
−
−ρ
ex− 2 ( σx ) Z ∞
y
2
σx
=
dx
dy √
e 2(1−ρ ) σy
2πσx
σy 1 − ρ2
−∞
−∞
1 x−x̄ 2
Z ∞
ex− 2 ( σx )
ρσy
2
=
dx
[ȳ +
(x − x̄)] = (ȳ + ρσx σy )ex̄+σx /2 .
2πσx
σx
−∞

E[yex ] =

x

−

dxdy

Q.E.D.
34

1
2(1−ρ2 )

y−ȳ
σy

´ ³
+

y−ȳ
σy

´2 ¸

(B18)

Appendix C
C.1

Other proofs

Proof to Theorem 2

Since the objective function to be minimized is continuous and the feasible set of variables
is compact, there must exist at least one minima for the optimization problem, as directly
implied by the Weierstrass Theorem. On the other hand, since the objective function is
strictly convex, the minima must also be unique.
C.2

Proof to Proposition 1

Since all sector factors are symmetric with an identical prior variance and informationefficiency parameter, and since these parameters stay constant over time, they receive identical constant attention allocations: λf,1 = · · · = λf,m , which we denote by λf . By construction, λf ≤ 1/m. All firm-specific factors also receive an identical attention allocation, which
we denote by λg . In addition, we denote the investor’s attention allocation to the market
factor as λh .
We first show that if n2 σf2 > σg2 , then λf ≥ λg . We prove this statement by contradiction.
We suppose that 0 ≤ λf < λg . Due to the stationary setting, we can rewrite the first-order
conditions in equations (42) and (43) as

2 2 −λf θφκ

 µκ = θφκ(n σf )e

if λf > 0

2 2

 µκ > θφκ(n σf )

 µκ = θφκσg2 e−λg θφκ

if λg > 0

 µ > θφκσ 2
κ
g

if λg = 0

if λf = 0

(C1)

(C2)

λg must be positive. Then the first-order conditions imply that
µκ ≥ θφκ(n2 σf2 )e−λf θφκ

(C3)

µκ = θφκσg2 e−λg φκ

(C4)

Thus, n2 σf2 e−λf θφκ ≤ σg2 e−λg θφκ . On the other hand, since n2 σf2 > σg2 and λf < λg by
assumptions, n2 σf2 e−λf θφκ > σg2 e−λg θφκ . This result is a contradiction. Therefore, λf ≥ λg .
By following the logic as above, we can also show that if m2 σh2 > σf2 , then λh ≥ λf .
35

If κ <

m
φθ

³

´

log n2 σf2 /σg2 , we can further show that λg must be zero. First we note that

the assumption implies that
(n2 σf2 )e−θφκ/m > σg2 .

(C5)

Starting from the first order conditions in equation (C1), we obtain the following:
µκ ≥ θφκ(n2 σf2 )e−λf θφκ ≥ θφκ(n2 σf2 )e−θφκ/m > θφκσg2 ,

(C6)

where we derive the second inequality above from the fact that λf ≤ 1/m, and the third
inequality from (C5). The first-order condition in equation (C2) then implies that λg = 0.
C.3

Proof to Proposition 2

Define
υp (x, φ) ≡ (1 − e−φx )2

1
,
1 − e−x

υd (x, φ) ≡ e−2φx + (1 − e−φx )2

e−x
.
1 − e−x

(C7)
(C8)

Lemma 3 derives the two parts of return variance in equation (46), V ar(fˆi,t ) and V ar(fi,t −
fˆi,t−1 ), based on these two functions.
Lemma 3 V ar(fˆi,t ) is determined by the amount of information processed by the investor,
λf,i,t θi κ, about the value of the factor in the next period, fi,t+1 ,:
V ar(fˆi,t ) = υp (λf,i,t θi κ, φ)σf2 .

(C9)

V ar(fi,t − fˆi,t−1 ) is determined by λf,i,t−1 θi κ, the amount of information processed in the
previous period about fi,t , which affects the remaining uncertainty in fi,t :
V ar(fi,t − fˆi,t−1 ) = υd (λf,i,t−1 θi κ, φ)σf2 .
υd (x, φ) is a monotonically decreasing function of x for any x ≥ 0 and φ ≥ 1.
PROOF: According to equation (26),
V ar(fˆi,t ) = (1 − e−λf,i,t θi φκ )2 V ar(sf,i,t )
36

(C10)

= (1 − e−λf,i,t θi φκ )2 [V ar(fi,t+1 ) + V ar(²f,i,t )]
σf2
= (1 − e−λf,i,t θi φκ )2
1 − e−λf,i,t θi κ
2
= υp (λf,i,t θi κ, φ)σf ,

(C11)

where the second equation above is obtained through equation (11), and the third equation
is derived through equation (20). Similarly,
V ar(fi,t − fˆi,t−1 ) = V ar{fi,t − [f¯ + (1 − e−λf,i,t−1 θi φκ )(sf,i,t−1 − f¯)]}
= V ar{fi,t − [f¯ + (1 − e−λf,i,t−1 θi φκ )(fi,t + ²f,i,t−1 − f¯)]}
= V ar[e−λf,i,t−1 θi φκ (fi,t − f¯)] + V ar[(1 − e−λf,i,t−1 θi φκ )²f,i,t−1 ]
"
#
−λf,i,t−1 θi κ
−2λf,i,t−1 θi φκ
−λf,i,t−1 θi φκ 2 e
= e
+ (1 − e
)
σf2
−λ
θ
κ
i
f,i,t−1
1−e
2
= υd (λf,i,t−1 θi κ, φ)σf .
(C12)
For any x > 0,
n
∂υd (x, φ)
1
= −
2φe−φx (1 − e−x )[e−φx − e−(φ+1)x ]
∂x
(1 − e−x )2

o

+[1 − (φ + 1)e−φx + φe−(φ+1)x ][e−x − e−(φ+1)x ] < 0.

(C13)

Thus, υd (x, φ) always decreases with x. Q.E.D.
We consider a stationary equilibrium in which the amount of information processed in
each period about a factor fi is identical: λf,i,t θi κ = λf,i,t−1 θi κ = x. Define
υ(x, φ) =

1
υp (x, φ) + υd (x, φ).
(1 + r)2

(C14)

The total return variance generated by a factor can be represented by
µ

¶

1 ˆ
fi,t + fi,t − fˆi,t−1 = υ(x, φ)σf2 .
V ar
1+r

(C15)

In the remaining part of the proof, we focus on the relation between the amount of
information about a sector factor, fi , and the associated return variance. The same result
applies to all other factors.
We first prove part A of Proposition 2. When the investor uses perfect Bayesian updating
(φ = 1), we can directly verify that υp (x, 1) + υd (x, 1) = 1. υp (x, 1) is the fraction of
37

uncertainty that is resolved early through information processing, and it increases with x.
υd (x, 1) is the remaining unresolved fraction, and it decreases with x. Thus, if the investor
processes more information, much uncertainty is resolved earlier, leaving less to be resolved
later through dividends.
The total return variance generated by the factor
µ

"

¶

#

1 ˆ
1
V ar
fi,t + fi,t − fˆi,t−1 =
υp (x, 1) + υd (x, 1) σf2
2
1+r
(1 + r)

(C16)

is determined by a weighted sum of the earlier resolution of uncertainty through information
processing and the later resolution through the realization of dividends. We note that a
discount factor,

1
,
(1+r)2

has been multiplied to the earlier resolution of uncertainty υp (x, 1),

reflecting that early resolution of future uncertainty creates less return variation. Once we
substitute out υd (x, 1) by 1 − υp (x, 1), we obtain
"

¶

µ

#

1 ˆ
r(2 + r)
fi,t + fi,t − fˆi,t−1 = 1 −
υp (x, 1) σf2 .
V ar
1+r
(1 + r)2

(C17)

This expression equals to σf2 if r = 0, and decreases with the amount of information, x, if
r > 0. This result is summarized in Part A of Proposition 2.
We prove part B of Proposition 2 as follows. By the definition of υ in equation (C14),
υ(x, φ) =

−x
1
(1 − e−φx )2
−2φx
−φx 2 e
+
e
+
(1
−
e
)
.
(1 + r)2 1 − e−x
1 − e−x

(C18)

We analyze the properties of υ(x, φ) around x = 0. Direct differentiation provides
¯

∂υ(x, φ) ¯¯
φ
¯
=
[(φ − 2)(1 + r)2 + φ],
2
¯
∂x
(1 + r)
x=0

(C19)

¯

φ2
∂ 2 υ(x, φ) ¯¯
¯
=
−
[2(φ − 2)(1 + r)2 + (1 + r)2 + 2φ − 1].
∂x2 ¯x=0
(1 + r)2

(C20)

In the derivation of these derivatives, we used the L’Hopital’s rule.
If φ > 1 +

(1+r)2 −1
,
(1+r)2 +1

we can verify that
¯

∂υ(x, φ) ¯¯
¯
> 0, and
∂x ¯x=0
38

¯

∂ 2 υ(x, φ) ¯¯
¯
< 0.
∂x2 ¯x=0

(C21)

Since υ is a smooth function, there must exist a critical level, x̄ > 0, such that υ(x) is strictly
increasing and concave for ∀x ∈ [0, x̄). We determine x̄ as the root to the equation
∂υ(x, φ)/∂x = 0.

(C22)

An analytical solution to this equation is not available. We numerically demonstrate the
values of x̄ in Appendix Appendix D for a wide range of model parameters.
Direct differentiation also provides that
h
³
´i
∂υ(x, φ)
2x
−φx
−2φx
2
−(1+φ)x
−2φx
=
e
−
e
+
(1
+
r)
e
−
e
> 0.
∂φ
(1 + r)2 (1 − e−x )

(C23)

Thus, υ increases with φ for any x ≥ 0.
C.4

Proof to Proposition 3

We denote xh = λh θh κ as the amount of market-level information processed by the investor,
xf,i = λf,i θi κ as the amount of information processed for sector i, and xg,i,j = λg,i,j θi κ as the
amount of information processed about firm j in sector i.
From equation (49), the return correlation between two firms from different sectors is
V ar

ρ =
V ar
=

³

1
ĥ
1+r t

µ

´

+ ht − ĥt−1 + V ar

υ(xh , φ)σh2 +

³

υ(xh , φ)σh2
υ(xf,i , φ)σf2 +

1
ĥ
1+r t
fˆi,t

1+r

+ ht − ĥt−1

´

¶

+ fi,t − fˆi,t−1 + V ar

υ(xg,i,j , φ)σg2

,

³

ĝi,j,t
1+r

+ gi,j,t − ĝi,j,t−1

´

(C24)

where the function υ is defined in equation (C14). From the factor structure in equation (4),
the fundamental correlation between them is
σh2
ρ = 2
.
σh + σf2 + σg2
D

(C25)

By rearranging the terms in equation (C24), we obtain
ρ
υ(xh , φ)σh2
=
1−ρ
υ(xf,i , φ)σf2 + υ(xg,i,j , φ)σg2

(C26)

According to Proposition 1, since m2 σh2 > σf2 and n2 σf2 > σg2 , we have that xh > xf,i > xg,i,j .
Furthermore, under the conditions of Proposition 2B, υ(x, φ) is an increasing function of x.
39

Therefore, υ(xh , φ) > υ(xf,i , φ) and υ(xh , φ) > υ(xg,i,j , φ). Thus,
ρD
σ2
ρ
> 2 h 2 =
,
1−ρ
σf + σg
1 − ρD

(C27)

and ρ > ρD .
Following equation (51), the return correlation between any two firms in sector i is
υ(xh , φ)σh2 + υ(xf,i , φ)σf2
.
ρi =
υ(xh , φ)σh2 + υ(xf,i , φ)σf2 + υ(xg,i,j , φ)σg2

(C28)

The fundamental correlation in the dividends of these two firms is
ρD
i

σh2 + σf2
= 2
.
σh + σf2 + σg2

(C29)

Following a procedure similar to the one above, we can prove that ρi > ρD
i .
C.5

Proof to Proposition 4

We denote xf,1 = λf,1 θ1 κ as the amount of information processed by the investor about the
sector factor of sector 1, and xf,1 = λf,1 θ1 κ as the amount of information processed about
the sector factor of sector 2. The first-order condition in equation (42) for the investor’s
attention allocation to sector factors implies that if all factors receive positive attention
allocation, then
ln µκ = ln(θ1 ) + ln(φκn2 σf2 ) − φxf,1 ,

(C30)

ln µκ = ln(θ2 ) + ln(φκn2 σf2 ) − φxf,2 .

(C31)

By taking the difference between the two equations above, we obtain that
xf,1 − xf,2 =

1
(ln θ1 − ln θ2 ) > 0.
φ

(C32)

We denote this difference by dx.
Since all the firm-specific factors in each sector have the same prior variance, they share
the same amount of attention allocation. We denote xg,1,j = λg,1,j θ1 κ as the amount of
information processed by the investor about a firm-specific factor in sector 1, and xg,2,j =
λg,2,j θ2 κ as the amount of information processed by the investor about a firm-specific factor
40

in sector 2. The first-order condition in equation (43) for the investor’s attention allocation
to firm-specific factors implies that if all factors receive positive attention allocation, then
ln µκ = ln(θ1 ) + ln(φκσg2 ) − φxg,1,j ,

(C33)

ln µκ = ln(θ2 ) + ln(φκσg2 ) − φxg,2,j .

(C34)

By taking the difference between the two equations above, we show that
xg,1,j − xg,2,j =

1
(ln θ1 − ln θ2 ) = xf,1 − xf,2 = dx > 0.
φ

(C35)

We note that relative to sector 2, the amount of information that the investor processes for
the sector factor and any firm-specific factor in sector 1 increases by the same amount, dx.
Since the amount of firm-specific information is smaller (xf,2 > xg,2,j from Proposition 1),
its increase is relatively larger.
To prove that return correlation of firms in sector 1 is lower (ρ1 < ρ2 ), we need only
establish that
ρ1
ρ2
<
,
1 − ρ1
1 − ρ2

(C36)

which, according to equation (C28), is equivalent to
υ(xh , φ)σh2 + υ(xf,1 , φ)σf2
υ(xh , φ)σh2 + υ(xf,2 , φ)σf2
<
.
υ(xg,1,j , φ)σg2
υ(xg,2,j , φ)σg2

(C37)

By rearranging the terms, we can rewrite the inequality above as
υ(xh , φ)σh2 + υ(xf,1 , φ)σf2
υ(xg,1,j , φ)σg2
−
1
<
− 1,
υ(xh , φ)σh2 + υ(xf,2 , φ)σf2
υ(xg,2,j , φ)σg2

(C38)

which is further equivalent to
υ(xf,2 + dx, φ) − υ(xf,2 , φ)
υ(xg,2,j + dx, φ) − υ(xg,2,j , φ)
<
.
2
2
υ(xh , φ)σh /σf + υ(xf,2 , φ)
υ(xg,2,j , φ)

(C39)

Since m2 σh2 > σf2 and n2 σf2 > σg2 , Proposition 1 implies that xg,2,j < xf,2 . Under the
conditions of Proposition 2B, υ is an increasing and concave function of x for x ∈ [0, x̄).
Thus, we have
υ(xg,2,j , φ) < υ(xf,2 , φ),

(C40)

υ(xg,2,j + dx, φ) − υ(xg,2,j , φ) > υ(xf,2 + dx, φ) − υ(xf,2 , φ) > 0.

(C41)

41

These two inequalities directly imply that inequality (C39) holds true. Thus, the return
correlation of firms in sector 1 is lower. A key reason for this result is that in the more
efficient sector, the investor not only processes more information for both sector- and firmspecific factors, but she also processes relatively more firm-specific information.
Next, we establish that stock prices in sector 1 are more informative. Using Lemma 3 in
C.3, we can rewrite the inverse measures of stock price informativeness of firms in sectors 1
and 2, defined in equation (52), as
υd (xh , φ)σh2 + υd (xf,1 , φ)σf2 + υd (xg,1,j , φ)σg2

(C42)

υd (xh , φ)σh2 + υd (xf,2 , φ)σf2 + υd (xg,2,j , φ)σg2 ,

(C43)

and

respectively. Lemma 3 shows that υd (x, φ) is a decreasing function of x. Since xf,1 > xf,2 and
xg,1,j > xg,2,j as in equation (C35), υd (xf,1 , φ) < υd (xf,2 , φ) and υd (xg,1,j , φ) < υd (xg,2,j , φ).
Thus, the term in (C42) is smaller than that in (C43) and the stock prices of firms in sector
1 are more informative than those in sector 2.
C.6

Proof to Proposition 5

In period t, we denote the attention allocation to the market factor by λh,t , and the amount
of information processed by xh,t = λh,t θt κ. Due to the symmetry assumption, all the sector
factors receive an identical attention allocation, which we denote by λf,t ; likewise, all firmspecific factors receive an identical attention allocation, denoted by λg,t . We specify xf,t =
λf,t θt κ as the amount of information processed for a sector factor and xg,t = λg,t θt κ as
the amount of information processed for a firm-specific factor. Furthermore, this symmetry
implies that the return correlation between any two firms from different sectors is identical.
We denote the return correlation as ρt .
To capture an increasing trend in θ, we consider the case that θt rises on even dates and
stays constant on odd dates. Thus, · · · = θ2t−1 < θ2t = θ2t+1 < θ2t+2 = · · ·. On odd dates the
investor’s attention allocations stay the same from the previous date, thus simplifying our
exposition. To prove the proposition, we need to show that the return correlation between
42

any two firms from different sectors decreases over time:
ρ2t+1 < ρ2t−1 .

(C44)

The first-order condition in equation (41) for the investor’s attention allocation to the
market factor implies that if all factors receive positive attention allocation, then
ln µκ,2t+1 = ln(θ2t+1 ) + ln(φκσh2 ) − φxh,2t+1 ,

(C45)

ln µκ,2t−1 = ln(θ2t−1 ) + ln(φκσh2 ) − φxh,2t−1 .

(C46)

By taking the difference of these two equations, we obtain that
xh,2t+1 − xh,2t−1 =

1
[ln(θ2t+1 ) − ln(θ2t−1 ) − (ln µκ,2t+1 − ln µκ,2t−1 )].
φ

(C47)

We denote the difference by dx.
Following a similar procedure, by using the first-order conditions in equations (42) and
(43), we verify that if all factors receive positive attention allocation, then
xf,2t+1 − xf,2t−1 = xg,2t+1 − xg,2t−1 = xh,2t+1 − xh,2t−1 = dx.

(C48)

This result suggests that the changes in the amount of information processed for all factors
are identical. Since all the attention allocations each period should sum up to one:
λh,2t+1 + mλf,2+1 + mnλg,2t+1 = 1,

(C49)

λh,2t−1 + mλf,2t−1 + mnλg,2t−1 = 1.

(C50)

These equations further imply that
xh,2t+1 + mxf,2+1 + mnxg,2t+1 = κθ2t+1 ,

(C51)

xh,2t−1 + mxf,2t−1 + mnxg,2t−1 = κθ2t−1 .

(C52)

By taking the difference of these two equations above and substituting in dx from equation
(C48), we can solve for dx:
dx =

κ
(θ2t+1 − θ2t−1 ) > 0.
1 + m + mn
43

(C53)

Thus, the changes in the amount of information processed for all factors over time are positive
and identical. Since the amount of information processed for firm-specific factors is smaller
than that of common factors, its percentage increase is larger.
To verify inequality (C44), we need only establish that
ρ2t−1
ρ2t+1
<
,
1 − ρ2t+1
1 − ρ2t−1

(C54)

which, according to equation (C26), is equivalent to
υ(xh,2t+1 , φ)σh2
υ(xh,2t−1 , φ)σh2
<
.
υ(xf,2t+1 , φ)σf2 + υ(xg,2t+1 , φ)σg2
υ(xf,2t−1 , φ)σf2 + υ(xg,2t−1 , φ)σg2

(C55)

By rearranging terms, we can rewrite the inequality above as
υ(xf,2t+1 , φ)σf2 + υ(xg,2t+1 , φ)σg2
υ(xh,2t+1 , φ)σh2
−
1
<
− 1,
υ(xh,2t−1 , φ)σh2
υ(xf,2t−1 , φ)σf2 + υ(xg,2t−1 , φ)σg2

(C56)

which is equivalent to
υ(xh,2t−1 + dx, φ) − υ(xh,2t−1 , φ)
υ(xh,2t−1 , φ)
[υ(xf,2t−1 + dx, φ) − υ(xf,2t−1 , φ)]σf2 /σg2 + υ(xg,2t−1 + dx, φ) − υ(xg,2t−1 , φ)
<
.(C57)
υ(xf,2t−1 , φ)σf2 /σg2 + υ(xg,2t−1 , φ)
Since m2 σh2 > σf2 and n2 σf2 > σg2 , Proposition 1 implies that xh,2t−1 > xf,2t−1 > xg,2t−1 .
Furthermore, under the conditions of Proposition 2B, υ is an increasing and concave function
of x for x ∈ [0, x̄). Thus, we have
υ(xh,2t−1 , φ) > υ(xf,2t−1 , φ) > υ(xg,2t−1 , φ)

(C58)

0 < υ(xh,2t−1 + dx, φ) − υ(xh,2t−1 , φ) < υ(xf,2t−1 + dx, φ) − υ(xf,2t−1 , φ),

(C59)

0 < υ(xf,2t−1 + dx, φ) − υ(xf,2t−1 , φ) < υ(xg,2t−1 + dx, φ) − υ(xg,2t−1 , φ).

(C60)

Inequalities (C59) and (C60) suggest that over time, return variances related to the investor’s
information processing for all factors are increased, but the magnitudes of these increases
are different. In particular, the increase in the component related to firm-specific factors is
largest, followed by the increase related to sector factors. The increase related to the market
factor is smallest. This order determines the decrease in return correlation over time.
44

Inequality (C60) implies that the right-hand side of inequality (C57) is larger than
[υ(xf,2t−1 + dx, φ) − υ(xf,2t−1 , φ)]σf2 /σg2 + υ(xf,2t−1 + dx, φ) − υ(xf,2t−1 , φ)
υ(xf,2t−1 , φ)σf2 /σg2 + υ(xg,2t−1 , φ)
σf2 /σg2 + 1
= [υ(xf,2t−1 + dx, φ) − υ(xf,2t−1 , φ)]
υ(xf,2t−1 , φ)σf2 /σg2 + υ(xg,2t−1 , φ)
υ(xf,2t−1 + dx, φ) − υ(xf,2t−1 , φ)
>
υ(xf,2t−1 , φ)

(C61)

where the last inequality is derived from inequality (C58) that υ(xf,2t−1 , φ) > υ(xg,2t−1 , φ).
Further applying inequalities (C59) and (C58) for the numerator and denominator of (C61),
respectively, we can verify that the right-hand-side term in (C61) is larger than the left-hand
side of inequality (C57). Thus, inequality (C57) holds, as well as inequality (C44).
Using a similar method, we can also prove that the return correlation between any two
firms in the same sector also decreases over time as the parameter θ increases.
C.7

Proof to Proposition 6

By substituting the linear price function in Theorem 1 and the factor structure in equation
(4) into an asset’s excess return in equation (44), we can divide the first-order autocovariance
of the asset’s return into three components corresponding to the three fundamental factors
involved:

Ã

!

ĥt+1
ĥt
Cov(qi,j,t , qi,j,t+1 ) = Cov
+ ht − ĥt−1 ,
+ ht+1 − ĥt
1+r
1+r
Ã
!
fˆi,t
fˆi,t+1
ˆ
ˆ
+Cov
+ fi,t − fi,t−1 ,
+ fi,t+1 − fi,t
1+r
1+r
Ã
!
ĝi,j,t
ĝi,j,t+1
+Cov
+ gi,j,t − ĝi,j,t−1 ,
+ gi,j,t+1 − ĝi,j,t (C62)
1+r
1+r
Here, we analyze the component related to the firm-specific factor as an illustration. We can
derive the other two components using the same method.
From the independence assumption of the fundamental factors across periods and the
associated Bayesian learning processes, gi,j,t −ĝi,j,t−1 is independent of ĝi,j,t+1 and gi,j,t+1 −ĝi,j,t ,
and ĝi,j,t is independent of ĝi,j,t+1 . Thus, we obtain
Ã

ĝi,j,t+1
ĝi,j,t
Cov
+ gi,j,t − ĝi,j,t−1 ,
+ gi,j,t+1 − ĝi,j,t
1+r
1+r
45

!

Ã

=
=
=
=

!

ĝi,j,t
Cov
, gi,j,t+1 − ĝi,j,t
1+r
1
Cov (ĝi,j,t , gi,j,t+1 − ĝi,j,t )
1+r
1
[V ar(ĝi,j,t + gi,j,t+1 − ĝi,j,t ) − V ar(ĝi,j,t ) − V ar(gi,j,t+1 − ĝi,j,t )]
2(1 + r)
1
{V ar(gi,j,t+1 ) − [V ar(ĝi,j,t ) + V ar(gi,j,t − ĝi,j,t−1 )]} .
2(1 + r)

(C63)
(C64)

In deriving equation (C63), we use the following formula:
1
Cov(x, y) = [V ar(x + y) − V ar(x) − V ar(y)].
2

(C65)

We note that V ar(gi,j,t+1 ) = σg2 . Based on Appendix C.3, V ar(ĝi,j,t ) + V ar(gi,j,t − ĝi,j,t−1 )
is the return variance related to the firm-specific factor when the discount rate is zero. If
we rewrite υ defined in equation (C14) as a function v(x, φ, r) where x is the amount of
information processed about a factor, φ is the investor’s overconfidence parameter, and r is
the discount rate, we have
V ar(ĝi,j,t ) + V ar(gi,j,t + ĝi,j,t−1 ) = σg2 υ(xg,i,j , φ, 0),

(C66)

where xg,i,j is the amount of information that the investor processes about the firm-specific
factor. Thus,
Ã

!

σg2
ĝi,j,t
ĝi,j,t+1
Cov
+ gi,j,t − ĝi,j,t−1 ,
+ gi,j,t+1 − ĝi,j,t =
[1 − υ(xg,i,j , φ, 0)]. (C67)
1+r
1+r
2(1 + r)
The source of the autocovariance is the investor’s overreaction to her information. Using
equation (C18), we have
υ(x, φ, 0) = 1 +

2(1 − e−φx ) x
(e − e−φx ) ≥ 1,
−x
1−e

(C68)

and that the equality holds only when x = 0. Thus, if the investor does not attend to any
information related to the factor, there is no overreaction and therefore no autocovariance
in the return related to the factor, either. According to equation (43), this situation occurs
when θi ≤ µκ /(φκσg2 ).
Furthermore, under the conditions of Proposition 2B, υ(x, φ, r) increases with x. Thus,
equation (C67) implies that in this region, the negative autocovariance caused by the investor’s overreaction decreases with the amount of firm-specific information processed.
46

C.8

Proof to Proposition 7

The information value of the ignored signal, νi,j,t , depends on its ability to resolve the
remaining uncertainty in prices. Thus, we can measure it by its correlation with gi,j,t+1 −ĝi,j,t ,
the remaining uncertainty in the firm’s fundamental factor. We denote x = λg,i,j,t θi κ as the
amount of firm-specific information processed by the investor. By substituting in ĝi,j,t from
equation (29), we obtain
gi,j,t+1 − ĝi,j,t = e−φx (gi,j,t+1 − ḡ) − (1 − e−φx )²g,i,j,t ,

(C69)

where ²g,i,j,t is the noise in the information processed by the investor in equation (12), and it
is independent of ²ν,i,j,t , the noise in the ignored signal. Then, we can compute the correlation
between νi,j,t in equation (53) and gi,j,t+1 − ĝi,j,t as
e−φx σg2

Corr = q

[e−2φx σg2 + (1 − e−φx )2 ηg2 ](σg2 + σν2 )

(C70)

where ηg2 = σg2 /(ex − 1) is the variance of ²g,i,j,t . We rearrange the correlation as
Corr = q
[1 +
Direct differentiation shows that

(eφx −1)2
ex −1

σg
(eφx −1)2
ex −1

](σg2 + σν2 )

.

(C71)

is a strictly increasing function of x. Thus, Corr

decreases with the amount of firm-specific information processed by the investor.

Appendix D

Numerical illustration of relation between return
variance and information

In Section 5.1, we discuss the relation between return variance and the amount of information
processed by the investor about a certain fundamental factor. Proposition 2B shows that
when the investor is sufficiently overconfident, the return variance increases with the amount
of processed information when it is below a threshold. In this appendix, we illustrate this
relation and the threshold using several numerical examples.
According to equation (C15), the return variance related to a factor is determined by the
factor’s fundamental variance multiplied by a function υ(x, φ), which captures the return
47

variance amplification caused by the investor’s overreaction to her information. x = λf,i,t θi κ
is the amount of information processed about the factor and φ is the investor’s overconfidence
parameter.
1.8

−
x

1.7

υ(x, φ)

1.6

1.5

1.4

1.3

1.2

1.1

1
0

0.1

0.2

0.3

x

0.4

0.5

0.6

Figure 1:

The relation between return variance amplification, υ(x, φ), and the amount of processed
information, x. The figure uses the following parameters: φ = 2 and r = 5%.

Figure 1 demonstrates a typical shape of the υ function based on φ = 2 and a discount
rate r = 5%. υ increases with the amount of information when it is below a threshold x̄,
which has a value of 0.521 in this example, and then becomes decreasing with the amount
of information when it passes above x̄. For the main part of our analysis, we restrict the
amount of information processed by the investor to be below the threshold level. Based on
equations (15) and (16), the economic interpretation of x̄ corresponds to a threshold level
in the logarithmic reduction in the variance of the investor’s belief about the underlying
fundamental factor:
2
2
x̄ = log(σprior
/σposterior
).

(D1)

A value of 0.521 represents a percentage reduction in the variance of investor belief by
2
2
− σprior
σposterior
= e−x̄ − 1 = −40.6%,
∆σ /σ ≡
2
σprior
2

2

(D2)

which is a substantial amount to be achieved by individual investors’ learning processes.

48

Table 1 provides the values of the threshold (x̄) and the corresponding percentage reduction in the variance of investor belief (∆σ 2 /σ 2 ) by varying the values of the investor’s
overconfidence parameter (φ) and the discount rate (r). Panel A shares a discount rate r = 0,
and Panel B shares a discount rate r = 5%. For the investor’s overconfidence parameter, we
choose a wide range of values from 1.2 to 2.4. Doing so implies that the investor exaggerates
her information processing ability by these multiples. Across all these values, the threshold
(x̄) stays between 0.449 and 0.857, and the corresponding reduction in belief variance is
between 36% and 58%. All these values are high for individual investors’ learning processes.
Also, we note that the lower bound for the investor’s overconfidence parameter φ in
Proposition 2B, inequality (47), is rather modest. For example, when the discount rate
r = 5%, the lower bound of φ corresponds to a value of 1.049.

Table 1: The threshold in amount of information
This table provides the values of the threshold (x̄) in the amount of information and the
corresponding percentage reduction in the variance of investor belief (∆σ 2 /σ 2 ) for different
values of the investor’s overconfidence parameter (φ) and the discount rate (r).

Panel A: r = 0

Panel B: r = 5%

φ

x̄

∆σ 2 /σ 2

φ

1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2.0
2.2
2.4

0.857
0.751
0.669
0.603
0.549
0.504
0.466

-57.6%
-52.8%
-48.8%
-45.3%
-42.2%
-39.6%
-37.2%

1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2.0
2.2
2.4

49

x̄

∆σ 2 /σ 2

0.646 -47.6%
0.657 -48.2%
0.613 -45.8%
0.565 -43.2%
0.521 -40.6%
0.483 -38.3%
0.449 - 36.2%

References
Barber, B., Odean, T., 2003. All that glitters: The effect of attention and news on the
buying behavior of individual and institutional investors. Unpublished working paper. UC
Davis and UC Berkeley.
Barber, B., Odean, T., Zhu, N., 2003. Systematic noise. Unpublished working paper. UC
Davis and UC Berkeley.
Barberis, N., Shleifer, A., Vishny, R., 1998. A model of investor sentiment.
Financial Economics 48, 307-343.
Barberis, N., Shleifer, A., 2003. Style investing.
161-199.

Journal of

Journal of Financial Economics 68,

Barberis, N., Shleifer, A., Wurgler J., 2005. Comovement. Journal of Financial Economics
75, 283-317.
Barberis, N., Thaler, R., 2003. A survey of behavioral finance. In: Constantinides G., Harris,
M., Stulz, R. (Ed.), Handbook of the Economics of Finance, North-Holland, Amsterdam.
Bernardo, A., Welch, I., 2001. On the evolution of overconfidence and entrepreneurs. Journal of Economics and Management Strategy, 10, 301-330.
Boyer, B., 2004. Style investing and comovement among stocks with similar book-to-market
ratios. Unpublished working paper. Brigham Young University.
Campbell, J., Lettau, M., Malkiel, B., Xu, Y., 2001. Have individual stocks become more
volatile? An empirical exploration of idiosyncratic risk. Journal of Finance 56, 1-43.
Cooper, M., Dimitrov O., Rau R., 2001. A rose.com by any name. Journal of Finance 56,
2371-2388.
Cover, T., Thomas, J., 1991. Elements of Information Theory. John Wiley & Sons, Inc.,
New York.
Daniel, K., Hirshleifer, D., Subrahmanyam, A., 1998. Investor psychology and security
market under- and overreactions. Journal of Finance 53, 1839-1885.
Della Vigna, S., Pollett, J., 2003. Attention, demographics, and the stock market. Unpublished working paper. UC Berkeley and Harvard University.
Durnev, A., Morck, R., Yeung, B., Zarowin, P., 2003. Does greater firm-specific return
variation mean more or less informed stock pricing? Journal of Accounting Research 41,
797-836.
Durnev, A., Morck, R., Yeung R., 2004. Does firm-specific information in stock prices guide
capital budgeting? Journal of Finance 59, 65-105.
Einhoen, H., 1980. Overconfidence in judgement. New Directions for Methodology of Social
and Behavioral Science 4, 1-16.
French, K., Roll, R., 1986. Stock return variances: the arrival of information and the reaction
of traders. Journal of Financial Economics 17, 5-26.
Gabaix, X., Laibson, D., 2003. Bounded rationality and directed cognition. Unpublished
working paper. MIT and Harvard University.
50

Gabaix, X., Laibson, D., Moloche, G., Weinberg, S., 2003. The allocation of attention:
theory and evidence. Unpublished working paper. MIT and Harvard University.
Gervais, S., Odean, T., 2001. Learning to be overconfident.
14, 1-27.

Review of Financial Studies

Grossman, S., Stiglitz, J., 1980. On the impossibility of informationally efficient markets.
American Economic Review 70, 393-408.
Hirshleifer, D., 2001. Investor psychology and asset pricing.
1597.

Journal of Finance 56, 1533-

Hirshleifer, D., Teoh, S. H., 2003. Limited attention, financial reporting and disclosure.
Journal of Accounting and Economics 36, 337-386.
Hirshleifer, D., Teoh, S. H. 2004. Limited investor attention and earnings-related under- and
over-reactions. Unpublished working paper. Ohio State University.
Hirshleifer, D., Lim S., Teoh, S. H., 2003. Disclosure to a credulous audience: The role of
limited attention. Unpublished working paper. Ohio State University.
Hirshleifer, D., Hou, K., Teoh, S. H., Zhang, Y., 2004. Do investors overvalue firms with
bloated balance sheets? Journal of Accounting and Economics 38, 297-331.
Hong, H., Stein, J., 1999. A unified theory of underreaction, momentum trading, and
overreaction in asset markets. Journal of Finance 54, 2143-2184.
Hong, H., Stein, J., 2003. Simple models and paradigm shifts. Unpublished working paper.
Princeton University and Harvard University.
Hong, H., Torous, W., Valkanov, R., 2003. Do industries lead the stock market? Unpublished
working paper. Princeton University and UCLA.
Hou, K., Moskowitz, T., 2003. Market frictions, price delay, and the cross-section of expected
returns. Review of Financial Studies, forthcoming.
Huberman, G., Regev, T., 2001. Contagious speculation and a cure for cancer: a non-event
that made stock prices soar. Journal of Finance 56, 387-396.
Kahneman, D., 1973. Attention and Effort. Prentice Hall, New Jersey.
Kaniel, R., Saar, G., Titman, S., 2004. Individual investor sentiment and stock returns.
Unpublished working paper. Duke University, New York University and University of Texas.
Kumar, A., Lee, C., 2003. Mass psychology and return comovement: the case of retail
trades. Unpublished working paper. University of Notre Dame and Cornell University.
Kyle, A., Wang, A., 1997. Speculation duopoly with agreement to disagree: Can overconfidence survive the market test? Journal of Finance 52, 2073-2090.
Lo, A., MacKinlay, C., 1988. Stock market prices do not follow random walks: evidence
from a simple specification test. Review of Financial Studies 1, 41-66.
Lucas, R., 1978. Asset prices in an exchange economy. Econometrica 46, 1429-1445.
Merton, R., 1971. Optimum consumption and portfolio rules in a continuous-time model.
Journal of Economic Theory 3, 373-413.
51

Morck, R., Yeung, B., Yu, W., 2000. The information content of stock markets: Why
do emerging markets have synchronous stock Price movements?
Journal of Financial
Economics 58, 215-260.
Mullainathan, S., 2002. Thinking through categories. Unpublished working paper. MIT.
Odean, T., 1998. Volume, volatility, price, and profit when all traders are above average.
Journal of Finance 53, 1887-1934.
Pashler, H., Johnston J., 1998. Attentional limitations in dual-task performance. In: Pashler, H., (Ed.), Attention, Psychology Press.
Peng, L., 2005. Learning with information capacity constraints.
Quantitative Analysis 40, 307-330.

Journal of Financial and

Poterba, J., Summers, L., 1988. Mean reversion in stock returns: evidence and implications.
Journal of Financial Economics 22, 27-59.
Pindyck, R., Rotemberg, J., 1993. The comovement of stock prices.
Economics 108, 1073-1104.

Quarterly Journal of

Roll, R., 1988. R2 . Journal of Finance 43, 541-566.
Scheinkman, J., Xiong, W., 2003. Overconfidence and speculative bubbles.
Political Economy 111, 1183-1219.

Journal of

Shiller, R., 1989. Comovement in stock prices and comovement in dividends.
Finance 44, 719-729.

Journal of

Shleifer, A., Vishny, R., 1997. The limits of arbitrage. Journal of Finance 52, 35-55.
Sims, C., 2003. Implications of rational inattention.
665-690.

Journal of Monetary Economics, 50,

Sloan, R., 1996. Do stock prices fully reflect information in accruals and cash flows about
future earnings? Accounting Review 71, 289-315.
West, K., 1988. Dividend innovations and stock price volatility. Econometrica 56, 37-61.
Wurgler, J., 2000. Financial markets and the allocation of capital.
Economics 58, 187-214.

Journal of Financial

Van Nieuwerburgh, S., Veldkamp, L., 2004. Information acquisition and portfolio underdiversification. Unpublished working paper. New York University.
Verrecchia, R., 1982. Information acquisition in a noisy rational expectations economy.
Econometrica 50, 1415-1430.
Yantis, S., 1998. Control of visual attention. In: Pashler, H., (Ed.), Attention, Psychology
Press.

52

