NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

IMPORTERS, EXPORTERS, AND MULTINATIONALS:
A PORTRAIT OF FIRMS IN THE U.S. THAT TRADE GOODS
Andrew B. Bernard
J. Bradford Jensen
Peter K. Schott
Working Paper 11404
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11404
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2005

Bernard and Schott thank the National Science Foundation (SES-0241474) for research support. The research
in this paper was conducted while the authors were Special Sworn Status researchers of the U.S. Census
Bureau at the Boston Census Research Data Center and the Center for Economic Studies Research. Results
and conclusions expressed are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Census
Bureau or the NBER. This paper has been screened to insure that no confidential data are revealed. The
views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by Andrew B. Bernard, J. Bradford Jensen, and Peter K. Schott. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Importers, Exporters, and Multinationals: A Portrait of Firms in the U.S. that Trade Goods
Andrew B. Bernard, J. Bradford Jensen, and Peter K. Schott
NBER Working Paper No. 11404
June 2005
JEL No. F10, F16, F23, J21
ABSTRACT
This paper provides an integrated view of globally engaged U.S. firms by exploring a newly
developed dataset that links U.S. international trade transactions to longitudinal data on U.S.
enterprises. These data permit examination of a number of new dimensions of firm activity,
including how many products firms trade, how many countries firms trade with, the characteristics
of those countries, the concentration of trade across firms, whether firms transact at arms length or
with related parties, and whether firms import as well as export. Firms that trade goods play an
important role in the U.S., employing more than a third of the U.S. workforce. We find that the most
globally engaged U.S. firms, i.e. those that both export to and import from related parties, dominate
U.S. trade flows and employment at trading firms. We also find that firms that begin trading between
1993 and 2000 experience especially rapid employment growth and are a major force in overall job
creation.
Andrew B. Bernard
Tuck School of Business at Dartmouth
100 Tuck Hall
Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER
andrew.b.bernard@dartmouth.edu
J. Bradford Jensen
Institute for International Economics
1750 Massachusetts Avenue
Washington, DC 20036-1903
jbjensen@iie.com

Peter K. Schott
Yale School of Management
135 Prospect Street
New Haven, CT 06520-8200
and NBER
peter.schott@yale.edu

Firms that Trade

1.

2

Introduction
“What does (Art Vandelay) do?”
“He’s an importer.”
“Just imports? No exports?”
“He’s an importer-exporter. Okay?”
Seinfeld, Episode: The Cadillac (2), aired 1996

Art Vandelay is not alone. In 1993, 38.1 million workers were employed by
a firm that was directly engaged in the international trade of goods (see Table
1). These workers represent 31.7 percent of the entire civilian workforce and 40.0
of employment outside government and education.1 By 2000, the total number of
workers at firms that either import or export had risen to 47.9 million or 35.0 percent
of the civilian workforce. Indeed, importing and exporting are closely related, more
than 50 percent of the firms in the United States that import also export and these
firms account for close to 90 percent of U.S. trade.
This paper oﬀers an integrated perspective on globally engaged firms by exploring a newly developed dataset that links international trade transactions to longitudinal data on U.S. enterprises. It extends existing empirical research by examining
importers as well as exporters, identifying the activities of multinational firms separately from those of domestic enterprises, and diﬀerentiating between arms length
and related-party (i.e., intra-firm) trade.
A surge of interest in the microeconomics of international trade and investment
has yielded numerous studies of exporters and multinationals. Using firm-level data,
empirical researchers have documented that exporting plants and firms represent a
small fraction of the total, that firms engaged in exporting have positive performance
characteristics (including higher productivity, larger size, greater capital intensity,
etc.), that multinational firms pay higher wages than domestic counterparts, and
1

These shares are probably an understatement of the employment at firms directly engaged in
goods trade as the linked data employed in this paper cannot associate every export and import
transaction with a firm. We discuss this issue in greater detail in the Data Appendix. We also
provide a more precise definition of non-government, non-agriculture workforce Section 3..

Firms that Trade

3

that globally engaged firms undertake more innovation.2 To date, these research
streams have proceeded largely in parallel with little integration. This paper expands our understanding of internationally engaged firms by examining a number
of new dimensions of firm activity, including how many products firms trade, how
many countries firms transact with, the characteristics of those countries, the concentration of trade across firms and whether firms import as well as export. We
also trace the evolution of these variables, as well as firm survival and employment,
over time.
Our ability to answer these questions is made possible by merging two newly
available datasets. The first records U.S. import and exports at the transaction
level, i.e., according to the customs documents that accompany every shipment of
goods crossing a U.S. border. A unique feature of these documents is that they note
whether a transaction takes place at arms length or between related parties.3 We
merge these data with a second, recently developed longitudinal database of U.S.
enterprises that tracks almost all private sector firms in the United States as well
as their employment over time (Jarmin and Miranda 2002).
The merged dataset provides a more complete picture of firm-level U.S. trade
than has heretofore been possible. For example, we can examine the trading activity
of firms both inside and outside of manufacturing. We also can identify firms that
import as well as firms that export or do both. Perhaps most importantly, unlike
most other data sources on trade, we can measure how much of each firm’s trade
takes place at arms length versus with related parties.
Our analysis uncovers a wealth of interesting results. Some of these reinforce
existing findings, while others are entirely new. We find U.S. trade to be concentrated among a very small number of firms. In 2000, for example, the top 1 percent
of trading firms (in terms of their trade flows) account for 81 percent of U.S. trade.
2

See Bernard and Jensen (1995, 1999), Doms and Jensen (1998) and Criscuolo, Haskel and
Slaughter (2004)
3
As discussed below, “related party” trade refers to trade between U.S. companies and their
foreign subsidiaries as well as trade between U.S. subsidiaries of foreign companies and their foreign
aﬃliates. For imports, firms are “related” if either owns, controls or holds voting power equivalent
to 6 percent of the outstanding voting stock or shares of the other organization (see Section 402(e) of
the Tariﬀ Act of 1930). For exports, firms are “related” if either party owns, directly or indirectly, 10
percent or more of the other party (see Section 30.7(v) of The Foreign Trade Statistics Regulations).

Firms that Trade

4

In terms of product and trading-partner intensity, we find that most importers as
well as exporters tend to trade relatively few products and engage in trade with a
relatively small number of high-income countries. However, the small number of
firms with the greatest product and trading-partner intensity employ large numbers
of workers and account for the preponderance of both exports and imports. Over
time, the number of firms that export and the number of firms that import rises
substantially, from 2.6 and 1.7 percent of all firms in 1993, respectively, to 3.1 and
2.2 percent of all firms in 2000. For exporters, this increase is matched by greater
product and trading-partner intensity: between 1993 and 2000, exporters’ average
number of products increases from 6 to 10 while their average number of destination
countries increases from 3.3 to 3.5. For importers, there is little change in either
product or trading-partner intensity.
By linking trade transactions to a comprehensive database on U.S. employment
we are able to explore the composition of trading firms across goods-producing,
wholesale and retail, and service sectors. We find that greatest share of exporting
and especially importing firms are found in wholesale and retail trade. However,
goods-producing firms account for the majority of exports and imports by value.
Multinationals that export are typically goods producers while more than half of
multinational importers are in the wholesale and retail sector.
Analysis of firm dynamics reveals that both importing and exporting are associated with greater probability of survival. Both importers and exporters are less
likely to exit than firms that do not trade, and firms that engage in some form of
related-party trade, i.e. multinationals, have even lower failure rates than firms that
trade at arms length.4
Employment growth also varies by trading status. We find that trading firms
increase employment more rapidly than non-trading firms between 1993 and 2000.
We also observe that firms switching their trading status during the sample period have more extreme changes in employment growth than firms with constant
trade status. The average firm that opens up to trade between 1993 and 2000
experiences employment growth of close to 100 percent, while the average firm that
4

This definition of a multinational is comparable to that employed by the Bureau of Economic
Analysis in its surveys of multinational firms.

Firms that Trade

5

quits trading over this period experiences a decline on the order of 10 percent. By
comparison, employment growth at continuing traders and continuing non-traders
averages between 20 and 25 percent.
The unique characteristics of our data permit identification of a special subset
of firms that we refer to as the “most globally engaged” (MGE). MGE firms import
as well as export and conduct at least a portion of both types of trade with related
parties. Thus, these multinationals have the maximum possible links to the global
economy. MGE firms are very influential in U.S. trade and employment. In 2000
they account for nearly 80 percent of U.S. exports and imports, respectively and
employ 18 percent of the entire U.S. civilian workforce. They also stand out in a
number of other dimensions. First, they are more likely to export to and import
from low-income countries than other U.S. exporters and importers. Second, they
experience substantially higher growth in exports and imports per worker than nonMGE traders. Finally, over time the MGEs increase their share of intra-firm trade
with low-income countries and increase their share of arms-length trade with upperincome countries.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. Section 2 documents
existing empirical research. Section 3 and the Data Appendix provide a detailed
description of our dataset. Section 4 characterizes U.S. trade according to various
dimensions of firm activity. Section 5 oﬀers an in-depth view of U.S. multinationals
and MGEs. Section 6 summarizes trading firm dynamics. Section 7 concludes.
2.

Existing Research

We begin by reviewing the existing literature on exporters, importers and multinationals. Our overview is limited to empirical studies that describe their characteristics and the role they play in U.S. trade and employment. We note that there
is virtually no research documenting and analyzing importing firms.
In the last decade a substantial body of work has documented the diﬀerences
between exporters and firms producing solely for the domestic market. Looking
at U.S. manufacturing firms, Bernard and Jensen (1995, 1999) find that exporters
are relatively rare and quite large. Even in tradable goods sectors, the majority of

Firms that Trade

6

plants and firms do not export and non-exporters are an order of magnitude smaller
than exporters. In addition, exporters are more productive, more capital-intensive,
pay higher wages, employ more technology and have more skilled workers than nonexporting firms even when controlling for industry and geography.5 To date, these
studies have been largely limited to the manufacturing sector due to the limitations
of the underlying data.6 In this paper, we summarize export participation and the
employment evolution of exporters across all sectors of the U.S. economy from 1993
to 2000.
Recent work by Eaton et al. (2004) extends the analysis of exporting manufacturing firms. These authors examine French firm-level data in 1986 that include
information on the destination markets for exporters as well as information about
the manufacturing firms themselves. 17.4 percent of the 234,300 French manufacturing firms export; among the exporters, 34.5 percent ship to exactly one country
while 19.7 percent export to 10 or more markets and only 1.5 percent export to 50
or more countries. We examine the intensity of export and import activity by U.S.based firms and changes in these intensities over time. In addition, we sort source
and destination countries into groups based on income per capita and examine how
trading patterns vary according to the global engagement of the firm.
Given the increasing attention to exporters, it is surprising how little work has
considered the actions of importing firms. There are no systematic studies of the
characteristics of importing firms in the U.S. or other developed economies. MacGarvie (2003) reports some features of large importers using French firm data in her
study of the patenting behavior of trading firms. In a subsample of 2757 large firms,
she finds diﬀerences between firms that trade and those that do not. Specifically, in
her sample she compares exporters and non-exporters and then importers and nonimporters and find that both exporters and importers are larger, more productive,
more capital-intensive and pay higher wages. While she notes that exporters are
5

Similar evidence on exporters has been documented for other countries, e.g. Bernard and
Wagner (1997) - Germany, Clerides, Lach and Tybout (1998) - Colombia, Mexico and Morocco,
Aw, Chung and Roberts (2000) - Korea and Taiwan, Delgado, Farinas, and Ruano (2002) - Spain
among many others.
6
The general data source for such studies are censuses of manufacturing plants or firms. e.g. the
U.S. Census of Manufactures.

Firms that Trade

7

likely to also be importers, she does not separately examine firms that both export
and import. Given the nature of our data, we are able to provide a first look at
the extent of importing by U.S. firms, the distribution of activity across importers,
and their role in the overall economy.
There is also an enormous literature on multinational firms which we cannot
hope to adequately summarize here. As our focus is on the exports, imports, and
employment of U.S.-based firms, we limit our discussion to studies of multinationals
based in the U.S., either U.S. parents or U.S. aﬃliates of foreign firms, that also
examine these areas.
Two recent papers by Slaughter (2004a,b) using aggregate data from the Bureau
of Economic Analysis summarize employment trends of multinationals operating in
the United States. Although these papers focus on two diﬀerent types of multinationals based in the U.S., both report sizable increases in employment at multinationals during the 1990s. Slaughter (2004a) finds that U.S. employment of U.S.
multinationals increases from 17.5 million to 23.9 million from 1993 to 2000. Looking at U.S. aﬃliates of foreign parents, Slaughter (2004b) reports that employment
rises from 3.9 million in 1992 to 5.4 million in 2002. Using our firm-level data, we
are able to decompose the overall changes in U.S. employment from 1993 to 2000
by the trading activities of the firm.7
Another body of work has documented diﬀerences between multinational and
domestic firms. Doms and Jensen (1998) use plant level data from the Census
Bureau and the Bureau of Economic Analysis to examine the characteristics of plants
owned by multinational companies. Doms and Jensen find that U.S. plants owned
by MNCs (whether U.S. MNCs or foreign-owned MNCs) are larger, more capital
intensive, more skill intensive, pay higher wages, are more technology intensive, and
are more productive than non-MNC plants.
A related literature focuses on multinational trade. Zeile (1997) summarizes the
role of multinationals and intra-firm trade in overall U.S. trade using data from firmlevel surveys conducted by the Bureau of Economic Analysis. Zeile (1997) reports
little trend in the share of intra-firm exports and imports in total U.S. exports and
7

Our linked trade-firm data does not provide information on the nationality of ownership so we
are unable to separately examine the activities of U.S.-based versus foreign-based multinationals.

Firms that Trade

8

imports from 1977 to 1994. He also reports that U.S. parents have seen their share
of trade decrease even as their trade has shifted toward intra-firm activity. Using
trade transaction data, we are able to examine the role of multinationals in U.S.
exports and imports and we report separate results for total trade and related-party
trade throughout the paper.
Another collection of recent papers using firm-level data has examined the decision by U.S. multinationals to export intermediate goods to their foreign aﬃliates.
Hanson et al (2004) find that higher trade costs, higher wages for unskilled labor
and higher corporate tax rates reduce demand for intermediate inputs exported by
U.S. parents. Borga and Zeile (2002) also use data on U.S. MNCs collected by
the U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis in the 1994 benchmark survey. They report
that the share of intermediate goods exported from U.S. parents to their aﬃliates
increased from 8 percent of total U.S. exports in 1977 to 15 percent in 1999. Borga
and Zeile (2002) are primarily concerned with analyzing vertical versus horizontal
multinational structure and consider the role of firm, industry and country eﬀects
on the share of imported intermediates in total sales of aﬃliates.
One of the main goals of this paper and further research using the transactionfirm linked data is the development of a deeper understanding of the decision to
trade at arms length or inside the firm. The role of arms-length versus intra-firm
trade has been the focus of several recent theoretical papers. Antràs (2003) develops a trade model with firm boundaries set by incomplete contracts and property
rights to examine the variation in intra-firm trade across destinations and sectors in
U.S. trade. Antràs and Helpman (2004) study the importance of within-sector heterogeneity and industry characteristics on the prevalence of integrated versus arms
length organizational forms in a model North-South trade. Grossman and Helpman
(2004) develop a model of firm organization and location across borders that focuses
on problems in contracting between principals and suppliers or employees in a world
with heterogeneous firms. Grossman et al. (2004) develop a model of heterogeneous
firms in the presence of variation in industry characteristics, the cost of transport,
and regional demand.

Firms that Trade

3.

9

Data

This paper exploits a new dataset which links individual trade transactions to
U.S.-based firms. This dataset is derived from two sources. The first is a database
of all U.S. trade transactions assembled by U.S. Customs (imports) and the U.S.
Census Bureau (exports). These data cover all shipments of goods that crossed
into or out of the United States between 1992 and 2000 inclusive. In this paper,
we make use of data from the years 1993 and 2000.
The second data source is the Longitudinal Business Database (LBD) of the
Census Bureau.8 These data record employment and survival information for all
U.S. establishments outside of agriculture, forestry and fishing, railroads, the U.S.
Postal Service, education, public administration and several other smaller sectors.
Total employment in the sectors covered by the LBD rose from 95 million to 115
million from 1993 to 2000.9
For the firm-level summary that is the focus of this paper, we aggregate imports and exports for each firm according to (a) product, (b) country (source or
destination), (c) relationship (intra-firm or arms length), and (d) year.10 We also
aggregate the establishment-level employment data in the LBD up to the level of
the firm, retaining information on the firm-level distribution of employment across
sectors. We link the two datasets at the level of the firm. This link allows us to
match the inward and outward trade transactions by the dimensions noted above
to the appropriate firms. This linked data covers more than three quarters of U.S.
imports and exports in each year. All of the results reported below are with respect
to this linked dataset unless otherwise noted. We also note that all dollar amounts
reported in this paper are nominal.
8
See the Data Appendix for more information on all the data sources and the sectors covered.
See Jarmin and Miranda (2002) for an extensive discussion of the LBD and its construction.
9
Total employment in the U.S. increases by 16.7 million from 120.2 million in 1993 to 136.9
million in 2000 (Economic Report of the President 2005).
10
Every export or import transaction records whether the transaction takes place between “related parties”. See the Data Appendix for the definition of related-party transactions for exports
and imports. We use the terms ‘intra-firm’ and ‘related-party’ interchangeably in this paper. All
firms that have a related-party transaction (export, import or both) during the year are described
as ‘multinationals’ or related-party firms.

Firms that Trade

10

Table 2 reports the number of trading firms as well as the total number of firms
in each year of the sample. Firms are categorized according to whether they export,
import, or both export and import, as well as according to whether they engage in
these activities as multinationals. We categorize firms as multinationals if at least
a portion of their trade is with related parties. Thus, “Multinational Exporters”
diﬀer from “Exporters” in that the former have non-zero shares of related-party
trade. As indicated in the table, trading firms are relatively rare vis-a-vis all firms,
and multinationals are rarer still. The data indicate that firms that export are
more prevalent than firms that import, but that the numbers of both types of firms
engaged in international trade are increasing three to seven times faster than the
overall number of firms. In 2000, 2.6 percent of firms export, 1.7 percent of firms
import, and 0.9 percent of firms both import and export. Fewer than a quarter of
exporters or importers are multinationals.
U.S. trade is heavily concentrated among a very small number of firms. Indeed,
trade concentration is much more extreme than either production or employment.
Table 3 reports the distribution of exports and imports across firm percentiles in
both 1993 and again in 2000. The top panel summarizes the share of U.S. trade
and employment at firms in the top 1, 5, 10, 25, and 50 percentiles of total trade,
i.e. imports plus exports. As indicated in the table, trade concentration is remarkably high, with the top 1 percent of traders (1732 firms) accounting for 77
percent of exports plus imports in 1993.11 These firms are also among the largest
in the economy, accounting for 15.1 percent of employment or 14.3 million workers. Over time trade is becoming increasingly concentrated at the top firms. By
2000, the largest 1 percent of trading firms (2245 firms) control almost 81 percent
of all trade.12 The second and third panels of Table 2 report concentration among
importers and exporters separately. Importers show a similar if slightly smaller
degree of concentration than exporters. For both imports and exports, the smallest
75 percent of firms are responsible for less than 2 percent of imports and exports,
respectively.
11

These firms control equal shares of exports and imports.
Note that while the shares of the top 5, 10, 25, and 50 percent of firms rose, these increases
were due entirely to growth in shares at the very top of the distribution.
12

Firms that Trade

4.

11

Importers and Exporters

In this section we characterize U.S. firm-level trade according to several dimensions of activity. First we examine firms’ product and trading-partner intensity,
i.e. the number of products firms trade and the number of countries with which
they trade. We then segment firm trade according to the income level of source
and destination countries. Finally, we categorize trading firms’ global engagement
and identify the set and influence of firms that we define to be the most globally
engaged (MGE).
This section highlights several noteworthy trends. First, we show that importers
as well as exporters tend to trade relatively few products with a relatively small
number of countries. Second, we show that most trading firms import from or
export to relatively high-income countries, and that importers are relatively more
likely to trade with lower-income countries than exporters. Third, we find that a
substantial and growing fraction of trading firms are in service sectors, particularly
wholesale and retail, though the majority of MGEs, multinationals that export as
well as import, are found in manufacturing. Finally, we demonstrate that MGE
firms dominate U.S. trade flows and employment among trading firms.
4.1.

Firms’ Product-Intensity

Exporters generally export fewer products per firm than importers import, but
exporters are catching up over time. Between 1993 and 2000, the average number
of products exported by exporters rose from 6.1 to 8.9 products per firm. The
average importer sources 10 products in both periods.
Table 4 reports the distribution of firms, export and import value, intra-firm
trade, and employment according to the number of products firms import or export
in each year. Each cell of the table reports the share of one of these variables
accounted for by all firms exporting or importing the number of products noted at
the left. As indicated in the table, exporters are more likely to trade just a single
product and are less likely to export more than ten products than importers, though
in both cases single-export and single-import firms are in the majority. The vast
majority of trade value and related-party trade value, on the other hand, increasingly

Firms that Trade

12

flows through firms that export or import the largest number of products. In 2000,
just 6 percent of exports, and 2 percent of related-party exports are accounted for
by firms shipping fewer than 10 products. Similar figures are reported for imports.
Export product intensity is increasing over time while import product intensity is
basically flat. The share of firms exporting just one product falls from 41.2 percent
in 1993 to 36.2 percent in 2000 while the share of firms exporting ten or more
products increases from 11.6 percent to 17.4 percent. This shift among exporters
occurs even as the number of exporting firms rises by 28 percent and the number
of exporters as a fraction of all U.S. firms increases from 2.6 percent to 3.1 percent
(see Table 2).
The final block of columns in Table 4 reports the share of U.S. employment
represented by firms that export and import relative to firms that serve the domestic
market only. The first row of these columns reveals that the share of workers
employed by firms that do not trade, while high in both periods, has fallen with
time. This decline is evident across both exporters and importers, but is more
pronounced among exporters (a decline of 63.7 to 60.6 percent versus 67.7 to 67.0
percent). The number of workers employed by firms that export the largest number
of products grows faster (34 percent) than the overall workforce (20 percent) between
1993 and 2000.
Table 5 reports the average employment as well as trading volume per firm
and per worker by the number of products firms trade. As expected, average
employment per firm is positively correlated with the number of products traded.
Firms that export the largest number of products are more than ten times larger
than exporters exporting just one or two products. Over time the average firm size
for the most prolific exporters has fallen from 1477 employees to 1025 employees.
Over the same interval, these firms experience a slight decline in export value per
firm (roughly $20 million in both years) and a 44 percent increase in export value
per worker, from $13.4 to $19.3 thousand.
These results demonstrate that, over time, trade is becoming more concentrated
at firms sending and receiving the most products across U.S. borders. This rise in
concentration stems both from an increase in the number of firms engaged in multiproduct trade as well as a dramatic increase in exports and imports per employee

Firms that Trade

13

at those same firms. Firm size is actually decreasing for this group.
4.2.

Firms’ Trading-Partner Intensity

This section examines the changing nature of the firms’ global engagement in
terms of their trading-partner intensity. The average number of countries with
which exporters trade is rising over the sample period, from 3.3 to 3.5. For importers, trading-partner intensity is flat at an average of 2.8 countries per firm in
both years. Table 6 summarizes this activity. Here, as with product intensity,
there is substantial variation across firms. More than half of both importers and
exporters transact with just a single foreign country, while substantially fewer firms
transact with ten or more countries. Here, too, the dominant portion of exports
and imports as well as related party trade flow through firms transacting with the
largest number of countries.
Trading partner intensity increases slightly over time for importers and more so
for exporters. Between 1993 and 2000 the share of exporters transacting with just
a single country declined from 60.3 percent to 56.6 percent, while the analogous
movement for importers is a decline from 52.1 percent to 51.3 percent. Similarly,
the share of trade, the share of related-party trade and the share of employment all
increase over time for firms trading with more than a single country.
Average firm employment as well as average trading value per firm and per
worker by trading-partner intensity are reported in Table 7. As above, average
employment is positively correlated with the number of countries with which firms
trade but is declining with time. For both exporters and importers, average value
per firm and per worker for firms trading with the largest number of countries
increases substantially between 1993 and 2000.
Trade is also becoming more concentrated at firms with the most trading partners. Again, this rise in concentration stems both from an increase in the number
of firms with multiple trading partners as well as a dramatic increase in exports and
imports per employee at those firms even as firm size has been shrinking.

Firms that Trade

4.3.

14

The Income Level of Firms’ Trading Partners

In this section we examine the types of countries with which firms trade. Our
analysis makes use of a classification developed by the World Bank that segments
countries according to whether their per capita income is low, lower-middle, uppermiddle or high.13 Use of these groups to classify trading partners is consistent
with existing research indicating a strong relationship between income per capita
and both variety-driven intra-industry trade and endowment-based comparative advantage. Though most trade is conducted with firms in upper-income countries,
a relatively greater share of importers and import value is associated with lowermiddle-income countries. Over time, the share of trade with middle- and low-income
countries is rising.
The first two columns of Table 8 report the share of exporters and importers
that trade with at least one country of each type in 1993 and 2000. In both
years, the largest share of both exporters and importers trade with at least one
upper-income country, though these shares decline over time for both groups of
firms. In 2000, 85.6 percent of exporters and 79.9 percent of importers transact
with at least one upper-income country, down from 88.3 percent and 85.5 percent
in 1993, respectively.14 The middle two rows of each panel in Table 8 reveal that
lower-middle-income countries are substantially more important for imports than for
exports. More than 30 percent of importers source goods from at least one lowermiddle country in 1993, rising to more than 38 percent in 2000. This diﬀerence is
likely driven by China, which is defined by the World Bank to be a lower-middle
country.
The largest shares of export and import value are destined for upper-income
countries. In 1993, 72.2 percent of exports and 69.7 percent of imports are ac13

We use the 2003 classification for both years of our sample.
The income cutoﬀs for the four groups are $765 or less, $766 to $3,035, $3,036 to $9,385 and
$9,386 or more.
For a list of countries and their World Bank income group, see
http://www.worldbank.org/data/countryclass/countryclass.html. The Data Appendix describes
modifications made to this data.
14
Note that the cumulative sum of shares in the first two columns of the table do not sum to 100
percent because firms may trade with countries of diﬀerent income levels, and therefore be included
in more than one row of the table.

Firms that Trade

15

counted for by upper income countries while low-income countries represented just
1.5 percent and 2.6 percent of trading value, respectively.15 Lower-middle income
countries are relatively more important for imports than for exports. Over time,
the export and import value shares represented by both middle income groups increases the most for both imports and exports, by 4.4 percentage points for exports
and 8.6 percentage points for imports.
The middle four columns of Table 8 report the employment shares of firms as
well as average employment per firm according to the types of countries with which
they transact. While most exports and most exporters are engaged in trade with
upper-income countries, average employment is greatest for firms shipping to lowincome destinations. Average firm size falls systematically as the income of firms’
trading partners increases. This finding suggests that the largest firms are the first
to enter markets that are least similar to the United States.
4.4.

Firms’ Sector Aﬃliation

Typically imports and exports are categorized according to the product being
traded. In this section we focus on firms and ask how much trade is controlled
by firms in three broad sectors: goods producing firms, wholesale and retail, and
service establishments. We provide the first direct evidence on the distribution of
trade by firms across sectors.
We first place firms in one of five groups based on the activities of their operations
in the U.S.. Each establishment within a firm is categorized by a primary industry
designation, i.e. a four-digit Standard Industrial Classification code. We group
these codes into three sectors: Goods, i.e. manufacturing, mining, and agriculture,
Wholesale & Retail trade, and Services, i.e. all remaining industries. We then
calculate the share of employment within the firm that is in each of these three
aggregate sectors. Firms are assigned to one of five groups — Goods, Wholesale and
Retail, Services, Goods Plus, and Other — depending upon these shares. Firms with
at least 75 percent of their employment in manufacturing, mining, and agriculture
are designated as Goods. Firms with at least 75 percent of their employment in
15

Note that export and import value shares do sum to 100 percent because export and import
value can be observed at the transaction level.

Firms that Trade

16

Wholesale and Retail or Services are assigned to those sectors respectively. Firms
with 25 to 75 percent of their employment in manufacturing, mining, and agriculture
are assigned to Goods Plus. All remaining firms, i.e. firms with less than 25 percent
employment in Goods and less than 75 percent employment in either Wholesale &
Retail or Services, are assigned to Other.
Table 9 shows the distribution of firms, employment and trade by firms’ sector
aﬃliation. In 2000, Goods, Wholesale & Retail, and Services account for 99.9
percent of firms (7.3, 23.2, and 69.4, respectively) and 95.5 percent of employment
(16.2, 24.9, and 54.4 respectively). Exporters are most likely to be in Goods or
Wholesale & Retail (35.2 and 40.8 percent, respectively) with Services accounting
for 22.6 percent. However, most exports (by value) originate in firms with a heavy
presence in Goods: 62.8 percent at Goods firms and 19.2 percent at Goods Plus
firms even though the latter sector comprises a relatively small number of firms.
Exports per firm in the Goods Plus category average more than $61 million in 2000.
Understandably, a greater share of importers than exporters are in Wholesale &
Retail (62.7 percent in 2000), followed by Goods and Other (24.9 and 20.4 percent,
respectively). Import value is also increasingly concentrated among Goods and
Goods Plus firms (40.1 and 21.6 percent, respectively), though the level of imports
due to Wholesale & Retail firms (27.3 percent in 2000) is substantially higher than
for export value (10.4 percent). Related-party trade is most heavily concentrated
at production-based firms: 90.5 percent of related-party exports and 74.5 percent
of related-party imports are at Goods and Goods Plus firms in 2000.
Though employment rises over the sample period for firms in all sectors except
Other, employment growth is disproportionately large among trading firms in the
Wholesale & Retail and Service sectors. While employment in Goods firms rises 3
percent, employment at Wholesale & Retail and Services firms grows by 18 and 30
percent, respectively.
These results point to a shift in activity in the tradeable goods sectors. While
goods-producing firms still dominate the landscape, trading firms are increasingly
engaged in wholesale and retail trade.

Firms that Trade

4.5.

17

Firms’ “Global Engagement”

In previous sections we found that the largest firms account for the preponderance of trade and are the most likely to trade with the poorest countries. In this
section we define firms’ global engagement according to the breadth and depth of
their global interaction. Firms may export, import, do both or neither. Firms
that both export and import have greater breadth of global engagement than firms
that do not trade or firms that just export or just import. Trading firms may also
trade via arms length transactions or with related parties, with the latter reflecting
greater depth of global engagement than purely domestic firms. We define the
most globally engaged (MGE) firms as those which both export to and import from
a related foreign aﬃliate.
Table 10 reports the distribution of exporters and importers according to their
export and import relationships. Results are reported in two panels, with the upper
panel summarizing all firms that export and the lower panel summarizing all firms
that import. The export and import relationships noted in the first two columns
roughly characterize increasing global engagement. For example, arms-length (AL)
exporters that do not import are the least globally-engaged exporters, i.e. they are
“less” globally engaged that exporters that also import and have at least some part
of one of their relationships encompassing trade with related parties.
As indicated in the table, the MGE firms comprise a very small share of trading firms, 6 percent of exporters and 9 percent of importers. The overall global
engagement of exporters is increasing with time. Between 1993 and 2000, the
share of exclusively arms-length exporters declined from 59 percent to 53 percent.
Exclusively arms-length importers are 44 percent and 43 percent of all importers,
respectively, in the two years.
Table 11 summarizes trading firms according to both their level of global engagement and the income level of countries with which they trade. The first block
of columns reports results for exporters and the countries to which they send goods
while the second block of columns reports results for importers and the countries
from which they source products. In 1993, for example, 3 percent of exporters that
only export and only via arms length trade shipped goods to at least one country

Firms that Trade

18

with the lowest-level of income. The analogous number for importers is 7 percent.16
Table 11 shows that trading firms are most likely to transact with upper-income
countries regardless of their level of global engagement, reinforcing the message of
Table 8 above. More interestingly, the table reveals that the most globally engaged
firms (MGEs), i.e. those that both import and export and engage in at least some
trade with related parties, are the most likely to export to countries of all types.
While just 4 percent of exclusively arms length exporters export to a low-income
country in 2000, for example, 18 to 26 percent of the most globally engaged firms do
so that year. These diﬀerences between the least and most globally engaged firms
are generally more pronounced for exporters than for importers, but are present for
both groups of trading firms. Table 11 also shows that the greater proclivity of
importers to trade with lower-middle income countries increases with their global
engagement.
Table 12 reports export and import value shares according to the same typology
used in Table 11.17 As expected, upper-income countries account for the largest
share of trade value. However, an interesting diﬀerence emerges between low and
low-middle trading partners versus upper and upper-middle partners. Looking
across types of firms, we find that poorer countries account for a relatively larger
share of trade at the least globally engaged firms. In 2000, arms length exporters
ship 20 percent of their goods to the two lowest income groups and arms length
imports source 40 percent of their imports from the same countries. In contrast,
the most globally-engaged multinationals send just 16 percent of their exports and
source 16 percent of their imports from these same countries.
5.

Multinationals

Multinationals play a key role in U.S. employment and trade patterns. Employment at multinationals accounts for 33.3 million workers or 29.1 percent of the
non-governmental workforce in 2000, up from 25.5 million workers and 26.7 percent
16

As noted in the table, the percentages for any given level of global engagement do not sum to
100 percent because firms may trade with countries of more than one income level.
17
As noted in the table, the export or import value percentages for each export and import
relationship pair sum to 100 percent because trade can be observed at the firm-transaction level.

Firms that Trade

19

in 1993 (Table 13). The increase of employment at multinational firms represents
more than 40 percent of the net job creation in the private sector over period highlighting the disproportionate role of multinationals as a source of job creation.
Multinationals also mediate a substantial majority of U.S. trade. This role
is highlighted by Figure 1, which reveals that roughly 90 percent of U.S. exports
and imports in our sample flow through multinational firms. Each column in
the figure reports the total trade by either exclusively arms length trading firms or
multinationals in 1993 or 2000. The first four columns summarize imports while the
second four columns summarize exports. The columns for multinationals note the
share of their trade that is conducted at arms length as well as the share conducted
inside the firm.
As indicated in the Figure, multinationals’ share of total trade in our sample increases over time, rising 2.0 percent for imports and 4.0 percent for exports. Within
multinationals, the breakdown of trade between intra-firm and arms length transactions remains relatively constant over time. For imports, the share of intra-firm
trade in the linked dataset rises slightly from 48.4 percent in 1993 to 51.7 percent
in 2000. For exports, it falls from 35.6 to 32.6 percent.
Figures 2 and 3 break down U.S. exports and imports, respectively, by the global
engagement categories employed in Section 4.5.. A large majority of both exports
and imports are due to firms that both export to and import from related-parties,
i.e. MGEs. In both cases these shares increase over time, from more than 70 percent
in 1993 to just under 80 percent in 2000. The role of MGEs in both employment
and, especially, trade is on the rise, driven in large part by a large increase in the
number of these most globally engaged firms.
Within multinationals, the share of trade that is with related parties varies
widely. Table 14 reports the distribution of multinational firms and related-party
trade according to related-party-trade intensity, i.e., whether related-party trade
accounts for less than 25 percent, between 25 percent and 75 percent, or more than
75 percent of multinationals’ trade, respectively. For a large share of multinationals,
related-party trade makes up less than a quarter of total trade.
Among firms with higher related-party-trade intensity, there are substantial differences between exporters and importers. About a quarter of multinationals have

Firms that Trade

20

intra-firm trade shares between 0.25 and 0.75. Exporters in this group account for a
majority of related-party trade, 56.6 percent in 1993 while importers in this group,
by contrast, account for a much smaller share of intra-firm trade, 30.8 percent.
The roles are reversed for multinationals reporting the highest level of related-party
trade intensity. Exporters with intra-firm trade shares greater than 75 percent are
only 22 percent of all exporting multinationals in 1993 and their share of overall
intra-firm exports is relatively low, 36.7 percent. Firms with intra-firm import
shares greater than 75 percent are about one third of importing multinationals but
dominate overall intra-firm imports, 66.0 percent of total related party imports in
1993.
There are significant changes over time in the share of firms and intra-firm trade
in the three groups of multinationals. In addition we find diﬀerent trends for
exports and imports. Between 1993 and 2000, the share of multinationals in the
lowest related-party-trade intensity category increases from 53.0 and 41.9 percent
to 63.9 and 43.1 percent for exporters and importers, respectively. However, these
firms are responsible for a relatively small, albeit rising, amount of related-party
trade in both years, less than 10 percent for exports and less than 4 percent for
imports. One potential explanation for these trends is the substantial increase in
the numbers of multinationals during the period. New multinationals may have
smaller share of related party trade than established firms.
The share of exports among firms with intermediate related-party-trade intensity
rises to 68.3 percent in 2000, while importers in this group account for a smaller
share of imports in 2000, 25.9 percent. The roles are reversed for multinationals
reporting the highest level of related-party trade intensity with the share of intrafirm trade falling to 13.1 for exporters and rising to 70.6 percent for importers in
2000.
5.1.

The Most Globally Engaged Firms (MGEs)

The most globally engaged firms are multinationals that both import and export
with related-parties. In this section we describe the activities of this set of firms in
greater detail.
Table 15 breaks out the number of firms, trading value and employment of the

Firms that Trade

21

most globally engaged firms according to the sectoral activity of the firm. The
distribution of MGEs across sectors is sharply diﬀerent from the overall distribution
of firms reported in Table 9. Firms with a major presence in goods production,
either Goods or Goods Plus, account for more than 50 percent of MGE firms. In
contrast goods-producing firms account for under 10 percent of all U.S. firms and 35
percent of non-multinational firms that import and export. Wholesale and Retail
and Services firms are 10 percent and 37 percent of MGEs respectively in 2000.
The importance of Goods and Goods Plus firms among the most globally engaged
firms is even more evident when we consider their share of trade flows. Goodsproducing firms control an increasing share of total trade by MGEs, 91 percent
of exports and 72 percent of imports in 2000. Intra-firm trade by MGEs is even
more concentrated at Goods and Goods Plus firms. Their share of MGE intra-firm
imports rises to 77 percent in 2000 while their export share increases to 93 percent.
These increases in export and import shares occur even as employment is shifting
towards MGEs in the Wholesale and Retail sector. The overall picture painted by
Table 15 is of the continued and increasing importance of goods-producing firms in
U.S. trade flows controlled by MGEs.
Table 16 provides a view of the distribution of MGE activity across countryincome groups. The first two columns report the share of MGE intra-firm exports
and imports by source or destination country where, as before, countries are grouped
by per capita income. The last two columns report the share of total U.S. exports
and imports controlled by MGEs. Looking across country groups, we find that
intra-firm trade shares for MGEs generally are rising with the income of the source
or destination country.
However, there have been several notable changes over
time. For both exports and imports, intra-firm trade shares are rising for the lower
income countries. In contrast, intra-firm exports to upper income destinations
fall for MGEs, while imports show small increases in intra-firm trade even for the
upper income source countries. At the same time, Table 16 reveals that while the
importance of trade with the most globally engaged firms is falling for low-income
countries, it is rising for middle- and high-income countries.
Throughout this paper, we have found that multinationals that both export to
and import from a related party play a large role in total U.S. trade. The results

Firms that Trade

22

here suggest these firms are still heavily associated with goods production and that
the extent of their intra-firm trade varies substantially with the characteristics of
the source or destination country.
6.

Importer and Exporter Dynamics

In this section we examine trading-firm versus non-trading-firm survival and
employment growth rates as well as changes in firms’ trading status between 1993
and 2000. We find that both importing and exporting are positively associated
with survival and that multinationals have an even higher probability of survival
than the larger group of trading firms. We also show that employment growth
varies by trading status, with firms that transition from being non-traders to traders
expanding the fastest.
6.1.

Firm Survival Dynamics

Table 17 decomposes the overall growth of trading firms between 1993 and 2000
into several categories. Each row of the table focuses on a diﬀerent, non-mutually
exclusive subset of trading firms. In the upper panel, the first and last columns
of the table report the number of firms in each subset of firms at the beginning
and end of the sample period. The second and third columns of the top panel
report the number of 1993 firms that shutdown and the number of new firms that
enter between 1993 and 2000 respectively. The fourth, fifth and sixth columns of
the upper panel report on firms that exist in both years according to their trading
status: trade in both years, start trading and stop trading respectively. The final
row of the upper panel reports an analogous breakdown for all firms. The lower
panel of the table expresses all of these firm counts as percentages of their 1993
values.
As indicated in the Table, survival rates for firms vary according to their trading
status. Exit rates for every type of trading firm (33 to 39 percent) are significantly
lower than the failure rate for all firms (47 percent). Among trading firms, multinationals have higher survival probabilities than their non-multinational counterparts,
while MGE firms, i.e., multinationals that both import and export, have the highest

Firms that Trade

23

survival rate of all. The relatively low failure of MGE firms is one contributor to
the rising share of MGE firms over time.
6.2.

Firm Trading-Status Dynamics

Table 17 reveals that another factor in the rising share of globally engaged firms
over the sample period is the transition of some continuing firms from non-trading
to trading status between 1993 and 2000. The first row of the table, for example,
indicates that 49,035 firms, or 1.9 percent of the 2.6 million continuing firms that
did not trade in 1993, become exporters over the sample period. The share continuing firms that move in the opposite direction, i.e., that shift from being exporters in
1993 to be non-exporters in 2000, by contrast, constitute a much small percentage (1
percent). Similar relative magnitudes are found for all forms of global engagement
— the share of continuing firms that disengage from international trade ranges from
roughly one-third to three-quarters of the share of continuing firms that start trading. Furthermore, the levels and shares of firms that start engaging in international
trade exceed the number of international traders that exit. Both the higher likelihood of firms switching into trade relative to switching out and the higher number
of new entrants engaged in international trade spur increases in the overall share of
globally engaged firms.
6.3.

Firm Employment Dynamics

Table 18 decomposes 1993 to 2000 employment growth along the same dimensions as Table 17. As indicated in the last row of each panel, aggregate employment
grows by 19 million workers, or 20 percent, over the sample period. Employment at
trading firms generally grows even faster. Exporters and multinational exporters experience the highest employment growth rates, at 30.2 and 32.3 percent respectively.
The higher employment growth in the exporters category is due to both employment
growth at continuing firms that export and continuing firms that start to export.
The net employment eﬀect of the exit of exporters and the entrance of new exporting firms is negative (as exiting firms tend to be larger than entrants). Employment
growth across importers and multinational importers is somewhat lower, at 22.3

Firms that Trade

24

and 19.5 percent, respectively, while employment growth across all firms that both
export and import is 27.4 percent while multinationals that both import and export
expand by 20.3 percent.
Table 19 shows the employment growth at firms by trading status. The most
striking feature is the employment growth rates at firms that change their trading
status. Firms that switch from being non-traders in 1993 to traders in 2000 experience the largest gains in employment growth. This growth is highlighted in Table
19, which reveals that firms that become exporters over the sample period increase
their employment by 94.3 percent, from 3.9 million to 7.4 million.18 Firms that
become importers or switch into both importing and exporting experience similar
increases. Table 19 also reports the employment declines experienced by firms that
exit international markets. Firms that quit exporting, quit importing, and quit both
importing and exporting witness declines of 12.3, 16.6 and 10.1 percent, respectively.
Table 19 also reports the employment growth rates at firms that maintained
the same status in both periods. For continuers, trading firms that maintain their
trading status typically have lower employment growth rates than non-trading firms
that maintain their trading status.
7.

Conclusions

This paper provides a new integrated portrait of firms in the U.S. that trade
goods. We document the increasing globalization of U.S. firms by linking data on
U.S. international trade transactions to a comprehensive census of U.S. enterprises.
U.S. firms’ global engagement is increasing in a number of dimensions. First, there
is substantial growth in the number of firms that export, import and trade with
related parties. Second, firms increasingly send a greater number of products to a
larger set of more diverse countries. Third, trading firms are becoming increasingly
more import and export intensive in terms of their dollar value of trade per worker.
We show that the most globally engaged firms, i.e., those that export as well as
import from related parties, have substantial influence: they both account for a
18

This is consistent the findings of Bernard and Jensen (1999, 2004) that exporters grow significantly faster than non-exporters.

Firms that Trade

25

significant share of U.S. employment and mediate a dominant portion of U.S. trade
flows.
The data employed in this paper can be used to answer a wide-ranging set of
questions about the decisions of firms engaged in international commerce. By being
able to separately identify arms-length and intra-firm transactions, we can understand the response of multinationals to financial crises, transfer pricing inside the
firm, the role of firm, product and country characteristics in the decision to outsource, pricing-to-market and pass-through responses to exchange rate movements,
the role of multinationals in job creation, and the importance of imports and exports
in firm performance among many others.

Firms that Trade

26

References
Antràs, Pol, (2003), “Firms, Contracts, and Trade Structure,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 118 (4), November, pp. 1374-1418.
Antràs, Pol and Elhanan Helpman, (2004), “Global sourcing”, Journal of Political
Economy 112: 552-580.
Aw, Bee Y., S. Chung, and Mark J. Roberts M, (2000), “Productivity and turnover
in the export market: Micro-level evidence from the Republic of Korea and
Taiwan (China)”, World Bank Economic Review, 14 (1): 65-90
Baldwin, John R. and Wulong Gu, (2003), “Export-market participation and productivity performance in Canadian manufacturing”, Canadian Journal of Economics, 36 (3): 634-657
Bernard, Andrew B. and J. Bradford Jensen. (1995). “Exporters, Jobs, and Wages
in U.S. Manufacturing, 1976-1987.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,
Microeconomics. Washington DC.
Bernard, Andrew B. and J. Bradford Jensen. (1999). “Exceptional Exporter Performance: Cause, Eﬀect or Both?” Journal of International Economics Vol. 47,
No. 1: 1-25.
Bernard, Andrew B. and J. Bradford Jensen. (2004). “Exporting and Productivity
in the USA” Oxford Review of Economic Policy, 2004, Vol. 20, No. 3, 343-357.
Bernard Andrew B. and Joachim Wagner (1997), “Exports and success in German
manufacturing”, Weltwirtschaftliches Archiv, 133 (1): 134-157
Borga, Maria and William J. Zeile, (2004), “International Fragmentation of Production and the Intrafirm Trade of U.S. Multinational Companies”, Bureau of
Economic Analysis Working Paper 2004-02.
Clerides, Sofronis K., Saul Lach, and James R. Tybout, (1998) “Is learning by
Exporting Important? Micro-dynamic Evidence from Colombia, Mexico, and
Morocco." Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 113, No. 3, 903-947.

Firms that Trade

27

Chiara Criscuolo, Jonathan E. Haskel and Matthew J. Slaughter (2004), “Why Are
Some Firms More Innovative? Knowledge Inputs, Knowledge Stocks, and the
Role of Global Engagement”, Tuck School of Business mimeo.
Delgado M.A., J.C. Farinas, and S. Ruano, (2002), “Firm productivity and export
markets: a non-parametric approach”, Journal of International Economics, 57
(2): 397-422
Doms, Mark E. , and J. Bradford Jensen, (1998) “Comparing wages, skills and
productivity between domestically and foreign-owned manufacturing establishments in the United States” in R.E. Lipsey R.E. Baldwin and J.D. Richardson,
editors, Geography and Ownership as bases for economic accounting, Universtiy
of Chicago press, 235—258.
Economic Report of the President, (2005) U.S. Government Printing Oﬃce, Washington, DC 20402-0001
Grossman, Gene M. and Elhanan Helpman, (2004), “Managerial incentives and the
international organization of production”, Journal of International Economics
63, 237-262.
Grossman, Gene M., Elhanan Helpman, and Adam Szeidl, (2004), “Optimal Integration: Strategies for the Multinatinal Firm”, CEPR Working Paper No. 4477.
Hanson, Gordon H., Raymond J. Mataloni, and Matthew J. Slaughter, (2004), “
Vertical Production Networks in Multinational Firms”, revision of NBER Working Paper #9723.
MacGarvie, Megan, (2003), “Do Firms Learn from International Trade? Evidence
from Patent Citations and Micro Data", Boston University School of Management mimeo.
Slaughter, Matthew J. (2004a), “Globalization and Employment by U.S. Multinationals: A Framework and Some Facts” Daily Tax Report, March 26.
Slaughter, Matthew J. (2004b), “Insourcing Jobs: Making the Global Economy
Work for America” Organization for International Investment, mimeo, October.

Firms that Trade

28

Zeile, William J., (1997), “U.S. Intrafirm Trade in Goods”, Survey of Current Business, 77:2, February, 23-38.

Firms that Trade

A
A1.

29

Data Appendix
Data Sources

In this paper, we make use of transaction level import and export data linked
to information on firms in operation in the U.S..
The transaction data used in this paper are compiled from administrative records
from the oﬃcial U.S. import and export merchandise trade statistics. The merchandise trade data are a complete enumeration of documentation collected by the U.S.
Customs Service and are not subject to sampling error. Quality assurance procedures are performed at every stage of collection, processing and tabulation; however,
the data are subject to non-sampling errors, including undocumented shipments,
timeliness, and data capture errors.
The establishment and firm data used in this paper are compiled from administrative records and the Census Bureau’s Company Organization Survey program.
The establishment level data should represent a complete enumeration of all establishments in scope for the Economic Census and not subject to sampling error.
However, the data are subject to non-sampling errors.
A2.

Export Transaction Data

We make use of transaction level data on exports collected by the U.S. Census
Bureau via the Shippers Export Declaration (currently U.S. Department of Commerce Form 7525-V). The Census Bureau collects export shipments data for all
export shipments above $2,500. The Shippers Export Declaration (SED) contains
information on the firm that ships the exports (Employer Identification Number),
detailed 10-digit Harmonized System product code, value, quantity, export destination, date of the transaction, port, mode of transport, and whether the transaction
is between related parties.19
The datanumber of export transactions range from 13 million in 1993 to 23
million in 2000 and represent the universe of export shipments greater than $2,500.
19

For exports, Foreign Trade Statistics Regulations, 30.7(v), define a related party transaction as
one between a U.S. exporter and a foreign consignee, where either party owns, directly or indirectly,
10 percent or more of the other party.

Firms that Trade

30

The Census Bureau imputes a total value for low-value exports. We exclude these
imputed records.
A2.1.

Canada Data Exchange

The data for exports to Canada is not collected through the Shippers Export
Declaration. To reduce reporting burden for U.S. and Canadian firms, the U.S. and
Canada exchange import transaction information. The U.S. uses Canadian import
transaction from the U.S. as export transaction to Canada. These transactions contain the same information as the SEDs with the exception of Employer Identification
Number. The Canadian transactions do not contain EIN but instead contain a firm
name field.
Exports to Canada account for approximately 35 percent of total transaction
volume and approximately 20 percent of total transaction value.
A3.

Import Transaction Data

We make use of transaction level data on imports collected by U.S. Customs
and Border Protection via import declarations (including current U.S. Customs
Forms 7501 and 7533). U.S. Customs collects import shipments data for all import
shipments above $2,000 ($250 for certain quota items). The Customs forms contain
information on the firm that imports (Employer Identification Number), detailed
10-digit Harmonized System product code, value, quantity, country of origin, date
of the transaction, port, mode of transport, and whether the transaction is between
related parties.20
The number of import transactions range from 16 million in 1993 to 33 million in
2000 and represent the universe of import shipments greater than $2,000. The Census Bureau imputes a total value for low-value imports. We exclude these imputed
records.
20

For imports, Section 402(e) of the Tariﬀ Act of 1930 defines related party trade to include
transactions between parties with various types of relationships including “any person directly or
indirectly, owning, controlling or holding power to vote, 6 percent of the outstanding voting stock
or shares of any organization.”

Firms that Trade

A4.

31

Standard Statistical Establishment List (SSEL)/Business Register

We make use of Employer Identification information and business name information from the Census Bureau Business Register (also called the Standard Statistical
Establishment List (SSEL)). The SSEL contains records for all private entities except
households. The SSEL carries information on the business name, address, Employer
Identification Number (EIN), and information on the industry and employment at
the entity. The SSEL also contains information on the firm or enterprise that owns
the entity. We make use of the EIN and name information to match firm identifiers
to the import and export transaction data. We use the SSEL because it contains
name, EIN, and firm level information and because it represents the largest possible
universe of firms.
A5.

Longitudinal Business Database (LBD)

To construct firm information (employment and industrial activity), we use the
Longitudinal Business Database (LBD). The LBD is a longitudinal version of the
information contained in the SSEL. The LBD represents a significant improvement
on the raw information contained in the SSEL in that it constructs longitudinal
linkages for all establishments and enhances industry code information (among other
improvements). See Jarmin and Miranda (2002) for more details.
We use establishments in the LBD that are considered in scope for the Economic
Censuses and the County Business Patterns program. We restrict our analysis to
industries that are in scope to the Economic Census/CBP program because industries that are not in scope for the Economic Censuses are not broken out into
establishments and the Census Bureau does not devote the same resources to these
industries so the data quality is more suspect. Jarmin and Miranda report that
currently, out of scope industries include: Agriculture, Forestry and Fishing (SIC
Division A), railroads (SIC 40), U.S. Postal Service (SIC 43), Certified Passenger Air
Carriers (part of SIC 4512), Elementary and Secondary Schools (SIC 821), Colleges
and Universities (SIC 822), Labor Organizations (SIC 863), Political Organizations
(SIC 865), Religious Organizations (SIC 866), and Public Administration (SIC Division J). Most government owned or operated entities are outside the scope of the

Firms that Trade

32

Economic Census. While some import and export trade transactions are matched
to SSEL entities that are not in scope for the Economic Census, the value of trade
associated with these entities is quite small (approximately 3-5 percent).
We use information from the LBD to construct firm level measures of employment and industrial activity and exploit the longitudinal nature of the LBD to
examine firm birth and death rates.
A6.

Import Transaction Matching

The import transaction data contain a field for the Employer Identification Number (EIN), so matching to the SSEL is relatively straightforward. The match rates
of import transactions to the SSEL are typically in the 80 percent range and the
share of matched import value is typically above 80 percent. The largest classes of
unmatched import transactions are import transactions where the EIN is not in the
SSEL or the EIN field is blank. Non-employers are not included in the SSEL, so import transactions with Social Security Numbers (SSN) as the firm identifier will not
match to the SSEL. The other large category of non-matches is import transaction
where the EIN field is blank representing about 3-5 percent of import transactions
and import value.
Once the match to the SSEL is made via the EIN, firm level identifiers are
applied to the import transaction data. These firm level identifiers are then used
to match to firm level information constructed from the LBD. Detailed match rate
information on import transactions and import value is presented in the top panel
of Table 20.
A7.

Export Transaction Matching

Exports to countries other than Canada contain EIN information and are relatively straightforward to match to the SSEL. For exports to Canada, we first perform
an automated name match using the name field on the export transaction and the
business name field on the SSEL. Subsequent to the automated matching, we do
hand matching for non-matched high value exporters to Canada. After these three
phases of matching, we match approximately 70-75 percent of transactions and 75-80

Firms that Trade

33

percent of value.21
The largest classes of unmatched export transactions are again export transactions where the EIN is not in the SSEL or the EIN field is blank. The unmatched
export transactions where the EIN field is blank represent about 7-10 percent of
export transactions and export value. Detailed match rate information on export
transactions and export value is presented in the bottom panel of Table 20.
A8.

Country-Income Groups

We use the 2003 World Bank classification of countries by their per capita income
for both years of our sample. The per capita income cutoﬀs for the four groups
are $765 or less, $766 to $3,035, $3,036 to $9,385 and $9,386 or more. For a list of
countries and their World Bank income group,see
http://www.worldbank.org/data/countryclass/countryclass.html.
Taiwan, Israel and Czechoslovakia (1993 only) were not in the World Bank listing and were allocated to the upper middle, upper, and lower middle country income
groups respectively. Smaller trading partners of the U.S., i.e. some small countries and country subdivisions, e.g. territories, that were missing per capita income
information in the World Bank data were omitted from the country income group
analysis.
21

These match rates represent slightly lower volume match rates than the Census Bureau’s Foreign
Trade Division reports for its “Profile of U.S. Exporting Companies” program. The Foreign Trade
Division reports that it matches approximately 78% of value in 1992. We do not have access to the
algorithm used by FTD or the matched files they produced, however, based on conversations with
FTD staﬀ, we believe that our algorithm is more conservative than theirs (reducing the number of
false positive matches). For our analytical purposes, we believe that a more conservative approach
is appropriate.

Firms that Trade
Employment (Mill) at Trading Firms
1993
2000
Employment
Share* (%)
Employment
Share* (%)
Firms that trade
38.1
40.0
47.9
41.9
Firms that export
34.6
36.3
45.0
39.4
Firms that import
30.8
32.3
37.7
33.0
Firms that export and import
27.3
28.7
34.8
30.4
Firms that just export
7.3
7.7
10.2
8.9
Firms that just import
3.5
3.7
2.9
2.5
Notes: Table reports the amount of employment (in millions of workers) and share of total
civilian U.S.employment at private firms. For a more detailed description of the firm and
employment data see Section 3 and the Appendix. The categories are not mutually
exclusive, i.e. the bottom three rows sum to the first row, as do the second and the sixth,
and similarly for the third and fifth rows.

Table 1: Employment at Firms Engaged in Trade

34

Firms that Trade

35
Breakdown of Firms

1993
2000
Change 1993 to 2000
Firm Type
Firms
% of Total
2000
% of Total
Firms
Percent
Exporters
130,072
2.6
167,217
3.1
37,145
29
Importers
86,294
1.7
117,792
2.2
31,498
37
Exporters & Importers
43,206
0.9
60,587
1.1
17,381
40
Multinational Exporters
23,293
0.5
39,141
0.7
15,848
68
Multinational Importers
19,141
0.4
24,324
0.4
5,183
27
Multinational Exporters & Importers
7,772
0.2
10,556
0.2
2,784
36
Total Firms
4,987,145
100.0
5,474,639
100.0
487,494
10
Notes: Table reports the number of trading firms by the type of trade they engage in, as well as the total number of
firms for 1993 and 2000. A firm is referred to as a multinational if at least a portion of its trade is conducted via related
parties.

Table 2: Breakdown of Trading Firms

Firms that Trade

36

Total Trade

Firm Rank
Top 1 percent
Top 5 percent
Top 10 percent
Top 25 percent
Top 50 percent

Number of Firms
1993
2000
1,732
2,245
8,658
11,223
17,316
22,445
43,290
56,111
86,580 112,221

Percent of All
Firms
1993
2000
0.03
0.04
0.13
0.20
0.26
0.41
0.65
1.02
1.30
2.05

Percent of
Employment
1993
2000
15.1
14.0
21.2
21.2
23.7
23.9
28.2
28.7
32.4
34.2

Percent of Trade
1993
2000
77.1
80.9
90.8
92.7
95.1
96.1
98.7
99.0
99.8
99.8

Percent of
Employment
1993
2000
11.8
11.0
17.7
17.6
21.5
20.8
26.0
27.0
30.5
32.7

Percent of Exports
1993
2000
78.2
80.9
91.8
93.0
95.6
96.3
98.7
98.9
99.7
99.8

Exports

Firm Rank
Top 1 percent
Top 5 percent
Top 10 percent
Top 25 percent
Top 50 percent

Number of Firms
1993
2000
1,301
1,673
6,504
8,361
13,008
16,722
32,518
41,805
65,036
83,609

Percent of All
Firms
1993
2000
0.03
0.03
0.13
0.15
0.26
0.31
0.65
0.76
1.30
1.53
Imports

Percent of All
Percent of
Employment
Number of Firms
Firms
Percent of Imports
1993
2000
1993
2000
1993
2000
1993
2000
Firm Rank
Top 1 percent
863
1,179
0.02
0.02
11.5
11.0
72.7
77.6
Top 5 percent
4,315
5,891
0.09
0.11
16.7
16.3
88.2
90.8
Top 10 percent
8,630
11,782
0.17
0.22
18.9
18.5
93.4
95.0
Top 25 percent
21,574
29,453
0.43
0.54
22.1
21.7
98.2
98.6
Top 50 percent
43,147
58,906
0.87
1.08
25.6
25.5
99.7
99.8
Notes: Table reports the number of firms, percent of all U.S. firms, percent of employment and
percent of U.S. trade for firms which are responsible for the top 1, 5, 10, 25, and 50 percentiles of the
total trade, export and import distributions, respectively.

Table 3: Export and Import Concentration Across Firms

Firms that Trade

37

Exports

Products
0
1
2
3-4
5-9
10+

Share of Firms (%)
1993
2000
41.2
16.8
16.3
14.2
11.6

36.2
15.5
15.6
15.3
17.4

Share of Value (%)
1993
2000
1.1
1.2
2.9
6.0
88.9

0.6
0.7
1.4
3.0
94.3

Related-Party
Value Share (%)
1993
2000
0.3
0.2
0.6
2.5
96.5

0.1
0.2
0.4
1.1
98.2

Employment
Share (%)
1993
2000
64
61
4.0
4.1
2.5
2.2
2.7
2.5
3.9
4.5
23.3
26.1

Imports
Employment
Share (%)
Products
1993
2000
0
68
67
1
32.1
31.6
0.8
0.7
0.2
0.2
3.8
3.5
2
15.1
15.2
1.1
1.1
0.4
0.3
1.9
2.8
3-4
15.7
15.9
2.5
1.9
0.8
0.8
2.3
2.4
5-9
16.3
16.5
5.2
4.1
2.3
1.6
2.8
2.9
10+
20.8
20.8
90.4
92.1
96.3
97.1
21.5
21.4
Notes: Table reports percent of firms, share of value produced by firms, and share of employment by firms
according to the number of products they import and export in 1993 and 2000.
Share of Firms (%)
1993
2000

Share of Value (%)
1993
2000

Related-Party
Value Share (%)
1993
2000

Table 4: Share of Firms, Value and Employment by Number of Products Exported
or Imported Per Firm

Firms that Trade

38

Exports

Products
1
2
3-4
5-9
10+

Workers
Per Firm
1993
2000
71
77
107
96
121
108
200
201
1,477
1,025

Value Per
Firm ($000)
1993
2000
66
60
182
161
456
322
1,093
714
19,806
19,762

Value Per
Worker ($000)
1993
2000
0.9
0.8
1.7
1.7
3.8
3.0
5.5
3.5
13.4
19.3

Imports
Workers
Value Per
Value Per
Per Firm
Firm ($000)
Worker ($000)
Products
1993
2000
1993
2000
1993
2000
1
131
108
132
193
1.0
1.8
2
136
179
383
619
2.8
3.5
3-4
164
146
812
1,023
5.0
7.0
5-9
192
170
1,623
2,086
8.5
12.3
10+
1,142
996
22,290
37,172
19.5
37.3
Notes: Table reports average employment per firm, export or import value per firm
and export or import value per worker across firms according to the number of
products they export or import in 1993 and 2000.

Table 5: Distribution of Per Firm and Per Worker Statistics by Number of Products
Exported or Imported Per Firm

Firms that Trade

39

Exports
Destination
or Source
Countries
0
1
2
3-4
5-9
10+

Share of Firms (%)
1993
2000
60.3
13.6
10.5
8.3
7.2

56.6
14.7
11.8
9.3
7.7

Share of Value (%)
1993
2000
5.9
2.7
4.0
5.8
81.7

3.7
2.3
3.2
5.2
85.6

Related-Party
Value Share (%)
1993
2000
3.4
1.6
2.1
4.1
88.7

1.7
1.2
1.6
2.8
92.6

Employment
Share (%)
1993
2000
64
61
7.9
7.7
2.7
3.1
3.1
4.2
3.4
5.8
19.2
18.6

Imports
Destination
Related-Party
Employment
or Source
Share of Firms (%)
Share of Value (%)
Value Share (%)
Share (%)
Countries
1993
2000
1993
2000
1993
2000
1993
2000
0
68
67
1
52.1
51.3
4.2
3.0
3.3
1.7
5.0
5.1
2
18.2
18.9
3.7
3.2
2.8
2.0
2.3
3.2
3-4
15.3
15.4
9.0
5.6
9.3
4.2
3.3
3.1
5-9
10.3
10.2
13.5
10.6
12.8
8.2
4.0
4.9
10+
4.1
4.2
69.6
77.7
71.8
83.9
17.6
16.7
Notes: Table reports percent of firms, share of value produced by firms,and share of employment by firms
according to the number of countries with which they trade in 1993 and 2000.

Table 6: Share of Firms, Value and Employment by Number of Source or Destination
Countries

Firms that Trade

40

Exports
Destination
or Source
Countries
1
2
3-4
5-9
10+

Workers
Per Firm
1993
2000
95
93
143
145
218
242
302
430
1,944
1,652

Value Per
Firm ($000)
1993
2000
251
241
514
562
964
980
1,786
2,049
29,085
40,675

Value Per
Worker ($000)
1993
2000
2.6
2.6
3.6
3.9
4.4
4.0
5.9
4.8
15.0
24.6

Imports
Destination
Workers
Value Per
Value Per
or Source
Per Firm
Firm ($000)
Worker ($000)
Countries
1993
2000
1993
2000
1993
2000
1
106
97
416
487
3.9
5.0
2
141
163
1,041
1,437
7.4
8.8
3-4
241
197
3,007
3,046
12.5
15.5
5-9
431
466
6,720
8,710
15.6
18.7
10+
4,713
3,815
86,412
153,956
18.3
40.4
Notes: Table reports average employment per firm, export or import value per firm
and export or import value per worker for firms according to the number of countries
with which they trade in 1993 and 2000.

Table 7: Distribution of Per Firm and Per Worker Statistics by Number of Countries
With Which Firms Trade

Firms that Trade

41

Exporting
Income Level of
Destination Country
Low
Lower Middle
Upper Middle
Upper

Share of Exporters (%)
1993
2000
5.2
7.0
20.5
22.7
21.4
28.6
88.3
85.6

Employment Share (%)
1993
2000
13.2
15.2
21.4
21.9
22.4
24.7
35.4
37.9

Employment Per Firm
1993
2000
1,863
1,480
764
660
766
591
293
303

Share of Exports (%)
1993
2000
1.5
1.0
11.6
11.1
14.7
19.6
72.2
68.3

Employment Per Firm
1993
2000
1,684
1,202
763
570
1,358
1,062
401
385

Share of Imports (%)
1993
2000
2.6
3.0
14.0
17.5
13.6
18.7
69.7
60.8

Importing
Income Level of
Source Country
Low
Lower Middle
Upper Middle
Upper

Share of Importers (%)
1993
2000
8.2
10.6
30.7
38.2
15.5
18.2
85.5
79.9

Employment Share (%)
1993
2000
12.5
13.2
21.3
22.5
19.0
19.9
31.1
31.7

Notes: Income levels of U.S. trading partners are according to the the 2003 World Bank Income Group classification available at
www.worldbank.org. First two columns report the percent of exporting and importing firms that export to and import from at least one
country in the noted country-income groups. Subsequent columns report the share of employment, employment per firm and export and
import value represented by firms that trade with the at least one country in the noted groups. The sums of all exporter and importer
shares as well as the sums of all employment shares for a given year do not equal 100 because firms may may appear in more than one
row of the table if they trade with countries of more than one type. The sums of the shares or exports and imports for a given year do sum
to 100 because they sum trade flows at the firm-destination country level.

Table 8: Share of Firms Trading with Diﬀerent Country-Income Groups

Firms that Trade

42

Sector Affiliation
Goods
Goods Plus
Wholesale & Retail
Services
Other
1993
2000
1993
2000
1993
2000
1993
2000
1993
2000
385
399
4
3
1,273
1,273
3,322
3,797
3
2
7.7
7.3
0.1
0.1
25.5
23.2
66.6
69.4
0.1
0.0
Exporting Firms
49.6
58.9
1.9
1.9
53.2
68.2
25.0
37.7
0.4
0.5
38.1
35.2
1.5
1.1
40.9
40.8
19.2
22.6
0.3
0.3
Importing Firms
23.1
29.4
1.3
1.4
46.8
62.7
14.9
24.1
0.3
0.3
26.7
24.9
1.5
1.2
54.2
53.2
17.2
20.4
0.3
0.2
E&I Firms
16.8
21.7
1.2
1.3
20.5
29.0
4.6
8.4
0.2
0.2
38.8
35.8
2.8
2.1
47.4
47.9
10.6
13.8
0.5
0.3
Multinational Exporters
10.0
17.5
0.9
1.1
8.3
14.1
4.1
6.2
0.1
0.2
42.7
44.8
3.7
2.9
35.6
36.1
17.4
15.7
0.6
0.5
Multinational Importers
5.7
7.3
0.7
0.7
10.0
12.3
2.7
3.9
0.1
0.1
29.9
30.1
3.4
2.9
52.1
50.6
14.0
16.0
0.6
0.4
Multinational E&I
3.5
4.9
0.5
0.6
3.0
3.9
0.7
1.1
0.1
0.1
45.3
46.4
7.0
5.9
38.0
36.9
8.8
10.0
0.9
0.8
Export Value
202,600 382,800
50,720
117,100
42,470
63,510
35,920
43,330
3,239
3,088
60.5
62.8
15.1
19.2
12.7
10.4
10.7
7.1
1.0
0.5
Import Value
170,400 397,100
89,270
214,200 139,200 269,900
36,560
86,690
6,942
21,980
38.5
40.1
20.2
21.6
31.5
27.3
8.3
8.8
1.6
2.2
Related-Party Exports
75,120
128,700
25,770
51,270
9,380
10,510
8,161
7,703
912
772
62.9
64.7
21.6
25.8
7.9
5.3
6.8
3.9
0.8
0.4
Related-Party Imports
96,820
248,200
58,270
133,000
50,280
95,260
5,157
15,400
3,464
19,770
45.2
48.5
27.2
26.0
23.5
18.6
2.4
3.0
1.6
3.9
Employment
18,026
18,554
4,167
4,207
24,023
28,409
47,849
62,149
1,187
940
18.9
16.2
4.4
3.7
25.2
24.9
50.2
54.4
1.2
0.8
Average Employment / Firm
47
46
1131
1354
19
22
14
16
372
381
Notes: Table reports the number of trading firms (in thousands), nominal trade values (in millions of dollars) and employment (in thousands) by
firms' sector affiliation. Each establishment within a firm possesses a primary industry designation via a four-digit Standard Industrial
Classification code. These codes map into three basic firm orientations: Goods (manufacturing, mining, or agriculture), Wholesale & Retail
(wholesale or retail trade) and Services (all remaining sectors). Firms with more than 75 percent of their employees in one of these orientations
are assigned to it. Firms where employment in Goods is between 25 percent and 75 percent are assigned to "Goods Plus", and all other firms
are assigned to "Other". Firms are "E&I" if they both export and import. Firms are multinationals if at least part of their trade is with related
parties. Italicized numbers represent the fraction of that column in the total (across all columns) for the row immediately above.
Firms (000), Trade Value
($Mill) or Employment (000)
Firms

Table 9: Breakdown of Firms, Trade and Employment by Firm Activity

Firms that Trade

43

Exporters
Export
Relationship
AL
AL
RP
AL
RP
RP

Import
Relationship
None
AL
None
RP
AL
RP

Firms
1993
2000
77,329
89,273
23,588
31,243
9,537
17,357
5,862
7,560
5,984
11,228
7,772
10,556
130,072 167,217

Firms (%)
1993
2000
59
53
18
19
7
10
5
5
5
7
6
6
100
100

Importers
Firms
Firms (%)
1993
2000
1993
2000
37,581
51,017
44
43
23,588
31,243
27
27
5,507
6,208
6
5
5,862
7,560
7
6
5,984
11,228
7
10
7,772
10,556
9
9
86,294
117,812
100
100
Notes: Table summarizes the distribution of exporters and importers
according to their export and import relationships. These relationships can
be either arms-length (AL) or via related parties (RP).
Import
Relationship
AL
AL
RP
AL
RP
RP

Export
Relationship
None
AL
None
RP
AL
RP

Table 10: Distribution of Trading Firms According to Their Export and Import
Relationships

Firms that Trade
Exporter Type
Exporters (%)
Importer Type
Importers (%)
Trading Partner
Export
Import
Import
Export
Income Level
Relationship Relationship
1993
2000
Relationship Relationship
1993
2000
Low
3
4
7
10
AL
None
AL
None
5
6
8
10
AL
AL
AL
AL
7
7
8
11
RP
None
RP
None
4
6
6
10
AL
RP
AL
RP
16
18
11
13
RP
AL
RP
AL
21
26
13
17
RP
RP
RP
RP
Lower Middle
13
14
29
36
AL
None
AL
None
24
26
31
38
AL
AL
AL
AL
26
21
29
34
RP
None
RP
None
23
26
27
37
AL
RP
AL
RP
49
47
36
41
RP
AL
RP
AL
51
57
40
51
RP
RP
RP
RP
Upper Middle
14
20
10
12
AL
None
AL
None
24
30
14
17
AL
AL
AL
AL
26
28
16
16
RP
None
RP
None
26
33
19
22
AL
RP
AL
RP
49
54
23
24
RP
AL
RP
AL
57
68
37
45
RP
RP
RP
RP
Upper
87
82
80
72
AL
None
AL
None
88
85
87
82
AL
AL
AL
AL
88
91
86
83
RP
None
RP
None
91
87
90
87
AL
RP
AL
RP
93
95
92
90
RP
AL
RP
AL
96
96
95
95
RP
RP
RP
RP
Notes: Table reports the distribution of trading firms according to both their export and import relationships and the
income level of their trading partners. Exporting and importing firms are allocated to one of six mutually exclusive
categories according to their export and import relationships, which can be either arms-length (AL) or related-party
(RP). The first block of columns reports results for exporters and the countries to which they export while the second
block of columns reports results for importers and the countries from which they import. The percentages reported
in columns 4, 5, 8 and 9 represent the percent of trading firms of each type that export to (columns 3 and 4) or
import from (columns 8 and 9) at least one country of the noted type. The percentages for any given export and
import relationship pair may not sum to 100 percent because firms may trade with countries of more than one
income level.

Table 11: Global Engagement and Trading Partner Characteristics

44

Firms that Trade

45

Exporter Type
Export Value (%)
Importer Type
Import Value (%)
Trading Partner
Export
Import
Import
Export
Income Level
Relationship Relationship
1993
2000
Relationship Relationship
1993
2000
Low
2
3
6
8
AL
None
AL
None
2
3
4
6
AL
AL
AL
AL
2
2
9
4
RP
None
RP
None
2
2
3
3
AL
RP
AL
RP
1
1
2
7
RP
AL
RP
AL
1
6
2
2
RP
RP
RP
RP
Lower Middle
16
17
32
32
AL
None
AL
None
16
18
32
37
AL
AL
AL
AL
10
11
15
23
RP
None
RP
None
16
13
29
38
AL
RP
AL
RP
9
11
21
28
RP
AL
RP
AL
11
10
10
14
RP
RP
RP
RP
Upper Middle
17
19
7
9
AL
None
AL
None
12
18
13
11
AL
AL
AL
AL
18
17
10
13
RP
None
RP
None
13
23
11
16
AL
RP
AL
RP
10
18
16
12
RP
AL
RP
AL
15
19
14
20
RP
RP
RP
RP
Upper
66
60
55
51
AL
None
AL
None
70
61
50
45
AL
AL
AL
AL
70
70
67
60
RP
None
RP
None
69
62
58
43
AL
RP
AL
RP
79
68
61
53
RP
AL
RP
AL
71
65
74
63
RP
RP
RP
RP
Notes: Table reports the distribution of export and impor value according to firms' export and import relationships
and the income level of their trading partners. Exporting and importing firms are allocated to one of six mutually
exclusive categories according to their export and import relationships, which can be either arms-length (AL) or
related-party (RP). The first block of columns reports results for exporters and the countries to which they export
while the second block of columns reports results for importers and the countries from which they import. The
percentages reported in columns 4, 5, 8 and 9 represent the share of value traded by firms of each type that export
to (columns 3 and 4) or import from (columns 8 and 9) at least one country of the noted type. The percentages for
any given export and import relationship pair sum to 100 percent (e.g. rows 1, 7, 13 and 19) because export and
import value are observed at the transaction level.

Table 12: Export and Import Value by Firms’ Global Engagement and Trading
Partner Characteristics

Firms that Trade
Multinational Employment (Mill)
1993
2000
Employment Share* (%) Employment Share* (%)
Multinationals
25.5
26.7
33.3
29.1
- that export to a related party
23.4
24.5
30.9
27.0
- that import from a related party
19.5
20.4
23.3
20.4
- that export to and import from a related party
17.4
18.2
20.9
18.3
- that just export to a related party
6.0
6.3
10.0
8.8
- that just import from a related party
2.1
2.2
2.4
2.1
Notes: Table reports the amount of employment (in millions of workers) at multinational firms in 1993 and
2000. The categories are not mutually exclusive, i.e. the bottom three rows sum to the first row, as do the
second and the sixth, and similarly for the third and fifth rows. *Employment shares are with respect to total
civilian U.S. employment as reported in the Economic Report of the President.

Table 13: Employment at Multinationals Engaged in Trade

46

Firms that Trade

47

Exports
Imports
Related Party
1993
2000
1993
2000
Share of Trade (%)
Firms Value Firms Value Firms Value Firms Value
<0.25
53.0
6.7
63.9
9.7
41.9
3.3
43.1
3.5
0.25-0.75
24.6
56.6
23.0
68.3
25.1
30.8
25.0
25.9
>0.75
22.4
36.7
13.1
22.0
33.0
66.0
31.9
70.6
Notes: Table reports the distribution of firms and related-party trade according to the share of
trade within multinationals that is with related parties. The percentages in each columns sum
to 100.

Table 14: Distribution of Multinational Firms and Related-Party Trade by Multinationals’ Related-Party Trade Intensity

Firms that Trade

48
Sector Affiliation

Other
Goods
Goods Plus
Wholesale & Retail
Services
1993
2000
1993
2000
1993
2000
1993
2000
1993
2000
Firms
3,523
4,901
541
626
682
1,057
2,955
3,891
71
81
45.3
46.4
7.0
5.9
8.8
10.0
38.0
36.9
0.9
0.8
Export Value
173
341
42
114
13
18
17
26
2
2
69.9
68.0
17.1
22.7
5.3
3.6
6.9
5.2
0.9
0.4
Import Value
155
366
82
209
20
46
73
149
6
21
46.1
46.2
24.4
26.4
6.0
5.8
21.6
18.8
1.9
2.7
Related-Party Exports
72
125
20
51
4
5
6
7
1
1
70.0
66.1
19.4
26.9
3.8
2.7
6.1
3.8
0.8
0.4
Related-Party Imports
95
244
56
133
4
11
41
79
3
20
47.7
50.2
28.1
27.3
1.9
2.3
20.6
16.2
1.7
4.0
Employment
8,018
8,510
3,131
3,334
2,349
4,682
3,232
3,974
625
373
46.2
40.8
18.0
16.0
13.5
22.4
18.6
19.0
3.6
1.8
Notes: Table breaks out the number of firms, trading value and employment of the most globally engaged (MGE) firms according to their
sector affiliation. Each establishment within a firm possesses a primary industry designation via a four-digit Standard Industrial
Classification code. These codes map into three basic firm orientations: Goods (manufacturing, mining, or agriculture), Wholesale &
Retail (wholesale or retail trade) and Services (all remaining sectors). Firms with more than 75 percent of their employees in one of these
orientations are assigned to it. Firms where employment in Goods is between 25 percent and 75 percent are assigned to "Goods Plus",
and all other firms are assigned to "Other".

Table 15: A Breakdown of The Most Globally Engaged Firms by Activity

Firms that Trade
Export Value

All countries
Low Income
Lower middle
Upper middle
Upper

Related-Party
Share (%)
1993
2000
42
38
14
15
19
22
53
42
43
38

Most-GloballyEngaged Share (%)
1993
2000
74
82
70
64
73
78
76
83
73
82

Import Value
Related-Party
Most-GloballyShare (%)
Engaged Share (%)
1993
2000
1993
2000
All countries
59
61
76
80
Low Income
14
24
61
59
Lower middle
27
35
56
64
Upper middle
63
68
78
88
Upper
64
66
80
83
Notes: Table summarizes the activity of multinational firms
that both export to and import from related parties, i.e., the
"most globally engaged" firms. Table reports the share of
trade by these firms that is intra-firm to the particular
country-income group as well as the share of total trade to
that country-income group accounted for by the most
globally engaged firms.

Table 16: Intra-firm Trade of the Most Globally-Engaged Firms

49

Firms that Trade

50

Number of Firms

Subset of Firms
Firms that Export
Firms that Import
Firms that Both E&I
Multinational Exporters
Multinational Importers
Multinational E&I
All Firms

1993
130,072
86,294
43,206
23,293
19,141
7,772
4,987,145

Exiting
New
Firms
Entrants
48,269
64,352
33,273
52,698
15,106
22,299
8,566
12,656
7,119
10,406
2,584
3,317
2,354,216 2,841,710

Continuing Firms
Non-Traders
Traders
Trade in
That Become That Become
Both Years
Traders
Non-Traders
53,830
49,035
27,973
36,458
28,656
16,583
18,987
19,301
9,113
8,034
18,451
6,693
7,212
6,706
4,810
3,377
3,862
1,811
2,632,929
na
na

2000
167,217
117,792
60,587
39,141
24,324
10,556
5,474,639

Share of Firms Relative to 1993 Level (%)
Continuing Firms
Non-Traders
Traders
Exiting
New
Trade in
That Become That Become
Subset of Firms
1993
Firms
Entrants
Both Years
Traders
Non-Traders
2000
Firms that Export
100
37
49
41
38
22
129
Firms that Import
100
39
61
42
33
19
137
Firms that Both E&I
100
35
52
44
45
21
140
Multinational Exporters
100
37
54
34
79
29
168
Multinational Importers
100
37
54
38
35
25
127
Multinational E&I
100
33
43
43
50
23
136
All Firms
100
47
57
53
na
na
110
Notes: Table summarizes dynamics across different subsets of firms between 1993 and 2000. The overall growth in the
number of firms of each type is decomposed across columns. Upper panel displays firm counts while lower panel displays
the share of each count relative to the 1993 total. Columns 1 and 7 report the number of firms of each type in 1993 and
2000, respectively. Note that the subsets of firms reported in each row are not mutually exclusive, i.e. some of the firms that
export also import, and vice versa . Columns 2, 3 and 4 report the number of 1993 firms that exit, the number of new firms
entering between 1993 and 2000 and the number of 1993 firms present in both years, respectively. Column 5 and 6 report
the number of firms that switch their trading status between 1993 and 2000. Column 5 indicates the number of continuing
firms that did not engage in the noted activity in 1993 but start doing so by 2000. Column 6 reports the opposite.

Table 17: Decomposition of the Number of Trading Firms, 1993 to 2000

Firms that Trade

51

Change in Employment

Subset of Firms
Firms that Export
Firms that Import
Firms that Both E&I
Multinational Exporters
Multinational Importers
Multinational E&I
All Firms

1993
34.6
30.8
27.3
23.4
19.5
17.4
95.3

Exiting
Firms
6.6
5.6
4.6
3.3
2.6
2.1
28.2

New
Entrants
5.9
4.7
4.1
3.2
2.3
1.8
29.1

Continuing Firms
Non-Traders
Traders
Trade in
That Become That Become
Both Years
Traders
Non-Traders
6.1
7.5
2.5
4.7
7.0
4.0
3.9
6.8
2.7
3.4
7.0
2.7
1.4
5.6
2.8
1.2
5.4
2.8
18.1
na
na

2000
45.0
37.7
34.8
30.9
23.3
20.9
114.3

Change in Employment Relative to 1993 Level (%)
Continuing Firms
Non-Traders
Traders
Exiting
New
Trade in
That Become That Become
Subset of Firms
1993
Firms
Entrants
Both Years
Traders
Non-Traders
2000
Firms that Export
100
19.2
17.0
17.7
21.7
7.1
130.2
Firms that Import
100
18.2
15.3
15.2
22.8
12.8
122.3
Firms that Both E&I
100
16.8
14.9
14.3
25.0
9.9
127.4
Multinational Exporters
100
14.3
13.7
14.5
30.0
11.6
132.3
Multinational Importers
100
13.6
12.0
7.0
28.6
14.4
119.5
Multinational E&I
100
11.9
10.5
6.6
31.3
16.3
120.3
All Firms
100
29.6
30.5
19.0
na
na
120.0
Notes: Table decomposes overall employment growth across the noted subsets of firms between 1993 and 2000. The upper
panel displays changes in employment for the noted subset of firms while the lower panel normalizes these employment
changes according to their respective 1993 levels. Columns 1 and 7 report total employment by the noted subset of firms in
1993 and 2000, respectively. Note that the subsets of firms reported in each row are not mutually exclusive, i.e. some of the
firms that export also import, and vice versa. Columns 2, 3 and 4 report the number of workers employed by firms that exit, by
firms that enter between 1993 and 2000 and by firms present in both years, respectively. Column 5 and 6 report the number of
workers employed by firms that switch their trading status between 1993 and 2000. Column 5 is computed for firms that did not
engage in the noted activity in 1993 but start doing so by 2000. Column 6 reports the opposite.

Table 18: Decomposition of Employment Across Trading Firm Types, 1993 to 2000

Firms that Trade
Employment (Mill)
Transition Type
1993
2000
Change
% Change
Not Exporting to Exporting
3.9
7.5
3.6
94.3
Not Importing to Importing
3.6
7.0
3.4
93.9
Not E&I to E&I
3.3
6.8
3.5
108.3
Exporting to Not Exporting
2.5
2.2
-0.3
-12.3
Importing to Not Importing
4.0
3.3
-0.7
-16.6
E&I to Not E&I
2.7
2.4
-0.3
-10.1
Continuing Exporters
25.5
31.6
6.1
24.0
Continuing Importers
21.3
25.9
4.7
22.0
Continuing E&I
20.0
23.9
3.9
19.5
Continuing Non-Exporters
35.3
43.9
8.6
24.5
Continuing Non-Importers
38.2
48.9
10.7
27.9
Continuing Non-E&I
41.1
52.0
10.9
26.6
Notes: Table reports the employment level of surviving firms that continue trading or switch to
being traders of the noted type from being non-traders, and vice versa , between 1993 and 2000.
E&I refers to firms that both import and export.

Table 19: Employment Growth by Firms’ Trading Status, 1993 to 2000

52

Firms that Trade

53

Matched to the LBD
Matched to the SSEL but not the LBD
Unmatched

Imports
Transactions
1993
2000
12,578,893 24,984,001
783,269
2,103,087
3,099,433
6,271,552

Value (Bill$)
1993
2000
442.4
989.9
28.4
75.6
82.5
228.0

Matched to the LBD
Matched by hand
Matched to the SSEL but not the LBD
Unmatched

Exports
Transactions
1993
2000
9,080,136 16,350,766
404,493
665,106
680,229
1,609,872
3,581,512
4,844,099

Value (Bill$)
1993
2000
334.9
609.8
18.3
18.8
18.0
50.7
100.0
155.2

Table 20: Matching Statistics for Imports and Exports

Firms that Trade

54

100%

30%
20%
10%

1993

2000

Arms-length exports
Intra-firm exports

40%

Arms-length exports

50%

Intra-firm exports

60%

Arms-length imports

70%

Intra-firm imports

Arms-length imports

80%

Intra-firm imports

Share of U.S. Imports,Exports

90%

1993

2000

0%
1993

2000

Arms-Length Importers

Related-Party Importers

1993

2000

Arms-Length Exporters

Related-Party Exporters

Figure 1: The Share of U.S Trade That Flows Through Multinational Firms

Firms that Trade

55

Exports by Firm Type, 1993 and 2000
90

Share of Total Exports

80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
Arms-Length
Exporter, No
Imports

Related-Party
Exporter, No
Imports

Arms-Length
Exporter, ArmsLength Importer
1993

Arms-Length
Exporter,
Related- Party
Importer

Related-Party
Exporter, ArmsLength Importer

2000

Figure 2: Global Engagement and Exports

Related-Party
Exporter,
Related-Party
Importer

Firms that Trade

56

Imports by Firm Type, 1993 and 2000
90

Share of Total Imports

80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
Arms-Length
Importer, No
Exports

Related-Party
Importer, No
Exports

Arms-Length
Exporter, ArmsLength Importer
1993

Arms-Length
Exporter,
Related- Party
Importer

Related-Party
Exporter, ArmsLength Importer

2000

Figure 3: Global Engagement and Imports

Related-Party
Exporter,
Related-Party
Importer

