NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

EMPLOYEE SENTIMENT AND STOCK OPTION COMPENSATION
Nittai K. Bergman
Dirk Jenter
Working Paper 11409
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11409
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2005

We are grateful for comments from seminar participants at the AFA Meetings in San Diego, the Harvard
Law, Economics, and Organizations Seminar, the Frank Batten Young Scholars Conference, the Financial
Management Association Meeting in New Orleans, the NBER Behavioral Finance Program Meeting, the 6th
Maryland Finance Symposium, MIT Sloan, the University of Minnesota, HEC Paris, INSEAD, Duke
University, the University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign, Cornell University, the University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill, the Kellogg School of Management at Northwestern University, and especially from
Andrei Shleifer, Jeremy Stein, Malcolm Baker, Rajesh Aggarwal, Gordon Alexander, Lucian Bebchuk, Luca
Benzoni, John Boyd, Markus Brunnermeier, Henrik Cronqvist, Louis Kaplow, Rakesh Khurana, Ross Levine,
Robert McDonald, Paul Oyer, Valery Polkovnichenko, Paul Povel, Michael Roberts, Scott Schaefer, Paul
Sengmueller, Aamer Sheikh, Rajdeep Singh, Clifford Stephens, Eric Van den Steen, Wanda Wallace, Martin
Weber, Andrew Winton, and Peter Wysocki. We thank John Core and Wayne Guay for making their
employee options data available to us. All remaining errors are our own.The views expressed herein are those
of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by Nittai K. Bergman and Dirk Jenter. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Employee Sentiment and Stock Option Compensation
Nittai K. Bergman and Dirk Jenter
NBER Working Paper No. 11409
June 2005
JEL No. G3, J3
ABSTRACT
The use of equity-based compensation for employees in the lower ranks of large organizations is a
puzzle for standard economic theory: undiversified employees should discount company equity
heavily, and any positive incentive effects should be diminished by free rider problems. We analyze
whether the popularity of option compensation for rank and file employees may be driven by
employee optimism. We develop a model of optimal compensation policy for a firm faced with
employees with positive or negative sentiment, and explicitly take into account that current and
potential employees are able to purchase equity in the firm through the stock market. We show that
employee optimism by itself is insufficient to make equity compensation optimal for the firm. Any
behavioral explanation for equity compensation based on employee optimism requires two
ingredients: first, employees need be over-optimistic about firm value, and second, firms must be
able to extract part of the implied rents even though employees can purchase company equity in the
market. Such rent extraction becomes feasible if employees prefer the non-traded compensation
options offered by firms to the traded equity offered by the market, or if the traded equity is
overvalued. We then provide empirical evidence confirming that firms use broad-based option
compensation when boundedly rational employees are likely to be excessively optimistic about
company stock, and when employees are likely to have a strict preference for options over stock.
Nittai K. Bergman
MIT Sloan School of Management
E52-410
Cambridge, MA 02142
nbergman@mit.edu
Dirk Jenter
MIT Sloan School of Management
E52-446
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
djenter@mit.edu

1. Introduction
The use of equity-based compensation for employees below the executive rank has been growing rapidly
during the last decade, with broad stock option plans as the most common method. The National Center
for Employee Ownership (2001) estimates that between 7 and 10 million US employees held options in
2000. The popularity of equity-based compensation for employees in the lower ranks of large
organizations is a puzzle for standard economic theory: any positive incentive effects should be
diminished by free rider problems and overshadowed by the cost of imposing risk on employees.4
Holding stock options in their employer exposes employees to price risk which is highly correlated with
their human capital.5 Hence employees should be an inefficient source of capital, at least compared to
well-diversified outside investors.
Several studies show, however, that employees do not value company stock and options as
prescribed by extant theory. For example, employees purchase company stock at market prices for their
401(k) and ESOP plans on a large scale, and especially so after company stock has performed well.6 In
any portfolio selection framework, this observation strongly suggests that employees’ valuation of
company stock is higher than the prevailing market price. With regard to stock options, survey evidence
suggests that many employees have unrealistic expectations about future stock prices and frequently value
their options substantially above Black-Scholes values.7 Motivated by these observations, we analyze
whether the popularity of option compensation for rank and file employees in large firms may be driven
by employee optimism about their employers.8
We develop a model of optimal compensation policy for a firm faced with employees that exhibit
either positive or negative sentiment towards it. We assess the circumstances under which employee
optimism leads to equity-based compensation, and show that employee optimism by itself is insufficient
to make equity compensation optimal for the firm. The crucial insight is that firms compete with financial
markets as suppliers of equity to employees; the ability of employees to purchase equity on their own
restricts firms’ capacity to profit from employees’ optimism, and hence restricts or even eliminates firms’
incentive to compensate with equity. Indeed, employee optimism about traded firm equity is sufficient to
4

See Core and Guay (2001) and Oyer and Schaefer (2005), as well as Lazear (1999).
In the remainder of the paper we use the term “employees” as equivalent to “non-executive employees”.
6
See Benartzi (2001), Liang and Weisbenner (2002), and Huberman and Sengmüller (2004).
7
See Lambert and Larcker (2001) and Hodge, Rajgopal, and Shevlin (2005).
8
The behavioral finance literature suggests that employees are more likely to be optimistic about their firm than
other investors in the equity market: Employees may “root for the home team” and feel loyalty towards their
5

2

make firms indifferent between paying their employees in equity or cash, but it is insufficient, by itself, to
force firms away from cash wages. Firms could simply pay employees a cash amount equal to the market
value of the desired equity, and leave the decision whether to purchase equity up to the employees.
We find that any behavioral explanation for equity compensation based on employee optimism
requires two ingredients: first, employees need be over-optimistic about firm value, and second, firms
must be able to extract part of the rents created by the overvaluation even though employees can purchase
company equity in the market. This second requirement is crucial as, although employees may greatly
overvalue company stock, the firm may be unable to appropriate any of the associated rents simply
because employees can purchase bets on firm value by themselves.
The model analysis further shows that the feasibility and magnitude of firms’ rent extraction is
determined by employees’ willingness to pay for equity compensation – that is, the cash wages that
employees are willing to give up in return for the equity compensation – rather than by employees’
optimistic valuations of the compensation instruments. This willingness to pay is determined in part by
what employees can purchase in the equity market. For example, if employees perceive that the stock
market offers bets on the firm equivalent to the equity compensation which they are being offered by
firms, then regardless of their degree of optimism, their willingness to pay for equity compensation is no
greater than its market price.
Our model presents two channels which make employees willing to overpay for equity
compensation, thereby lowering compensation costs, and causing equity compensation to become optimal
from the firm’s perspective. The first channel is operative if employees, for behavioral or rational reasons,
prefer a non-traded compensation instrument to a position in traded equity of similar fundamental value.
In this case, as monopoly suppliers of the compensation instrument, firms are able to profitably extract the
implied valuation premium from their employees. Put differently, employees’ willingness to pay for the
non-traded compensation instrument will reflect, in part, their preference for the non-traded compensation
instrument over traded equity, and hence their willingness to pay may exceed fundamental value.
This first channel requires that employees view the compensation instruments offered by firms as
superior to the equity offered by the market, even if fundamental values are the same. Comparing nontraded compensation instruments to traded equity is more difficult for employees when firms offer
employer (Baker, Jensen, and Murphy (1988), Cohen (2004)), and employees’ familiarity with their employer may
increase their valuations for employer equity (Huberman (2001)).
3

options, since rational option valuation on the basis of observed stock prices and volatilities is difficult
and beyond the capabilities of most employees. Instead, employees are likely to rely on heuristics and to
value options on the basis of their own or their peers’ past experience with option payoffs. When looking
for alternative methods for investing in their employer, many employees are likely to simply compare the
options offered by the firm to traded shares, which are the most salient alternative offered by the market,
and then use their valuation heuristics to decide which of the two assets they prefer.9 When these
valuation heuristics lead employees to prefer options over traded shares, the first channel is operative and
option compensation becomes optimal for firms. 10
The second channel which makes paying optimistic employees with traded or non-traded equity
optimal comes into effect when the equity is overvalued by the market. If employees are sufficiently
optimistic about firm value, their willingness to pay for traded equity equals the market price of equity.
Thus, overpriced equity can make equity compensation optimal for firms, as firms are able to profit by
effectively selling overvalued equity to their employees. Firms become on the margin indifferent between
paying their employees with equity, and issuing overvalued equity directly into the market.11 With
overvaluation, this is profitable even if the price the firm is able to charge is no higher than the prevailing
market price.
Next, the model allows us to analyze the effects of sentiment-induced equity compensation on firm
profitability and labor market outcomes. Perhaps somewhat surprisingly, positive employee sentiment is
not always beneficial to the firm subject to it. Because employees’ human capital covaries positively with
stock returns, optimistic employees may decide to work at a different firm while still investing in the one
they are optimistic about, thereby avoiding the positive correlation between labor income and financial
wealth. If firm-specific human capital risk is a serious problem, and if the equity market is highly
9

Exchange-traded short-term options are available for a subset of firms, but most employees are unlikely to be
aware of this.
10
Besides bounded rationality, there may be other reasons for employees to strictly prefer the compensation
instruments offered by firms to traded equity. Employees may prefer a levered, option-like position in their
employer and may face borrowing constraints. Alternatively, transaction costs of trading in the stock market may
make the provision of options by the firm more efficient than purchases of equity by employees in the market.
Transaction costs can give an advantage to firms paying with equity, even though this advantage is arguably too
small to explain the massive increases in salary required in non-sentiment firms to retain their employees (Snider,
2000).
11
If firms face downward-sloping demand curves for their shares in the market, and employees are subject to an
endowment effect (so that once granted shares they do not sell them, even though they would not have gone out and
purchased any by themselves), then paying optimistic employees with shares may be cheaper than issuing equity
into the market (Baker, Coval, and Stein (2004)). Alternatively, transaction costs associated with seasoned equity
issues (Smith (1986), Lee, Lochhead, Ritter and Zhao (1996), and Altinkiliç and Hansen (2000)) may make paying

4

efficient, this mechanism can make firms without positive sentiment the beneficiaries of positive
sentiment towards other firms, both in terms of profitability and in terms of firm size. On the other hand,
the model shows that firms subject to positive sentiment are the net beneficiaries of equity compensation
if their employees exhibit a significant preference for non-traded compensation instruments over traded
stock and the level of firm-specific human capital risk is moderate, or when equity markets are inefficient.
The stock option boom of the late 1990s can thus be interpreted as a situation in which firms subject to
both positive employee sentiment and overvalued equity benefited through lower compensation costs, a
larger number of employees, and higher profits.
With the theoretical foundation for the use of equity compensation in place, we empirically test
whether the observable cross-sectional and time-series patterns of broad-based option grants are
consistent with the hypothesis that option compensation is driven by employee sentiment. Our model
predicts that option compensation is used when employees are optimistic about options, and when
employees strictly prefer (non-traded) options to the equity instruments available in the market. To
empirically assess this prediction, we utilize prior literature suggesting that employee sentiment towards
their employer improves with prior stock price performance. In addition, due to the amplified nature of
option payoffs, we expect boundedly rational employees to extrapolate more strongly from past returns
when valuing options than when valuing stock. Thus, as past stock price performance increases, both
employee sentiment and employees’ preference for options over traded equity increase. Our model
therefore predicts that better stock price performance is associated with greater use of stock option
compensation. We make use of the psychology literature on expectation formation and excessive
extrapolation to develop additional testable hypotheses relating stock return patterns and firm
characteristics to employee sentiment and stock option compensation. All hypotheses are developed in
detail in Section 4.
Figure 1 gives a first graphical impression of the evolution of employee option grants in our
sample of 2,171 publicly traded firms from 1992 to 2003. The graph provides some prima facie evidence
in support of the sentiment hypothesis: in close parallel with stock market valuations, per employee
option grants started to rise rapidly in the mid 1990s, peaked in 2000, and dropped by approximately 60%
over the subsequent three years. Using regression analysis, we show that the predictions of the employee
sentiment hypothesis are strongly confirmed by both the cross-sectional and the time series evidence.
Option compensation for non-executive employees is most common among firms with excellent prior
optimistic employees with equity cheaper than issuing equity into the market (Core and Guay (2001), Fama and
French (2003)).
5

stock price performance: the average prior two-year return for companies with granting activity in the
bottom quintile is 7% per annum, compared to 30% p.a. for firms in the top quintile.12 Sorting firms by
prior year returns yields average (median) grants of $21,155 ($2,838) among firms in the top return
quintile compared to only $7,850 ($1,116) among firms in the bottom return quintile. Consistent with
Griffin and Tversky (1992), the effect of past returns on granting activity is non-linear, with granting
activity concentrated among the very best prior performers. Consistent with Benartzi (2001), the positive
relationship between stock returns and option grants becomes stronger when we enlarge the window over
which past returns are measured. In addition, distressed firms which are about to delist for performance
reasons use fewer options, suggesting that bad sentiment prevents these firms from using option
compensation to conserve on cash. Finally, firms which grant more options have faster employment
growth than firms which use fewer or no options, consistent with the predictions of our model.
Next, we test the model prediction that firms are more likely to pay with options when top
executives view their own stock as overvalued. We identify situations in which company leaders are
likely to view their firm’s stock price as too high by looking at firms in which managers have manipulated
earnings and at firms in which top managers sell large amounts of company equity. We measure earnings
manipulation using several versions of the modified Jones model and find that firms likely to have
manipulated earnings upwards grant between 13% and 23% more options than firms with no
manipulation. The insider trading results indicate that firms in which the top five managers cash out grant
11% to 19% more options to their employees than comparable firms, while firms in which top managers
purchase equity for their own accounts grant 17% to 19% less. The last result, however, is not robust to
the inclusion of firm fixed effects, leaving us with mixed evidence for the relationship between executive
trading and employee option compensation.
We examine share repurchase decisions by option granting firms to provide further evidence on
executives’ beliefs on equity mispricing.13 If top executives view their own stock price as too high, they
should be reluctant to repurchase shares at market prices, and should instead consider issuing new shares
into the market. The results show that a sizeable subset of the heaviest option granters in our sample are
also active repurchasers of company equity, rendering it unlikely that market prices are viewed as
substantially overvalued by top executives. We conclude, therefore, that a perception of equity
12

We define non-executive employees as all employees except the five most highly paid executives identified in the
proxy statement. This definition is used by several studies (Core and Guay, (2001); Desai (2002)) and is imposed by
the available data. See section 5 for an extensive discussion.
13
The result that share repurchases are empirically linked to employee option programs has been documented by,
among others, Weisbenner (2000), Kahle (2001), and Bens, Nagar, Skinner, and Wong (2003).
6

overvaluation by these firms’ top executives does not explain their employee option programs. In the
framework of our model, and consistent with the empirical evidence above, this leaves employees’
preference for options over traded equity as a driving force behind option compensation.
Finally, our empirical results provide evidence against the hypothesis that firms with cash
constraints use option compensation in order to minimize cash payouts.14 Core and Guay (2001) argue
that equity compensation is efficient if firms need to raise cash and if the information asymmetries
between firms and their employees are smaller than those between firms and outside investors. We
therefore control for several measures of cash constraints in our empirical analysis. We find that option
grants are strongly positively associated with corporate cash balances and contemporaneous cash flows,
and negatively related to cash outflows for debt service (interest burden, leverage). These findings cast
doubt on the hypotheses that option grants are motivated by asymmetric information and cash constraints.
Instead, the results are again supportive of the idea that employee sentiment determines the ability of
firms to compensate their employees with equity: employees are likely to display more positive sentiment
towards firms with higher cash balances, higher levels of investment, and better investment opportunities,
and worse sentiment towards firms with higher levels of debt and higher interest payments. This
interpretation also helps to explain Fama and French’s (2005) observation that many fast-growing and
highly profitable firms issue equity to employees every year, in apparent contradiction to the MyersMajluf (1984) pecking order theory: We propose that equity based compensation is not driven by firms’
intention to raise funds, but instead by exuberant employees who wish to be paid with options.
Beyond our own empirical results, our model can explain several other empirical regularities. The
equilibrium of the model is consistent with the survey evidence of Ittner, Lambert, and Larcker (2003)
that firms need to compensate with options in order to attract and retain employees. Moreover, anecdotal
evidence from the dot-com era supports the model prediction that an improvement in employee sentiment
towards a firm can lead to a reduction in employment and an increase in compensation in its competitors:
Snider (2000) reports that top law firms were forced to massively increase the salaries for associates to
prevent them from leaving to internet start-ups offering equity-based compensation. In addition, our
model is consistent with the empirical dominance of options over restricted stock as employees are more
likely to overpay for options given that a close substitute to restricted stock is traded in the market.15

14

See, for example, Yermack (1995), Dechow et al. (1996), and Core and Guay (2001).
The greater popularity of options compared to stock is usually attributed to their favorable accounting treatment
(Murphy (2002)).
15

7

Our paper is not the first to consider employee sentiment as a factor in option compensation. The
paper closest to our model is by Oyer and Schaefer (2005), who perform a calibration exercise to assess
the effect of optimism about future returns on employees’ relative valuations of stock and options. In
addition to the novel empirical evidence presented here, the main difference in our approach is that their
analysis does not consider employees’ ability to purchase equity in the market. Our model shows that
financial markets put a crucial constraint on firms’ ability to extract rents from employees, and that
employees’ relative valuations for stock and options are of only secondary importance. Our analysis
differs further from Oyer and Schaefer in that we explicitly model the effect of employee sentiment on
labor market equilibria, taking into account firm-specific human capital risk and allowing for equity to be
mispriced by the market.
In the next section we present a simple model of optimal employee compensation when employees
display sentiment towards firms. We defer a detailed review of the prior literature on employee option
plans and on employees’ psychological biases until section 3. Section 4 translates the model and the prior
literature on the formation of employee sentiment into testable predictions. Section 5 describes the data
and variable definitions, and Section 6 presents the empirical results. The final section summarizes and
concludes.

2. A Simple Model of Optimal Compensation
We develop a simple one-period model in which two firm compete in the labor market and compensate
their employees using cash and equity instruments. Both firms are assumed to be large, so that equity
compensation has no effect on employees’ incentives to exert effort. The two firms, indexed by 1 and 2,
have identical production functions using labor l1 and l2 as sole input to produce output G1 and G2, with
Gi = f(li), and f(0) = 0, f’ > 0, f’(0) =

, and f’’ < 0. The two firms hire employees in a competitive labor

market, each offering a compensation contract consisting of Wi in cash wage, Ni units of traded company
equity, and Mi units of a non-traded equity compensation instrument.
The sole, but crucial, difference between the two equity instruments offered by firms is that one is
traded in the equity market and can be purchased by employees, while the other is not traded and offered
by the firms only. We call the former simply “traded equity” and the latter the “non-traded equity
compensation instrument”. The assumption that each firm competes with the market in offering traded

8

equity, while being, in essence, a monopoly supplier of its own compensation instrument, will drive much
of the model results. To emphasize the fundamental equivalence of the two forms of equity in our model,
aside from their differing tradability, we assume that for each firm, the payoff of a unit of the traded and

~

of the non-traded equity is identical and given by the random variable X i (i ∈ {1,2}), with mean
normalized to 1 and variance σ 2 . Thus, our results are not driven by different payoff structures of the
two instruments. We assume for simplicity that the equity payoffs of the two firms are independent of
each other, and that the number of equity instruments to be issued is small relative to the number of equity
instruments outstanding so that the expected payoff to an instrument does not change when more
instruments are issued.16 The equity market is risk neutral with a riskless interest rate of zero, which
implies that the fair market value of a unit of traded or non-traded equity of either firm is equal to 1.
There is a homogeneous mass of potential employees which we normalize to 1. Employees are riskaverse with mean-variance preferences and have a reservation wage of zero. We assume that potential
employees display sentiment with regard to the expected payoffs to the equity instruments of firm 1.
Parameterizing employee sentiment by s, employees believe the payoff of a unit of traded equity to

~

~

be X 1 + s , and the payoff of a unit of the non-traded compensation instrument to be X 1 + z ( s ) , with z’
greater than 0. Thus, we assume that employees do not necessarily recognize the fundamental equivalence
in payoffs between the non-traded compensation instrument and traded equity, and allow employees to
exhibit differing sentiment towards each.17
Whether employees prefer the non-traded compensation instrument to traded equity, and the
determinants of any preference for one over the other, are ultimately empirical questions, and we consider
both possibilities (i.e. s

z and s < z) in the analysis below. We motivate the assumption that employees

may not recognize the equivalence between traded equity and the non-traded compensation instrument by
the observation that most employees are completely unfamiliar with asset pricing techniques. Deriving the
value of a non-traded compensation instrument from the observed prices and volatilities of traded equity
is potentially difficult and beyond the abilities of employees. Instead, employees are likely to value the
non-traded compensation instrument using simple heuristics such as experienced past payoffs.18 This may

16

This assumption of infinitesimal dilution is similar in spirit to the “infinitesimal new loans” assumption in Stein
(1998).
17
At the cost of some complexity, we could assume that the traded equity and the non-traded compensation
instrument have differing payoffs, and allow employees to exhibit different sentiment towards each. Doing so yields
similar conclusions.
18
See for example Benartzi (2001) and the discussion in Section 4.
9

lead employees to prefer, for example, non-traded employee options to traded shares after a period with
high stock (and even higher option) returns.
In contrast to firm 1, potential employees do not display sentiment towards firm 2. We think of firm
1 as operating in a “new economy” industry subject to sentiment and fads, and of firm 2 as operating in an
“old economy” industry for which sentiment plays no role. Modeling two firms with non-zero sentiment
does not change the results, but greatly complicates the exposition . Similarly, the modeling assumption
that the traded and non-traded equity instruments are identical and linear claims is a convenient
simplification; assuming instead that the non-traded compensation instrument is, for example, an optionlike claim and replacing the traded equity by employees’ preferred trading strategy would deliver similar
results. In this context, the difference in sentiment between traded equity and the non-traded
compensation instrument would measure whether employees prefer the compensation instrument to the
best asset or trading strategy the employees are able to identify in the market.19
The model takes into account that employees bear risk associated with firm-specific human capital
correlated with the equity values of their employer. When working for firm i, employees obtain implicit

~

~ ~

random compensation Yi , with mean 0, variance σ Y2 , and Cov(Yi , X i ) ≡ φ ≥ 0 , so that the level of firmspecific human capital risk is the same in both firms. Finally, we allow for the market price of a unit of
traded equity of firm 1 to deviate from fundamental value because of noise trader sentiment and limited
arbitrage. For simplicity, employee sentiment and noise trader sentiment are identical, although allowing
these to differ does not materially change the results. Formally, a unit of traded firm 1 equity can be
purchased in the market for p(s), where p(0) = 1, and 0

p’(s)

1. In this formulation, p’(s) is a measure

of the effectiveness of arbitrage. With p’(s) = 0 for all s, there are no limits to arbitrage and capital
markets are perfectly efficient. When p’(s) = 1, arbitrage has no effect and prices move one for one with
sentiment.20 As there is no sentiment towards firm 2 equity, its market price equals its fundamental value
of 1.
Potential employees use their subjective beliefs about firm value to evaluate the compensation
contracts offered by each firm (Wi, Ni, Mi) and take into account their ability to purchase traded equity on
their own. For empirical realism, we assume that employees cannot sell the equity they receive as
compensation, though our results are unchanged without this assumption. We begin solving the model by
19

Borrowing constraints and transaction costs may be reasons different from bounded rationality for why employees
are unable to use traded equity to create claims that they prefer to the compensation instruments offered by the firm.

10

calculating the equity purchases of employees with a given compensation package. Since employees are
risk averse and since they value firm 2 correctly, it is easy to see that employees never purchase firm 2
equity on their own. In contrast, traded firm 1 equity may appear cheap to optimistic employees of either
of the two firms. The optimal purchase of firm 1 equity by an employee of firm 1 with compensation
package (W1, N1, M1) is the N̂1 maximizing the following expected, subjective utility:

[

] [

]

[

]

~
~ ~ 1
~
~ ~
Eˆ U ( Nˆ1; W1, N1, s) = Eˆ W1 + ( N1 + Nˆ1) ⋅ X1 + M1 ⋅ X1 + Y1 − Var W1 + ( N1 + Nˆ1) ⋅ X1 + M1 ⋅ X1 + Y1 − p( s ) Nˆ1
2
1
= W1 + ( N1 + Nˆ1) ⋅ (1 + s) − p( s) Nˆ1 + M1(1 + z ( s)) − [( N1 + Nˆ1 + M1)2 ⋅ σ12 + σ Y2 + 2( N1 + Nˆ1 + M1)φ ]
2

(2)

Solving this maximization problem of firm 1 employees, and the corresponding problem of firm 2
employees, yields the following result:
Lemma 1 The optimal purchases of firm 1 equity are given by:

(a) for firm 1 employees:

1 + s − p(s) − φ
Nˆ 11 = Max {0,
− N1 − M 1 }
2

(3)

(b) for firm 2 employees:

1 + s − p( s)
Nˆ 12 = Max {0,
}
2

(4)

σ

σ

Lemma 1 states that upon receiving (W1, N1, M1) from firm 1, employees of firm 1 purchase traded
equity in their employer until they reach their optimal portfolio of

1 + s − p(s) − φ

σ2

units of equity, taking

into account the traded equity and non-traded compensation instruments received from the firm. If an
employee has received more than her desired allocation of firm 1 equity as compensation, she would
prefer to sell units of the traded equity instrument, but is by assumption precluded from doing so. An
increase in sentiment s increases the demand for equity in firm 1 by both sets of employees, despite the
fact that an increase in sentiment also tends to increase the price of traded firm 1 equity. This is because
arbitrageurs cause the increase in price to be smaller than the increase in sentiment (p’(s)

1). Also, as

would be expected, purchases by firm 1 employees are decreasing in firm-specific human capital risk, φ .

20

This price structure is the outcome of standard models of financial markets with noise traders and limited
arbitrage (see, for example, Shleifer (2000)).
11

Since employees of firm 2 do not bear firm 1 firm-specific human capital risk, their purchases of firm 1
equity are independent of φ .
Firms maximize shareholder value by hiring the optimal number of workers and minimizing
compensation costs. In doing so, firms take into account that employees may purchase equity on their
own, and that employees will work for the competing firm if its contract is more attractive:

[

)]

(

~
~
Max E f (l i ) − l i ⋅ Wi + N i ⋅ X i + M i ⋅ X i = f (l i ) − l i ⋅ (Wi + N i + M i )

li , Wi , N i

[

]

[

] [

s.t. Eˆ U (Wi , N i , Nˆ 1i , M i ; s, z ( s ), φ , p ( s )) ≥ 0

(5)

]

Eˆ U (Wi , N i , Nˆ 1i , M i ; s, z ( s ), φ , p ( s )) ≥ Eˆ U (W j , N j , Nˆ 1j , M j ; s, z ( s ), φ , p ( s )) for i ≠ j.
The firms’ valuations of the compensation contracts differ from employees’ valuations because
firms are risk neutral while employees are risk averse, and because employees (may) feel sentiment
towards equity compensation. The difference in risk aversion by itself would make equity-based
compensation inefficient since risk is transferred to the party less able to bear it. However, as will be
shown, this conclusion may be reversed by sufficiently positive employee sentiment.
The equilibrium in this model, described in the following theorem, is given by a pair of
compensation contracts (W1* , N1* , M 1* ) and (W2* , N 2* , M 2* ) offered by the two firms and by the resulting
allocation of labor (l1* , l 2* ) .
Theorem 1 The equilibrium compensation contracts and labor allocations are such that:
(a) The perceived expected utility from working for each firm is equalized:

[

]

[

]

Eˆ U (W1* , N 1* , Nˆ 11 , M 1* ; s, z ( s ), φ , p( s )) = Eˆ U (W2* , N 2* , Nˆ 12 , M 2* ; s, z ( s ), φ , p( s )) ,
where N̂11 and N̂12 are the optimal purchases of traded firm 1 equity by firm 1 and firm 2 employees
respectively given in equations (3) and (4).

12

(b) The allocation of labor between the two firms is such that marginal products of labor equal actual
compensation costs, and the labor market clears.

( )
f '(l ) = W

(i ) f 'l1* = W1* + N 1* + M 1*
(ii )

*
2

*
2

(iii ) l1* + l 2* = 1
(c) The optimal compensation contract offered by firm 2 involves only cash: N 2* = M 2* = 0 .
(d) The optimal compensation contract offered by firm 1 is described by:

(i ) N1* ∈ [0,

s −φ

] and M 1* = 0 if s > φ and z ( s ) ≤ s and p'
(⋅) = 0

σ
s −φ
(ii ) N1* = 2 and M 1* = 0 if s > φ and z ( s ) ≤ s and p'
(⋅) > 0
σ
z ( s) − φ
(iii ) N1* = 0 and M 1* =
if z ( s ) > φ and z ( s ) > s
σ2
(iv) N1* = 0 and M 1* = 0 if s ≤ φ and z ( s ) ≤ φ
Proof

2

See Appendix A.
The intuition for the first three parts of Theorem 1 is straightforward: In equilibrium, the

compensation packages offered by both firms are perceived to be of equal value by potential employees,
which is the only way both firms can simultaneously attract employees (part a).21 Also, as is standard, the
labor market must clear, and firms hire employees up to the point where their marginal product equals the
cost of their employment (part b). Because employees are risk averse and do not exhibit sentiment
towards firm 2, firm 2 never offers equity in its compensation package (part c).
The crux of Theorem 1 is in part d, which describes the optimal compensation contract offered by
firm 1. Part (d.i) of Theorem 1 shows that employee optimism is, by itself, insufficient to make equity
compensation profitable and to force firms away from cash wages. The essential insight is that the firm
directly competes with the stock market when supplying equity to its employees. The availability of
traded equity from the market places a limit on the amount of cash wages employees are willing to forgo
in return for an extra unit of equity provided by the firm. Understanding this willingness to pay for equity

13

is the key to understanding equity compensation. Since employees can buy traded equity on their own,
their willingness-to-pay for traded equity is capped by the market price of equity, independently of their
degree of optimism. Thus, with perfectly efficient markets as assumed in case (d.i), the cost to the firm of
providing a unit of traded equity – its fundamental value – exactly equals the price which employees are
willing to pay. Firm 1 is therefore indifferent between paying with cash and paying with traded equity of
the same market value.
Figure 2a below illustrates the result. The downward sloping curve represents employees’ valuation
for each marginal unit of traded equity; marginal valuation decreases since employees are risk averse, and
hence place lower values on each additional unit of traded equity. Crucially, employees’ willingness to
pay firm 1 for equity, given by the bolded line in the figure, differs from employees’ marginal valuation.
This is because, as long as employees’ marginal valuation exceeds 1, employees are willing to pay only
the market price of 1 for each unit of traded equity. Once employees’ valuation falls below the market
price, their willingness to pay simply equals their valuation. Since the firm’s cost of compensating
employees is 1 per unit of traded equity, it is indifferent between all contracts at which employees’
marginal willingness to pay equals 1. Thus, the firm is indifferent between any contract offering between
zero and s − φ / σ 2 units of traded equity, the latter being the point at which employees’ marginal
willingness to pay drops below the firm’s marginal cost.22 Focusing on employees’ willingness to pay for
equity rather than their valuation shows that the firm is unable to extract from employees any of the
“consumer surplus” represented by the area between employees’ demand schedule and the firm’s fixed
marginal cost. The availability of traded equity at fair prices through the market ensures that the firm
captures none of the behavioral rents created by employees’ optimistic valuations. This result has been
largely overlooked by the prior literature, which has focused on employees’ valuations of equity claims
rather than their willingness to pay for equity.
When markets are not perfectly efficient, in the sense that sentiment does affect equity prices (case
(d.ii)), then firm 1 is no longer indifferent to the amount of traded equity it grants its employees. Because
optimistic employees’ willingness to pay for traded equity goes as high as the (overvalued) market price,
compensating employees with traded equity becomes profitable for the firm, as it is, in effect, equivalent

21

Equilibria in which one firm attracts all the potential employees and the other firm shuts down are ruled out by the
assumption that f '(0) = ∞ .
22
This upper bound equals the number of units of traded equity that an employee would buy on his own when
purchasing equity at its fundamental value of 1.
14

to issuing overvalued equity to the market.23 Figure 2b provides a graphical representation of this case.
Employees’ willingness to pay for traded equity is equal to the maximum of their valuation and the
market price of traded equity, with the latter exceeding the fundamental value of 1 since the market is
inefficient and sentiment is positive. The firm provides equity to its employees as long as employees’
willingness to pay for equity is greater than its fundamental value. The firm thus compensates each
employee with s − φ / σ 2 units of traded equity, and in doing so extracts a portion of employees’
behavioral consumer surplus (given by the shaded trapezoid). The difference between this case and case
(d.i) is that the firm is selling the intra-marginal units of equity to its employees at prices above
fundamental value. Viewing cases (d.i) and (d.ii) of Theorem 1 together, we see that compensating
employees with the traded equity instrument cannot be motivated by employee sentiment alone. A
necessary additional ingredient for compensation with traded equity to be profitable is an overvalued
equity price.

Figure 2b

Figure 2a

1+ s

1+ s
Employee
Valuation

Employee
Valuation

p(s)

1

1
Willingness to Pay

Willingness to Pay

s −φ
σ2

s −φ
σ2

Units of
Traded Equity

Units of
Traded Equity

In contrast, compensating employees with the non-traded equity instrument can be explained by
employee sentiment alone. The crucial difference is that employees’ willingness to pay for non-traded
equity may exceed its fair market value if employees prefer the non-traded equity to traded equity of the
same value.24 Because firm 1 is a monopoly supplier of its non-traded compensation instrument, it is able
to extract any sentiment premium for the compensation instrument over the traded equity (given by z(s) –
23

See footnote 11 for reasons why firms may prefer either equity compensation or direct equity issuance in this
situation.

15

s). Still, the availability of traded equity continues to place a cap on the amount of rents the firm can
extract: the maximum amount optimistic employees are willing to pay for the compensation instrument is
the market price of traded equity plus the employees’ excess valuation of the compensation instrument
over traded equity. For example, if the market price of traded firm 1 equity is $5 per share, and optimistic
employees value the traded equity at $10 and the compensation instrument at $11, then employees are
willing to forgo at most $6 (= $5 + ($11 – $10)) in cash wages for a unit of the compensation instrument
(and only $5 in wages for a unit of traded equity). The sentiment premium for the compensation
instrument over traded equity (z(s) – s) is equal to $1 and is successfully extracted by firm 1. Figure 2c
provides a graphical representation of this case: We assume once more that the market is efficient so that
the price of traded equity is 1. As the discussion above implies, employees willingness to pay for a unit of
non-traded equity is capped at 1 + (z(s) – s), allowing the firm to extract a portion of the employees’
“consumer surplus” (given again by the shaded trapezoid.)

Figure 2c

1+ s

Employee
Valuation

1 + (z(s) – s)
1
Willingness to Pay

z (s) − φ
σ2

Units of
Traded Equity

Finally, part (d.iv) simply states that when neither the sentiment for traded nor non-traded equity is
sufficiently high to overcome the cost of being exposed to firm specific human capital risk, the firm
resorts to compensating its employees with cash only.
Moving beyond the requirements for equity compensation to be part of an optimal contract, the
following theorem demonstrates formally how sentiment affects the profit levels of the two firms in
equilibrium. It is straightforward to show that employment levels (firm size) and profits are strictly
24

Recall that even though options are not traded, their fair market value can be deduced from the price of the
fundamentally equivalent traded shares.
16

increasing functions of each other in our model, and hence identical results apply to employment levels as
well.
Theorem 2

Assume that sentiment for traded and non-traded equity of firm 1 is positive: s > 0 and

hence z(s) > 0. We have that:
(a) If max(s, z) > φ , so that firm 1 pays with equity, firm 1 makes greater profits and hires more
employees than firm 2 if and only if:
max(z – s, 0) + (p(s) – 1) > φ .
(b) If max(s, z)

(6)

φ , so that firm 1 pays in cash, firm 1 makes smaller profits and hires fewer employees

than firm 2.
Proof

See Appendix A.

There are two channels through which firm 1 can profit from positive sentiment. First, the firm extracts a
sentiment premium for the non-traded compensation instrument when such a sentiment premium exists,
as represented by the max(z – s, 0) term in (6). When traded equity is preferred to the compensation
instrument (s > z), this channel shuts down because employees can buy their preferred equity instrument
in the market with no need for the firm. The second channel works through sentiment’s effect on stock
prices as represented by the (p(s) – 1) term in (6). Positive sentiment combined with imperfect arbitrage
leads to overvalued prices, allowing firm 1 to profit by selling overvalued equity to its optimistic
employees. When the equity market is perfectly efficient, p is equal to 1, and this second channel closes.
Firm 1 benefits from positive sentiment, and enjoys higher profits and employment than firm 2, if the
combined overvaluation (p(s) – 1) and sentiment premium (z(s) – s) exceed the level of firm-specific
human capital risk, φ . Firm specific human capital enters into the calculation because firm 1 must
compensate its employees for the correlation between their human capital and their equity holdings in
firm 1.25 All else equal, this places firm 1 at a disadvantage relative to firm 2; indeed, as can be seen from
25

Recall that, because employees exhibit sentiment only towards firm 1, they hold firm 1 but not firm 2 equity in
our model. In general, if employees exhibit positive sentiment towards both firms, the firm with greater positive
sentiment is the one towards which, ceteris paribus, employees have more equity exposure, and therefore the one
which must compensate its employees more for their attendant firm specific human capital risk.
17

part (b) of the theorem, when employees are excited about traded firm 1 equity, but not sufficiently
excited to overcome the firm specific human capital risk (max(s, z)

φ ), then firm 1 has lower profits

than firm 2 since employees prefer to work in firm 2 and invest in firm 1.
In summary, the model has identified two reasons why firms pay optimistic employees with a non-traded
equity compensation instrument: the extraction of a sentiment premium and the issuing of overvalued
equity to employees. In both cases, firms pay with the compensation instrument because employees are
willing to overpay for equity compensation. Beyond the motivation for paying employees with equity, the
model illustrates the effects of sentiment on profitability and labor market outcomes. If firm-specific
human capital risk is a serious problem when working for firm 1, and if the equity market is highly
efficient, firm 2 can be the beneficiary of positive sentiment towards firm 1. On the other hand, when the
non-traded compensation instrument is preferred to traded equity and the level of firm-specific human
capital risk in firm 1 is moderate, or when markets are less efficient, it is firm 1 which benefits from
positive sentiment towards its equity through lower compensation costs, a larger number of employees,
and higher profits. Firm 2 reacts by increasing its wage offer, and still loses employees to firm 1 in
equilibrium.
Thus, which firm benefits from employee sentiment in reality depends on the level of firm specific human
capital risk and the level of stock price misvaluation. The prior empirical and experimental evidence
(Benartzi (2001), Degeorge et al. (2004), Klos and Weber (2004)) suggests that employees tend to ignore
the correlation between human capital and stock returns when evaluating investments. If employees,
rightly or wrongly, act as if firm-specific human capital risk φ is low, then positive sentiment for firm 1
is more likely to benefit firm 1. Market overvaluation of firm 1 stock caused by positive sentiment and
limits to arbitrage advantages firm 1 further.26 In light of our model, the stock option boom of the 1990s’
technology bubble likely represents a case of positive sentiment towards options combined with
overvalued stock prices, which lead to an expansion of technology firms at the expense of other firms.
With the theoretical foundation for the use of equity compensation to optimistic employees
established, we next review the prior empirical and theoretical literature on broad-based equity
compensation. We pay particular attention to the behavioral literature on expectations formation and to

26

A natural extension of our model would allow for employee sentiment to affect also employees’ perception of the
value of their human capital. Positive sentiment towards firm 1 then gives employees a direct preference for
employment in firm 1 over firm 2, allowing, once again, firm 1 to lower its compensation costs and increase its size
and profits relative to firm 2.
18

the empirical literature on employee behavior towards company stock, in order to derive predictions about
where and when employee sentiment is likely to induce equity-based compensation.

3. Literature Review
The question as to why some firms encourage or even mandate holdings of company equity by nonexecutive employees has attracted considerable attention. Oyer and Schaefer (2005) present an extensive
discussion of the potential benefits of stock option usage in firms. They argue that the incentive effects
from options for lower-level employees are likely to be insignificant and outweighed by the cost of
exposing employees to risk.27 They further argue that the vesting structure of option grants helps firms
retain employees. Lazear (1999) and Murphy (2002) have shown that other forms of deferred
compensation that do not expose employees to stock price risk are a more efficient means of providing
retention incentives.28 A large number of papers quantify the deadweight loss from selling company
equity and options to employees, with a general consensus that employees’ rational valuations of
company stock and options are significantly below fair market values.29
Murphy (2002, 2003) proposes that firms perceive the cost of option compensation as low and
prefer it to cash compensation because options bear no accounting charge and incur no outlay of cash. We
view this hypothesis as complimentary to the employee sentiment hypothesis, though we note that it does
not explain the cross-sectional and time series patterns of option compensation presented in Section 6.
Inderst and Müller (2004) show that employee option compensation can be beneficial because it lowers a
firm’s compensation bill in bad states of nature in which owners should have full cash flow rights in order
to induce efficient strategic decisions. Finally, Oyer and Schaefer (2005) argue that option compensation
allows firms to screen for optimistic employees. As we discuss in the introduction, Oyer and Schaefer
focus on employees’ valuations rather than their willingness-to-pay for equity compensation, and they do
not incorporate firms’ competition with the stock market as supplier of equity to employees into their

27

Kruse and Blasi (1997) and Kruse (2002) review the evidence on the hypothesis that equity ownership by
employees helps to align stakeholder interests and find mixed results at best.
28
Oyer and Schaefer (2005) argue on the basis of Oyer (2004) that unvested options serve to index employees'
deferred compensation to their outside opportunities and reduce transaction costs associated with the renegotiation
of compensation.
29
See, for example, Lambert, Larcker, and Verecchia (1991), Murphy (1999), Hall and Murphy (2001), Meulbroek
(2001 and 2002), Ingersoll (2002), Jenter (2002), and Kahl, Liu, and Longstaff (2003).
19

analysis. The model in the previous section demonstrates the importance of the constraints this
competition imposes on firms.30
Core and Guay (2001) are the first to perform a large-sample analysis of non-executive employee
stock option holdings, grants, and exercises. They document the widespread use of stock option grants to
non-executive employees in a sample of 756 firms during 1994 to 1997. They present evidence that grants
are positively associated with investment opportunities and with the difference between cash flow from
investment and cash flow from operations (“cash flow shortfall”). Anderson, Banker and Ravindran
(2000) as well as Ittner, Lambert and Larcker (2001) document that stock option compensation is used
most extensively in “new economy” firms. Interestingly, and consistent with the evidence we present
below, Ittner, Lambert and Larcker (2001) show that new economy companies with greater cash flows
use employee options more extensively, contradicting the notion that options are used to alleviate cash
constraints. Finally, Desai (2002) and Graham, Lang, and Shackelford (2002) consider the effect of
employee stock options on corporate taxes. These studies focus on how option compensation affects
corporate taxes and capital structure decisions, and do not attempt to find the determinants of option
usage by firms.31
There is considerable evidence that employees’ thinking about company stock and employee stock
options is subject to behavioral biases. Benartzi (2001) provides evidence that employees excessively
extrapolate past performance when deciding about company stock holdings in their 401(k) plans.
Employees of firms with the worst stock performance over the last 10 years allocate 10% of their
discretionary contributions to company stock, whereas employees whose firms experienced the best stock
performance allocate 40%. There is no evidence that allocations to company stock predict future
performance.32 Huberman and Sengmüller (2004) analyze 401(k) allocations in a larger sample and find
that employees choose higher inflow allocations and transfers to company stock based on past returns
over a three-year window, and to a much smaller extent based on volatility and business performance.
30

Zhang (2002) argues that employee option compensation occurs when both managers and employees view firm
equity as overvalued. Through the exercise of granted options and sale of the resultant shares employees and the
firm are, in effect, colluding to sell overvalued equity to the market. Employee sentiment does not play a role in the
model as employees’ opinion about firm value is identical to that of managers.
31
Graham, Lang, and Shackelford (2002) point out that, despite the massive size of option-related tax deductions,
the net effect of option compensation is most likely a revenue gain for the U.S. Treasury because of the income
taxes that employees pay at exercise. Therefore, option compensation cannot be explained as a tax-saving strategy.
See also Core and Guay (2001).
32
Benartzi (2001) also conducts a survey with Morningstar.com visitors asking them to rate the performance of their
companies’ stock over the last five years and the next five years. Despite the fact that individual stock returns are
largely unpredictable, the respondents’ past and future ratings where positively correlated with a ρ of 0.52,
consistent with excessive extrapolation.
20

Liang and Weisbenner (2002) show that the average share of participants’ discretionary 401(k)
allocations in company stock is almost 20%, and increasing in prior stock price performance.
The psychology and behavioral finance literature provides possible explanations for the observed
biases in employee thinking about company equity: excessive extrapolation can be attributed to the
representativeness heuristic described by Tversky and Kahneman (1974). They show that people expect
that a sequence of events generated by a random process will resemble the essential characteristics of that
process even when the sequence is short. In an extension, Griffin and Tversky (1992) document that
people tend to focus on the strength or extremeness of the evidence provided, while giving insufficient
regard to its weight or predictive power. People tend to see trends and patterns even in random sequences,
and expect especially extreme sequences to continue. In the context of company equity, the
representativeness heuristic may lead employees to expect extreme good and extreme bad price
performance to continue into the future.
Finally, there is substantial evidence that employees tend to underestimate, or even ignore, the
correlation between their firm-specific human capital and firm stock returns when making investment
decisions. Benartzi (2001), Huberman and Sengmüller (2004), and Liang and Weisbenner (2002)
document that employees invest significant portions of their retirement funds in 401(k) plans voluntarily
into company stock. Degeorge et al. (2004) show that during the partial privatization of France Telecom,
employees with high firm-specific human capital risk invested more in their employer’s equity.
Consistent with this, Klos and Weber (2004) report evidence from laboratory experiments showing that
investors fail to take background risk into account when making investment decisions. The empirical
evidence, therefore, suggests that firm-specific human capital risk is unlikely to play an important role in
the design of optimal employee compensation schemes, or in terms of the notation of our model, φ is
likely to be low.33

4. Empirical Predictions
The model in Section 2 predicts that equity-based compensation is used when employees are optimistic
about the non-traded equity compensation instrument and value it above its fair market value (z(s) > 0),
and when employees strictly prefer the non-traded compensation instrument to the equity available in the
33

An alternative interpretation suggested by Huberman (2001) is that concerns about firm-specific human capital
risk are counterbalanced and outweighed by employees’ desire to invest into firms they are “familiar” with.
21

market (z(s) > s). Greater employee exuberance about firm equity should therefore make equity
compensation more likely and lead to a higher percentage of equity compensation in total pay.
Empirically, stock options are the most common form of equity compensation for rank and file
employees, and correspond well to the non-traded compensation instrument in our model: for most firms,
employee options are not traded and hence employees are unable to directly observe market prices for
them, and their valuation as a function of observable prices and volatilities is sufficiently difficult to
exceed the abilities of almost all employees.34 Most employees are likely to simply compare the
compensation instrument offered by their employer to traded shares, which are the simplest alternative
available in the market, and then use valuation heuristics to decide which of the two assets they prefer.
The results in Benartzi (2001) and Huberman and Sengmüller (2002) suggest that prior stock returns are a
major determinant of employees’ willingness to invest in company stock, with sentiment improving with
prior stock price performance. We further conjecture that other measures of high and increasing firm
quality, like investment, cash balances, and R&D, are positively correlated with employee sentiment,
while any signs of distress (high leverage, high interest burden) are associated with worsening sentiment.
Finally, we make use of the psychology literature on expectations formation reviewed above to
understand the factors determining excessive extrapolation.
Learning and extrapolating from past option payoffs is an obvious heuristic for employees with
no knowledge of rational option valuation. Due to the amplified nature of option payoffs, employees are
likely to extrapolate more strongly from past performance when valuing options than when valuing stock
or any other simple traded equity position which they recognize. Thus, after periods with high stock
returns, employees are likely to view options as more desirable than the traded equity they see in the
market. On the other hand, employees are likely to assign low values to options after periods with low
stock returns. In terms of the notation of our model, we expect employee sentiment for the non-traded
compensation instrument (options) to react more strongly to past performance than employee sentiment
for traded equity (z’(s) > 1), and thus the sentiment premium of options over traded equity to increase in
past performance (z(s) – s larger after good performance). Finally, the empirical evidence that employees
tend to ignore correlations between human capital and stock returns suggests that firm-specific human
capital risk φ is unlikely to significantly dampen employees’ demand for equity compensation after
periods of high stock returns (z(s) – s > φ ).

34

Single-stock options for some firms are traded. They are usually of much shorter maturity than the options used

22

The observation that employees’ private valuations of company equity increase in past
performance (and for many rise above the market price), combined with the hypothesized increase in the
sentiment premium of options over stock in past performance, leads to our first testable hypothesis:
H1: Firms should be more likely to grant options and should grant more options to employees
after high stock returns.
Griffin and Tversky (1992) document that people tend to give excessive weight to extreme
information while giving insufficient regard to its weight or predictive power. We therefore conjecture
that the relationship between past performance and employee sentiment is non-linear, with employee
exuberance associated mostly with extraordinarily good returns. Extraordinarily good returns are further
amplified in option payoffs, making it likely that option sentiment exceeds sentiment for traded equity.
This leads to our second hypothesis:
H2: Options grants should be non-linearly related to past performance and concentrated among
the very best past performers.
Benartzi (2001) documents that the effect of past returns on employees’ purchases of company
stock increases in the time frame over which past returns are measured. We therefore conjecture that the
path of past returns is important in determining employee sentiment towards the firm, and propose that
employee sentiment will be especially positive following a series of years with high stock returns. This
leads to our third hypothesis:
H3: Firms should be most likely to grant options and use more options as compensation after the
stock price has done well over several years.
While positive sentiment can make option compensation the profit-maximizing choice, negative
sentiment makes option compensation clearly inferior to cash compensation. We conjecture that
employees in firms in financial or economic distress are unlikely to be exuberant about the prospects for
company equity, and indeed are likely to exhibit negative sentiment towards it. Thus, even though
distressed firms are likely to face binding cash constraints and would like to compensate their employees
with equity, they will be unable to do so. Our fourth hypothesis is therefore:

for compensation, and few employees are likely to be aware of their existence.
23

H4: Firms in financial or economic distress should be less likely to pay their employees with
options.
Our model of employee compensation predicts that firms which pay with equity are able to lower
their labor costs and expand relative to firms which do not benefit from positive sentiment, as long as
firm-specific human capital risk is not too much of a concern for employees. The empirical evidence
suggests that employees tend to ignore correlations with human capital risk when evaluating investments.
Hence our fifth hypothesis predicts a positive link between option compensation and employment growth:
H5: Firms which pay their employees with options are characterized by faster growth in
employment compared to firms which do not pay with options.
Finally, our model predicts that firms are more likely to pay their employees with equity when the
top managers of the firm view the stock price as too high. With or without sentiment premium for
options, managers may use actual or perceived inside information about firm value when deciding on the
optimal compensation mix. This leads to our final hypothesis:
H6: Firms are more likely to use options and grant more options to employees whenever
managers have reason to view the stock as overvalued.
The next section describes the data sets we use to test these hypotheses.

5. Data Sources and Variable Definitions
5.1 Data Sources
Our main source of data on employee option grants is the Standard & Poors ExecuComp database. The
ExecuComp data provides information on option grants to the five highest-paid executives of each firm in
the S&P 500, S&P MidCap, and S&P SmallCap stock indexes for the 1992 to 2003 period. Desai (2002)
has extrapolated this data to firm-wide option grants by making use of the requirement that firms report
the share of total grants represented by grants to the top five executives. In particular, the ExecuComp
variable “pcttotop” reports the percentage which each grant to executives represents of all options granted
to employees. Hence, each reported executive grant provides an estimate of the number of options granted
to all employees during the fiscal year. We use the mean of these estimates as a proxy for the number of

24

options granted to all employees in a given firm-year. We drop all firm-years in which the sample
standard deviation of these estimates is greater than 10 percent of the mean.
As is standard in the literature, we estimate the number of options granted to non-executive
employees by subtracting the number of options granted to the top five executives, taken from
ExecuComp, from the number of options granted to all employees. We then apply the Black-Scholes
(1973) formula to value the options granted to non-executive employees. We do not know the exercise
and stock prices at which the non-executive options are granted. To minimize the measurement error from
estimating these prices, we assume that 1/12th of the total number of options granted during the year are
granted each month, and use the midpoint of the month high and month low stock prices as the exercise
and strike price.35 The estimates of dividend yield and stock price volatility used in the Black-Scholes
formula are taken from ExecuComp.36 The risk-free rate is set to 6 percent, and option maturity is
uniformly set to ten years.37 Finally, we calculate the per-employee value of options granted by dividing
the value of options granted to all non-executive employees by the average of the beginning-of-the-year
and end-of-the-year number of employees.
There are obvious weaknesses to our data on employee stock options. We obtain only an estimate
of option grants to non-executive employees, and we do not have information on the number of options
outstanding, option exercises, and the number of options expired, forfeited or cancelled. Furthermore, we
have to estimate the strike and grant prices of the options grants, introducing noise into the grant
valuations. Finally, since we extrapolate from executive grants to employee grants, we miss firm-years in
which no executives received options. This also implies that firms which use options for neither top
executives nor rank-and-file employees are incorrectly coded as missing, rather than zeros. This
introduces a sample selection bias which we discuss in detail in Section 6.5. An additional weakness of
the data, common to all studies on this topic, is the absence of information on how deep the options are
spread into the organization.

35

Our results do not materially change when the price at which the options are valued and their exercise price are
taken to be the midpoint of the year high and year low stock price, or the midpoint of the year open and close stock
prices. The results are similarly unchanged when the per-option value of the executive options reported in
ExecuComp is used as estimate of the value of the employee options.
36
If dividend yield data is unavailable on ExecuComp, we calculate it as the average dividend yield over the
previous two years using Compustat data. If stock price volatility is unavailable on ExecuComp, we calculate it from
daily stock return data over the previous two years taken from CRSP. Volatility estimates are censored at 80 percent
to eliminate outliers.

25

To check the robustness of our approach to estimating option grants, and to assess the effect of
sample selection bias on our results, we repeat our analyses on a smaller, hand-collected data set on
employee option grants. We obtain the data on option grants collected from annual reports by Core and
Guay (2001) for the years 1995 to 1997 for a subset of the companies in our full sample.38 We then extend
the Core and Guay data through further hand collection to the years 1998 to 2000. As a first robustness
check, we calculate the correlation between our measure of option grants with the more precise measure
obtained from the hand-collected data. The correlation coefficient is 0.93, providing some assurance that
measurement problems are not severe. A more detailed analysis of the hand collected data is presented in
Section 6.5. All the results obtained with the full data set are robust and usually stronger in the handcollected data.
5.2 Variable Definitions
Our main measure of past performance (and hence sentiment) in year t is the annualized stock return,
taken from CRSP, over the previous two years calculated from the beginning of year t – 2 to the end of
year t – 1. For brevity, we call this return the prior two-year return. We also control for contemporaneous
year t stock returns in all our regressions, but note that a positive relation between contemporaneous
returns and the value of option grants could be purely mechanical: if the number of at-the-money options
to be granted is determined at the beginning of the fiscal year, then high stock returns during the year lead
to high grant prices and hence high Black-Scholes values.
In all our regressions we attempt to control for corporate cash constraints. Measuring whether a
firm is cash constrained is a difficult task (Kaplan and Zingales, 1997) and we utilize several composite
measures of cash constraints developed in other papers as well as their disaggregated components. We use
two measures of financial constraints proposed by Core and Guay (2001): cash flow shortfall and interest
burden. Cash flow shortfall is the three-year average of common and preferred dividends plus cash flow
used in investing activities less cash flow from operations, all divided by total assets. Interest burden is
the three-year average of interest expense scaled by operating income before depreciation, with interest
burden set to one when interest expense is greater than operating income before depreciation. A third
measure of financial constraints we use has been developed by Kaplan and Zingales (1997) and adopted

37

The last assumption likely overstates the estimated life of the options since employees tend to exercise options
early (Huddart and Lang (1996)) and because some options are forfeited. Assuming shorter maturities of five or
seven years does not change our results.
38
Core and Guay (2001) collect data from annual reports for 1997 for all firms (excluding banks) with fiscal year
1997 data in the ExecuComp database. We are grateful to John Core and Wayne Guay for kindly making their data
available to us.
26

to large-sample empirical work by Lamont, Polk and Saa-Requejo (2001). We follow Baker, Stein and
Wurgler (2003) and calculate the Kaplan Zingales (KZ) measure of financial constraints as:

KZ it = −1.002

CFit
DIVit
C
− 39.368
− 1.315 it + 3.139 LEVit + 0.283Qit .
Ait −1
Ait −1
Ait −1

(6)

Here CFit is cash flow, Ait-1 is lagged assets, DIVit is cash dividends, Cit is cash balances, LEVit is
leverage, and Qit is the market value of equity plus assets minus the book value of equity all over assets.
All ingredients of KZ are winsorized at the 1% level before the measure is constructed. A conceptual
difficulty with the KZ measure is that it contains both measures of the availability of funds (CF, DIV, C,
LEV) and a measure of investment opportunities in Q. Following Baker, Stein and Wurgler (2003), we
construct a cropped KZ measure, called KZ4, which excludes Q. The construction of the financial
constraint measures is described in detail in Appendix B.
Following the previous literature, we further control for investment opportunities, hypothesizing
that employees in firms with higher growth opportunities will be granted more options. This could be the
case because providing incentives to employees is more important with greater growth opportunities,
because growth firms need to preserve cash, or because employee sentiment is higher in growth firms. As
in Core and Guay (2001), we use the three-year average of R&D scaled by assets as a proxy for growth
opportunities. We include Q as an alternative measure of growth opportunities in most regressions.
Finally, we also control for sales as measure of firm size, and use a long-term debt indicator as a proxy for
access to debt markets.
Our model predicts that managers’ perception of misvaluation is a determinant of employee option
grants. To assess the effect of managerial inside information on compensation policy, we examine the
relationship between option grants to non-executive employees and earnings manipulation. We use
discretionary current accruals as calculated in Teoh, Welch and Wong (1998 a,b) from changes on the
balance sheet as our first measure of earnings manipulation. This measure has been criticized by Hribar
and Collins (2001) who show that it is prone to misinterpret merger effects and foreign currency
adjustments as earnings manipulation.

Hribar and Collins propose a more robust calculation of

discretionary accruals using information from the cash flow statement, and we use their approach to
construct two additional measures of discretionary accruals. The calculations are described in detail in
Appendix B. Briefly, both methods predict “normal” accruals using a year-by-year industry level
regression model. The regression residual is considered to have been “managed” and is called

27

discretionary current accruals (DCAs). After calculating DCAs for all firm years, we label firms with
discretionary accruals in the top 10% of all firm-years as “manipulators”.
We use insider trading by managers as a second indicator of manager opinion about fundamental
firm value. Managerial insider trading is calculated as in Jenter (2005) from data on managerial stock
ownership reported in the ExecuComp database. The net number of shares bought or sold by each
executive in a given year is derived as the change in stock holdings less the number of shares acquired
through option exercises and stock grants. Dollar values are calculated by multiplying the number of
shares acquired (or sold) by the year-end stock price. We scale each manager’s trades by her total
exposure to company equity, defined as the sum of her stock and option holdings at the beginning of the
year plus stock and option grants during the year. We then average the scaled insider trades for all
managers in a firm-year to obtain a firm-wide measure of managers’ insider trades.
Finally, we use two measures of open-market share repurchases based on Stephens and Weisbach
(1998) and Jagannathan, Stephens, and Weisbach (2000) as further indicators of manager opinion about
fundamental firm value. The first measure is based on the Compustat data item “Purchases of Common
and Preferred Stock”. Similar to Kahle (2001) and Grullon and Michaely (2002), we subtract decreases in
the value of preferred stock to minimize the effect of redemptions of preferred stock. The second measure
of repurchases uses the change in the number of shares outstanding from CRSP, which we adjust for
stock grants to top executives and for option exercises. The details of the variable construction are
described in Appendix B.
5.3 Sample Screens
Our initial sample comprises all 2,598 firms from the ExecuComp database in an unbalanced panel
from 1992 to 2003, and includes 21,732 firm-years. We exclude the 127 firm-years for which our
estimate of the total number of options granted is smaller than the options granted to the top five
executives as reported in ExecuComp. We eliminate 1,064 observations for which the standard deviation
of our estimates of the number of options granted in a given firm-year is greater than 10% of the mean
estimate. Finally, we exclude firm-years because information on at least one of the variables used in our
base regressions is missing.39 The final data set used in our base regressions comprises 2,171 firms and

39

The 7,643 deleted firm-years are dropped for the following, non-exclusive reasons: 4,815 because one of the
variables necessary to calculate the per-employee dollar value of option grants is missing, 1,580 because KZ cannot
be calculated, 1,357 because KZ4 cannot be calculated, 1,484 because the average cash flow shortfall is missing,
2,323 because the average interest burden is missing, 394 because Q is missing, 895 because contemporaneous stock
28

12,898 firm-years. Similar screens are applied to the hand-collected data set assembled by Core and Guay
(2001) and extended by ourselves. The data set is a subset of our full sample and runs from 1995 to 2000.
The final hand-collected sample contains 889 firms and 4,279 firm years.
Table 1 provides some descriptive statistics for the full sample. The firms in our sample have a
median equity value of $1.083 billion, median sales of $1.073 billion, and median assets of $1.067
billion. The median number of employees is 5,400. Turning to option grants, the median firm grants
options equal to 1.8% of shares outstanding per year. Employees ranking below the top-five executives
receive 71% of the options granted. The median per-employee option grant is $1,029 per year for nonexecutive employees, with a mean of $8,818.40

6. Empirical Results
As an initial test of the employee sentiment hypothesis, we assess the relationship between employee
option grants and past stock returns in a univariate setting. We sort firms by the value of their peremployee option grants into quintiles and calculate average stock returns over the previous two years for
each quintile. Panel A of Table 2 reports results consistent with the sentiment hypothesis: mean (median)
prior stock returns are 7 percent (7 percent) for firms with option grants in the lowest quintile and rise to
30 percent (19 percent) for firms with grants in the highest quintile. Similarly, when sorting firms by prior
returns in Panel B, firms in the lowest return quintile grant options with a mean (median) value of $7,850
($1,116) while firms with prior returns in the top quintile grant options worth $21,155 ($2,838). Hence,
consistent with out first hypothesis, intensive use of non-executive options is preceded by extraordinarily
good performance.
To better control for other cross-sectional determinants of employee option grants, we turn to a
regression framework. Our baseline specification is:

Ln(1 + dollar value of

grants per employee) it = β 0 + β1retit −1 + β 2 X it + it.

(7)

returns are missing, 2,380 because stock returns for the prior two years are missing, 103 because sales are missing,
117 because the long-term debt indicator is missing, and 4 because average R&D is missing.
40
The average grant values are likely to be overstated because of sample selection bias. We discuss this issue in
detail in Section 6.5.
29

Here retit-1 is a measure of a firm’s past stock return, and X is a vector of firm characteristics. We estimate
the baseline regression with several measures of past returns and include several measures of financial
constraints. All regressions include industry fixed effects based on 3-digit SIC codes as well as year fixed
effects unless explicitly stated otherwise.
6.1 The effect of past performance on employee option grants
We first test the hypothesis that employee option grants increase in prior stock price performance. In each
column of Table 3 a different measure of financial constraints is included as explanatory variable, and
past performance is measured as the stock return over the previous two years. The cash constraint
measures used are KZ, KZ4, average cash flow shortfall, and interest burden. In all specifications, we
further control for log sales and R&D, as well as a dummy variable measuring whether the firm has long
term debt.
The first hypothesis is strongly supported by the data. In all specifications in Table 3 the coefficient
on prior stock returns is positive and highly statistically and economically significant: a 10 percentage
point increase in stock returns is associated with a 5.3 to 8.6 percent increase in the value of options
granted. The t-statistics, calculated using robust standard errors with clustering at the firm level, are
between 12.29 and 18.93. Employee option grants are used more intensively by firms with better past
stock price performance. The coefficient on contemporaneous stock returns is positive and significant in
the first specification without Q, and becomes insignificant when the highly collinear Q is included.
Since the relationship between grant values and contemporaneous returns may be purely mechanical and
driven by inertia in the contracting technology, we focus our analysis on past stock performance.
Including firm fixed effects (Table 4) does not materially change the results.
Our second hypothesis is that the relationship between stock price performance and employee
sentiment should be non-linear, so that option grants are concentrated among the very best performers. To
allow for a non-linear relationship, we sort firms by their prior performance into quintiles and assign a
dummy variable to each quintile. Cut-off levels are constructed using the entire pooled sample. Repeating
the analysis from Table 3 while replacing the prior return variable with the performance quintile dummies
shows that the effect of past returns on option grants is indeed highly non-linear (Table 5): in each
specification the effect of moving from quintile one to quintile four is smaller than the effect of moving
from quintile four to quintile five.

30

To test our third hypothesis that firms should be most likely to grant options to employees after the
stock price has done well for several years, we sort firms into quintiles based on prior one, two, three,
four, and five year returns. From here on we use a base regression specification which includes the usual
set of firm characteristics and KZ4, cash flow shortfall, and interest burden as comprehensive measures of
financial constraints. Table 6 shows that options are granted in a manner consistent with the results in
Benartzi (2001) and the employee sentiment hypothesis: the effect of past returns on option grants is
increasing in the window over which the past returns are calculated. When sorting on previous one-year
returns, we find option grants which are 29 percent larger in the highest return quintile compared to the
lowest quintile. This difference increases to 67 percent when sorting on previous 3-year returns, and to 87
percent when sorting on previous 5-year returns.
6.2 The effect of cash constraints on employee option grants
Several measures of cash constraints are included as control variables in Tables 3 to 6. Examining the
coefficients on these composite measures of cash constraints produces conflicting results. Cash flow
shortfall is consistently positively related to grants, suggesting that cash poor firms use more options to
pay their employees. On the other hand, interest burden is consistently negatively related to grants,
implying that cash constrained firms use fewer option grants. Finally, the KZ measure is not significantly
related to grants.
To better understand the effect of cash constraints on firms’ option granting behavior, we analyze
the relationship between option grants and each of the components of the composite measures separately.
The results are presented in Table 7. We find that the value of option compensation per non-executive
employee is increasing in cash balances, increasing in cash flow, increasing in Q, and decreasing in
leverage.41 Firms with large amounts of cash and high cash flows grant more options, while firms with
more need for cash to service debt grant fewer options.42 On the other hand, we also find that option
compensation is decreasing in dividends, and increasing in cash flow used for investment activities.
Taken together, these results are supportive of the sentiment hypothesis: variables which are arguably
positively related to employee sentiment (Q, cash balances, cash flow, investment) predict greater use of
option grants, while variables negatively related to sentiment like leverage and interest burden are
associated with less use of options. Since composite measures of cash constraints include both
41

The same positive relationship between cash balances and option grants shows up in the univariate results in
Table 2C. Firms in the lowest cash balance quintile pay a mean (median) option value of $2,274 ($524) to each
employee while those in the highest cash quintile pay a mean (median) value of $30,111 ($10,525).

31

components which are positively related to sentiment as well as components negatively related to
sentiment, these results explain why different composite measures of cash constraints show conflicting
correlations with option grants.43
6.3 Employee option grants in distressed firms
The fourth hypothesis states that firms in or close to financial or economic distress should be less likely to
pay their employees with options, as employees of these firms are unlikely to be exuberant about the
prospects for company stock. Thus, even though distressed firms are likely to face binding cash
constraints and would prefer to compensate their employees with equity, if employee sentiment plays an
important role in the ability to use equity compensation, they will be unable to do so.
To test this hypothesis we construct an indicator variable for firms which delist for performance
reasons in the first year after the end of the current fiscal year, and a second indicator variable for firms
which delist in the second year after the end of the current fiscal year. Performance-related delistings are
identified through CRSP delisting codes in the 400 to 591 range. We propose that these firms have both
employees with low sentiment and an urgent need to conserve cash. Table 8 shows the results of
regressing the log of per-employee option grants on the two delisting dummies and the same control
variables as in the base regression. In support of the sentiment hypothesis, firms which are about to delist
grant significantly fewer options to their employees. In the specifications with industry fixed effects,
firms which are one year from delisting grant between 72 and 74 percent less to their employees than
firms which do not delist, while firms which are two years from delisting grant 40 percent less, with all
coefficients highly significant. The coefficients are smaller and less significant when firm fixed effects
are included, indicating that firms one year from delisting grant between 48 (p-value 0.088) and 54 (pvalue 0.055) percent less, and firms two years from delisting 30 percent less than firms which do not
delist (p-value 0.123).44

42

An alternate explanation for the negative relation between firm leverage and option grants is that firms substitute
the tax shield obtained from employee option exercises for debt tax shields. For a discussion of this argument see
Graham, Lang, and Shackelford (2002).
43
The results are unchanged when we repeat the analysis using firm fixed effects, with the positive effect of cash
flow on option grants strengthened. These results are available from the authors upon request.
44
This analysis does not necessarily generalize to all distressed firms. We identify firms which are subsequently
delisted, i.e. most likely firms which did not manage to recover, and show that they were unable or unwilling to
conserve cash by paying their employees in options. It is possible that other firms were able to substitute options for
cash pay and to avert the delisting.
32

6.4 Employee Options and Growth in Employment
Our fifth hypothesis predicts a positive link between employment growth and employee option
compensation. We define employment growth as the percentage change in the number of employees
relative to the number of employees at the beginning of the fiscal year. The employment growth variable
is winsorized at the 1 percent level to dampen the effect of outliers.
Table 9 shows the results of adding employment growth to the base regression. Consistent with the
model predictions, employment growth and stock option grants are strongly linked, even when controlling
for past and contemporaneous stock returns. An increase of ten percentage points in employment growth
translates into 7.1 percent larger per-employee option grants in a cross-sectional regression, and into 3.9
percent larger per-employee option grants with firm fixed effects.
6.5 Sample Selection Bias and Robustness Checks
In this section we perform several tests to assess the robustness of the empirical results presented in
the previous sections. The ExecuComp database encompasses a wide range of firms with employment
size ranging from 5 to 1.4 million. Paying all or the majority of employees with stock options in a firm
with few employees can be fully justified as a means to provide incentives to maximize firm value. This
raises the concern that our previous results may be driven by small firms. Table 10 shows that our base
regression results are robust to restricting the sample to firms with more than 500 and to firms with more
than 1,000 employees. A second concern with our analysis is that linear regressions may not be
appropriate because the dependent variable is censored at zero. Employee option grants cannot become
negative, suggesting that a censored (Tobit) regression model is the appropriate choice. Table 11 repeats
the base regression using a Tobit set-up. The coefficient estimates are quite similar to the linear
regressions in Tables 3 and 4, even though, as would be expected from the censoring- induced attenuation
bias, the Tobit coefficients are generally larger and more significant than the coefficients from the linear
regressions.
A more serious concern is that our calculation of employee option grants from the ExecuComp
database requires that at least one top executive receives an option grant in any given year. We lose firmyears in which no top executive receives options, leading to a sample selection problem. We record a
missing observation both for firms which do not grant options to anyone, and for firms which grant
options to rank-and-file employees but not to top executives. This sample selection biases the estimates of
average per-employee grants in Table 1 upwards since firms which do not grant options to anyone drop
out. The second effect of the sample selection is that the estimated relation between past performance and

33

employee option grants is likely understated. Casual inspection of the data suggests that option grants to
top executives tend to drop to zero after bad stock price performance. Hence we lose more observations
after bad performance, which is when we expect employee stock option grants to decline due to
worsening sentiment.
The only method to confirm that the sample selection bias does indeed work in the direction
suggested is to use hand-collected data which contains valid observations on firms which do not grant
options to their top executives. We use the data set collected by Core and Guay (2001) for the time period
1995 to 1997 and extended by us to the years 1998 to 2000. The firms in this data set are a subset of the
firms in the ExecuComp database. We run the base regression of per-employee option grants on the usual
explanatory variables and present the results in Table 12. Regressions (1) and (2) are linear regressions
corresponding to the analyses in Tables 3 and 4, while regressions (3) and (4) are Tobit regressions
corresponding to the analyses in Table 11. As hypothesized, the estimated effects of prior performance on
employee option grants are larger than the estimates from the full data set: a 10 percentage point increase
in past returns is associated with an increase in employee option grants of between 7.4 and 10.9 percent.
For comparison, Panel B shows the same regressions for the same set of firms and the same sample
period but using options data extrapolated from ExecuComp rather than the hand-collected data.
6.6 Earnings Manipulation and Insider Trading by Managers
Our model predicts that firms are more likely to use employee options when executives view the
stock price as too high. To test this hypothesis we identify two situations in which we can make
inferences about managers’ opinion about the fundamental value of the firm in relation to its market
value. One such situation is when managers manipulate earnings to boost the current stock price, in which
case managers have reason to view their stock as overvalued. We measure earnings manipulation using
three different measures of discretionary accruals, based on Teoh et al.’s (1998 a,b) cross-sectional
adaptation of the modified Jones (1991) model. The first measure of discretionary accruals is based on
current accruals calculated from year-to-year changes of the balance sheet. Hribar and Collins (2001)
propose two alternative definitions of accruals which are computed directly from the cash flow statement
and therefore not affected by non-operating changes in accounts. The details of the calculations are
explained in Appendix B. Firms with discretionary accruals in the top 10 percent of all firm-years in our
sample are classified as likely manipulators. Table 13 shows the base regression with added indicator
variables for earnings manipulators. Consistent with our hypothesis, option compensation is strongly
positively associated with earnings manipulation. Controlling for industry effects or firm-fixed effects,
earnings manipulation predicts a 13 to 23 percent higher value of option grants per employee.

34

Our second measure of managers’ views on firm value is insider trading. We identify firms with
high insider selling and firms with high insider buying using the methodology in Jenter (2005). We label
firms in which managers’ normalized inside buying is in the top 20 percent of all firm-years as firms with
“buying managers” and firms in which managers’ inside selling is in the top 20 percent as firms with
“selling managers”. The regression results for the base regression with indicator variables for buying and
selling managers, as well as indicators for earnings manipulation, are presented in Table 14. Across all
specifications with industry fixed effects, we consistently find that firms in which the top five managers
cash out grant between 11 and 19 percent more options to their employees than comparable firms, while
firms in which top managers purchase equity for their own account grant between 17 and 19 percent less
to employees. These results suggest that top executives increase option grants to rank-and-file employees
when they regard the stock as overvalued, and reduce grants when they regard the stock as undervalued.
At the same time, though, the relation between insider trading and employee option grants vanishes when
firm fixed effects are included. This suggests that it is cross-firm variation in insider trading, rather than
changes in insider trading for a given firm, which is correlated with employee option grants. Hence there
is a concern that the correlation between insider trading and employee option grants may be due to
unobserved differences across firms which are not picked up by our control variables.
Finally, we examine share repurchase decisions by option granting firms to provide further
evidence on executives’ beliefs on equity mispricing. Prior literature has shown that many firms which
use broad-based option compensation are also repurchasing shares in the market. If top executives view
their own stock price as too high, they should be reluctant to repurchase shares at market prices, and
should instead consider issuing new shares into the market. Weisbenner (2000), Kahle (2001), and Bens,
Nagar, Skinner, and Wong (2003) argue that firms with employee option programs repurchase shares to
offset the dilution of earnings-per-share (EPS) resulting from employee option grants and exercises.
Observing that firms in the same year both grant options to employees and repurchase shares from the
market would therefore indicate that any perception of stock prices overvaluation is, at the very least, not
strong enough to overcome executives’ aversion against EPS dilution.
We use two measures of share repurchases for our analyses. The first measure uses the Compustat
data item “Dollar Value of Common and Preferred Repurchased”, from which we subtract any decreases
in the value of preferred stock in the same year. The second measure of repurchases uses the change in the
number of shares outstanding from CRSP, which we adjust for stock grants to top executives and for
option exercises. The need for option exercise data implies that the analysis using the second measure is

35

restricted to the smaller, hand-collected sample described in Section 5.1.45 Table 15 shows share
repurchase activity as a function of employee option grants. Neither the incidence nor the intensity of
open market share repurchases show a strong relationship with employee option grants. Even among the
most intensive users of employee option grants, 38% to 51% of firms are repurchasing shares, and the
average repurchaser acquires between 2.61% and 3.85% of shares outstanding per year, depending on the
measure used. This is despite the fact that the most intensive option granters have high prior stock returns,
which are usually associated with fewer share repurchases. These results indicate that, at least for a
sizeable subset of the firms in our sample, equity overvaluation is unlikely to be the main driver behind
broad-based option compensation. Many of the heaviest option granters are also active repurchasers of
company equity at market prices, rendering it unlikely that these market prices are viewed as substantially
overvalued by top executives.

7. Summary and Conclusion
In this paper we analyze whether the popularity of option compensation for rank and file employees in
large firms may be driven by employee optimism. We model the optimal compensation policy of a firm
faced with employees who exhibit sentiment towards it, and assess whether employee optimism leads to
option compensation. We find that employee optimism by itself is insufficient to make equity
compensation optimal for the firm. The crucial insight is that firms compete with financial markets as
suppliers of equity to employees: the ability of employees to purchase equity on their own restricts their
willingness to pay for equity compensation and hence restricts or even eliminates firms’ incentive to pay
with equity. We show that option compensation is used in equilibrium only if employees are willing to
overpay for equity. This occurs in our model if employees prefer the (non-traded) options offered by the
firm to the (traded) equity offered by the market, or if the (traded) equity is overvalued. We argue that
employees are, in certain situations, willing to overpay for options because rational option valuation is
difficult and beyond their abilities. When faced with the need to evaluate options, employees are likely to
rely on heuristics and to value options on the basis of their own or their peers’ past experience with option
payoffs. This makes it likely that employees strictly prefer options to both stock and cash after periods
with high stock returns and high option payoffs.
We proceed by providing empirical evidence confirming that firms use broad-based option
compensation when boundedly rational employees are likely to be excessively optimistic about company
45

A more detailed description of the two measures of repurchases is given in Appendix B.
36

value, and when employees are likely to have a strict preference for options over stock. We show that
employee option grants are positively associated with previous stock returns, investment and investment
opportunities, and with cash balances and cash flows. In contrast, grants are negatively associated with
interest burden and leverage, and firms in distress reduce their option grants in the periods before they
delist. These findings are consistent with the view that options are used in firms in which employees are
exuberant about their employer, and in which employees prefer the options offered by the firm to traded
shares. Further, as predicted by our model, firms seem to use the lower compensation costs resulting from
overpayment for option compensation to expand in size.
Finally, also consistent with the model, we find some evidence that managers use option
compensation for rank-and-file employees more aggressively when managers believe that their company
stock is overvalued. On the other hand, a sizeable subset of the heaviest option granters in our sample are
also active repurchasers of company equity, rendering it unlikely that market prices are viewed as
substantially overvalued by top executives. We conclude, therefore, that a perception of equity
overvaluation by top executives is not sufficient to explain all employee option programs. In the
framework of our model, and consistent with the empirical evidence found, this leaves an employee
preference for options over traded equity as a driving force behind option compensation.

37

APPENDIX A: Proofs
Proof of Theorem 1
Assuming that the perceived utilities of employees working in the two firms are not equal leads to a
contradiction, as the firm whose employees have higher utility could profitably deviate by marginally
reducing its compensation costs. Further, differentiating the Lagrangian associated with maximization
problem (6) leads immediately to f '
(l i* ) = Wi * + N i* + M i* .
We now solve for the optimal firm 1 compensation contract assuming that its employee must obtain a
utility of u . Assume first that s

φ, so that N̂ 11 = 0. Firm 1’s optimization problem is therefore:

Min {W1 + N 1 + M 1 }

W1 , N1 , M 1

1
s.t. W1 + M 1 (1 + z ) + N 1 (1 + s ) − [( N 1 + M 1 ) 2 σ 2 + σ Y2 + 2( N 1 + M 1 )φ ] ≥ u
2

(A1)

N 1 ≥ 0, M 1 ≥ 0, W1 ≥ 0
It is easy to see that the first inequality constraint will be binding, and so we can easily eliminate W1 from
the maximization problem by representing it as a function of N1 and M1. Denoting the Lagrangian of the
problem by , we have that

∂Γ
∂Γ
= ( N 1 + M 1 )σ 2 + φ − s and
= ( N 1 + M 1 )σ 2 + φ − z . Since s
N1
M1

it is easy to see from the Kuhn-Tucker complimentary slackness requirements that N1 = 0. Also, if z
the optimal solution has M1 = 0 and otherwise, M 1 =

z −φ

σ2

φ,
φ,

.

Assume now that φ < s < φ + p – 1. We have that N̂ 11 = 0, and firm 1’s maximization problem is identical
to that written above. The Kuhn-Tucker conditions show that when z s, the optimal compensation
involves M1 = 0 and N 1 =

s −φ

σ

2

, and when z > s we have M 1 =

z −φ

σ2

and N1 = 0.

Next, assume that s > φ + p – 1. If N̂ 11 = 0, then the solution is identical to the case where φ < s < φ + p –
1. If, on the other hand, N̂ 11 > 0, then firm 1’s maximization problem is given by:

Min {W1 + N 1 + M 1}

W1 , N1 , M 1

(1 + s − p − φ ) 2 1 2 (1 + s − p − φ )φ
ˆ
ˆ
s.t. W1 + M 1 (1 + z ) + ( N 1 + N 1 )(1 + s ) − pN 1 −
− σY −
≥ u.
2
2σ 2
σ2

(A2)

Since once again the first inequality constraint will be binding, with some algebraic manipulation it is
easy to see that the above maximization problem can be written as:

38

Min {(1 − p) N 1 + (1 + s − z − p) M 1 }

W1 , N1 , M 1

(A3)

s.t. N 1 ≥ 0 and M 1 ≥ 0
Thus, when p > 1, the solution to the problem involves N1 =
when p = 1 but z > s, the solution involves M1 =
= 1 and z

in contradiction to N̂ 11 > 0. Additionally,

in contradiction once again to N̂ 11 > 0. Finally, when p

s, M1 = 0 will be optimal and the firm is indifferent to any N1 between 0 and

upper bound of

s −φ

σ

2

s −φ

σ2

. (The

guarantees that N̂ 11 > 0.)

Putting it all together, we see that firm 1’s optimal compensation policy follows that described in part (d)
of Theorem 1. The optimal compensation of firm 2, whereby N 2* = M 2* = 0 , is proven in an analogous
way by considering the case of s = z = 0 above.
Proof of Theorem 2
Consider first the case where s
that N 1* =

Nˆ 12 =

s −φ

σ

2

σ

z . Using parts (d.i) and (d.ii) of Theorem 1, we have

and M 1* = 0 are optimal for Firm 1. By Lemma 1 we have that Nˆ 11 = 0 , and

1 + s − p( s)
2

z > φ or s > φ

. Plugging these values of M 1* , N 1* , N̂ 11 and N̂ 12 into the equations in parts (a) and

(b) of Theorem 1 yields after some algebraic manipulation:

f '(l1 ) − f '(l 2 ) =

(1 + s − p( s )) 2 ( s − φ ) 2
−
.
2σ 2
2σ 2

(A4)

Since f '
'< 0 , we have that l1 > l 2 if and only if p(s) – 1 > φ . Finally, since firm i’s profits are given by

Π i = f(li) – li (Wi+Ni+Mi) = f(li) – li f’ (li), it is easy to see that l 2 > l1 if and only if Π 2 > Π 1 .

Consider next the case where z > φ and z > s. Using part (d.iii) of Theorem 1, we have that N 1* = 0 and

M 1* =

z −φ

σ

2

1 + s − p( s)
, so that Nˆ 11 = 0 , and Nˆ 12 =
. Applying parts (a) and (b) of Theorem 1 yields
2

σ

(1 + s − p( s )) 2 ( z − φ ) 2
f '(l1 ) − f '(l 2 ) =
−
.
2σ 2
2σ 2

Since f '
'< 0 , we have that l1 > l 2 (and Π 1 > Π 2 ) if and only if (p(s) – 1) + (z(s) – s) > φ .

39

(A5)

Finally, consider the case where 0 < max(s, z)

φ . Using part (d.iv) of Theorem 1, we have that

1 + s − p( s)
N 1* = M 1* = 0 . By Lemma 1 we have that Nˆ 11 = 0 , and Nˆ 12 =
2

σ

0. As above, plugging

(1 − p( s ) + s ) 2
these values into the equation in part (a) of Theorem 1 yields W1 − W2 =
. By part (b) of
2σ 2
(1 − p ( s ) + s ) 2
Theorem 1, we therefore have f '
(l1 ) − f '(l 2 ) =
. Since (1 − p ( s ) + s ) 2 0 and f '
'< 0 ,
2
2σ
we have that l 2 ≥ l1 and, therefore, also Π 2 ≥ Π 1 . If p(s) < 1+s then Π 2 > Π 1 , i.e., firm 1 makes
strictly smaller profits than firm 2.

40

APPENDIX B: Variable Definitions
Measures of cash constraints
We use both composite measures of cash constraints developed in other papers as well as their
disaggregated components. Core and Guay (2001) propose two measures of financial constraints: cash
flow shortfall and interest burden. They define cash flow shortfall as the three year average of common
and preferred dividends (Compustat data items 19 and 21) plus cash flow used in investing activities
(data item 311) less cash flow from operations (data item 308), all divided by total assets (data item 6).
Interest burden is the three-year average of interest expense (data item 15) scaled by operating income
before depreciation (data item 13), where interest burden is set to one when interest expense is greater
than operating income before depreciation.
A third measure of financial constraints we use has been developed by Kaplan and Zingales (1997)
and adopted to large-sample empirical work by Lamont, Polk and Saa-Requejo (2001). We follow Baker,
Stein and Wurgler (2003) and calculate the Kaplan Zingales (KZ) measure of financial constraints as:

KZ it = −1.002

CFit
DIVit
C
− 39.368
− 1.315 it + 3.139 LEVit + 0.283Qit ,
Ait −1
Ait −1
Ait −1

(B1)

where CFit is cash flow (data item 14+data item 18), Ait-1 is lagged assets (data item 6), DIVit is cash
dividends (data item 21+data item 19), Cit is cash balances (data item 1), LEVit is leverage ((data item 9 +
data item 34)/ (data item 9 + data item 34+data Item 216)), and Qit is the market value of equity (price
times shares outstanding from Compustat) plus assets minus the book value of equity (data item 60 + data
item 74) all over assets. All ingredients of KZ are winsorized at the 1% level before the measure is
constructed. One conceptual difficulty with the KZ measure for our purposes is that it contains both
measures of the availability of funds (CF, DIV, C, LEV) and a measure of investment opportunities in Q.
Following Baker, Stein and Wurgler (2003), we construct a cropped KZ measure called KZ4 which
excludes Q. It is defined as:

KZ 4 it = −1.002

CFit
DIVit
C
− 39.368
− 1.315 it + 3.139 LEVit .
Ait −1
Ait −1
Ait −1

(B2)

We interpret KZ4 as a measure of the availability of cash with which a firm can finance its
investment opportunities. Thus, in the calculus of supply and demand of cash used to construct a measure
of financial constraints, we view KZ4 as representing the supply of cash to a firm.46 Similarly, Q
represents investment opportunities and hence the demand for cash in this calculus.
Measures of earnings manipulation
We use discretionary current accruals as calculated in Teoh, Welch and Wong (1998 a,b) as our first
measure of earnings manipulation. Current accruals are defined from the balance sheet as follows:

CABS = ∆[CurrAsset − Cash] − ∆[CurrLiab − CurrLTDebt ] .

(B3)

Here CurrAsset stands for current assets (Compustat data item 4), Cash stands for cash and short-term
investments (data item 1), CurrLiab stands for current liabilities (data item 5), and CurrLTDebt is the
46

Firms with a high KZ4 measure have a low supply of cash.
41

current portion of long-term debt (data item 44). Teoh et al. use a cross-sectional adaptation of the
modified Jones (1991) model to split current accruals into their discretionary and non-discretionary
components. This entails regressing accruals on the change in sales in a cross-sectional regression using
all firms in the same two-digit SIC code on Compustat, excluding the firm for which discretionary
accruals are to be calculated. The cross-sectional regression is performed each fiscal year for each sample
firm, and all variables are scaled by lagged assets:

CABS , j ,t
TA j ,t −1

=α

∆Sales j ,t
1
+β
+ ε j ,t .
TA j ,t −1
TA j ,t −1

(B4)

TAj,t-1 is lagged total assets (data item 6) and Salesj,t is the change in sales (data item 12) in year t. The
predicted (fitted) accruals of the sample firm are calculated using the estimated regression coefficients
from (B4) and the actual change in sales net of the change in trade receivables. The fitted accruals are
considered to be at the level necessary to support the firm’s growth in sales, and hence not caused by
manipulation.

NDCAi ,t = αˆ

∆Salesi ,t − ∆AccReci ,t
1
.
+ βˆ
TAi ,t −1
TAi ,t −1

(B5)

Here AccRec is the change in accounts receivables in year t, and is meant to account for changes in
credit sales. The remaining current accruals are the residual discretionary current accruals and are the
portion of current accruals which are interpreted as signaling earnings manipulation. High values of
DCAi,t indicate that earnings have been managed upwards:

DCAi ,t =

CAi ,t
TAi ,t −1

− NDCAi ,t .

(B6)

The balance sheet based measure of earnings manipulation used by Teoh et al. has been criticized
by Hribar and Collins (2001) who show that DCAi,t is affected by nonoperating events such as
reclassifications, acquisitions, divestitures, accounting changes, and foreign currency translations. In
particular, Hribar and Collins show that the misclassification of merger effects as earnings manipulation
is empirically important and can lead to incorrect inferences about the presence and effects of earnings
manipulation. Hribar and Collins propose two alternative definitions of accruals which are computed
directly from the cash flow statement and therefore not affected by non-operating changes in accounts.
The first measure captures total accruals and is calculated as

TAC CF = EBXI − CFOCF ,

(B7)

where TACCF stands for total accruals, EBXI stands for earnings before extraordinary items and
discontinued operations (Compustat data item 123), and CFOCF stands for operating cash flows from
continuing operations (data item 308 – data item 124). The second Hribar and Collins measure of accruals
uses only the changes in the non-cash working capital accounts and is more directly comparable to the
balance sheet definition of current accruals presented above. Hribar and Collins compute this measure as
follows:

CACF = −(∆Acc Re cCF + ∆InvCF + ∆AccPay CF + ∆TaxCF + ∆OtherCF + DepCF ) .
42

(B8)

Here AccRecCF is the decrease in accounts receivable (data item 302),
InvCF is the decrease in
inventory (data item303), AccPayCF is the increase in accounts payable (data item 304), TaxCF is the
increase in taxes payable (data item 305), OtherCF is the net change on other current assets (data item
307), and DepCF is depreciation expense (data item 125). Given the two Hribar and Collins measures of
accruals, we again split accruals into their discretionary and nondiscretionary components using the crosssectional industry regression approach as in Teoh et al. and presented above in equations (B4) to (B6).
Measures of share repurchases
The first measure of share repurchases uses the “Purchases of Common and Preferred Stock” from
Compustat (data item 115) less any decrease in the par value of preferred stock (data item 130). The
second measure calculates share repurchases (and issues) as the difference in the number of shares
outstanding between the beginning and the end of the fiscal year. The number of shares outstanding is
taken from the monthly CRSP tapes. The decrease in the number of shares outstanding is then adjusted
for both executive stock grants and stock option exercises. The number of shares granted to executives is
calculated as the dollar value of restricted stock grants taken from ExecuComp divided by an estimate of
the stock price on the grant date. We use the average of the midpoints of the month high and month low
stock prices as estimate for the stock price. The number of options exercised by both top executives and
rank-and-file employees is hand-collected from annual reports as described in Section 5.1.

43

REFERENCES
Aboody, David, Mary E. Barth, Ron Kasznik, 2001, SFAS 123 Stock-based compensation expense and
equity market values, Working Paper, Stanford University.
Altinkiliç, Oya, and Robert S. Hansen, 2000, Are there economies of scale in underwriting fees? Evidence
of rising external financing costs, Review of Financial Studies, Vol. 13 (1), p 191-218, Spring.
Anderson, M., R. Banker, and S. Ravindran, 2000, Executive compensation in the information technology
industry, Management Science 46, 530-547.
Baker, George P. , Kevin J. Murphy, and Michael C. Jensen, 1988, Compensation and incentives: Practice
vs. theory, Journal of Finance, Vol. 43(3), p. 593-616.
Baker, Malcolm, Jeremy C. Stein, and Jeffrey Wurgler, 2003, When does the market matter? Stock prices
and the investment of equity-dependent firms, Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 118(3), 969-1006.
Baker, Malcolm, Joshua Coval, and Jeremy C. Stein, 2004, Corporate financing decisions when investors
take the path of least resistance, Working Paper, Harvard University, August.
Benartzi, Shlomo, 2001, Excessive extrapolation and the allocation of 401(k) accounts to company stock,
Journal of Finance, Vol. 56, No. 5, 1747-1764.
Bens, Daniel A., Venky Nagar, Douglas J. Skinner, and M.H. Franco Wong, 2003, Employee stock
options, EPS dilution, and stock repurchases, Journal of Accounting and Economics, 36, 51-90.
Black, F. and M. Scholes, 1973, The pricing of options and corporate liabilities, Journal of Political
Economy, 81, 637-659.
Cohen, Lauren, 2004, Loyalty based portfolio choice, Working Paper, University of Chicago, November.
Core, John, and Wayne Guay, 2001, Stock option plans for non-executive employees, Journal of
Financial Economics, 61 (2), 253-287.
Dechow, P., Hutton, A. and Sloan, R., 1996. Economic consequences of accounting for stock-based
compensation. Journal of Accounting Research , 34, pp. 1–20.
Degeorge, François, Dirk Jenter, Alberto Moel, and Peter Tufano, 2004, Selling company stock to
reluctant employees: France Telecom’s Experience, Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 71(1), 169202.
Desai, Mihir A., 2003, The divergence between book and tax income, in Tax Policy and the Economy
(17), ed. James Poterba, MIT Press, p. 169-206.
Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 2005, Financing decisions: Who issues stock?, Journal of
Financial Economics, forthcoming.
Graham, John R. and Campbell R. Harvey, 2001, The theory and practice of corporate finance: Evidence
from the field, Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 60 (2-3), May.
Graham, John R., Mark H. Lang, and Douglas A. Shackelford, 2002, Employee stock options, corporate
taxes, and debt policy, Working Paper, University of North Carolina and Duke University, July.
44

Griffin, Dale, and Amos Tversky, 1992, The weighting of evidence and the determinants of confidence,
Cognitive Psychology 3, 430-454.
Grullon, Gustavo, and Roni Michaely, 2002, Dividends, share repurchases, and the substitution
hypothesis, Journal of Finance, Vol. 57(4), 1649-1684.
Hall, Brian, and Kevin J. Murphy, 2002, Stock options for undiversified executives, Journal of
Accounting and Economics, 33(1), 3-42.
Hodge, Frank, Shiva Rajgopal, and Terry Shevlin, 2005, How do managers value stock options and
restricted stock?, Working Paper, the University of Washington Business School.
Huberman, Gur, 2001, Familiarity breeds investment, Review of Financial Studies Vol. 14(3), 659-680.
Huberman, Gur, and Paul Sengmüller, 2004, Performance and employer stock in 401(k) plans, Review of
Finance, Vol. 8, p. 403-443.
Huddart, Steven, and Mark Lang, 1996, Employee stock option exercises: An empirical analysis, Journal
of Accounting & Economics Vol. 21(1), 5-43.
Inderst, Roman, and Holger M. Müller, 2004, A theory of broad-based option pay, Working Paper, NYU
Stern School of Business, November.
Ingersoll, Jonathan E., 2002, The subjective and objective evaluation of incentive stock options, Yale ICF
Working Paper, No. 02-07, February.
Ittner, Christopher D., Richard A. Lambert, and David F. Larcker, 2003, The structure and performance
consequences of equity grants to employees of new economy firms, Journal of Accounting and
Economics, Vol. 34, p. 89-127.
Jenter, Dirk C., 2002, Executive Compensation, Incentives, and Risk, Working Paper, MIT Sloan School
of Management, April.
Jenter, Dirk C., 2005, Market timing and managerial portfolio decisions, Journal of Finance, Vol. 60(4),
1903-1949.
Jones, Jennifer J., 1991, Earnings management during import relief investigations, Journal of Accounting
Research, Vol. 29(2), 193-228.
Kahl, Matthias, Jun Liu, and Francis A. Longstaff, 2003, Paper millionaires: How valuable is stock to a
stockholder who is restricted from selling it? Journal of Financial Economics, 67(3), 385-410.
Kahle, Kathleen M., 2001, When a buyback isn’t a buyback: open market repurchases and employee
options. Journal of Financial Economics, 63, 235-261.
Kaplan, Steven N., and Luigi Zingales, Do financing constraints explain why investment is correlated
with cash flow?, Quarterly Journal of Economics, February, 1997, 169-215.
Kedia, Simi, and Abon Mozumdar, 2002, Performance impact of employee stock options, Working
Paper, Harvard Business School, August.

45

Klos, Alexander, and Marin Weber, 2004, Portfolio choice in the presence of nontradeable income: An
experimental analysis, Working Paper, Universität Mannheim, January.
Kruse, Douglas and Joseph Blasi, 1997, Employee ownership, employee attitudes, and firm performance:
A review of the evidence, in Human Resources Management Handbook, Part 1, eds. D. Lewin, D.J.B.
Mitchell, and M. Zaidi. Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.
Kruse, Douglas, 2002, Research evidence on prevalence and effects of employee ownership, Testimony
for the Subcommittee on Employer-Employee Relations, Committee on Education and the Workforce, US
House of Representatives, February.
Lambert, Richard A., and David F. Larcker, 2001, How employees value (often incorrectly) their stock
options, Kowledge@Wharton Online Article, available at
http://knowledge.wharton.upenn.edu/index.cfm?fa=viewArticle&id=363, May.
Lamont, Owen A., Christopher Polk and Jesus Saá-Réquejo, 2001, Financial constraints and stock
returns, Review of Financial Studies, 14, 529-554.
Lazear, Edward P., 1999, Output-based pay: incentives or sorting?, NBER Working Paper, No. W7419.
Lee, Inmoo, Scott Lochhead, Jay Ritter, and Quanshui Zhao, 1996, The costs of raising capital, Journal of
Financial Research, Vol. 19 (1), p 59-74, Spring.
Liang, Nellie, and Scott J. Weisbenner, 2002, Investor behavior and the purchase of company stock in
401(k) plans – the importance of plan design, Working Paper, Finance and Economics Discussion Series
2002-36, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, July.
Meulbroek, Lisa, 2001, The efficiency of equity-linked compensation: Understanding the full cost of
awarding executive stock options, Financial Management, 30(2), 5-44.
Meulbroek, Lisa, 2002, Company stock in pension plans: How costly is it?, Harvard Business School
Working Paper, No. 02-058, March
Murphy, Kevin J., 1999, Executive compensation, in: Orley Ashenfelter and David Card (eds.),
Handbook of Labor Economics, Vol. 3, North Holland.
Murphy, Kevin J., 2002, Explaining executive compensation: Managerial power versus the perceived cost
of stock options, University of Chicago Law Review, 69(3), 847-869.
Murphy, Kevin J., 2003, Stock-based pay in new economy firms, Journal of Accounting and Economics

34, 129-147.

Myers, Stewart C, and Nicholas S. Majluf, 1984, Corporate financing and investment decisions when
firms have information that investors do not have, Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 13 (2), p 187221, June.
Ofek, Eli, and Matthew Richardson, 2002, The valuation and market rationality of internet stock prices,
Oxford Review of Economic Policy, 18(3), 265-287.
Ofek, Eli, and Matthew Richardson, 2003, DotCom mania: The rise and fall of internet stock prices,
Journal of Finance, forthcoming.

46

Oyer, Paul, 2004, Why do firms use incentives that have no incentive effects?, Journal of Finance 59(4),
1619-1649.
Oyer, Paul, and Scott Schaefer, 2005, Why do some firms give stock options to all employees?: An
empirical examination of alternative theories, Journal of Financial Economics 76, 99-133.
Shleifer, Andrei, 2000, Inefficient markets: An introduction to behavioral finance, Clarendon Lectures in
Economics, Oxford University Press.
Smith, Clifford W., 1986, Investment banking and the capital acquisition process, Journal of Financial
Economics, Vol. 15 (1-2), p 3-29, January-February.
Snider, Anna, 2000, Brobeck’s pay boost beats NYC firms, New York Law Journal, January 24.
Stein, Jeremy, 1998, An adverse-selection model of bank asset and liability management with
implications for the transmission of monetary policy, RAND Journal of Economics, 29(3).
Teoh, Siew-Hong, Ivo Welch, and T.J. Wong, 1998(a), Earnings management and the long-run market
performance of initial public offerings, Journal of Finance 53-6, 1935-1974.
Teoh, Siew-Hong, Ivo Welch, and T.J. Wong, 1998(b), Earnings management and the post-issue
underperformance in seasoned equity offerings, Journal of Financial Economics 50-1, 63-99.
Tversky, Amos, and Daniel Kahneman, 1974, Judgment under uncertainty: Heuristics and biases, Science
185, 1124-1131.
Weisbenner, Scott J., 2000, Corporate share repurchases in the 1990s: What role do stock options play?,
Working Paper, Federal Reserve Board, April.Yermack, David L., 1995, Do corporations award CEO
stock options effectively?, Journal of Financial Economics 39, 237-269.
Zhang, Ge, 2002, Why do firms grant employee stock options?, Working Paper, Fuqua School of
Business, Duke University, October.

47

Figure 1: Average option grants per non-executive employee in large firms. Per employee option
grants (left y-axis) are the dollar value of options granted to employees divided by the average number of
employees during the firm year. The options granted to employees are calculated by subtracting the
number of options granted to top-five executives from the total number of options granted. Market
cumulative return (right y-axis) is calculated using CRSP value weighted NYSE/AMEX/NASDAQ data.
The sample is restricted to firm-year observations in which the average number of employees exceeds
1000.

Average option grants per non-executive employee
16,000

4.5

14,000

4
3.5

12,000

3

10,000

2.5
8,000

2

6,000

1.5

4,000

1

2,000

0.5

0

0
1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003

48

Option grants ($)
Market Cumulative Return

Table 1. Summary statistics. Per employee option grants are the dollar value of options granted to
employees divided by the average number of employees during the firm year. The options granted to
employees are calculated by subtracting the number of options granted to top-five executives from the
total number of options granted. Q is the market value of equity plus assets (Compustat data item 6)
minus the book value of equity (data item 60 + data item 74) all over assets. R&D is the three-year
average of R&D (data item 46) scaled by assets. The cash constraint measures KZ and KZ4 are calculated
as in Baker, Stein and Wurgler (2003). Cash flow shortfall is the three year average of common and
preferred dividends (Compustat data items 19 and 21) plus cash flow used in investing activities (data
item 311) less cash flow from operations (data item 308), all divided by total assets. Interest burden is the
three-year average of interest expense (data item 15) scaled by operating income before depreciation (data
item 13). Interest burden is set to one when interest expense is greater than operating income before
depreciation.

Number of observations
12,898
Panel A: Firm characteristics
Mean
Median
Number of employees
19,018
5,400
Total option grants relative to shares
18%
1.8%
outstanding
Employee option grants relative to total
67%
71%
grants
Per employee option grants
$8,818
$1,029
Market value of equity (millions)
$5,466
$1,083
Book assets (millions)
$6,329
$1,067
Sales (millions)
$3,992
$1,073
Q
2.00
1.51
3-year average of R&D to assets
3.3%
0.00%
Panel B: Measures of cash constraints
Mean
Median
Kaplan-Zingales (KZ) measure of cash
0.87
0.88
constraints
KZ4 measure of cash constraints
0.30
0.35
3-year average of cashflow shortfall
1.44%
0.59%
3-year average of interest burden
20%
13%

49

Table 2. Prior returns, cash balances and employee option compensation. The per employee option
grants are the dollar value of options granted to employees divided by the average number of employees
during a firm year. The options granted to employees are calculated by subtracting the number of options
granted to top-five executives from the total number of options granted. Normalized cash balances are
calculated as cash balances (Compustat data item 1) divided by lagged assets (data item 6). Stock returns
are constructed from the CRSP monthly return files. The stock return over the previous two years is
calculated as the annualized stock return over fiscal years t-1 and t-2 for employee option grants made in
fiscal year t. Quintile cutoff points are calculated using the entire pooled sample.

Panel A: Prior stock returns by per employee option grant quintile
Stock return over
previous two years
Option grant quintile
Mean
Median
1
7%
7%
2
13%
10%
3
14%
12%
4
18%
14%
5
30%
19%
Panel B: Per employee option grants by prior stock return quintile
Option grant per
employee
Stock return quintile over
previous two years
Mean
Median
1
$7,850
$1,116
2
$4,987
$718
3
$4,469
$692
4
$5,632
$888
5
$21,155
$2,838
Panel C: Per employee option grants by cash balance quintile

Cash balance quintile
1
2
3
4
5

50

Option grant per
employee
Mean
Median
$2,274
$524
$2,445
$574
$3,592
$746
$5,674
$1,366
$30,111
$10,525

Table 3. Regression of log option grants per employee on past returns and measures of cash
constraints. The Long Term Debt Dummy is an indicator variable which takes a value of one if a firm
has long term debt and zero otherwise. All other variables are calculated as in Tables 1 and 2. All
regressions include year dummies and three-digit SIC industry dummies. T-statistics use
heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors and allow for clustering at the firm level.

Independent variables
Stock return over previous two years
Contemporaneous stock return
Qt
KZt-1
KZ4t-1
Cash flow shortfallt-1
Interest burdent-1
Log sales
Long term debt dummy
R&D
Industry fixed effects
Year fixed effects
Constant
Observations
Adjusted R-Squared
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%

Dependent variable: Log option grants per employee
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
0.86
0.54
0.55
0.54
0.53
[18.93]** [12.29]** [12.79]** [12.34]** [12.38]**
0.19
-0.04
-0.04
-0.04
-0.02
[9.34]**
[1.74]
[1.58]
[1.47]
[0.74]
0.31
0.32
0.30
0.31
[14.30]** [15.10]** [14.36]** [14.36]**
0.03
[1.26]
-0.02
-0.01
[0.85]
[0.19]
2.11
2.36
[9.37]**
[10.40]**
-0.34
-0.55
[2.84]**
[4.06]**
-0.09
-0.10
-0.07
-0.11
-0.08
[4.69]**
[5.75]**
[3.89]**
[6.04]**
[4.32]**
-0.51
-0.23
-0.33
-0.22
-0.28
[6.04]**
[2.95]**
[4.10]**
[2.74]**
[3.60]**
5.28
3.96
3.29
4.30
3.79
[5.82]**
[4.76]**
[3.85]**
[4.95]**
[4.21]**
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
5.80
5.78
5.60
5.91
5.76
[35.02]** [36.49]** [34.96]** [34.97]** [34.36]**
12898
12898
12898
12898
12898
0.55
0.58
0.58
0.58
0.59

51

Table 4. Regression of log option grants per employee on past returns and measures of cash
constraints with firm fixed effects. All variables are defined as in Table 3. All regressions include year
dummies and firm fixed effects. T-statistics use heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors and allow for
clustering at the firm level.

Independent variables
Stock return over previous two years
Contemporaneous stock return
Qt
KZt-1
KZ4t-1
Cash flow shortfallt-1
Interest burdent-1
Log sales
Long term debt dummy
R&D
Company fixed effects
Year fixed effects
Constant
Observations
Adjusted R-Squared

Dependent variable: Log option grants per employee
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
0.57
0.41
0.45
0.43
0.42
[14.86]** [9.58]** [10.69]** [10.17]** [9.91]**
0.12
0.02
0.01
0.03
0.04
[7.12]**
[0.93]
[0.58]
[1.11]
[1.77]
0.15
0.16
0.16
0.15
[8.46]**
[8.89]**
[8.62]**
[8.57]**
-0.03
[1.27]
-0.11
-0.07
[4.18]**
[2.88]**
0.83
1.03
[3.56]**
[4.32]**
-0.89
-0.79
[7.37]**
[6.46]**
-0.02
-0.02
-0.02
-0.06
-0.06
[0.40]
[0.48]
[0.60]
[1.50]
[1.45]
-0.04
0.05
-0.02
0.02
0.03
[0.64]
[0.70]
[0.28]
[0.38]
[0.54]
-1.65
-2.13
-2.34
-1.95
-1.89
[2.09]*
[3.07]**
[3.34]**
[2.75]**
[2.70]**
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
5.64
5.61
5.61
6.05
5.97
[20.37]** [20.77]** [20.50]** [22.18]** [22.13]**
12898
12898
12898
12898
12898
0.81
0.82
0.82
0.82
0.82

* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%

52

Table 5. Regression of log option grants per employee on past return quintiles and measures of cash
constraints. Quintiles of past stock returns are constructed using the pooled sample. Quintile i is a
dummy variable taking a value of one when a firm'
s stock return over fiscal years t-1 and t-2 is in the ith
quintile, and zero otherwise. All other variables are defined as in Table 3. All regressions include year
dummies and three-digit SIC industry dummies. T-statistics use heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors
and allow for clustering at the firm level.

Independent variables
Stock return over previous two years
Quintile 1
Quintile 2
Quintile 3
Quintile 4
Quintile 5
Contemporaneous stock return

Dependent variable: Log option grants per employee
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
-

-

-

-

-

0.19
[4.28]**
0.32
[7.16]**
0.48
[11.01]**
0.98
[21.90]**
0.18
[8.72]**

0.07
[1.49]
0.13
[2.93]**
0.23
[5.35]**
0.55
[11.90]**
-0.06
[2.51]*
0.32
[14.91]**

0.10
[2.31]*
0.18
[4.01]**
0.28
[6.57]**
0.59
[12.88]**
-0.06
[2.37]*
0.33
[15.82]**

0.05
[1.10]
0.11
[2.53]*
0.21
[4.96]**
0.54
[11.72]**
-0.06
[2.41]*
0.32
[15.15]**

0.06
[1.34]
0.13
[2.90]**
0.24
[5.47]**
0.56
[12.10]**
-0.03
[1.44]
0.31
[14.90]**

-0.36
[2.94]**
-0.11
[6.07]**
-0.21
[2.61]**
4.18
[4.78]**
Yes
Yes
6.37
[39.10]**
12898
0.58

-0.02
[0.77]
2.44
[10.57]**
-0.54
[3.92]**
-0.08
[4.26]**
-0.26
[3.36]**
3.64
[4.03]**
Yes
Yes
6.18
[37.93]**
12898
0.58

Qt
KZt-1

0.02
[1.04]
-0.03
[1.44]

KZ4t-1

2.18
[9.48]**

Cash flow shortfallt-1
Interest burdent-1
Log sales
Long term debt dummy
R&D
Industry fixed effects
Year fixed effects
Constant
Observations
Adjusted R-Squared

-0.09
[4.86]**
-0.51
[5.92]**
5.19
[5.62]**
Yes
Yes
6.47
[41.16]**
12898
0.55

* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%

53

-0.10
[5.76]**
-0.21
[2.67]**
3.84
[4.59]**
Yes
Yes
6.22
[41.03]**
12898
0.57

-0.07
[3.96]**
-0.32
[4.04]**
3.16
[3.66]**
Yes
Yes
6.03
[39.24]**
12898
0.58

Table 6. Regression of log option grants per employee on past return quintiles and measures of cash
constraints. The sample is restricted to firms for which 5 years of past returns are available on CRSP.
Prior returns for different horizons are defined similarly to prior two-year returns in Table 2. For example,
the prior three-year return for year t is the annualized three year return over the 36 month period
comprising years t-3, t-2, and t-1. All other variables are defined as in Tables 3 and 5. All regressions
include year dummies and three-digit SIC industry dummies. T-statistics use heteroskedasticity-robust
standard errors and allow for clustering at the firm level.

Independent variables
Stock return over the...
Quintile 1

Dependent variable: Log option grants per employee
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
previous
year
-

-0.01
[0.19]
0.01
Quintile 3
[0.11]
0.05
Quintile 4
[1.01]
0.29
Quintile 5
[6.59]**
-0.08
Contemporaneous stock return
[3.08]**
0.37
Qt
[14.80]**
0.01
KZ4t-1
[0.27]
1.83
Cash flow shortfallt-1
[6.45]**
-0.63
Interest burdent-1
[4.00]**
-0.05
Log sales
[2.37]*
-0.26
Long term debt dummy
[3.01]**
3.39
R&D
[3.58]**
Industry fixed effects
Yes
Year fixed effects
Yes
5.91
Constant
[32.20]**
Observations
11143
Adjusted R-Squared
0.56
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%
Quintile 2

previous
two years
-

previous
three years
-

previous
four years
-

previous
five years
-

0.07
[1.37]
0.11
[2.39]*
0.20
[4.21]**
0.52
[10.50]**
-0.05
[1.76]
0.34
[13.32]**
0.01
[0.39]
1.85
[6.56]**
-0.58
[3.70]**
-0.05
[2.33]*
-0.29
[3.27]**
3.55
[3.70]**
Yes
Yes
5.86
[31.98]**
11143
0.57

0.11
[2.39]*
0.25
[5.11]**
0.39
[7.78]**
0.67
[12.67]**
-0.03
[0.95]
0.32
[12.68]**
0.01
[0.45]
1.69
[6.05]**
-0.44
[2.83]**
-0.05
[2.48]*
-0.29
[3.27]**
3.66
[3.81]**
Yes
Yes
5.71
[31.34]**
11143
0.57

0.16
[3.29]**
0.28
[5.47]**
0.49
[9.17]**
0.77
[12.94]**
-0.01
[0.44]
0.30
[12.12]**
0.01
[0.36]
1.42
[5.13]**
-0.32
[2.02]*
-0.05
[2.57]*
-0.28
[3.23]**
3.80
[3.95]**
Yes
Yes
5.62
[30.86]**
11143
0.57

0.19
[3.99]**
0.31
[5.86]**
0.52
[9.29]**
0.87
[13.70]**
-0.01
[0.18]
0.29
[11.52]**
0.00
[0.15]
1.27
[4.55]**
-0.22
[1.43]
-0.06
[2.73]**
-0.27
[3.16]**
3.89
[4.01]**
Yes
Yes
5.65
[31.30]**
11143
0.57

54

Table 7. Regression of log option grants per employee on past returns and measures of cash
constraints. Dividends (Compustat data item 21 + data item 19), cash balances (data item 1), leverage ((data
item 9 + data item 34)/ (data item 9 + data item 34+data item 216)) and cash flow to investment (-data item
311) are normalized by lagged assets (data item 6). All other variables are defined as in Tables 3. All
regressions include year dummies and three-digit SIC industry dummies. T-statistics use heteroskedasticityrobust standard errors and allow for clustering at the firm level.

Independent variables
Stock return over previous two years
Contemporaneous stock return
Qt
Dividendst-1
Cash flowt-1
Cash balancest-1
Leveraget-1
Cash flow to investmentt-1
Log sales
Long term debt dummy
R&D
Industry fixed effects
Year fixed effects
Constant
Observations
Adjusted R-Squared

Dependent variable: Log option grants per employee
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
0.85
0.51
0.33
0.51
0.53
0.27
[18.76]** [11.00]** [7.79]** [11.92]** [12.72]** [6.60]**
0.19
-0.04
-0.01
-0.03
0.01
0.00
[9.20]**
[1.47]
[0.50]
[1.42]
[0.24]
[0.17]
0.30
0.28
0.30
0.28
0.29
[13.76]** [13.91]** [14.40]** [14.24]** [14.51]**
-10.85
-14.63
[6.09]**
[8.89]**
0.52
-0.04
[2.49]*
[0.21]
1.41
1.18
[15.63]**
[13.88]**
-0.63
-0.65
[6.01]**
[6.32]**
3.41
2.67
[11.84]** [9.70]**
-0.05
-0.11
-0.06
-0.09
-0.08
0.02
[2.84]**
[5.91]**
[3.12]**
[4.71]**
[4.70]**
[0.81]
-0.54
-0.23
-0.08
-0.12
-0.28
-0.04
[6.58]**
[2.92]**
[1.08]
[1.51]
[3.59]**
[0.63]
5.26
4.32
3.07
3.97
4.95
3.74
[5.85]**
[4.95]**
[4.19]**
[4.88]**
[6.90]**
[5.94]**
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
5.83
5.80
5.38
5.80
5.34
5.16
[35.75]** [36.21]** [34.22]** [36.51]** [34.10]** [34.16]**
12898
12898
12898
12898
12898
12898
0.56
0.58
0.59
0.58
0.59
0.62

* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%

55

Table 8. Regression of log option grants per employee on past returns, measures of distress, and
measures of cash constraints. Distress is measured by whether a firm delists for performance-related
reasons in the next fiscal year (t+1) or in the fiscal year after the next (t+2). CRSP delisting codes
between 400 and 599 are used to identify performance-related delistings. All other variables are defined
as in Table 3. Regressions (1) and (3) include year dummies and 3-digit SIC dummies, regressions (2) and
(4) include year dummies and firm fixed effects. T-statistics use heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors
and allow for clustering at the firm level.

Independent variables
Delisted in the following year (t+1)
Delisted two years later (t+2)
Stock return over previous two years
Contemporaneous stock return
Qt
KZ4t-1
Cash flow shortfallt-1
Interest burdent-1
Log sales
Long term debt dummy
R&D
Industry fixed effects
Firm fixed effects
Year fixed effects
Constant
Observations
Adjusted R-Squared
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%

Dependent variable: Log option grants per employee
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
-0.72
-0.48
-0.74
-0.54
[2.98]**
[1.71]
[3.06]**
[1.92]
-0.40
-0.30
[2.18]*
[1.54]
0.53
0.41
0.52
0.41
[12.30]**
[9.88]**
[12.26]**
[9.85]**
-0.02
0.04
-0.03
0.03
[0.98]
[1.60]
[1.12]
[1.52]
0.31
0.15
0.31
0.16
[14.35]**
[8.59]**
[14.39]**
[8.61]**
-0.01
-0.075
-0.004
-0.075
[0.17]
[2.90]**
[0.15]
[2.88]**
2.38
1.04
2.39
1.04
[10.46]**
[4.37]**
[10.51]**
[4.37]**
-0.53
-0.77
-0.52
-0.76
[3.90]**
[6.27]**
[3.83]**
[6.20]**
-0.08
-0.06
-0.08
-0.06
[4.35]**
[1.53]
[4.40]**
[1.60]
-0.28
0.03
-0.28
0.03
[3.62]**
[0.49]
[3.60]**
[0.52]
3.79
-1.84
3.80
-1.81
[4.21]**
[2.55]*
[4.21]**
[2.49]*
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
5.77
5.99
5.78
6.01
[34.44]**
[22.19]**
[34.50]**
[22.30]**
12898
12898
12898
12898
0.59
0.82
0.59
0.82

56

Table 9. Regression of log option grants per employee on past returns, employment growth, and
measures of cash constraints. The percentage change in the number of employees for year t is
calculated as the difference between the employment numbers at the end of fiscal years t and t-1, divided
by the number of employees at the end of fiscal year t-1. The ratio is winsorized at the 1 percent level to
dampen the effect of outliers. All other variables are defined as in Table 3. Regression (1) includes year
dummies and 3-digit SIC dummies, regression (2) includes year dummies and firm fixed effects. Tstatistics use heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors and allow for clustering at the firm level.

Independent variables
Percentage change in number of
employees
Stock return over previous two years
Contemporaneous stock return
Qt
KZ4t-1
Cash flow shortfallt-1
Interest burdent-1
Log sales
Long term debt dummy
R&D
Industry fixed effects
Firm fixed effects
Year fixed effects
Constant
Observations
Adjusted R-Squared
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%

57

Dependent variable: Log
option grants per employee
(1)
(2)
0.71
0.39
[12.48]**
[7.95]**
0.42
0.37
[9.88]**
[8.77]**
-0.06
0.02
[2.39]*
[0.81]
0.30
0.15
[13.90]**
[8.52]**
0.00
-0.058
[0.05]
[2.26]*
2.10
1.00
[9.41]**
[4.27]**
-0.48
-0.76
[3.59]**
[6.26]**
-0.07
-0.06
[3.90]**
[1.56]
-0.30
0.01
[3.88]**
[0.11]
3.99
-1.80
[4.47]**
[2.66]**
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
5.86
6.07
[35.40]**
[22.69]**
12898
12898
0.59
0.82

Table 10. Regression of log option grants per employee on past returns and measures of cash
constraints for large firms only. Regressions (1) and (2) exclude firm years with average employment
of less than 500 employees, regressions (3) and (4) exclude firms with average employment of less than
1,000 employees. All variables are defined as in Table 3. Regressions (1) and (3) include year dummies
and 3-digit SIC dummies, regressions (2) and (4) include year dummies and firm fixed effects. T-statistics
use heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors and allow for clustering at the firm level.

Independent variables
Stock return over previous two years
Contemporaneous stock return
Qt
KZ4t-1
Cash flow shortfallt-1
Interest burdent-1
Log sales
Long term debt dummy
R&D
Industry fixed effects
Firm fixed effects
Year fixed effects
Constant
Observations
Adjusted R-Squared

Dependent variable: Log option grants per employee
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
0.54
0.44
0.52
0.45
[13.27]**
[12.41]**
[11.75]**
[11.14]**
-0.03
0.04
-0.04
0.04
[1.16]
[1.73]
[1.28]
[1.30]
0.33
0.16
0.35
0.17
[16.26]**
[8.61]**
[15.55]**
[7.97]**
0.03
-0.06
0.04
-0.05
[1.29]
[2.08]*
[1.56]
[1.57]
2.74
0.97
2.60
1.09
[12.59]**
[4.24]**
[11.35]**
[4.57]**
-0.65
-0.78
-0.63
-0.78
[4.61]**
[5.58]**
[3.94]**
[4.90]**
-0.04
-0.04
-0.01
-0.06
[1.99]*
[0.86]
[0.27]
[1.21]
-0.23
0.10
-0.20
0.10
[2.74]**
[1.59]
[2.12]*
[1.45]
8.79
-0.93
9.83
-0.74
[11.84]**
[1.17]
[11.83]**
[0.76]
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
5.10
5.50
4.73
5.47
[31.16]**
[18.39]**
[27.43]**
[16.71]**
11924
11924
10991
10991
0.58
0.81
0.57
0.8

* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%

58

Table 11. Tobit regression of log option grants per employee on past returns and measures of cash
constraints. Regressions (1) and (2) use Tobit estimation with censoring at zero. All variables are defined
as in Table 3. Regressions (1) includes year dummies, regression (2) includes year dummies and firm
random effects. T-statistics use heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors and allow for clustering at the
firm level.

Independent variables
Stock return over previous two years
Contemporaneous stock return
Qt
KZ4t-1
Cash flow shortfallt-1
Interest burdent-1
Log sales
Long term debt dummy
R&D
Firm random effects
Year fixed effects
Constant
Observations
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%

59

Dependent variable: Log
option grants per employee
(1)
(2)
0.73
0.47
[14.50]**
[17.55]**
0.06
0.02
[2.09]*
[1.32]
0.35
0.21
[13.39]**
[17.13]**
0.03
-0.105
[0.83]
[6.92]**
2.67
1.78
[8.25]**
[12.44]**
-0.61
-0.68
[3.72]**
[8.70]**
-0.11
-0.21
[4.97]**
[14.87]**
-0.44
-0.12
[4.28]**
[2.62]**
7.92
3.09
[7.84]**
[10.39]**
Yes
Yes
Yes
5.52
6.81
[27.37]**
[56.45]**
12898
12898

Table 12. Regression of log option grants per employee on past returns and measures of cash
constraints using hand-collected data from 1995 to 2000. All variables are defined as in Table 3.
Regressions (1) and (2) use standard OLS estimation, regressions (3) and (4) use Tobit estimation with
censoring at zero. All regressions include year dummies. Regression (1) includes industry fixed effects,
regression (2) includes firm fixed effects, and regression (4) includes firm random effects. T-statistics use
heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors and allow for clustering at the firm level in regressions (1) to (3).

Panel A: Hand-collected data
Independent Variables
Stock return over previous two years
Contemporaneous stock return
Qt
KZ4t-1
Cash flow shortfallt-1
Interest burdent-1
Log sales
Long term debt dummy
R&D
Industry fixed effects
Firm fixed effects
Firm random effects
Year fixed effects
Constant
Observations
Adjusted R-Squared

Dependent Variable: Log Option Grants per Employee
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
0.74
0.79
1.09
0.96
[6.49]**
[7.28]**
[6.96]**
[13.53]**
0.05
0.20
0.10
0.17
[0.72]
[3.24]**
[1.08]
[3.81]**
0.21
0.04
0.38
0.13
[4.69]**
[1.30]
[5.35]**
[4.96]**
0.02
-0.087
0.166
0.002
[0.40]
[1.88]
[2.44]*
[0.06]
3.20
1.30
3.90
2.41
[6.55]**
[2.68]**
[6.10]**
[7.90]**
-0.73
-1.47
-1.14
-0.91
[2.52]*
[4.28]**
[3.15]**
[4.22]**
-0.02
-0.08
-0.08
-0.18
[0.33]
[0.82]
[1.64]
[8.65]**
-0.19
0.34
-0.12
0.21
[0.81]
[1.57]
[0.41]
[1.59]
5.64
1.41
8.58
4.85
[4.55]**
[1.24]
[5.55]**
[8.16]**
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
4.92
5.34
4.36
5.63
[12.61]**
[7.21]**
[9.29]**
[.]
4208
4208
4208
4208
0.53
0.84
-

* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%

60

Panel B: ExecuComp data
Independent Variables
Stock return over previous two years
Contemporaneous stock return
Qt
KZ4t-1
Cash flow shortfallt-1
Interest burdent-1
Log sales
Long term debt dummy
R&D
Industry fixed effects
Firm fixed effects
Firm random effects
Year fixed effects
Constant
Observations
Adjusted R-Squared

Dependent Variable: Log Option Grants per Employee
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
0.66
0.70
0.99
0.80
[5.45]**
[6.28]**
[7.24]**
[12.02]**
-0.02
0.21
0.13
0.12
[0.29]
[3.51]**
[2.06]*
[2.95]**
0.29
0.02
0.34
0.15
[6.44]**
[0.52]
[7.93]**
[6.32]**
0.03
-0.04
0.062
-0.047
[0.64]
[0.73]
[1.30]
[1.77]
2.58
0.81
3.35
2.26
[6.41]**
[1.85]
[6.80]**
[7.91]**
-0.22
-1.11
-0.45
-0.59
[0.83]
[4.22]**
[1.58]
[3.39]**
-0.09
0.04
-0.12
-0.17
[2.47]*
[0.38]
[3.43]**
[6.52]**
-0.32
0.25
-0.22
0.01
[1.77]
[1.66]
[1.04]
[0.10]
2.28
-2.14
4.29
2.07
[1.49]
[1.70]
[2.92]**
[4.38]**
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
6.09
5.29
5.57
6.31
[18.83]**
[7.51]**
[15.87]**
[28.89]**
3146
3146
3146
3146
0.58
0.84
-

* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%

61

Table 13. Regression of log option grants per employee on past returns, earnings manipulation, and
measures of cash constraints. Manipulator is a dummy variable taking a value of one if a firm’s
discretionary accruals are in the top 10% of all firm-years in our sample. Three different measures of
discretionary accruals are calculated as residuals from industry-year regressions of normalized accruals on
normalized sales growth. Balance sheet discretionary accruals (regressions (1) and (2)) are calculated as
in Teoh, Welch, and Wong (1998 a,b). Cash flow statement discretionary total accruals (regressions (3)
and (4)) and cash flow statement discretionary operating accruals (regressions (5) and (6)) are calculated
as in Hribar and Collins (2001). Appendix A describes the calculations in detail. All other variables are
defined as in Table 3. Regressions (1), (3), and (5) include year dummies and 3-digit SIC dummies,
regressions (2), (4), and (6) include year dummies and firm fixed effects. T-statistics use
heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors and allow for clustering at the firm level.

Independent variables
Manipulator - balance sheet
discretionary current accruals
Manipulator - cash flow statement
discretionary total accruals
Manipulator - cash flow statement
discretionary operating accruals
Stock return over previous two years
Contemporaneous stock return
Qt
KZ4t-1
Cash flow shortfallt-1
Interest burdent-1
Log sales
Long term debt dummy
R&D
Industry fixed effects
Firm fixed effects
Year fixed effects
Constant
Observations
Adjusted R-Squared
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%

Dependent variable: Log option grants per employee
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
0.13
0.14
[2.80]**
[3.43]**
0.16
0.13
[3.40]**
[3.26]**
0.23
0.23
[3.07]**
[3.55]**
0.52
0.41
0.52
0.41
0.48
0.32
[11.17]** [8.86]** [11.50]** [9.23]**
[6.57]**
[3.73]**
-0.02
0.02
-0.02
0.03
-0.07
-0.02
[0.93]
[0.90]
[0.76]
[1.25]
[2.30]*
[0.62]
0.30
0.14
0.30
0.14
0.33
0.15
[13.49]** [7.61]** [13.68]** [7.91]** [11.66]** [5.47]**
0.00
-0.09
0.00
-0.09
-0.05
-0.11
[0.16]
[3.74]**
[0.05]
[3.62]**
[1.58]
[2.78]**
2.27
0.98
2.27
0.95
2.15
0.84
[9.88]**
[4.53]**
[9.97]**
[4.48]**
[7.22]**
[2.49]*
-0.57
-0.85
-0.57
-0.85
-0.62
-0.89
[4.27]**
[6.94]**
[4.24]**
[7.04]**
[3.54]**
[4.32]**
-0.10
-0.06
-0.09
-0.06
-0.14
-0.08
[5.00]**
[1.61]
[4.80]**
[1.56]
[5.35]**
[1.46]
-0.26
0.07
-0.27
0.07
-0.20
0.15
[3.27]**
[1.11]
[3.34]**
[1.09]
[2.09]*
[2.03]*
3.81
-2.00
3.85
-1.94
2.81
-2.72
[4.12]**
[2.63]**
[4.18]**
[2.57]*
[2.31]*
[3.09]**
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
5.88
6.07
5.86
6.06
6.29
6.41
[35.12]** [22.62]** [34.63]** [23.08]** [28.98]** [17.55]**
11710
11710
12080
12080
5551
5551
0.6
0.83
0.6
0.83
0.65
0.86

62

Table 14. Regression of log option grants per employee on past returns, insider trading, earnings
manipulation, and measures of cash constraints. Buying (selling) managers is a dummy variable taking
on a value of one if the average share purchases by a firm’s management are in the top (bottom) 20% of
all firm-years. Managerial share purchases are calculated as in Jenter (2005). The manipulator variables
indicating earnings management are defined as in Table 13. All other variables are defined as in Table 3.
Regressions (1), (3), and (5) include year dummies and 3-digit SIC dummies, regressions (2), (4), and (6)
include year dummies and firm fixed effects. T-statistics use heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors and
allow for clustering at the firm level.

Independent variables
Buying managers
Selling managers
Manipulator - balance sheet
discretionary current accruals
Manipulator - cash flow statement
discretionary total accruals
Manipulator - cash flow statement
discretionary operating accruals
Stock return over previous two years
Contemporaneous stock return
Qt
KZ4t-1
Cash flow shortfallt-1
Interest burdent-1
Log sales
Long term debt dummy
R&D
Industry fixed effects
Firm fixed effects
Year fixed effects
Constant
Observations
Adjusted R-Squared
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%

Dependent variable: Log option grants per employee
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
-0.18
-0.04
-0.17
-0.04
-0.19
-0.02
[4.87]**
[1.20]
[4.79]**
[1.29]
[3.80]**
[0.30]
0.11
-0.05
0.11
-0.05
0.19
-0.01
[2.93]**
[1.47]
[2.97]**
[1.65]
[3.27]**
[0.16]
0.10
0.14
[2.03]*
[3.36]**
0.10
0.11
[2.18]*
[2.83]**
0.20
0.18
[2.65]**
[2.89]**
0.52
0.44
0.52
0.44
0.50
0.40
[13.33]** [12.22]** [13.72]** [12.55]** [9.42]**
[8.16]**
-0.05
0.02
-0.04
0.03
-0.10
-0.01
[1.99]*
[0.90]
[1.70]
[1.21]
[2.74]**
[0.25]
0.30
0.13
0.29
0.13
0.31
0.12
[13.04]** [7.53]** [13.19]** [7.93]** [10.62]** [4.83]**
-0.01
-0.084
-0.002
-0.08
-0.054
-0.09
[0.21]
[3.39]**
[0.07]
[3.28]**
[1.76]
[2.21]*
2.16
0.85
2.17
0.82
2.05
0.60
[9.08]**
[3.72]**
[9.21]**
[3.72]**
[6.62]**
[1.68]
-0.55
-0.91
-0.55
-0.92
-0.57
-0.95
[3.95]**
[7.10]**
[3.97]**
[7.24]**
[3.20]**
[4.65]**
-0.09
-0.05
-0.09
-0.04
-0.13
-0.08
[4.65]**
[1.16]
[4.44]**
[1.08]
[5.01]**
[1.38]
-0.26
0.07
-0.27
0.07
-0.20
0.11
[3.18]**
[1.03]
[3.31]**
[1.02]
[1.98]*
[1.44]
3.84
-1.93
3.89
-1.87
2.80
-2.34
[3.97]**
[2.50]*
[4.04]**
[2.45]*
[2.22]*
[2.45]*
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
5.93
6.04
5.91
6.01
6.28
6.42
[35.54]** [21.27]** [35.29]** [21.56]** [28.90]** [16.78]**
10560
10560
10898
10898
4996
4996
0.6
0.84
0.6
0.83
0.65
0.86

63

Table 15. Share repurchases as a function of employee option grants. Option grants are the dollar
value of options granted to non-executive employees divided by the average number of employees during
a firm year. Quintile cutoff points are calculated using the entire pooled sample. For Panel A, share
repurchases are calculated from Compustat as the “Purchases of Common and Preferred Stock” (data item
115) less any decrease in the par value of preferred stock (data item 130). For Panel B, share repurchases
are calculated as minus the change in the number of shares outstanding from CRSP, adjusted for both
executive stock grants from ExecuComp and stock option exercises hand-collected from annual reports.

Panel A: Share repurchases from Compustat in the full sample 1992-2003
A1: Percentage of firm years with positive share repurchases
Option grant quintile
Percentage repurchasers Observations
1
46%
2478
2
55%
2477
3
58%
2427
4
56%
2403
5
51%
2252
A2: Percentage of outstanding shares repurchased during the year for
repurchasing firms
Option grant quintile
Mean
Median
Observations
1
2.81%
1.58%
1138
2
2.87%
1.54%
1364
3
3.11%
1.85%
1417
4
3.12%
1.76%
1356
5
2.61%
1.61%
1147

Panel B: Share repurchases from CRSP adjusted for option exercises and
executive stock grants in the hand-collected subsample 1995-2000
B1: Percentage of firm years with positive share repurchases
Option grant quintile
Percentage repurchasers Observations
1
45%
806
2
60%
818
3
60%
818
4
56%
820
5
38%
819
B2: Percentage of outstanding shares repurchased during the year for
repurchasing firms
Option grant quintile
Mean
Median
Observations
1
2.89%
1.19%
363
2
3.32%
1.65%
488
3
3.44%
2.07%
488
4
3.83%
2.05%
456
5
3.85%
1.63%
310

64

