NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE VALUE OF HEALTH AND LONGEVITY
Kevin M. Murphy
Robert H. Topel
Working Paper 11405
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11405
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2005

The authors are also Research Associates of the National Bureau of Economic Research, Senior Fellows of
the Milkin Institute, and Research Associates of the George J. Stigler Center for the Study of the Economy
and the State. We acknowledge support from the Milken Foundation, the Lasker Charitable Trust, and the
Stigler Center. An earlier version was presented as keynote lectures to the European meetings of the
Econometric Society and the Society of Labor Economists, as the Thompson Lecture to the Midwest
Economic Association, the Pihl Lecture at Wayne State University, and in workshops at the World Bank,
the University of Chicago, Stanford University, Boston University, NBER, MIT, University of Wisconsin,
and Texas A&M. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by Kevin M. Murphy and Robert H. Topel. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

The Value of Health and Longevity
Kevin M. Murphy and Robert H. Topel
NBER Working Paper No. 11405
June 2005
JEL No. D11, I10, I18, I19, J10, J17, J19
ABSTRACT
We develop an economic framework for valuing improvements to health and life expectancy, based
on individuals' willingness to pay. We then apply the framework to past and prospective reductions
in mortality risks, both overall and for specific life-threatening diseases. We calculate (i) the social
values of increased longevity for men and women over the 20th century; (ii) the social value of
progress against various diseases after 1970; and (iii) the social value of potential future progress
against various major categories of disease. The historical gains from increased longevity have been
enormous. Over the 20th century, cumulative gains in life expectancy were worth over $1.2 million
per person for both men and women. Between 1970 and 2000 increased longevity added about $3.2
trillion per year to national wealth, an uncounted value equal to about half of average annual GDP
over the period. Reduced mortality from heart disease alone has increased the value of life by about
$1.5 trillion per year since 1970. The potential gains from future innovations in health care are also
extremely large. Even a modest 1 percent reduction in cancer mortality would be worth nearly $500
billion.
Kevin M. Murphy
Graduate School of Business
The University of Chicago
1101 East 58th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
murphy@chicagogsb.edu
Robert H. Topel
Graduate School of Business
The University of Chicago
1101 East 58th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER

I. Introduction
During the 20th century, life expectancy at birth for a representative American increased by
roughly 30 years. In 1900, nearly 18 percent of males born in the United States died before their
first birthday – today, it isn’t until age 62 that cumulative mortality reaches 18 percent.1 As we
demonstrate below, this remarkable increase in longevity reflects progress against a variety of
afflictions and diseases, driving reductions in mortality at all ages. It illustrates a substantial, but
unmeasured, increase in social welfare due to improvements in health.
This paper develops and applies an economic framework for valuing improvements in
health and longevity, based on individuals’ willingness to pay. We use our framework to estimate
the economic gains from declining mortality in the United States over the 20th century, and to
value the prospective gains that could be obtained from further progress against major diseases.
We find that these values are enormous. Gains in life expectancy over the century were worth
over $1.2 million per person to the current population. From 1970 to 2000 gains in life
expectancy added about $3.2 trillion per year to national wealth, with half of these gains due to
progress against heart disease alone. Looking ahead, we estimate that even modest progress
against major diseases would be extremely valuable. For example, a permanent 1 percent
reduction in mortality from cancer has a present value to current and future generations of
Americans of nearly $500 billion, while a cure (if one is feasible) would be worth about $50
trillion.

1

Death rates by age are recorded in Vital Statistics of the United States. Other developed countries show similar
progress over the century. Longer term data are scant, but suggest that progress accelerated up until about 1950. For
example, Swedish data since 1751 show an increase in life expectancy of 6 years between 1800 and 1850, 9 years
between 1850 and 1900, 17 years between 1900 and 1950, and 9 years between 1950 and 2000 (Statistics Sweden,
Program for Population Statistics).
1

Our analysis of the values of health improvements is founded on individuals’
maximization of lifetime expected utility. We distinguish two types of health improvements –
those that extend life by reducing mortality, and those that raise the quality of life. Life extension
is valued because utility from goods and leisure accrues over a longer period, and improvements in
the quality of life raise utility from given amounts of goods and leisure. This framework delivers
precise expressions for the economic value of a life-year, for the value of remaining life, and for
changes in these values when health improves. We show that the social value of improvements in
health is greater: (a) the larger is the population, (b) the higher are average lifetime incomes, (c)
the greater is the existing level of health, and (d) the closer are the ages of the population to the
age of onset of disease. These factors point to an increasing valuation of health improvements
over the past several decades and into the future. As the U.S. population grows, as lifetime
incomes grow, as health levels improve and as the baby-boom generation approaches the primary
ages of disease-related death, the social value of improvements in health will continue to rise.
We also show that improvements in health tend to be complementary; for example,
improvements in life expectancy (from any source) raise willingness to pay for further health
improvements by increasing the value of remaining life. This means that advances against one
disease, say heart disease, raise the value of progress against other age-related ailments such as
cancer or Alzheimer’s. This is of significant empirical relevance, as it implies that the welldocumented historical progress against heart disease, for which mortality has fallen by roughly 30
percent since 1970, has increased the value of further progress against other afflictions. We find
that reductions in mortality since 1970 have raised the value of further health progress by about 18
percent.

2

An analysis of the social value of improvements in health is a first step toward evaluating
the social returns to medical research and health-augmenting innovations. Improvements in health
and longevity are partially determined by society’s stock of medical knowledge, for which basic
medical research is a key input. The U.S. invests over $50 billion annually in medical research, of
which about 40 percent is federally funded, accounting for 25 percent of government research and
development outlays.2 The $27 billion federal expenditure for health related research in FY 2003,
the vast majority of which is for the National Institutes of Health, represented a real dollar
doubling over 1993 outlays. Are these expenditures warranted? Our analysis suggests that the
returns to basic research may be quite large, so that substantially greater expenditures may be
worthwhile. By way of example, take our estimate that a 1 percent reduction in cancer mortality
would be worth about $500 billion. Then a “war on cancer” that would spend an additional $100
billion (over some period) on cancer research and treatment would be worthwhile if it has a 1-in-5
chance of reducing mortality by 1 percent, and a 4-in-5 chance of doing nothing at all.
Against these potential benefits of improving health one must weigh the costs of
implementing new medical technologies. Our analysis highlights some of the important economic
issues surrounding the valuation of improvements in health, health research and the growth in
health expenditures. Many of these issues have significant policy implications. For example, the
annuitization of many public and private retirement benefits (Social Security, private pensions,
Medicare and private medical coverage) and the prevalence of third party payers increase
incentives to spend on medical care, even when benefits are far smaller than costs. These
distortions also skew investments in research away from cost-decreasing improvements in
2

The distribution of health R&D expenditure is reported by the National Institutes of Health. See
http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/products/pubs/pubd/hus/tables/2001/01hus126.pdf. Pharmaceutical industry R&D
expenditures are reported in www.phrma.org/publications/publications/profile02/chapter2.pdf. Government

3

technology, as the demand for care is artificially price insensitive. This creates “second-best”
considerations in valuing medical advances: innovations that would otherwise be welfare
improving may be socially wasteful because ex-post utilization decisions are distorted. In the
presence of such distortions, we must take account of the induced effect that medical advances
have on expenditures when evaluating the social returns to improvements in technology. Our
methodology does this, and we provide evidence on the value of improving health relative to
increased health care expenditures. Overall, the value of increased longevity has greatly exceeded
the costs of health care, though for some cases we find negative net social values.
The paper is organized as follows. Section II provides some empirical foundation for the
analysis that follows, documenting the increase in longevity, and its sources, that occurred has
occurred in the U.S. Section III develops our economic model for valuing improvements in health
and life expectancy, and Sections IV calibrates willingness to pay for health improvements.
Sections V and VI present the empirical application of our methods, estimating the economic
gains associated with the improvements in life expectancy over the 20th century, with particular
focus on the post-1970 period. We also estimate the potential gains to future progress against
major categories of disease, and we provide a rough estimate of the value of improvements in the
health-related “quality” of life. Section VII concludes.

II.

The Setting: Long-Term Evidence of Improvements in Health
Figure 1 shows life expectancy at birth and age 50 in the United States since 1900. These and

other estimates that follow are based on cross sectional age-specific death rates at each date, so
(when health is improving) they will underestimate life expectancy for a given birth cohort. The
figure shows that life expectancy over the century increased by slightly over 30 years. Progress
expenditures for health R&D are reported by the National Science Foundation; see
www.nsf.gov/sbe/srs/nsf02330/historic.htm.
4

during the first half of the century was rapid and evidently concentrated at younger ages – life
expectancy conditional on reaching age 50 grew only slightly. In 1900, about 18 percent of males
died before their first birthday. By 1950 it took 52 years for cumulative male mortality to reach
18 percent, and with current mortality rates it would take 62 years. Progress slowed between 1950
and 1970, especially for men, but the upward trend in life expectancy began again after 1970.
Late century gains were especially prominent for older individuals—expected remaining life of 50
year old men has increased by 5 years since 1970.
Tables 1 and 2 provide further insight into the reasons for these trends. Table 1 uses age
specific mortality data to decompose inter-decade changes in longevity into contributions from
various age intervals. The estimates show the additional life years contributed by declining
mortality rates in each age interval and decade; for example, between 1910 and 1920 lower male
infant mortality (<1 year old) contributed 2.48 of the 4.85 expected life-years gained over the
decade. The table demonstrates important age and gender differences in the timing of lifeextending improvements in health. Over the century reductions in infant (<1) and child (1-14)
mortality were the major contributing factors to increasing lifespans, yet almost all (85%) of these
gains occurred before 1950. This partially explains the slowdown in overall growth that occurred
from 1950 to 1970. In contrast, the renewal of growth that occurred after 1970 is largely
accounted for by declining mortality among older Americans. For example, the contribution of
reduced mortality among men aged 55 and over was negligible before 1970, but since then
declining death rates of older men have added 3.9 years to expected lifetimes. This is more than
half of the total male gain over that period. Women’s gains at older ages began earlier, in the
1940’s, but slowed relative to men’s gains after 1980.3
3

Evidence for other developed countries roughly conforms to the data in Figure 1 and Tables 1 and 2. For OECD
countries as a whole, from 1960 to 2000 the average at-birth life expectancy of women increased by 9 years and that
5

This shift in the age distribution of rising longevity reflects differential progress against lifethreatening ailments, shown in Table 2. The importance of declining mortality from afflictions
that strike older individuals is clear. Since 1950 the largest single contributor is reduced mortality
from heart disease, which added more than 3.5 years to the expected lifetimes of both men and
women, accounting for more than 40 percent of the total. When combined with strokes, progress
against cardiovascular diseases added 4.7 and 5.1 years to the expected lifetimes of men and
women, with most of the gain occurring after 1970.4
These data are the foundation for the problem we study. Rising longevity, and health
improvements more generally, are a form of economic progress. Valuation of these gains is
important for two reasons. First, traditional measures of economic growth and welfare, based on
national income accounts, make no attempt to account for this source of rising living standards.
They therefore underestimate improvements in well-being. Second, public expenditure accounts
for a large portion of both medical research and the provision of medical care. Efficient decisions
require a framework for measuring the value of treatment, and of research-based medical progress.

III.

Economic Framework: Valuing Improvements in Health
Advances in health-related knowledge and its application can take many forms, ranging

from the development of new medicines and techniques for treating disease to improvements in
public health infrastructure. These advances affect the quality of life and the risks of mortality at
various stages of the lifecycle. We assume that these effects are channeled through the intangible
“health” of individuals, of which we distinguish two types. The first, H(t), raises the quality of life

of men by 8 years. OECD Health Data, Table 1, Life Expectancy in Years,
http://www.oecd.org/xls/M00031000/M00031357.xls.
4
These tabulations indicate little progress against cancer. This is partly an artifact of the way the underlying data are
aggregated. Closer examination (we do not provide the details here) shows declining cancer mortality at younger ages
and rising mortality at older ones, with the overall age-adjusted rate fairly constant. This may reflect selection: those
who would have died from heart disease at younger ages may also be more prone to die from cancer later in life.
6

without affecting mortality. For example, new medicines that improve mental health, cure
migraine headaches, or reduce the effects of arthritis will increase instantaneous utility without
necessarily affecting the length of life. The other, G(t), affects mortality without affecting the
quality of life. New methods of detecting treatable diseases or advances in surgical techniques are
examples. Of course, many advances in medical knowledge affect both types of health. New
medicines that reduce blood pressure or retard the advance of cancer can raise both the quality of
life and its duration. H(t) and G(t) are affected by the state of health technologies and also by
individuals’ choices, but we relegate these choices to the background.
How much are people willing to pay for improvements in health? We build on the
lifecycle analyses of Arthur (1981) and Rosen (1988, 1994) by assuming that willingness to pay is
determined by the expected discounted present value of lifetime utility.5 Write remaining lifetime
expected utility for a representative individual of age a as
∞

(1)

H (t )u (c(t ), l (t )) S (t , a )e − ρ (t − a ) dt

a

where ρ is the rate of time preference. We adopt the normalization that the utility of death is
zero. Notice in (1) that H(t) enters multiplicatively, so improvements in type-H health enhance the
“quality” of life by increasing instantaneous utility from consumption, c(t), and non-market time,
l(t).6 Type-G health enters (1) through the survivor function:
t

(2)

S (t , a ) = exp[− λ (τ , G (τ ))dτ ]
a

5

Arthur (1981) and Rosen (1988, 1994) analyze the value of changes in longevity derived from lifetime expected
utility. They ignore quality of life (our H), the value of non-market time, and variation in the value of a life-year over
the lifecycle. Our equation (11), below, incorporates estimates of the value of non-market time and the value of
improvements to health while living in assessing the value of health improvements.
6
This specification for H is consistent with empirical methods for evaluating the quality of life for individuals with
various ailments. The most popular method asks individuals to index their current quality of a life-year against what

7

In (2), λ (τ , G (τ )) is the instantaneous mortality rate (hazard function) and S (t , a ) is the
probability that the agent survives from age a to age t. We assume that λG ≡ ∂λ

∂G

< 0 so that an

increase in type-G health reduces mortality and increases the survivor function.
Notice from (2) that any factor that affects the instantaneous hazard of death, λ, affects the
survivor function in proportion to the survivor function itself. Formally, for any factor α that
shifts the hazard at particular ages the impact on S (t , a ) is
t

(3)

∂S (t , a )
≡ Sα′ (t , a ) = − S (t , a ) λα′ (τ , G (τ ))dτ
∂α
a
= S (t , a )Γα (t , a )

A given change in the hazard at some age prior to t has a larger impact on the probability S (t , a )
when S (t , a ) is itself large. We return to the implications of this point later.
To close the lifecycle problem we must specify a budget constraint. We assume a perfect
annuity market, which means that at each age a, the lifetime expected discounted value of future
consumption must equal expected lifetime wealth
∞

(4)

A(a ) + [ y (t ) − c(t )]S (t , a )e− r (t − a ) dt = 0
a

where r is the interest rate, A(a) is initial assets at age a, and y(t) is life-contingent income at age
t.7 Equation (4) is the lifecycle equivalent of a complete market for consumption insurance. With
endogenous labor supply, y(t) is determined by the choice of l(t), y (t ) = w(t )[1 − l (t )] + b(t ) , where
we normalize the maximum amount of non-market time at unity and b(t) is life-contingent nonwage income such as social security or defined-benefit pension receipts.
they would achieve if they were in “perfect” health. The resulting “Quality Adjusted Life Years” (QALY) gives
values of H≤1, where H=1 indexes perfect health.
7
Later we briefly consider the polar opposite case of zero saving and borrowing, so that c(t)=y(t) for all t.
8

The individual chooses c(t) and l(t) to maximize (1) subject to (4)
∞

(5)

U (a ) = {H (t )u (c(t ), l (t ))e − ρ (t − a ) + µ [ y (t ) − c(t )]e − r (t − a ) }S (t , a )dt + µ A(a )
a

where µ is the multiplier associated with constraint (4).8 Optimization yields the familiar
necessary conditions

H (t )uc′ (c(t ), l (t )) = µ e − ( r − ρ )(t − a )
(6)

H (t )ul′ (c(t ), l (t )) = w(t ) µ e − ( r − ρ )(t − a )
Notice that H(t) and consumption of other goods are natural complements in our setup. For
example, if type-H health declines at older ages (6) implies that consumption will decline as well.9
This is consistent with empirical studies of lifecycle consumption, and we exploit this feature
below in calibrating the value of a life-year.
Equation (5) is our basic building block for thinking about factors that provide value by
improving health. Before turning to those issues, notice that (5) and (6) provide a dollar figure for
the “value of a life.” Consider a small change d λ (a ) in the instantaneous hazard of death at age
a. Using the properties of the survivor function in (2), d λ (a ) < 0 increases survivorship in all
future periods of life. The effect on expected lifetime utility is
∞

dU (a ) = −d λ (a ) {H (t )u (c(t ), l (t ))e − ρ (t − a ) + µ [ y (t ) − c(t )]e− r (t − a ) }S (t )dt
a

The value of remaining life at age a is the marginal rate of substitution between changes in

λ (a) and assets, A(a):

8

We have simplified by ignoring personal medical expenditures, which might be treated as a non-consumption
expense. We return to a consideration of medical expenditures and the costs of health care in our empirical work.
9
A sufficient condition for health and consumption to move together over the lifecycle is ucl (c, l ) ≥ 0 -- leisure does
not reduce the marginal utility of consumption. If

ucl′′ sufficiently negative, then consumption can rise as health falls.
9

∞

∂U (a ) / ∂λ (a ) 1
=
Vλ (a ) ≡ −
{H (t )u (c(t ), l (t ))e − ρ (t − a ) + µ[ y (t ) − c(t )]e − r ( t − a ) }S (t )dt
∂U (a ) / ∂A(a ) µ a

Using (6),
∞

(7)

Vλ (a ) = v(t )e− r (t − a ) S (t , a )dt
a

where
(8)

v(t ) =

u (c(t ), l (t ))
− c(t ) + y (t )
uc′

is the “value of a life-year”: the monetary value of instantaneous utility

u ( c, l )
plus net savings
uc′

that accrue at age t. Net savings at age t increase the value of a life-year because they are used to
finance consumption in other periods, with marginal utilityµ. Notice that the personal rate of time
preference, ρ , does not appear in (7): the ability to borrow and lend means that the expected value
of a future life-year is discounted at the market rate of interest, r. As both interest and mortality
cause future life-years to be discounted, we define S (t , a ) ≡ e − r (t − a ) S (t , a ) as the “discounted
survivor function.”
Similarly H(t) does not appear explicitly in the value of life formula (7). For example,
think of two individuals, A and B, with identical mortality and wealth, but where person A has
uniformly greater H(t). Then (7) indicates that the monetary value of a life will be the same for A
and B because type-H health raises total utility and the marginal utility of consumption by the
same proportional amount. Put differently, the marginal rate of substitution between “life” (or the
probability of living) and consumption does not depend on health.10 This does not mean that

10

Think of a utility function for three goods: (1) health, H, (2) the probability of surviving a given period of time, S;
and (3) consumption, c. If utility is of the form v(H)u(S,c) then the marginal rate of substitution between S and c does
not depend on H. Nevertheless, H is valuable, with marginal value v’(H)/uc(S,c).
10

health has no value, however; it simply says that willingness to pay for changes in survival do not
depend on the level of health. This property is consistent with empirical evidence, as summarized
by the Environmental Protection Agency’s Science Advisory Board (2000):
There are no published studies that show that persons with physical limitations or chronic
illnesses are willing to pay less to increase their longevity than persons without those
limitations. People with physical limitations appear to adjust to their conditions, and their
willingness to pay to reduce fatal risks is therefore not affected.11
Life-Cycle Changes in the Value of Life

While differences in type-H health between individuals do not generate corresponding
differences in the value of life, age-related changes in type-H health and income affect the age
•

profile of the value of a life-year. Adopting the notation x ≡ d log x(t ) / dt , differentiation of (8)
yields the rate of change in the value of a life-year as an individual ages:
(9)

•

v(t ) =

•
•
y (t )
sw (t ) w(t ) + (1 − sw (t )) b(t )
v(t )

+

1−

y (t ) − c(t )
v(t )

•

H (t ) + r − ρ

where sw is the share of labor earnings in total life-contingent income. The first term in (9) ties the
age profile of v(t) to changes in income. Pre-retirement we can set sw=1, so the value of a life-year
•

tracks the age profile of wages. Indexing of post-retirement annuity incomes suggests b =0 is a
good approximation for retired persons. The second term ties life-cycle changes in v(t) to changes
in health and to time preference. Complementarity between type-H health and consumption of
•

goods and leisure in (6) causes the value of a life-year to fall as health declines ( H < 0 ) at older
ages, so persons with declining health are, in effect, more impatient. In our later empirical work
•

we calibrate a lifecycle pattern of H based on lifecycle patterns of consumption.

11

http://www.epa.gov/sab/pdf/eeacf013.pdf
11

Cost-benefit evaluations that apply employ empirical estimates of the “value of a
statistical” life (VSL), and the empirical studies on which they are founded, typically assume that
VSLs do not depend on age. Then it is just as valuable to “save” a 60 year old as a 40 year old.
Our framework indicates that the value of remaining life is age dependent, first rising and then
falling as a person ages. From (7) the value of remaining life satisfies the usual law of motion for
an asset price:
∂Vλ (a )
= (r + λ (a ))Vλ (a ) − v(a )
∂a

Letting R(a) represent the (discounted) length of remaining life at age a, this becomes
(10)

∞
∂Vλ (a)
∂R(a )
= (r + λ (a)) [ v(t ) − v(a) ]S (t , a)dt + v(a)
∂a
∂a
a

Life tables for the United States and other developed economies indicate that the last term is
negative at all ages—surviving another year reduces the length of remaining life—though it is
conceivably positive in situations where the young are at particularly high risk of death, say due to
childhood disease or violence. The first term is positive (negative) if the future is “better” (worse),
on average, than the present. From (9), this term will be positive at younger ages because wages
typically rise with age and because type-H health is unlikely to deteriorate much among the young.
Later in life, when wage growth is negligible, Vλ (a) must decline as persons age because type-H
health deteriorates ( v(t ) < v(a ) for t > a) and because the remaining length of life is falling.

Willingness to Pay for Improvements in Health
To see how this framework can be used to evaluate improvements in health, consider some
factor, α , that can affect both the type-H and type-G concepts of health. For purposes of
subsequent discussion we will refer to α as the state of “medical knowledge”—techniques,
medicines, and so on—though it can equally represent factors that improve public health, such as
12

environmental improvements, improved nutrition or access to medical care. The marginal value
of some improvement in medical knowledge follows from the displacement of (5):
(11)

Vα ( a ) ≡

U α′ ( a )

µ

∞

∞

a

a

= v ( t ) S ( t , a ) Γ α (t , a ) dt +

H α′ ( t ) u ( c ( t ), l ( t ))
S ( t , a ) dt
H (t )
uc

Equation (11) measures the change in value of life induced by changes in any factor that affects
type-H or type-G health. The first term in (11) is the dollar value of the gain in lifetime expected
utility from changes in mortality, indexed by changes in the survivor
function S (t , a )Γα (t , a ) =

∂S (t , a )
. These changes in the probability of survival weight the value
∂α

of a life-year in each period where mortality changes.
The second term is the value of changes in type-H health at each age, Hα′ (t ) ≡ ∂H (t ) / ∂α ,
that raise quality of life while holding mortality fixed. These improvements weight utility itself,
with no contribution from net savings. Notice that when savings are negligible, proportional
changes in type-H health ( Hα′ / H ) and in the survivor function ( Γα ) are valued in exactly the
same way. Living a bit better is like living a bit longer.
Equation (11) is the foundation for our efforts to value past and prospective changes in
longevity and the quality of life. To make empirical headway we restrict utility to be homothetic,
so u (c, l ) ≡ u ( z (c, l )) where z is homogeneous of degree one. Then the dollar value of a life-year is
(suppressing time arguments)
(12)

v= y+

u ( z c c + zl l )
u (c, l )
−c = y+
−c
u c (c , l )
zc u ′( z )

so z is a composite commodity that aggregates consumption and non-market time. Define full
consumption and full income by adding the shadow value of non-market time to consumption and
income:

13

cF = c +

zl
l = zc−1 z
zc

yF = y +

zl
l
zc

where for labor force participants we know that

v= y+

ul ( z ) z l
= = w , the market wage.
uc ( z ) z c

Then

u ( z c c + zl l )
u( z)
− c = y F + cF
−1
zc u ′( z )
zu ′( z )

or
(13)

v = y F + c F Φ( z )

In (13), Φ( z ) is consumer surplus per unit of the composite commodity z, which is identical to
surplus per dollar of full consumption. It is positive when average utility of z is greater than
marginal utility, or equivalently when the elasticity of utility with respect to z is smaller than 1.0.
The theory does not imply that Φ( z ) ≥ 0, however. Positive utility may require composite
consumption above some minimum subsistence level, z0 , where u ( z0 ) = 0 . Then Φ( z0 ) = −1 and,
by monotonicity of surplus, there is a z1 > z0 where Φ( z1 ) = 0 .12

Equation (13) demonstrates two important points about the value of a life-year. First, even
if Φ( z ) = 0 the value of being alive exceeds measured income because of the value of non-market
time. This is especially important for persons without wage and salary income—such as the
retired—for whom the value of non-market time accounts for most of y F . For full-time workers
non-working hours are valued at w and annual hours of leisure are (reasonably) greater than hours
worked, so that y F may be more than double money income. Second, full consumption adds to

12

Note that v(t)<0 doesn’t mean that death is preferred, as the value of continued life at a is determined by
Vλ (a) which will be positive if future prospects are brighter.

14

this value so long as Φ( z ) > 0 . For example, if Φ( z ) = 1 (surplus equals consumption expenditure)
and y=c (no savings), then the value of a life year would be more than 4 times annual income. For
a typical male at peak lifecycle earnings—roughly $45,000 per year around age 50—this would
put the value of a life year above $180,000. The evidence we develop below suggests it is larger
still.
Now use (13) to rewrite (7) and (11):
∞

(14)

Vλ (a ) = [ y F (t ) + c F (t )Φ ( z (t ))]S (t , a )dt
a

(15)

∞

∞

a

a

Vα (a ) = [ y F (t ) + c F (t )Φ( z (t ))]S (t , a )Γα (t , a )dt +

Hα′ (t ) F
c (t )[1 + Φ( z (t ))]S (t , a )dt
H (t )

Equation (14) is the value of an age-a statistical life, which is the expected discounted value of full
income and surplus on full consumption. Equation (15) is the age-a willingness to pay for
improvements in health. Both are proportional to full income and consumption, implying that
health is perhaps the ultimate “normal” good. To pursue this point let σ ( z ) = −

u′( z )
denote the
zu′′( z )

elasticity of intertemporal substitution (EIS) in consumption, and consider the impact of increased
income or wealth on v(t). Abstracting from saving by setting y=c, the income elasticity of v(t) is
(16)

∂ log v
1
1
= 1+
−
∂ log y
σ ( z ) 1 + Φ( z ) −1

which is larger than 1.0 if σ ( z ) < 1 +

1
. Evidence developed below indicates Φ( z ) ≈ 2 for
Φ( z )

prime-aged individuals, and empirical estimates of the EIS suggests σ ( z ) = 1.0 as a rough upper
bound, so the condition is likely satisfied—with these values the income elasticity of the value of a

15

life year is 1.33. It would be larger still for values of σ ( z ) < 1.0 , as are common found in
empirical applications.13
Equations (14)-(16) have a number of implications for valuing improvements in health and
health-related investments.
1. Willingness to pay for improvements in health is proportional to full income and full
consumption, so willingness to pay rises with wealth. That wealthier individuals are willing to
pay more for improvements in health may seem obvious, but the broader implication is that
economic growth is a boon to health-related investments. This is especially important when
willingness to pay for health improvements is income elastic, as suggested by (16). Then
richer societies invest proportionally more in health because life itself is more valuable.14
2. The relevant concepts of income and consumption include the shadow value of non-market
time. Common attempts to value life-years based on income or consumption expenditures
alone will miss a large part of what people value, especially when health improvements are
concentrated at older ages.15
3. Wealth constant, improvements in both type-G and type-H health are more valuable when
surplus per dollar of full consumption, Φ , is large. Intuitively, Φ is large when the demand
for current consumption is inelastic, so that consumption expenditures at different ages are
poor substitutes— σ ( z ) is small. Then loss of a year of life cannot be offset by simply
reallocating consumption to other years. We exploit this notion in the next section, gauging
Φ from evidence on intertemporal substitution in consumption.
4. For given profiles of income and consumption, the value of a reduction in mortality ( Γα ) or an
improvement in the quality of life ( Hα′ / H ) is larger when S (t , a ) is large. This suggests a
form of increasing returns in health improvements: medical and other advances that reduce
mortality raise the value of further advances, because individuals are more likely to be alive to
enjoy the benefits. So health-related investments will be more valuable to already healthy
Section IV discusses empirical evidence on σ ( z ) .
Our estimates of the value of a life year are based on empirical estimates of the value of a statistical life (VSL), as
surveyed in Viscusi (1992) and Viscusi and Aldy (2003). Based on comparisons of VSLs across countries Viscusi
and Aldy conclude that the income elasticity of the value of a statistical life is about 0.6.
15
For example, the Conference Board of Canada’s (2001) estimates the “costs” of excess mortality based on what a
decedent would have produced, not the value to the individual of remaining alive.
13
14

16

individuals, and in societies where average health is already high. We develop this point more
completely in Section V.
5. The value of progress against a particular disease is greatest when the current age, a, is close
to, but before, the typical age of onset of the disease. For example, for an ailment like
cardiovascular disease, mortality-reducing progress ( Γα ) is likely to be concentrated at ages
50 and above. Then the expected present value of such progress will be greater at age 45 than
at ages 25 or 90 because of both discounting and survivorship. Thus we estimate in Section
VI that a 10% reduction in mortality from heart disease would be worth about $30,000 to a 45year old male but only about $15,000 to men aged 25 or 90. Similarly, progress against
Alzheimer’s that improves the quality of life ( Hα′ / H >0) will be more valuable to 60 year-olds
than to 30 year-olds.

IV. Calibration: The Value of a Life-Year
Our calibration strategy begins with estimates of “the value of a statistical life” taken from
the literature on willingness to pay for reductions in risks of accidental death (see Viscusi (1992)
for a survey or Thaler and Rosen (1975) for an original analysis). These studies estimate
willingness to pay from wage differences on jobs with varying probabilities of accidental death, or
from market prices for products (such as airbags) that reduce the likelihood of a fatal injury. For
example, suppose that workers in a particular occupation require a $500 annual wage premium in
order to accept a 1 in 10,000 increase in the annual probability of accidental death. In a population
of 10,000 workers this change in risk would raise expected deaths by 1 each year, with an
aggregate value of $500 × 10,000 = $5 million. Then the value of one statistical life is $5 million.
In our framework this is the conceptual equivalent of the value of remaining life given by Vλ (a) in
(14).
According to Viscusi’s (1993) survey, this literature yields a “reasonable range” of values
for Vλ (a) of $4 million to $9 million per statistical life, expressed in current (2004) dollars, while

17

Viscusi and Aldy (2003) provide a tighter range for U.S. data at $5.5 to $7.5 million. Government
agencies and panels regularly update these estimates to account for economic growth, new
methods, and evidence; for example since 1999 the Environmental Protection Agency used a value
of $6.3 million per statistical life in its cost-benefit analyses.16 These estimates are typically
founded on regression analyses of risk-income tradeoffs for working-age individuals, so for the
calculations that follow we will assume that the survivorship-weighted average value of a
statistical life for individuals between the ages of 25 and 55 is $6.3 million. Readers who prefer a
different value may adjust things accordingly, as most of our later estimates are scalable.
Given this average value in (14), it remains to impute a lifecycle shape for the value of a
life-year, v(t ) = y F (t ) + c F (t )Φ( z (t )) , which in turn determines the lifecycle pattern of the value of
a life (14) and willingness to pay for health improvements (15). We construct v(t) from the
model’s structure and empirical evidence on key parameters. Values of full income y F (t ) for a
representative individual can be constructed from lifecycle wage profiles, while the time paths of
c(t ) and c F (t ) satisfy

(17a)

c = σ ( r − ρ ) + σ H − (η − σ ) sL w

(17b)

c F = σ ( r − ρ ) + σ H − (1 − σ ) sL w

where sL is the share of non-market time in full consumption and η is the elasticity of substitution
between consumption and leisure in z(c,l). We assume that σ and η are constants, which implies
that z(c.l) is CES and that
−1

(18)

16

z1−σ − z10−σ
u( z) =
1 − σ −1

−1

Φ( z ) =

−1
z
1
1 − σ ( 0 )1−σ
z
σ −1

See Dockins et. al. (2004) for a review.
18

where u ( z0 ) =0. The value of a life-year will be larger when demand for current full consumption
is more inelastic, which occurs when there is little intertemporal substitution in consumption.
There is a substantial empirical literature seeking to estimate σ based on versions of (17a).
Hansen and Singleton (1983), Hall (1988), and Campbell and Mankiw (1989) find that aggregate
consumption growth is insensitive to changes in the real interest rate, so that σ is close to zero.
This would imply unreasonably large values of a life-year because Φ( z ) would be huge.
Similarly Barsky et. al. (1997), using questionnaire responses, find an upper bound on σ of about
0.36. In contrast, Browning, Hansen, and Heckman (1999) survey estimates of σ from microdata and conclude that the evidence favors a value for σ that is “a bit” larger than 1.0. We know
of no formal evidence on an analogue of z0 / z , though comparisons of living standards over time
and across countries suggest that it is quite small. In effect, the ratio asks how much composite
consumption individuals would sacrifice before they would rather be dead. Notice that this ratio
must be sufficiently positive for values of σ < 1 to generate positive surplus in (18).
Table 3 shows values of a life-year for a 50 year-old male who earns annual wages and
benefits of $60,000 for 2000 hours of work.17 We assume that y=c for these calculations, which is
reasonable at this point in the lifecycle,18 and that full income and consumption are based on 4000
hours available for work and leisure. We calculate v(t) under various assumptions for the sizes of

σ and z0 / z . The values in the table are large. For example, for σ =1.0 the value of an age-50
life-year ranges from $193,000 ( Φ ( z ) = 0.61) when z0 / z =.2 up to $360,000 ( Φ ( z ) = 2.0) when

17

Median annual earnings of men aged 45-54 who worked full time in 1999 were about $45,000,
http://www.census.gov/hhes/income/earnings/call1usmale.html. Non-wage benefits average about 29% of total
compensation for a typical worker, http://www.bls.gov/news.release/ecec.t01.htm.
18
Consumer Expenditure Survey data indicate that households with a “reference person” aged 45-54 2002-2003
reported average after tax incomes of $53,195 and consumption expenditures of $46,353.
http://www.bls.gov/cex/home.htm, Table 29.
19

z0 / z =.05. For purposes of the following calculations we assume σ = .80 at all ages and z0 / z =
.10 at age 50, yielding a value of a life-year of $373,000 ( Φ ( z ) = 2.11) when y=c.
To complete the lifecycle calibration of v(t) we choose the parameters of (17) in order to
fit lifecycle patterns of consumption, and y(t) to match lifecycle wages. We impute the shape of
y(t) by estimating a standard human capital earnings function with a 4th order polynomial in years
of labor market experience. Empirical studies of lifecycle consumption indicate that consumption
expenditures peak around age 50 and then decline by about 2% per year thereafter.19 This pattern
is consistent with declining type-H health after middle-age, together with r > ρ , which we
assume. Figure 2a shows our imputed lifecycle patterns of v(t), y F (t ) and c F (t ) that yield an
average value of Vλ =$6.3 million between ages 25 and 55.20 The value of a life-year peaks at
over $350,000 around age 50, but falls by more than half by age 80 because consumption (health)
declines. Figure 2b shows the implied shape of H(t) that is consistent with lifecycle
consumption—type-H health is stable until age 40, but declines rapidly in late middle-age.
The values of a life-year shown in Figure 2a are large in comparison to values that have
been used in some related studies, but these magnitudes are necessary in order to match empirical
estimates of the value of a statistical life. Lichtenberg (2001) and Cutler et. al. (1998) apply a
uniform value of $25,000 per life year saved in valuing gains from new drugs and advances
against heart disease. This value is less than income for a typical full-time worker, and almost
19

See Banks et. al. (1998) and Browning and Crossley (2001). Fernandez-Villaverde and Krueger (2004) track the
lifecycle profile of consumption from age 20, using Consumer Expenditure Survey data. Their relative consumption
index peaks at about 1.3 at age 50 and declines by about 2 percent per year thereafter. Using British data Banks et. al.
(1998) find that consumption peaks at age 50, declines by 2 percent per year pre-retirement, and by about 1 percent
per year post-retirement. In our calibrations, relative consumption peaks at 1.29 at age 50, with a rate of decline of 2
percent at age 60 and 1.5-2 percent thereafter.
20
In addition to the assumptions stated in the text, we assume r − ρ =.02, η =.50 and equal present values of expected
lifetime income and consumption from age 20 forward. We also assume that post-retirement life-contingent income
replaces 50 percent of pre-retirement earnings, commencing at age 65. Further details are presented in Murphy and
Topel (2005).
20

certainly less than full income, so it appears inconsistent with both theory and the evidence
mentioned above that puts the value of a statistical life in the $4-9 million range.21 Other studies
impute higher values. Moore and Viscusi (1988) estimate the value of a life-year at $175,000,
while Miller, Calhoun, and Arthur (1990) estimate a value of $120,000, based on a $2 million
value of a statistical life. None of these studies account for lifecycle changes in the value of a lifeyear, as implied by theory.
Figure 3 plots values of remaining life by age for men and women using values of v(t)
from Figure 2a for both sexes. In these and following calculations we value life-years from birth
to age 20 at their age 20 values. The curves differ because we apply gender-specific survivor
functions, so imputed values of remaining life are higher for women because they live longer. The
role of discounting, due to both interest and future mortality in S(t,a), is apparent in the figure: the
value of remaining life peaks at $7 million for persons in their early 30’s, but declines smoothly
thereafter even though the value of a life-year continues to rise until age 50. We estimate that the
value of remaining life declines to $5 million at age 50 and to $2 million by age 70.

V. Further Results
Complementarity in Willingness to Pay for Health Improvements
As noted above, willingness to pay for health improvements in is larger the greater is the
likelihood that one will be around to enjoy them; that is, the larger are future values of S(t,a). This
suggests a form of complementarity in the willingness to pay for health advances. An
improvement in type-G health that reduces mortality from cardiovascular disease, for example,
raises future values of S(t,a). This increases the value of advances against other mortality-causing

21

The purpose of the calculation in Cutler et. al. (1998) was to show that the value of additional life years offset the
medical cost of achieving them. So a conservative value imputed to life-years gained simply reinforced their point
that benefits offset costs.
21

diseases such as cancer. So there is a sort of increasing return inherent to medical progress: past
success raises the value of new improvements in health. This complementarity is also important at
the level of individual investments in health. A medical advance that raises future survival
probabilities raises the return to individual investments in health such as diet and exercise that
have their main benefit in the future.
To formalize these ideas, assume that there are only two diseases, call them A and B, that
affect type-H or type-G health. To keep things simple, assume that A (B) affects one of type-H or
type-G health, but not both. This means that an advance against A might reduce mortality but
leave the “quality” of life, through H, unchanged. Other possibilities are simple combinations of
the formulas that follow.
Consider first the case where A and B each affect mortality only. By the nature of
competing risks we know λ (t ) = λ A (t ) + λ B (t ) , where λ j (t ) is the mortality hazard from disease j.
∂λ A (t )
Denote by dα (d β ) a health advance that reduces mortality from A (B), so that
< 0 .22
∂α
Differentiation of (15) and some algebra yields
Vαβ (a ) ≡

(19)

∞

∂Vα (a )
= [ y F (t ) + Φ ( z )c F (t )]S (t , a )Γα (t , a )Γ β (t , a )dt
∂β
a
−

∞

∂ ln µ
[1 + Φ( z )]c F (t ) S (t , a )Γα (t , a )dt
∂β a

In (19) the functions Γα ≥ 0 and Γ β ≥ 0 are derivatives of ln S (t , a ) , defined in (3), and are nondecreasing in t and strictly positive for some values of t. This means that the first integral in (19)
is strictly positive, reflecting the intuition stated above: Progress against heart disease (A) raises
future values of S(t,a). This makes progress against cancer (B) more valuable because the

22

individual is more likely to be alive to enjoy the gains. Progress against cancer isn’t worth much
if you are sure to die of a heart attack first.
The second line of (19) is a wealth effect that occurs because people now expect to live
longer, so lifecycle income must be spread over a longer life.23 From the lifecycle budget
constraint these adjustments must satisfy:
∞

∞

∂c(t )
S (t , a )dt = [ y (t ) − c(t )]S (t , a)Γ β (t , a)dt
β
∂
a
a

Then using the definition of σ ( z ) :
∞

(20)

∂ ln µ
=−
∂β

a

[ y (t ) − c(t )]S (t , a)Γ β (t , a)dt
∞

σ ( z )c(t ) S (t , a)dt

a

If reductions in mortality from ailment B are weighted toward periods where net saving is positive,
then consumption rises (marginal utility falls) and complementarity in (19) is assured. But if
progress against B occurs mainly in periods of negative net saving the marginal utility of
consumption must rise. For recent medical advances such as reductions in mortality from
cardiovascular disease – which mainly strikes older, non-working individuals – lower per-period
consumption is likely because savings must finance a longer retirement when mortality falls.24
Even so, for reasonable values of the parameters and empirically relevant savings rates this term is
negligible. Then (19) is positive and we conclude that mortality-reducing improvements in health
are complementary.

22

To focus on essential ideas, we rule out the obvious case where progress against one disease, say A, affects
mortality from B.
23
Absent saving, so y=c in all periods, this term does not appear and complementarity is assured.
24
We ignore other indirect effects that would reinforce complementarity by increasing y(t), such as delayed retirement
or increased investment in human capital.
23

The next case we consider is when ailment A affects mortality (e.g. cancer) but B affects
the quality of life through type-H health (e.g. Alzheimer’s). Does progress against cancer raise the
value of progress against Alzheimer’s? As utility takes the form Hu(z), we have ruled out the
obvious case where willingness to pay depends directly on H.25 Instead the effect is channeled
though the complementarity of H with z: a medical advance that raises H at older ages, for
example, causes a reallocation of lifecycle consumption, raising consumer surplus at older ages as
well. This is complementary with reductions in mortality, which raise the probability of being
alive at older ages. Formally, the displacement of the budget constraint when d β > 0 yields
∞

0 = c F (t ) S (t , a )σ ( z )[

(21)

a

∂ ln H (t ) ∂ ln µ
−
]dt
∂β
∂β

because in this case the survivor function is unaffected by d β . If the improvement in health is
age-neutral (

∂ ln H
∂ ln H (t ) ∂ ln µ
is constant) then
−
= 0 at all ages because the consumption
∂β
∂β
∂β

profile is unchanged. But if proportional changes in H are larger at older ages, such as for
progress against diseases like Alzheimer’s or arthritis, then

∂ ln H (t ) ∂ ln µ
−
is negative at young
∂β
∂β

ages and positive at older ones. This fact is useful in evaluating complementarity in willingness to
pay, determined by
(22)

Vαβ (a ) =

∞

1 + Φ( z)
∂ ln H (t ) ∂ ln µ
Γα (t , a )c F (t ) S (t , a )σ ( z )[
−
]dt
σ ( z)
∂β
∂β
a

In (22) the integrand from (21) is multiplied by

1 + Φ( z )
1+ Φ
Γα (t , a) . If
is constant, then since
σ ( z)
σ

Γα (t , a) is non-decreasing the sign of (22) is determined by whether improvements in H rise or
25

That is, we have ruled out the case where an increase in H has a larger impact on utility than on the marginal utility
of consumption. In that case, progress against Alzheimer’s (for example) would raise the value of a life year among

24

fall with age. The expression is positive if

greater weight to positive values of

∂ ln H (t )
rises with age, because then Γα (t , a) gives
∂β

∂ ln H (t ) ∂ ln µ
−
. This means that mortality-reducing
∂β
∂β

medical advances are complementary with type-H health improvements that increase with age.
Advances against heart disease raise willingness to pay for progress against Alzheimer’s and
arthritis, and so on.
The last case to consider is when afflictions A and B both affect type-H health, but not
mortality. Then complementarity is determined by the sign of
∞

(23)

Vαβ (a ) = [1 +
a

Again assuming

1+ Φ

σ

1 + Φ( z ) F
∂ ln H (t ) ∂ ln H (t ) ∂ ln µ
]c (t ) S (t , a )σ ( z )
[
−
]dt
σ ( z)
∂α
∂β
∂β

constant, comparison with (21) indicates that Vαβ > 0 when

largest weight at ages when

∂ ln H (t )
gives
∂α

∂ ln H (t )
is large. So age-increasing advances (e.g. against arthritis
∂β

and Alzheimer’s) tend to be complements, as are age-decreasing ones (e.g. against non-fatal
childhood ailments).
This analysis has yielded three additional implications:
6. Mortality-reducing (type-G) improvements in health tend to be complementary: reductions in
mortality from one disease raise the value of progress against other life-threatening ailments.
Progress against heart disease raises the value of progress against cancer.
7. Mortality reducing improvements in health raise the value of type-H improvements that
increase with age. Reductions in mortality from heart disease raise the value of progress
against Alzheimer’s or arthritis.
8. Type-H improvements in health that increase with age are complementary with one another.
Progress against Alzheimer’s raises the value of progress against arthritis.
the elderly, reinforcing complementarity with other advances that reduce mortality.
25

The Social Value of Improvements in Health
The framework set out above values health improvements by measuring willingness to pay
for a representative individual. An important application of our method is in assessing the value
of medical advances or improvements in public health infrastructure that increase society’s
“output” of health. These advances typically affect both current and future populations, so to
measure the social value of such advances we must aggregate over the current and expected future
populations that benefit. If (15) represents an individual’s willingness to pay for health
improvements, then the current social value of advances that improve health from date τ onward
is:
(24)

Wα (τ ) =

∞

N (a,τ )Vα ( a )da + N f (τ )Vα (0)

a =0

Here N(a,τ) is the population of age a at date τ and N f (τ ) is the present discounted value of the
number of births in future years. These enter the calculation because a medical advance that
improves the health of the current population will also apply to future generations, for whom value
is measured at birth. When combined with (15), equation (24) yields two additional implications.
9. The current social value of a medical advance is proportional to the size of the current and
future populations to which it applies.
10. Aggregate willingness to pay for progress against a particular disease will be highest when the
age distribution of the population is concentrated near, but before, the typical age of onset of
the disease. For example, the aging of the baby-boom generation has raised the social value of
medical advances against age-related ailments.

26

In our empirical applications we will apply (24) to mortality data in three ways. First, treating
reductions in mortality at any past date τ as the outcome of technical improvements that increase
health output, we will augment date- τ national income to include the value of life-years
“produced”. Second, we use (24) to calculate what past reductions in mortality are worth today.
For example, we calculate the current value of reductions in mortality from heart disease that
occurred between 1970 and 2000. Third, we use (24) to calculate the prospective value of medical
progress that would, say, reduce the average likelihood of dying from cancer or AIDs by some
amount.

VI. Estimating the Value of Past and Prospective Health Improvements
This section applies the model of Sections III-V to measure long-term gains in the value of
life, the disease-specific sources of those gains, and the prospective values of future progress
against life-threatening diseases. We also show how to account for changes in medical
expenditures that accompany life-extending medical progress, which is a central feature of costbenefit analyses of improving health care. We begin by gauging the size, timing, and agedistribution of gains over the 20th century.

Valuing Longevity Gains over the 20th Century
Using age and gender specific mortality tables for the United States that begin in 1900,
Figures 4a-b show the timing and age distribution of increases in the value of life over the 20th
century.26 For these calculations, we value additional life-years at past dates at current willingness
to pay, using the age profile of values shown in Figure 2a. In other words, the figures show the
value received by individuals of a particular age today from health-improving advances that were
26

Nordhaus (2003) discusses the production of health in the context of national income accounts, and concludes that
valuing increased longevity substantially growth in welfare. Murphy and Topel (2003a) provide initial estimates for
the 1970-98 period.
27

achieved in the past. Vertical differences between two curves represent the present discounted
value of changes in survivor rates accruing to individuals of a particular age for a particular
decade, so the top curve (2000) shows cumulative gains from 1900 to 2000, and so on.
For both men and women the largest gains in the value of life are at birth and at young
ages, representing large declines in infant mortality and deaths from childhood diseases. We
estimate that health improvements from all sources and at all ages over the 20th century yielded
additional life years for a new born male or female with a present discounted value of nearly $2
million. Most of the gains for newborns occurred in the early decades of the century – more than
half occurred by 1930 and more than 80 percent had been realized by 1950, reflecting substantial
progress against infant and childhood mortality in the first half of the century. But gains are also
very substantial for adults. Men aged 20 to 40 gained additional life-years worth roughly $1
million, valued at current implicit prices. Women’s gains in these “prime” years were even larger,
peaking at nearly $1.2 million for women in their early 30s. This reflects the fact that expected
remaining durations of life increased by more for women than for men, as we value life years for
men and women at the same implicit prices. Importantly for what follows, Figures 4a-b show
negligible progress for women after 1980, though men enjoyed substantial gains over this period.
Even among adults, the gains by age were unevenly distributed over the century. Roughly
three-fourths of the $1 million gain enjoyed by 20 year old men had occurred by 1960, but the
corresponding proportion for 40 year olds is about half and among 60 year olds it is substantially
less than half. In other words, progress during the first half of the 20th century disproportionately
benefited the young, but progress at the end of the century shifted toward older individuals,
reflecting (as we shall see) progress against heart disease, stroke, and other older-age ailments.

28

To evaluate whether these estimates are reasonable, consider the $1 million gain enjoyed
by a 30 year old male. Over the century, the expected remaining duration of life for 30 year old
men increased by 11.3 years, from 34.9 to 46.2. So think of a current 30 year old male who is
offered the choice of (a) his current standard of living and health or (b) a lump sum of $1 million
and the life-expectancy of 30 year old in 1900, which is 11.3 years shorter. Our estimates imply
that the choice is a close call, but for a payment of less than $1 million he would keep his current
health. For women, the corresponding gain in life expectancy is 14.9 years, from 36.4 to 50.5,
which is worth nearly $1.2 million. If the reader thinks that it would take greater payments than
these to induce a trade, then our estimates are conservative.
Figure 5 further documents the difference in timing between men’s and women’s
cumulative gains. We graph age-weighted average gains for men and women over the entire
century, using end-of-century population weights. These gains cumulate to about $1.3 million for
the representative individual of each sex. Notice that women’s gains started to outpace men’s in
the 1930s and that progress for both men and women decelerated in the early 1950s, reflecting the
near-exhaustion of potential progress against infant and child mortality. For men, health progress
stalled for 20 years, so that the female-male gap in attained value gained reached nearly $180,000
by 1970. But male progress resumed after 1970, reflecting advances against adult ailments (see
Figure 4), and the female-male disparity had vanished by the end of the century.27
The estimates in Figures 4a-b value past gains at current willingness to pay, so they
represent the current value of past progress—what people alive today gained from earlier
improvements. Another way to illustrate the importance of health progress is to value mortalityreducing progress using willingness to pay at the date it occurs, so newly “produced” life years are
27

Murphy and Topel (2003b) apply these methods to disparities in health progress by race and gender, showing
convergence in the value of health outcomes for blacks relative to whites.
29

a component of output—health capital—that is uncounted in national income accounts.28 The
result is a sort of “health augmented” measure of per-capita national output that counts the present
value of reduced mortality at the date it is observed. Table 4 reports the results of this exercise.
From 1900 to 1950 the average per-capita value of new life-years “produced” through
declining mortality was roughly equal to average output of goods and services. The decade from
1910-20 is an exception, reflecting the impact of the flu pandemic of 1917-19. Gains after 1950
form a smaller share of “output” per person because other forms of productivity have grown faster.
Taking account of health capital in this way also changes one’s perspective on relative growth
rates from different decades: per-capita GDP grew rapidly during the 1960s and slowly during the
1970s, yet production of this measure of health stagnated in the 1960s—it was lower than at any
other time during the century—but boomed in the 1970s.

Post-1970 Gains
Figures 4 and 5 showed a resumption of mortality-reducing health progress after 1970,
which was concentrated at older ages and greater for men than for women. We now turn to a more
detailed examination of this episode.
Figures 6a-b show the timing and age-distribution of gains after 1970. In contrast to the
century-long gains shown above, the largest gains after 1970 accrue to persons between ages 40
and 60, reflecting progress against ailments that affect older individuals. Cumulative gains for
men peak at over $460,000 for 50 year olds (who gained about 5 years of life-expectancy), which
is about double the peak gains of women (who gained 2.8 years). Most of this value, and most of
the difference between the gains of men and women, is due to substantial progress against heart
28

To measure willingness to pay in each period we maintain the shape of v(t) in 2000, but rescale its level according
to the ratio of GDP per capita in year and in 2000. We (necessarily) count reductions in mortality when they are
observed, which may not correspond to when they are produced. For example, if improved neo-natal care reduces the
likelihood of heart attacks at age 50, we will badly miss the timing of health production.
30

disease alone (Figure 7), which kills more men, at earlier ages, than women. Reduced mortality
from heart disease over this 30-year interval was worth nearly $300,000 to a 50 year old male
(Figure 8), which was roughly three-fourths of the overall increase in the value of remaining life.
This partially accounts for the late-century “convergence” of men’s and women’s gains, due to a
sharp deceleration in women’s progress after 1980 (Figure 6b). This fact will prove important
below, when we deduct rising expenditures for medical care from these values.
Table 5 reports the social value of these advances, using (24) to aggregate private values
over end-of-century and expected future populations. So, for example, the 1970-80 gain of
$188,706 for 45-54 year old men represents what men of that age in 2000 would be willing to pay
to have 1980 survival rates instead of 1970 survival rates. This gain applies to a population of
15.8 million men, and so on. The population at birth represents the present discounted value (at
3.5%) of projected birth cohorts, as estimated by the U.S. Bureau of the Census.29
The numbers are huge because the population to which per-person gains are applied is
large. For men, mortality reductions that were achieved between 1970 and 1980 have an
aggregate present discounted value of $27 trillion. Progress slowed somewhat after 1980, but
even so the cumulative post-1970 gains for men total $61 trillion. Women’s gains, which total
“only” $34 trillion over the full period, decline sharply relative to men’s after 1980. Combining
men’s and women’s gains, reductions in mortality between 1970 and 2000 yielded additional lifeyears with an end-of-century value of $95 trillion, or about $3.2 trillion per year. Of this amount,
separate calculations show that about two-thirds ($64 trillion) accrued to persons alive in 2000,
and one-third will be enjoyed by future birth cohorts.

31

Net Gains: Deducting the Rising Costs of Medical Care
To be economically worthwhile the benefits of health improvements must offset the costs
of achieving them. These costs have two basic components. The first is the up-front cost of
developing new health-improving technologies or infrastructure, which takes the form of medical
research and development expenditures, broadly defined. The second is the cost of actually
implementing new procedures and treatments, which is a flow of direct health care expenditures.
These costs can either rise or fall as a consequence of technical advances, depending on the nature
of the advance and the nature of demand for medical services.
Health expenditures can be accounted for by a straightforward extension of the earlier
analysis. We assume that health expenditures at age t, k(t), provide no direct utility beyond their
necessity for maintaining health. Then a health-improving technical advance ( dα > 0 ) may
improve both longevity and the quality of life while also changing the costs of health care.
Willingness to pay for such an advance is a simple extension of (15):
∞

∞

a

a

Vα (a ) = [ y F (t ) − k (t ) + c F (t )Φ( z (t ))]( Sα (t , a ) + S k (t , a )kα (t ))dt − kα (t ) S (t , a )dt

(25)

+

∞

a

Hα′ (t ) + H k′ (t )kα (t ) F
c (t )[1 + Φ ( z (t ))]S (t , a )dt
H (t )

In (25) kα (t ) is the change in health spending at age t. If health spending is chosen efficiently
then terms involving kα (t ) vanish because the net return to a marginal increase in expenditure is
zero. Then the balance of benefits and costs is surely positive and (25) is equivalent to (15). But
the presence of third-party payers for medical services can distort these decisions, so the true
benefits of medical advances can be smaller than the costs of supplying them. This can be

29

http://www.census.gov/ipc/www/usinterimproj/ , Table 2A.
32

important on certain margins, as when large medical costs are incurred very near the end of life,
allegedly to little benefit.
Our empirical analogue of (25) compares the value of increased longevity to changes
health expenditures, broken out by gender and age. We use data on individuals’ expenditures
from the Medical Expenditure Surveys, collected in 1977, 1987, and then as a panel starting in
1996. As is the case with virtually all survey estimates of household consumption, surveypredicted aggregate medical spending underestimates actual national expenditure for medical
services. So we use the age profile of relative spending from the survey data to allocate total
medical expenditures. This procedure gives us estimates of aggregate health care expenditure by
age and gender from 1970 to 2000.30
Table 6 shows that medical expenditures grew from 11.3% of total consumption in 1970 to
19.6% in 2000. Adjusting real per-capita expenditures for the changing age composition of the
population, per-person expenditure on medical services grew from $2171 in 1970 to $4855 in
2000, or by 124%. Calculating the present value of aggregate medical expenditures using 2000
population weights and survival probabilities, and assuming that the same level of expenditure
applies to future years and birth cohorts, the capital value of medical expenditures grew from
$16.2 trillion in 1970 to over $50 trillion by 2000.
Table 7 calculates net social gains from increased longevity by combining the estimates
from Tables 5 and 6. It is important to note that this method of allocating benefits and costs is
only a rough analogue of equation (25). In (25), kα (t ) represents the change in medical
expenditures that are the direct consequence of implementing a new medical technology. We
30

If the understatement varies by age, then our allocations will be biased. Based on data from national health care
systems in Canada and the UK, the age profile of expenditures in the MES and MEPS is flatter than in these systems,
suggesting that we might understate spending at older ages. However, MES and MEPS projections account for about

33

actually measure the value of increased longevity and changes in medical expenditures from all
sources. This may cause us to either overestimate or underestimate the true social value of health
care advances. First, changes in medical expenditures include expenditures that raise the “quality”
of life ( Hα (t ) > 0 ), which we ignore, so we may underestimate true social gains. Second, some
current medical expenditures are investments in health that produce future benefits, so costs
incurred in one period may yield measurable benefits later. Expenditures during our period of
study may yield future benefits, leading to an underestimate of net gains, or benefits that we
observe may be the outcome of past events, which causes an overestimate. Finally, some observed
gains may be due to things unrelated to direct medical spending—cleaner air or water, for
example. We don’t count the costs of these things.
With these caveats in mind, Table 7 shows our estimates of “net” social gains. Between
1970 and 2000 increased longevity yielded a “gross” social value of $95 trillion, while the
capitalized value of medical expenditures grew by $34 trillion, leaving a net gain of $61 trillion—
still large by any standard. Almost two thirds ($39 trillion) of this gain “occurs” in the 1970s,
where both gross benefits are highest and additional costs are lowest. Overall, rising medical
expenditures absorb only 36% of the value of increased longevity.
The estimates in Table 7 represent a sort of “average” gain over the population as a whole.
Yet many critiques of the efficacy of rising medical expenditures focus on marginal decisions to
expend resources when benefits are smaller than costs (e.g., Meltzer, 2003; Fuchs, 1972),
especially on life-extending procedures for individuals who are near death.31 Table 8 provides
some evidence on how our estimates of average net gains vary with age. For men, net gains are

62 percent of total medical spending but 68 percent of actual Medicare expenditures, for which virtually all Americans
over age 65 qualify. These data suggest that the actual age profile of medical spending is flatter in the US.
31
For example, over a quarter of all Medicare expenditures are spent in the last year of life, a proportion that has
remained remarkably stable since the 1970s. See Hogan, Lunney, Gabel, and Lynn (2001).
34

positive overall and in each sub-period for all but the oldest (85+) age category. Incremental cost
as a proportion of gross benefits is fairly constant until we reach older age categories (65 and
older), when the cost share rises sharply. The story is different for women, however. Women’s
incremental costs are a larger proportion of benefits in every age group, and we estimate negative
average net benefits for women over age 65. In the 1990s we estimate average net losses for
women in every age group except infants, and the size of deficits rises sharply with age. Though
these expenditures may surely be offset by uncounted improvements in the quality of life, they
provide a cautionary tale that even large values may be swamped by increased costs.

What’s on the Table? Prospective Gains from Medical Progress
We now turn to estimates of what can be gained from future progress against particular
mortality-causing diseases. Our calculations make no attempt to deduct prospective costs of such
progress, so they should be interpreted as the value of life-years that could be gained from a given
reduction in mortality from a disease. This value must be large enough to cover the costs of
developing and implementing new medical advances that would save lives.
Our benchmark is a 10 percent reduction in mortality from a life-threatening disease; this or
even greater progress seems within the realm of possibility. Figures 9a and 9b show our estimates
of the age profiles of individual values resulting from a 10 percent reduction in mortality from five
major causes of death. For both men and women the largest potential values are for
cardiovascular diseases, with peak gains occurring in late middle age of nearly $35,000 per
person for men and $28,000 for women. Potential gains from progress against cancer are nearly as
large, with a noteworthy 20-year earlier peak for women that reflects the incidence of breast
cancer. Progress against infectious diseases—of which mortality from AIDS accounts for about a

35

third—has far lower average value because of much lower incidence, and it peaks earlier
reflecting the typical age of onset.
The profiles in Figures 9a-b give values of progress at different ages. To get the current social
value of such progress we aggregate over the age distribution of the 2000 U.S. population and add
the present value of gains measured at birth for forecasted future birth cohorts, as in (25). These
social values are shown in Table 9. A 10 percent reduction in all-cause mortality would have a
present discounted social value of $18.5 trillion. About 30 percent of this total ($5.7 trillion) is
due to potential progress against cardiovascular diseases, where much progress has already been
made. Similar progress against cancer would be worth $4.7 trillion, with roughly equal benefits
for men and women. A ten percent reduction in mortality from infectious diseases, including
AIDS, is of roughly the same value to men ($500 billion) that progress against breast cancer
would be for women ($444 billion). For women, mortality-reducing progress against heart disease
is four times more valuable than equivalent progress against breast cancer.
To put these values in perspective, total federal support for health related research in the
United States for fiscal 2005 is about $28 billion. If we capitalize this expenditure over the
indefinite future at 3 percent interest, it is roughly equal to the $1 trillion value of a one percent
reduction in mortality from cancer and cardiovascular disease. Even if we offset these gains by
substantial increases in the cost of the treatments required to implement potential new
technologies, potential net gains would still be very large.
Our discussion of equation (19) indicated that forms of health progress are complementary—
reductions in mortality from any source raise the value of further progress. The right hand column
of Table 9 illustrates the importance of this effect by calculating the impact of 1970-2000 health
progress on the prospective values from Panel A. The estimates show the increase in the current

36

social value of future progress against each disease that is due to the decline in mortality between
1970 and 2000. Formally we calculate:
(26)

∆Wα =

∞

{N 1 (a)[Vα1 (a) − Vα0 (a )] + Vα0 (a)[ N 1 (a ) − N 0 (a)]}da

a=0

The social value of health complementarity has two components. The first is how much more
today’s population ( N 1 ) will pay for future progress when that value is based on current survival
rates (denoted Vα1 ) than on past ones ( Vα0 ). The second component reflects the fact that today’s
population ( N 1 ) is larger than had people lived their lives under mortality rates from 1970 ( N 0 ).
Overall, we find that declining mortality between 1970 and 2000 raised the social value of
future health progress by 18 percent, or by $3.3 trillion for our benchmark case of a 10 percent
reduction in death rates. Two-thirds of this effect ($2.2 trillion) is due to increased willingness to
pay for progress against heart disease and cancer. This illustrates that the value of health progress
will continue to rise simply because people are getting healthier, even in the absence of growing
productivity and incomes. Economic growth and income-elastic willingness to pay for health
progress will only reinforce this effect.
Notice that the share of value attributed to complementarity is larger for diseases whose
incidence increases with age. This is implied by equation (19) because reductions in mortality
between 1970 and 2000 have mainly occurred at older ages, which has a stronger impact in raising
the value of progress against age-related causes of mortality.

Changes in the Quality of Life
All of our calculations to this point have placed a value on actual and prospective changes
in the quantity of life (longevity), ignoring possible gains in the quality of life through
improvements in type-H health. This is simply because changes in mortality are directly

37

measurable, while changes in the quality of life are not. Though we have no direct measure of
these improvements, we think it’s important to provide at least a ballpark estimate of how valuable
these gains might be.
As a rough approximation we assume that advances in longevity and quality of life are
related. Let λ0 (t ) and λ1 (t ) denote mortality rates at age t in 1970 and 2000, respectively. Since
mortality rates declined, we assume that if λ1 (t ) = λ0 (t − k ) then persons of age t in 2000 are k
years “younger” than were similarly aged people in 1970. We then assign
H ′(t ) / H (t ) = ln H (t − k ) − ln H (t ) based on the H-profile in Figure 2b, and we calculate the

second term of (15):
∞

(28)
a

H α′ (t ) F
c (t )[1 + Φ ( z (t ))]S (t , a )dt
H (t )

Figure 10 shows estimates of the value of post-1970 changes in type-H health based on this
procedure. Peak valuations are big: roughly $1.2 million for men and $820,000 for women in
their late-40s. The values are large because the data indicate that men in this age range were about
6 years “younger” in 2000 than they were in 1970—a 55 year old in 2000 is equivalent to a 49
year old from 1970—and our estimate of H(t) is steeply declining. These estimates are roughly
triple the peak values from increased longevity over the period, shown in Figures 6a-b, which
suggests that improvements in quality of life may be the more valuable dimension of recent health
advances.

VII. Conclusions
We have developed a framework for valuing improvements in health, based on willingness
to pay, and used this framework to estimate the value of past and prospective future health
advances. The resulting values are large by any standard. Reductions in mortality from 1970 to

38

2000 had an (uncounted) economic value to the 2000 population of the U.S. of about $3.2 trillion
per year. Over the longer term, cumulative longevity gains during the 20th century were worth
about $1.3 million per person to the representative member of the 2000 U.S. population. Valued
at the date they occurred, the production of longevity-related “health capital” would raise
estimates of per-capita output in the U.S. by from 10 to 50 percent, depending on the time period
in question.
Prospectively, even modest progress against mortality causing diseases such as cancer and
heart disease would have enormous social values. A one percent reduction in mortality from
cancer or heart disease would be worth nearly $500 billion to current and future Americans.
These estimates ignore the value of health advances to individuals in other countries, so they
likely understate aggregate social values of possible innovations. They also ignore corresponding
improvements in the quality of life—which evidence suggests may be even more valuable than
gains in longevity—and for these reasons as well they are likely to be conservative. We show that
these values will increase in the future because of economic growth and, more interestingly,
because health itself continues to improve.
Large as they are, these values may be offset by the costs of developing and implementing
improvements in health. Current public and private spending on health-related research is a tiny
fraction of what is on the table, yet such investments may not be worthwhile if the costs of
implementing new technologies is large. Social transfer programs and other third-party methods
of financing health care can distort both utilization decisions and research, with the result that
some health improvements are socially inefficient.

39

References
Arthur, W.B., “The Economics of Risk to Life”, American Economic Review 71, March 1981, 5464.
Banks, James; Richard Blundell and Sarah Turner, “Is There a Retirement-Savings Puzzle?”
American Economic Review, vol. 88, No. 4 (Sept., 1998), 769-788
Barsky, Robert, Thomas Juster, Miles Kimball, and Matt Shapiro, “Preference Parameters and
Behavioral Heterogeneity: An Experimental Approach in the Health and Retirement
Survey,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 12, 1997: 537-580.
Becker, Gary S. and Casey B. Mulligan. “The Endogenous Determination of Time Preference.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics. 112(3), August 1997: 729-58.
Browning, Martin, Lars Peter Hansen, and James J. Heckman “Micro Data and General
Equilibrium Models” in Handbook of Macroeconomics, volume I, ed. John Taylor and
Michael Woodford, Elsevier Science, 1999.
Browning, Martin, and Thomas Crossley, “The Life-Cycle Model of Consumption and Saving”,
Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 15, No. 3 (Summer, 2001), 3-22.
Campbell, John and Gregory Mankiw, “Consumption, Income, and Interest Rates: Reinterpreting
the Time Series Evidence” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 4, 1989: 185-216
Cutler, David. “Technology, Health Costs, and the NIH,” Unpublished paper prepared for NIH
Roundtable on Economics, October 19, 1995.
Cutler, David, and Richardson, Elizabeth. “Measuring the Health of the U.S. Population,”
Brookings Papers: Microeconomics 1997, pp. 217-271.
Dockins, Chris, Kelly Maguire, Nathalie Simon and Melonie Sullivan, “Value of Statistical Life
Analysis and Environmental Policy: A White Paper”, U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency, National Center for Environmental Economics, April 2004.
V.R. Fuchs, “Health Care and the United States Economic System: An Essay in Abnormal
Physiology,” Milbank Quarterly 50, no. 2 (1972): 211–237.
Hogan, Christopher, June Lunney, Jon Gabel, and Lynn, "Medicare beneficiaries'costs of care in
the last year of life," Health Affairs 20(4), July 2001,pp. 188-195.
Griliches, Zvi, and Lichtenberg, Frank. “R&D and Productivity at the Industry Level: Is There
Still a Relationship?” in R&D, Patents, and Productivity, edited by Zvi Griliches.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1984.
40

Hall, Robert “Intertemporal Substitution in Consumption”, Journal of Political Economy, 96(2),
1988: 339-357.
Hansen, Lars Peter and Kenneth Singleton “Stochastic Consumption, Risk Aversion, and the
Temporal Behavior of Asset Returns, Journal of Political Economy, 91(2), 1983, 249-265.
Jones, Matthew T. and Maurice Obstfeld, “Saving, Investment, and Gold: A Reassessment of
Historical Current Account Data,” from Money, Capital Mobility, and Trade: Essays in
Honor of Robert Mundell, ed. Guillermo Calvo, Rudiger Dornbusch and Maurice Obstfeld,
(Cambridge, MA, MIT Press, 2001)
Lichtenberg, Frank R. “The Allocation of Publicly-Funded Biomedical Research,” National
Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 6601. Cambridge, MA: NBER, June
1998.
Meltzer, David, “Can Medical Cost Effectiveness Analysis Identify the Value of Medical
Research?”, in Measuring the Gains from Medical Research: An Economic Approach,
edited by Kevin M. Murphy and Robert H. Topel. Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
2003.
Murphy, Kevin M. and Robert H. Topel (2003a),“The Economic Value of Medical Research” , in
Measuring the Gains from Medical Research: An Economic Approach, edited by Kevin M.
Murphy and Robert H. Topel. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2003.
Murphy, Kevin M. and Robert H. Topel (2003b), “Diminishing Returns? Evidence on the Costs
and Benefits of Improving Health”, Perspectives in Biology and Medicine, volume 46, no.
3, (Summer, 2003): pp108-128.
Murphy, Kevin and Robert H. Topel, “Black-White Differences in the Economic Value of
Improving Health”, Perspectives in Biology and Medicine, vol 47, no. 3, (Summer, 2004).
Nordhaus, William D. "The Health of Nations: The Contribution of Improved Health to Living
Standards." in Measuring the Gains from Medical Research: An Economic Approach,
edited by Kevin M. Murphy and Robert H. Topel. Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
2003.
Rosen, Sherwin. “The Quantity and Quality of Life: A Conceptual Framework”, in George Tolley,
Donald Kenkel, and Robert Fabian, Valuing Health for Policy, University of Chicago
Press, 1994.

41

Thaler, Richard and Sherwin Rosen “The Value of Saving a Life: Evidence from the Labor
Market. In Household Production and Consumption, ed. Nestor E. Terleckyj, New York,
NBER, 1975.
Tolley, George, Donald Kenkel and Robert Fabian “State of the Art Health Values” in Tolley et.
al. Valuing Health for Policy, University of Chicago Press for NBER, 1994.
Topel, Robert H., and Finis Welch. “Efficient Labor Contracts with Employment Risk,” Rand
Journal of Economics 17 (Winter 1986): 490-507.
United States Environmental Protection Agency, Science Advisory Board, “SAB Report from the
Environmental Economics Advisory Committee on EPA’s White Paper ‘Valuing the
Benefits of Fatal Cancer Risk Reduction”, July 27, 2000.
Viscusi, W. Kip. “The Value of Risks to Life and Health,” Journal of Economic Literature 31
(1993): 1912-1946.
Viscusi, W. Kip and Joseph E. Aldy, “The Value of a Statistical Life: A Critical Review of Market
Estimates Throughout the World”, Brookings Joint Center for Regulatory Studies, January
2003.

42

Figures and Tables
Figure 1

Life Expectancy at Birth and Age 50
United States, 1900-2000

85.0

32.0

80.0

Life Expectancy at Birth

75.0

Male at birth

70.0

Female at 50

65.0

28.0

60.0
55.0

24.0

50.0

Life Expectancy at Age 50

Female at birth

Male at 50

45.0
40.0
1900

1910

1920

1930

1940

1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

20.0
2000

YEAR

Source: National Vital Statistics Reports, vol 52, #14, February 18, 2004, Table 12.

43

Table 1

Age Distribution of Increasing Longevity, by Decade, 1900-2000
(Additional expected life-years due to reduced mortality in each age interval)
Men
Age
Interval 1900-1910 1910-1920 1920-1930 1930-1940 1940-1950 1950-1960 1960-1970 1970-1980 1980-1990 1990-2000
1.90
2.48
1.63
0.97
1.66
0.54
0.36
0.75
0.23
0.19
<1
1.51
1.00
1.37
1.04
0.65
0.17
0.10
0.13
0.10
0.09
1-14
0.68
0.16
0.96
0.99
0.71
0.18
-0.27
0.18
0.09
0.38
15-34
0.18
0.71
0.02
0.55
0.76
0.30
-0.02
0.67
0.32
0.37
35-54
0.02
0.45
-0.21
0.09
0.49
0.10
0.05
1.00
0.82
1.01
55-74
0.02
0.05
0.05
-0.03
0.31
0.05
0.16
0.18
0.28
0.57
75+
Total

4.31

4.85

3.83

3.62

4.57

1.33

0.37

2.92

1.85

2.60

Total
10.71
6.16
4.06
3.87
3.83
1.61

30.25

Women
Age
Interval 1900-1910 1910-1920 1920-1930 1930-1940 1940-1950 1950-1960 1960-1970 1970-1980 1980-1990 1990-2000
1.65
2.22
1.28
0.88
1.39
0.40
0.35
0.59
0.22
0.16
<1
1.67
1.02
1.47
0.99
0.62
0.15
0.10
0.11
0.07
0.06
1-14
1.11
-0.57
1.62
1.24
1.00
0.30
-0.01
0.16
0.06
0.08
15-34
0.66
0.03
0.63
0.83
1.01
0.48
0.02
0.56
0.28
0.05
35-54
0.20
0.17
0.29
0.62
1.20
0.70
0.43
0.71
0.29
0.36
55-74
0.02
0.02
0.16
0.03
0.66
0.23
0.73
0.80
0.34
0.09
75+
Total

5.31

2.89

5.46

4.59

5.87

2.25

1.61

2.94

1.25

0.79

Total
9.12
6.26
4.99
4.56
4.97
3.07

32.97

Notes: Figures are additional expected life-years calculated from cross sectional age-specific mortality rates in each year. Entries for each age interval are
contributions to additional expected life years over the decade due to changes in mortality rates in that age interval. Source: Authors’ calculations from Center
for Disease Control, Vital Statistics, Special Reports, various years.

44

Table 2
Additional Life Years Due to Reduced Mortality
From Selected Causes, by Decade, 1950-2000
Men
Disease

1950-60

1960-70

1970-80

1980-90

1990-00

Total

0.54

0.36

0.75

0.23

0.20

2.07

Heart Disease

0.16

0.38

1.05

1.26

0.88

3.73

Cancer

-0.19

-0.17

-0.08

0.02

0.43

0.01

Stroke

0.10

0.15

0.41

0.24

0.08

0.98

Accidents

0.18

-0.15

0.37

0.41

0.17

0.98

Other

0.54

-0.19

0.41

-0.31

0.85

1.30

Total

1.33

0.37

2.92

1.85

2.60

9.07

Infant Mortality

Women
Disease

1950-60

1960-70

1970-80

1980-90

1990-00

Total

0.40

0.35

0.59

0.22

0.13

1.68

Heart Disease

0.59

0.72

0.87

0.90

0.46

3.54

Cancer

0.20

0.07

-0.01

-0.11

0.17

0.31

Stroke

0.20

0.33

0.63

0.38

0.06

1.59

Accidents

0.10

-0.04

0.17

0.13

0.01

0.36

Other

0.77

0.19

0.69

-0.25

-0.04

1.36

Total

2.25

1.61

2.94

1.25

0.79

8.85

Infant Mortality

Notes: Figures are additional expected life-years calculated from cross sectional age-specific
mortality rates in each year. Entries for each cause of death are contributions to additional expected
life years over the decade due to changes in mortality rates from that cause. Source: Authors’
calculations from Center for Disease Control, Vital Statistics, Special Reports, various years.

45

Table 3
Estimated Values of a Life-Year for 50 Year-Old Men

z
1
y + c Φ( z ) = y + c
[1 − σ ( 0 )
σ −1
z
F

F

F

F

σ −1
σ

]

Elasticity of Intertemporal Substitution (σ )
z0/z

1.2

1.1

1.0

.9

.8

.7

.05

$282

$314

$360

$426

$535

$731

.10

$229

$249

$276

$314

$373

$471

.20

$169

$180

$193

$211

$237

$278

Note: The table assumes a value of full consumption of y = c = $120, 000 for a 50 year-old male with
4000 total available hours per year and wage of $30/hour, including benefits.
F

F

46

v(t)
cF(t)
yF(t)

Notes: See text for discussion of methods. Valuations assume $6.3 million average value of a statistical life,
earnings of $60,000 at age 50, and peak consumption at age 50. Health profile is estimated residually from
optimal consumption.

47

Women

Men

Notes: See equation (14). Estimates are based on v(t) from Figure 2a, assuming an average value of a statistical
life of $6.3 million between ages 25 and 55. Valuations of a life year are assumed identical for men and women.

48

Notes: Each curve shows the cumulative value of increased longevity since 1900. Distance between curves
represents gains in each decade.

49

Notes: Each curve represents the cumulative value to the indicated year due to increased longevity since 1900, as
valued by persons in 2000. Age specific values are averaged using 2000 population weights.

50

Table 4
Decade Averages of GDP and Production of Health Capital per Capita
1900-2000 ($2004)
1900-10

1910-20

1920-30

1930-40

1940-50

1950-60

1960-70

1970-80

1980-90

GDP

$6,011

$7,239

$7,703

$7,578

$13,592

$15,856

$20,343

$25,342

$28,381

19902000
$32,057

Health
Capital

$4,987

$2,754

$5,513

$6,062

$12,314

$4,951

$2,381

$12,839

$7,305

$8,240

Total

$10,998

$9,993

$13,216

$13,640

$25,906

$20,807

$22,724

$38,181

$35,685

$40,297

0.45

0.28

0.42

0.44

0.48

0.24

0.10

0.34

0.20

0.20

Share of
Health
Capital

Source: Average annual real ($2004) amounts. Author’s calculations for health capital. GDP before 1929 from Kuznets (1961) as compiled by Jones and
Obstfeld (2001), downloaded from NBER website. Post-1929 data from U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis. Pre-1913 price index
from Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.

51

Notes: Each curve shows the cumulative value of increased longevity since 1970. Distance between curves
represents gains in each decade.

Source: Health, United State 2001, Death Rates for Diseases of Heart (Table 37).

Notes: See equation (15). Value to person of the indicated age in 2000 of reduced mortality from that age
forward, 1970-2000.

53

Table 5
Economic Gains From Reductions in Mortality: 1970-2000
Males
Birth
1to4
5to14
15to24
25to34
35to44
45to54
55to64
65to74
75to84
85+
Females
Birth
1to4
5to14
15to24
25to34
35to44
45to54
55to64
65to74
75to84
85+

Population
(1000)
72,134
7,938
19,681
18,618
20,191
21,569
15,836
10,166
8,325
4,486
1,070

1970-1980
$129,381
$77,707
$92,564
$118,310
$155,129
$186,015
$188,706
$160,057
$96,938
$37,124
-$8,112

68,773
7,578
18,741
17,604
20,177
21,824
16,533
11,195
10,345
6,944
2,692

1970-1980
$99,375
$59,139
$69,415
$90,711
$115,916
$131,014
$130,033
$122,529
$106,297
$66,766
$19,385

Males
Females
Total

Gains Per Capita ($2004)
1980-1990 1990-2000 1970-2000
$62,904
$80,536
$272,821
$44,446
$67,747
$189,900
$50,912
$81,699
$225,175
$60,553
$103,061
$281,925
$76,181
$114,201
$345,511
$114,368
$119,097
$419,481
$142,098
$130,001
$460,805
$123,566
$128,891
$412,514
$87,575
$90,695
$275,207
$43,542
$56,356
$137,022
$14,405
$25,764
$32,057
1980-1990
$43,392
$26,859
$30,220
$37,422
$48,058
$60,700
$61,701
$51,496
$48,121
$33,786
$11,524

1990-2000
$27,808
$15,649
$16,407
$19,168
$21,755
$27,032
$34,326
$23,018
-$47
-$8,995
-$10,213

1970-2000
$170,575
$101,647
$116,042
$147,301
$185,729
$218,746
$226,061
$197,043
$154,370
$91,558
$20,696

Aggregate Gains (Billions of $2004)
1970-1980 1980-1990
1990-20 1970-2000
$26,699
$15,471
$19,153
$61,323
$20,515
$9,067
$4,440
$34,022
$47,214
$24,538
$23,593
$95,345

Notes: Aggregate gains calculated using equation (24) and year 2000 U.S. population by age, as shown.
Population at birth includes Census-predicted future birth cohorts discounted at 3.5 percent.

54

Table 6
U.S. Health Expenditures 1970-2000
1970

1980

1990

2000

Nominal Expenditures ($Billions)
% of Total Consumption Expenditures

$73
11.3%

$246
13.9%

$696
18.2%

$1,311
19.6%

Real Expenditures ($Billions 2004)
Current Year Population
Fixed Population

$261
$369

$445
$548

$812
$883

$1,221
$1,143

$1,537
$2,171

$2,354
$2,897

$3,911
$4,249

$5,187
$4,855

$16,209

$24,414

$39,342

$50,933

Per Capita Expenditures ($2004)
Current Year Population
Fixed Population
Present Value of Total Expenditures
($Billions 2004, Fixed Population)

Source: Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, Office of the Actuary: National Health Statistics Group. “Fixed
population” refers to the population in 2000.

Table 7
Estimated Gains Net of the Increase in Health Expenditures
1970-2000
Gross Gains (from Table 5)
Increase in Expenditures
Gains Net of Expenditure Growth
Expenditure Increase as a % of Gains

1970-1980
$47,214
$8,206
$39,008
17.4%

1980-1990
$24,538
$14,928
$9,611
60.8%

1990-2000
$23,593
$11,591
$12,001
49.1%

1970-2000
$95,345
$34,725
$60,620
36.4%

55

Table 8
Economic Gains From Reductions in Mortality
Net of Increased Health Care Expenditure, 1970-2000
Males

Birth
1to4
5to14
15to24
25to34
35to44
45to54
55to64
65to74
75to84
85+
Females

Birth
1to4
5to14
15to24
25to34
35to44
45to54
55to64
65to74
75to84
85+

Population

72,134
7,938
19,681
18,618
20,191
21,569
15,836
10,166
8,325
4,486
1,070
Population

68,773
7,578
18,741
17,604
20,177
21,824
16,533
11,195
10,345
6,944
2,692

1970-1980

1980-1990

1990-2000

1970-2000

Cost/Value

$119,958
$68,373
$81,703
$105,116
$139,412
$167,199
$166,351
$133,497
$69,395
$16,138
-$21,094

$38,551
$20,716
$23,746
$28,576
$39,890
$73,290
$97,230
$78,043
$46,002
$11,866
-$5,191

$61,967
$49,657
$60,995
$78,704
$86,580
$87,865
$95,943
$94,456
$59,350
$32,473
$10,989

$220,477
$138,746
$166,444
$212,396
$265,882
$328,354
$359,524
$305,996
$174,747
$60,477
-$15,296

19.2%
26.9%
26.1%
24.7%
23.0%
21.7%
22.0%
25.8%
36.5%
55.9%
147.7%

1970-1980

1980-1990

1990-2000

1970-2000

Cost/Value

$83,703
$43,537
$51,176
$68,355
$88,985
$98,440
$90,914
$75,543
$54,837
$20,825
-$17,106

$14,249
-$1,779
-$2,832
-$2,117
$2,131
$7,395
$1,438
-$13,315
-$17,060
-$24,405
-$34,698

$4,743
-$7,009
-$9,736
-$12,086
-$14,513
-$15,017
-$13,128
-$27,842
-$51,047
-$54,526
-$46,378

$102,695
$34,749
$38,608
$54,153
$76,603
$90,818
$79,224
$34,386
-$13,269
-$58,107
-$98,182

39.8%
65.8%
66.7%
63.2%
58.8%
58.5%
65.0%
82.5%
108.6%
163.5%
574.4%

Source: Table 5 and imputations of health care spending by age and gender, as described in text.

56

Notes: Curves show value at indicated age of a 10% reduction in mortality from the indicated disease, using
equation (15).

57

Table 9

Current Value of a 10 Percent Reduction in Mortality from Major Diseases
(Billions of $2004)
Major Cause of Death

Males

Females

Total

Complementarity
Effect
Value
Share
$3,278
0.18

All Causes

$10,651

$7,885

$18,536

Cardiovascular Diseases
Heart Disease
Cerebrovascular Diseases

$3,254
$2,676
$393

$2,471
$1,852
$460

$5,725
$4,529
$852

$1,288
$1,013
$194

0.22
0.22
0.23

Malignant Neoplasms
Respiratory & Intrathoracic
Breast
Genital & Urinary
Digestive Organs

$2,415
$847
$3
$301
$575

$2,261
$557
$444
$302
$431

$4,675
$1,404
$447
$603
$1,006

$863
$278
$51
$126
$200

0.18
0.20
0.11
0.21
0.20

All Other Infectious Diseases

$500

$148

$649

$60

0.09

Obstructive Pulmonary Disease

$343

$331

$674

$153

0.23

Pneumonia & Influenza

$214

$194

$408

$98

0.24

Diabetes

$237

$249

$486

$91

0.19

Liver Disease & Cirrhosis

$217

$102

$319

$46

0.14

Accidents & Adverse Effects

$977

$421

$1,398

$133

0.10

Motor Vehicle Accidents

$519

$247

$767

$62

0.08

Homicide & Legal Intervention

$324

$90

$415

$29

0.07

Suicide

$411

$102

$513

$50

0.10

Notes: Social value of a 10% reduction in mortality from the indicated disease, calculated using equation (24).
Calculations use 2000 population values and Census predictions of future birth cohorts, discounted at 3.5%.

58

Figure 10
Estimated Per-Capita Gain from Type-H Health Improvements
1970-2000

Notes: Value at each age of type-H health improvements between 1970 and 2000, using equation (28).
Calculations assume age groups with identical mortality rates in 1970 and 2000 have identical type-H health.

59

