                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            FDI AND TRADE – TWO WAY LINKAGES?

                                             Joshua Aizenman
                                                 Ilan Noy

                                          Working Paper 11403
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w11403


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       June 2005




The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by Joshua Aizenman and Ilan Noy. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
FDI and Trade – Two Way Linkages?
Joshua Aizenman and Ilan Noy
NBER Working Paper No. 11403
June 2005
JEL No. F15, F21, F36, H21

                                           ABSTRACT

The purpose of this paper is to investigate the intertemporal linkages between FDI and disaggregated

measures of international trade. We outline a model exemplifying some of these linkages, describe

several methods for investigating two-way feedbacks between various categories of trade, and apply

them to the recent experience of developing countries. After controlling for other macroeconomic

and institutional effects, we find that the strongest feedback between the sub-accounts is between

FDI and manufacturing trade. More precisely, applying Geweke (1982)’s decomposition method,

we find that most of the linear feedback between trade and FDI (81%) can be accounted for by

Granger-causality from FDI gross flows to trade openness (50%) and from trade to FDI (31%). The

rest of the total linear feedback is attributable to simultaneous correlation between the two annual

series.

Joshua Aizenman
Department of Economics ; E2
1156 High St.
University of California
Santa Cruz, CA 95064
and NBER
jaizen@ucsc.edu

Ilan Noy
Department of Economics
Suanders 542, 2424 Maile Way
University of Hawaii, Manoa
Honolulu, HI 96822
noy@hawaii.edu
                                               1


1.     Introduction

       A growing literature has recognized the existence of two-way feedbacks between

financial flows and trade for developing countries. Yet, it is clear that aggregate

measures of both financial flows and trade openness mask important differences between

the various components of both measures. It is reasonable to expect that the linkages

between FDI and trade in goods will be strong (and possibly bi-directional), but it is less

evident whether the impact of trade on FDI should be different for, for example, countries

in different stages of development or whether inflows and outflows of FDI react

differently with different types of goods trade flows. This paper aims to provide

preliminary answers to such questions with the help of both theoretical modeling and an

empirical estimation of these relationships.

       We investigate linkages between finance and trade with more disaggregated

measures of both. Such dis-aggregation allows us to identify the salient features of the

feedback effects. We describe several methods for investigating two ways feedbacks

between various categories of trade, and apply them to the recent experience of

developing countries. We find that the strongest feedback between the sub-accounts is

between FDI and manufacturing trade. Specifically, applying Geweke (1982)’s

decomposition method, we find that most of the linear feedback between trade and FDI

(81%) can be accounted for by Granger-causality from FDI gross flows to trade openness

(50%) and from trade to FDI (31%). The rest of the total linear feedback is attributable to

simultaneous correlation between the two annual series. Similar results are obtained when

we instead investigate causality between trade openness and net FDI flows or net inflows.
                                              2


We also consider other linkages between the sub-accounts of the current and the financial

accounts and generally find them significantly less important.

           In Section 2 we discuss the theoretical literature and present a model on the

possible links between FDI and trade. In section 3 we discuss the state of the empirical

literature on the subject while section 4 presents our findings for disaggregated measures

of FDI and trade flows. Section 5 focuses on the question of causality and section 6

concludes the paper with further interpretive remarks and by outlining several avenues

for future research.



2. Model

       One of the more robust links between finance and trade in developing countries is

through vertical FDI. We should expect two ways feedbacks between trade and FDI,

possibly because both would increase due to similar reasons, like higher factor

productivity, better institutions, growing markets, etc.1

       Below we describe a model of production by multinationals that fragment their

production optimally, and benefit from the cost advantage associated with locating labor-

intensive production stages in labor abundant countries. A by-product of this

fragmentation is the growth of two-way trade: higher imports of primary and intermediate

products, followed by higher exports of the improved/final products. Multinationals will

opt to locate the production in the developing countries that offer the highest

productivity/wage ratio. A developing country experiencing rapid improvement in its

productivity, due to accumulation of human capital, learning by doing, or better
                                                          3


institution will attract growing inflows of vertical FDI, increasing thereby its international

trade. In circumstances where the multinational employ skilled workers in the

developing country, the greater volume of trade that comes with the vertical FDI opt to

increase the demand for skilled workers, increasing thereby the return to human capital in

the developing country. This in turn will increase overtime the supply of skilled workers,

potentially increasing future FDI .

         We consider a global economy composed of 2 blocks of countries, H and F, each

consuming two types final goods -- a homogeneous one, Z , and n heterogeneous goods,

denoted by Yt ,i , i = 1, …, n. The F block is composed of developing countries, differing

in labor productivity. Asterisks signify F variables. The utility of the H consumers at

time t is a semi-additive function of the two goods


                                      [Y ]δ
                                       n
                                  A
         (1)         ut = Z t +
                                  δ
                                    ∑ i =1
                                               t ,i   ,        0 < δ < 1.


The intertemporal utility is the conventional net present value of the temporal utilities,

discounted applying the subjective rate of time preferences. Similar preferences

characterize consumers in country F. The supply of labor in each block is inelastic and

Good Z is produced using a simple Ricardian technology. In H, this technology is

         (2)                               Z = Lz .

We normalize the price of good Z to one, so the real wage is one in the competitive

equilibrium.

         For concreteness, we focus on one of the developing country, where the

technology in the homogenous sector is:

1
         Gordon et. al. (2001) shows that vertical FDI from the OECD to developing countries has
increased substantially in the last twenty years. This increase has been paralleled with a corresponding
                                                              4


        (3)                                       Z * = a * L*z ,

where the parameter a* is the productivity of foreign labor and the real wage is w* = a* .

The homogenous good, Z, is a composite good, characterized by stable and mature

technology, with limited prospects for future productivity improvements. In contrast, Y

goods are relatively high tech goods, the outcome of multinationals’ R&D. Unlike good

Z, producing intermediate Y inputs in country F is likely to increase F’s productivity

overtime. Due to the reasons elaborated in the literature dealing with vertical FDI,

multinationals producing Y goods frequently fragment vertically their production line

[see Feenstra (2003) for a useful overview]. Specifically, we assume that goods Y are

produced in a vertical mode, where production is fragmented geographically. The final

production stage is done at H, using intermediate inputs produced in F at an earlier stage,

at the developing county that offers the most cost effective production line. The

intermediate input, M i , can be produced in the foreign country at time t using a Cobb-

Douglas production technology

        (4)                               M t ,i = bt* L*t ,i

where L*t ,i is the labor employed, bt*,i is labor productivity in the foreign intermediate-

good sector. The final production stage combines the intermediate input M t ,i and H

value added using a Leontief technology to supply the final output, Yt ,si :2

          (5)                         [
                         Yt ,si = Min M t ,i ; bi Lt ,i   ]

increase in trade flows.
2
  The analysis can be extended to a general CES function. Of course, the Leontief technology simplifies
the math. It may be also a reasonable assumption in manufacturing industries where, by design, there are
fixed proportions [like auto body produced in Mexico, engine in the US, etc.].
                                                    5


       The fragmented production process requires the multinational to invest in two

plants, resulting in a periodic set-up cost of C i at each country. This cost may be viewed

as the periodic investment needed to sustain the production capacity. We assume that

goods Yi are ordered such that a higher index i is associated with higher periodic set-up

cost. We consider the case where, due to learning by doing and accumulation of human

capital, the developing country’s labor employed in activities Yi becomes more

productive -- bt* < bt*+1 . To simplify, we take first the productivity improvement as an

exogenous process. Each period, the multinational allocates the production of the

intermediate output M t ,i to the developing country that is the most cost effective. To

simplify notation, we henceforth suppress the time subscript.

       Applying (1), the demand for good Y in each country is

                                                              1
       (6)                     Yi d = ( A / Py ,i )η ; η =       > 1.
                                                             1−δ

The total demand facing the multinational is qYi d , where q stands for a scale measure of

the number of countries composing the global economy.

       Assuming that good i is produced, it follows from (4) and (5) that employment

levels in the final and the intermediate production stages of good i are:

                                        (Yi s ) 2        (Y s ) 2
       (7)                   Ly , i =             ; L*i = i * .
                                          b                b

The monopoly profits are

       (8)                          Π i = qYi d Py ,i − L y ,i − w * L*i − 2C i .

Substituting (6)-(7) into (8), we find that
                                                   6


                                     (Yi s ) 2      (Y s ) 2
        (9)     Π i = A (Yi s )δ −             − w * i * − 2Ci where A = A(q)1 / η
                                       b              b

                                                        ~
                                                                 ()
The first-order condition characterizing optimal output Y and the resultant profits are

                                              1

                  ~ ⎡        0 .5 A δ      ⎤ 2−δ
        (10)      Yi =⎢ −1            * −1 ⎥
                                                 . ;    Π i = k i − 2C i        where
                      ⎢⎣ (b) + w (b ) ⎥⎦
                                   *



                                                          δ

                                  ⎡      0 .5 A δ      ⎤ 2−δ
        (11)    ki = (1 − 0.5δ )A ⎢ −1            * −1 ⎥
                                                             .
                                  ⎣⎢ (b) + w (b ) ⎦⎥
                                               *




Hence, k i is determined by the real wages and by the efficiency of the labor in H and F,

where

                         ∂Π i      ∂Yi
        (12)                  > 0;     >0
                         ∂b*       ∂b*

        The multinational allocates the production of the intermediate product i to the

developing country characterized by the highest normalized productivity/wage ratio (i.e.,

the highest b * / a * ). Hence, a developing country that gains productivity in activity i at a

rate that exceeds its competitors will attract overtime more FDI. The exports of such a

country would increase both due to the higher production level of the infra marginal

goods, and the introduction of new, relatively high Ci goods.

        Our analysis assumed so far that the productivity improvements are exogenous, as

will be the case if productivity is only impacted by exogenous accumulation of human

capital. One can extend our model to account for endogenous accumulation of human

capital, allowing for heterogonous labor force. Specifically, suppose that the there are

two labor types, skilled and unskilled. Unskilled labor is employable only in sector Z,

whereas skilled workers have the option of employment at sector Y. The economy starts
                                             7


with relative scarcity of skilled labor. Unskilled workers may become skilled workers

following the accumulation of human capital, a process that is associated with time and

resource costs. In such an economy, higher trade implies also higher demand for skilled

workers, inducing more unskilled workers to acquire human capital. Consequently,

greater abundance of skilled workers would increase the economy’s attractiveness to

multinationals. Higher trade would tend to increase the demand for skilled workers,

increasing overtime the supply of skilled workers, increasing thereby the future

attractiveness of the country for multinational FDI. Appendix A outlines a specific

example of a model where such feedbacks are at work. We consider the case where

mobility of workers from sector Z to Y is limited and costly. Specifically, we assume

that workers in the developing country can move from to the Y sector only after paying a

switching cost, the sum of investment in human capital, and other reallocation costs.

These costs are worker specific, and are assumed to be known to each agent. In these

circumstances, the supply of labor in activity Y is segmented in the short run from the

supply of labor in activity Z, and wages are sector specific, a* ; wt*, y . Workers would

switch from sector Z to Y when the net present value of the future wage gap, wt*, y − a*

exceeds the switching costs. In an economy where the wage gap is anticipated to grow in

favor of sector Y, agents with lower switching costs will move earlier. The supply of

labor in sector Y is composed of workers that have switched already. Consequently,

higher productivity in sector Y (induced by higher investment in that sector Y, learning

by doing, etc.) would increase the wages in sector Y. This in turn would induce more

agents to switch to sector Y, encouraging overtime further investment in sector Y.
                                                    8


        Arguably, India’s recent trade history is a case study exemplifying these trends.

The education system in India has been known for producing highly qualified engineers.

In the 1970s-1980s, the options available to these engineers in India were rather limited,

implying that relatively low domestic demand imposed a constraint on the effective

supply of engineers. The recent advances of telecommunication and the Internet reduced

drastically the cost of trade in information services. The direct outcome has been sizable

increase in trade in services, putting in motion a two way feedback process. The greater

export of services from India increased the return for education in India, increasing

overtime the supply of human capital, and the attractiveness of India for future FDI, etc...

        The observed positive association between trade and finance may also be the

outcome of other processes, such as political-economy factors. Rajan and Zingales

(2003), for example, propose an interest group theory of financial development whereby

incumbents oppose financial development because it breeds competition. In these

circumstances, the incumbents’ opposition will be weaker when an economy allows both

cross-border trade and capital flows. They predict that a country’s domestic financial

development should be positively correlated with trade openness, and identify the time

varying nature of this association. Another alternative channel, operating in the same

direction from finance to trade, might be due to reliance of international trade on trade

credits. Greater openness to trade credit flows, leads to a decrease in the cost of this credit

and thereby increases international trade.3




3
         See Helpman and Razin (1978) for an integrated theory of trade in goods and securities. For a
similar argument on the impact of services liberalization on goods trade see Blyde and Sinyavskaya (2004).
                                              9


3. The Empirical Literature

       A number of recent papers have examined the interactions between financial

flows and trade (See Albuquerque et al., in press, Do and Levchenko, 2004, Lane and

Milesi-Ferretti, 2004, Rose and Spiegel, 2004, Swenson, 2004). Most prominent in this

literature is the argument that a larger inflows of foreign direct investment (FDI) will lead

to higher volume of trade as well as other benefits such as increased rates of total factor

productivity growth or higher output growth rates.

       Aizenman and Noy (2004) examine de-facto measures of financial and trade

openness, and show that aggregate financial and commercial openness measures are

closely linked. They empirically decompose causality and find strong affects in both

directions. Anther approach linking trade and financial openness is Portes and Rey

(2003), showing that both international trades in goods and in assets are explained by

similar gravity regressions. Their work highlights the role of information flows and

frictions in accounting for trade in goods and assets. Aviat and Coeurdacier (2004) extend

the methodology of Portes and Rey (2003), and investigate the geography of trade in

goods and asset holdings. They find that the causality between bilateral asset holdings

and trade in goods runs significantly in both ways and that these effects are strong. Other

recent work that discuss financial flows or FDI more specifically is Agénor (2003),

Blonigen and Wang (2004), Chan and Gemayel (2004), Edison and Warnock (2003),

Harrison et al. (2004), Lane (2003), and Razin et al. (2003).
                                            10


4. Data, Methodology and Results

      This section reviews the data, the methodology we employ and our main results on

the determinants of various measures of financial and trade openness and causality

between them. We begin by describing the data. We next discuss the model we estimate

for the determination of FDI flows and trade and finally examine the question of

causality. Appendix B provides a detailed summary of the variables, sources and

samples described in this section.



4.1      The data

         We measure de facto financial openness using the sum of total capital inflows and

outflows (in absolute values) measured as a percent of gross domestic product. Capital

flows are the sum of FDI, portfolio flows, trade credits and loans. We construct an

openness index for each one of these flour components and briefly discuss them below.

We then focus on FDI openness in our estimations. The data on financial flows is taken

from the IMF’s Balance of Payments Statistics dataset. These measures of financial

openness are exactly analogous to the standard measure of commercial openness (sum of

exports and imports as percent of GDP), which we investigate as well.

         We sub-divide the standard measure of commercial openness into openness for

trade in goods, trade in services and trade in incomes. We further divide trade in goods

into openness measures for trade in foodstuffs, in fuel, in manufacturing and in

metals/ores. This data is from the World Bank’s World Development Indicators. We

provide descriptive statistics and then incorporate them in our estimations.
                                                   11


        In table 1 we describe our data for financial and commercial openness.

Specifically, table 1A presents averages for financial openness disaggregated by type

(FDI, loans, trade credits and equity flows) for the 1980s and 1990s.4 We divide our

country sample into industrialized and developing countries. A number of observations

merit discussion at this point. First, one can observe a dramatic increase (doubling) of

FDI in the 1990s as compared to the previous decade. This trend is more pronounced for

the developing countries whose inflows of FDI went up from an average of about 1% of

GDP to almost 3% (most of this increase appears to have come from a large increase in

FDI outflows from the industrial countries). Portfolio flows have also seen a dramatic

increase (more pronounced for the industrialized countries) while trade credits and the

amount of loan flows have not changed that much in the last two decades (as % of GDP).

        Table 1B records descriptive statistics for trade flows (disaggregated by type,

countries’ income levels and decades). Apparent is the relative stability of most measures

of trade openness in both developing and developed countries. Exception are a large

increase in the volume of trade in manufactures for developing countries and a large

decrease in trade in fuels for both samples.5 Interestingly, on average, developing

countries appear to be more open to trade in both goods (across all types) and services

than our sample of industrialized countries.

        Table 2 presents correlation coefficients between our financial openness measures

and the commercial/trade openness measures disaggregated by types of flows. The only

notable correlations are a significant correlation of FDI flow measures with goods and

services trade (especially trade in manufactures and fuels) for developing countries and a

4
        The 1990s include data up to and including 1998. Because we limit our data to 1998, our data does
not completely reflect the slowdown in capital flows following the Asian crisis.
                                                     12


much weaker association between FDI flows and trade in industrialized countries. Other

significant and noteworthy correlations are between trade in goods and trade in services

(for both samples) and a high correlation between equity flows and FDI flows for the

industrialized countries sample.

         In our estimations, we include several control variables that are described below.

This list is based on our previous research (Aizenman and Noy, 2004) and recent

empirical work on FDI (especially Albuquerque et al., 2005 and Blonigen and Wang,

2004). In order to ensure our results are not driven by a ‘missing variables’ bias, we

include a host of macroeconomic control variables. In all regressions we use per capita

gross domestic product (measured in PPP dollars), a domestic interest rate spread (from a

world rate of interest), and a weighted average of G3 growth rates. In an initial

specification, we also included the government’s budget surplus (as % of GDP), the

inflation rate (CPI), a world interest rate (U.S 1-year T-bill rate), the government’s

budget surplus, gross domestic product (in $1995), and government consumption (as %

of GDP). Neither of these was significant and all were dropped from the specifications

we report. 6 All the macroeconomic data are taken from the World Bank’s World

Development Indicators and the IMF’s International Finance Statistics.

         For the political-economy determinants of financial openness, we concentrate our

empirical investigation on two political-institutional measures. Aizenman and Noy (2004)

discuss the motivation behind the inclusion of political variables in the estimation of

5
  At the very least, part of the reason for this decline is average lower oil prices during the 1990s.
6
          In Aizenman and Noy (2003) we found a disparity between the impacts of budget surplus in
developing and OECD countries which may be explained by the differential cyclical patterns of fiscal
policy. In contrast to the OECD countries, fiscal policy tends to be pro-cyclical in developing countries.
Financial crises tend to lead to recessions in developing countries, inducing abrupt fiscal adjustment,
reducing fiscal deficits. These observations may lead to the positive association between smaller budget
                                                  13


financial openness. We first include a variable that measures the degree of democratic

rule. Our democracy index is taken from the Polity IV project and ranges from -10 (fully

autocratic) to +10 (fully democratic).7

        In addition, for our second political-economic control, following the work of Wei

(2000) and Dreher and Siemers (2003), we examine whether corruption matters for the

degree of financial openness. To that end, we use a measure of corruption that is taken

from the International Country Risk Guide. The data are available in monthly

observations. We obtain annual observations from 1982 onward by averaging the

monthly data points for each year. This index ranges from -6 (low probability/risk of

encountering corruption) to 0 (high risk of corruption). Two other political variables that

were initially included but later dropped due to their insignificance were a measure of

political risk (from the ICRG data) and a measure of government unity (taken from the

World Bank’s Dataset on Political Institutions 2000).

        In order to examine whether the occurrence of financial crises contaminates our

result, as they might systematically change the relationship between financial openness

and our control variables, we also include crises measures in a number of regressions.

Crisis measures were never significant.

        As the theoretical discussion in Aizenman and Noy (2004) suggests, one of the

determinants of de facto financial openness should be the legal impediments to financial

flows (de jure financial openness). Accordingly, we also attempted to include in our


deficits and lower de facto financial openness [see Gavin, Hausmann, Perotti and Talvi (1996), Aizenman,
Gavin and Hausmann (2000) and Talvi and Vegh (2000)].
7
          The “Polity IV database includes annual measures for both institutionalized democracy (DEMOC)
and autocracy (AUTOC), as many polities exhibit qualities of both these distinct authority patterns….A
third indicator, POLITY, is derived simply by subtracting the AUTOC value from the DEMOC value; this
procedure provides a single regime score that ranges from +10 (full democracy) to -10 (full autocracy).”
                                                  14


multivariate analysis a binary measure for restrictions on the capital account taken from

the IMF’s Annual Report on Exchange Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions. This

binary measure is the only internationally comparable measure of de jure financial

openness available for a large sample of countries and over the time period.

        A priori, we see no reason to restrict our sample and therefore attempted to

include all 205 countries and territories for which data are available in the 2001 edition of

the World Bank’s World Development Indicators (WDI). Our control variables, though,

are available for only a subset of this group. Most importantly, most of the data on FDI

flows are typically available only from the 1980s and only for a much smaller set of

countries. Our data set is therefore an annual panel of 83 countries for the years 1982-

1998.

        Blonigen and Wang (2004) argue that pooling developed and developing

countries in empirical studies of this type is inappropriate and likely to lead to misleading

results. We also hypothesize that results for industrialized/developed countries might be

different from those for developing countries as the nature of FDI in these groups might

be different; for example vertical vs. horizontal FDI. We thus repeat our regressions for

developed economies – which we define as those economies that were members of the

OECD in 1990 – and developing countries. Developing countries are defined by

excluding OECD countries and island economies (as these are often used as off-shore

banking centers and their level of de facto openness to financial flows is often

dramatically different from other countries in the same income level). For a summary of




(Marshall and Jaggers, 2000, p. 12). We use the POLITY variable in our regressions. In Aizenman and Noy
(2003), we also use other measures of political competition to verify the robustness of this result.
                                                       15


the information described in this section including detailed data sources and sample sizes,

see Appendix B.



4.2    Methodology and Estimation Results

       We start by positing a linear structure for the determination of the level of

financial openness whereby:

       (13)     FDI it [T ] = α + β1 X it + β 2 CO it −1[T ] + ε it

The dependent variable [(FDIit(T)], FDI openness for country i at time t and type T

(gross, net, inflow, or outflow), is assumed to be dependent on separate country

intercepts, a vector Xit of macroeconomic and political-institutional control variables, a

vector of average lagged trade openness measures [ CO it −1 (T)] , and an error term. The

variables examined are described below.

       While in Aizenman and Noy (2004), we found strong evidence of autocorrelation

in the aggregate financial openness measure; this is not the case for estimations of the

different components of financial openness. We therefore estimate the model with a

standard fixed-effects least-squares methodology.



       Table 3A and 3B include results for our basic regressions. The adjusted R2 is

between 0.47 and 0.71 depending on the list of macroeconomic controls, the LHS trade

variables used and the sample (industrial/developing). In table 3A, we report results of

regressions that exclude the macroeconomic and political control variables. Only GDP

per capita and a dummy for the 1990s are included besides the trade variables of interest

to us in this paper. We find that the coefficient for per-capita GDP is always positive and
                                              16


statistically significant – i.e., an increase in domestic per capita GDP of PPP$1000 will

facilitate 0.2-0.4 percentage points increase in the volume of FDI flows (as percent of

GDP). A dummy variable for the 1990s is consistently positive and significant for the

developing countries and negative but only occasionally significant for the industrial

countries sample.

       The association between FDI gross flows and trade is positive and significant at

the 1% level for the developing countries sample and is apparently positive but

insignificant for the developed countries (columns 1-2 in table 3A). A decomposition of

our measure of trade openness into trade in goods, in services, and in incomes however,

yields very similar statistically significant results for the two samples; with trade in goods

dominating the association between trade and FDI flows (columns 3-4 in table 3A).

Services trade is never statistically significant for either sample nor in the different

specifications for tables 3A and 3B. Interestingly, in table 3B columns 3-4, the

association between goods trade and FDI openness and trade in incomes and FDI

openness is twice as strong and statistically significant while that is no longer the case for

the industrial economies.

       Results for other macroeconomic and political control variables are reported in

table 3B. The coefficient for the interest rate spread is negative for developing countries

and positive for industrial ones but is rarely statistically significant. Foreign growth rates

are positive and significant for developing countries but negative and insignificant for

developed ones. The political-economy determinants of international financial flows,

corruption levels and the democracy measure are never statistically distinguishable from

zero in our regression specifications. The democratic regime variable is consistently
                                                    17


negative, in line with our previous findings on aggregate measures of financial openness.

Since we use a fixed-effects specification these results are not surprising, as these

measures tend to be fairly constant over time.8

        In table 4, we go on and further break down our measures for trade into trade in

services, incomes and four categories of goods trade (foodstuffs, fuel, metals/ores and

manufacturing). In columns 1-2 we report the stripped down specification without macro-

controls. As reported above, the positive and significant relationships between the GDP

per capital variable, the 1990s decade dummy, and the dependent variable (FDI gross

flows) are robust to any inclusion or exclusion of trade variables. As also reported in

table 3B for developing countries, the association between trade in services and FDI

flows is negative (and significant in columns 1 and 5) for that sub-sample. The

association of FDI with trade in incomes is positive and occasionally significant for the

developing countries sample. For this sample, we now also find that the association

between FDI gross flows and goods trade is due mostly to an association of FDI flows

with trade in foodstuffs. Intriguingly, the association of FDI with trade in fuels is

negative and significant; this result also holds for industrial economies. Trade in

manufacturing is the only trade openness measure that is consistently significant and

positive for developed economies (it is insignificant for the developing countries sample).

        In columns 5-6 of table 4, we add a binary variable for capital account

restrictions. As might be predicted, restricting the capital account reduces significantly

the openness to FDI flows for both developing and industrial countries.




8
          In Aizenman and Noy (2003), we present significant results for these measures when fixed effects
are not included.
                                                      18


         In table 5, we re-estimate our benchmark specifications with different left-hand-

side FDI variables. In columns 1 and 3 we examine FDI inflows while in columns 2 and

4, outflows. For the trade openness measures, the only variable that is consistently

significant, as before, is goods trade for the inflows specifications (columns 1 and 3).

Trade does not appear to explain FDI net outflows.

         In addition to the specifications discussed above, we tested a number of

alternative specifications of our empirical model in order to verify the robustness of our

results. Because of space considerations we do not include the full specifications in our

tables but all these results are available upon request. As we already noted in the previous

section, we tested the significance of a number of other control variables and found none

to have any explanatory power. We also hypothesized that financial crises (either banking

or currency crises) might significantly affect the level of financial openness in general

and more specifically the use of financial repression for generating government revenues.

Interestingly, in all iterations of the model we attempted, none of the coefficients for the

crises variables comes out significant for the developing countries sample (nor for the

other samples).9




9
         We utilized a number of variants of these binary indicators (currency crisis and banking crisis,
their onset year only, and these separately or together in the same specification) and we never reject the null
(no effect). For currency crises, our indicator is identified by periods in which an index, composed of a
weighted average of the real exchange rate and foreign reserves, changed dramatically – by more than 2
standard deviations. This measure is described in detail and evaluated in Hutchison and Noy (2002). The
banking crisis binary indicator is taken from Caprio and Klingebiel (1999) and is analyzed in Arteta and
Eichengreen (2002) and Hutchison and Noy (forthcoming).
                                                    19


5. Reverse Causality from finance to trade

5.1    Reverse Specifications

       In the previous section we have established that past trade openness Granger-

causes FDI gross flows openness (see Granger, 1969 and Sims, 1972 for a definition of

G-causality). As we already suggested that causality might also run from past financial

openness to present trade openness we also estimate the opposite specification:

       (14)    COit [ goods ] = γ + δ1 X it + δ 2 FO it−1[T ] + ηit

       Where the LHS variable is now the openness to goods trade while on the RHS we

include a set of control variables (chosen incrementally with the Akaike Information

Criterion) and various measures of financial openness (FDI, loans, equity and trade

credits). The measures for trade credits and portfolio flows are not reported for many

countries so we subsequently drop them in the specifications reported in columns 3-4 and

thus increase the sample size significantly. We use the same assumptions, methodology,

definition of variables and samples as before. Results are reported in table 6. The FDI

openness measure appears to have a statistically significant, positive, and large effect on

trade in goods while for the developing-countries sample the measure of gross loans

appears to have the opposite effect (reducing goods trade).



5.2    Decomposition of Causality

       In Granger (1969), the possibility of simultaneous causality between the two time

series is assumed away by arguing that, at least in principle, it should be feasible to obtain

higher frequency observations and thus identify accurately the exact chronology of

effects and do away with the correlations in the contemporaneous data series. As we only
                                                                20


have annual data, and since financial flows respond quickly to exogenous shocks, it is

reasonable to expect that our data will also contain what appears to be instantaneous

causality between trade and financial openness. Furthermore, Granger’s (1969) approach

does not allow us to estimate and compare the relative magnitudes of causality between

the two time series.

        Geweke (1982) suggests a methodology to distinguish between (temporal)

causality from x to y, from y to x and simultaneous causality between the two. We briefly

describe the methodology and provide results.10

        First we estimate the following equations using a panel fixed-effects least squares

estimation.
                                      p                     p

        (15)     FDI it = α i1 + ∑ β11s FDI it−s + ∑ β 21s COit−s + ε it1
                                   s =1                    s =0



                                        p                   p

        (16)     FDI it = α i2 + ∑ β12s FDI it −s + ∑ β 22s COit −s + ε it2
                                      s =1                 s =1



                                        p

        (17)     FDI it = α i3 + ∑ β13s FDI it −s + ε it3
                                      s =1



                                  p                  p

        (18)     COit = α i4 + ∑ β14s COit −s + ∑ β 24s FDI it −s + ε it4
                                 s =1               s =1



                                  p

        (19)     COit = α i5 + ∑ β15s COit−s + ε it5
                                 s =1




        Next, following Geweke’s (1982) notation we define FCO→FDI as the linear feedback

(i.e. G-causality) from trade openness to FDI, FFDI →CO as the G-causality from FDI

openness to trade openness, and FFDI •CO as the instantaneous linear feedback between the


10
         Readers may also consult Geweke (1984) and Granger (1988). The only applications we are aware
of which apply this methodology to macro-economic data series are Chong and Calderón (2000), Calderón
and Liu (2003) and Aizenman and Noy (2004). Other approaches to identifying causality in
                                                         21


two series. FFDI ,CO , defined as the total measure of linear dependence between the two

series is therefore given by:

        (20)      FFDI ,CO = FFDI →CO + FCO→FDI + FFDI •CO .

        Given these definitions, Geweke (1982) concludes the following:

        (21) FFDI →CO = log[var(ε it5 ) / var(ε it4 )]

        (22) FCO→FDI = log[var(ε it3 ) / var(ε it2 )]

        (23) FFDI •CO = log[var(ε it2 ) / var(ε it1 )]

        Geweke (1982) shows that the null hypothesis (H0: F=0) can be statistically

examined using the χ2 distribution. In estimating (15)-(19), we started with three lags

(p=3) of the independent variables in each regression and reduced step-wise the number

of lags using the Akaike Information criterion. In all cases, it turned out that a single lag

(p=1) contained all the information required to estimate the model. Consequently, we set

p=1 throughout. Table 7 provides our results for this decomposition of causality between

the two series for the complete sample. Most of the linear feedback between trade and

FDI (81%) can be accounted for by Granger-causality from FDI gross flows to trade

openness (50%) and from trade to FDI (31%). Simultaneous correlation between the two

only accounts for 19% of the total linear feedback between the two series. Similar results

are obtained when we instead investigate causality between trade openness and net FDI

flows or net inflows.




macroeconomics will typically rely on an instrumental variable methodology. An excellent book length
treatment of the issue of causality in macroeconomics is Hoover (2001).
                                             22


6.     Concluding remarks

       Our analysis indicates that there are complex two-way positive feedbacks between

FDI and international trade. It suggests the presence of large benefits associated with

reducing restrictions to trade. We close the paper by noting that our model and empirical

work can be extended to account for more complex aspects of the association between

FDI and trade. For example, we ignore the potential importance of private and public

infrastructure investment as an input into the production process, and the role of financial

intermediation in facilitating domestic investment. All these considerations are left for

future research.
                                                   23


                                                   References
Agénor, Pierre-Richard (2003). “Benefits and Costs of International Financial Integration: Theory and
   Facts,” World Economy, 26 (8), 1089-1118

Aizenman, J., M. Gavin and R. Hausmann, (2000) "Optimal Tax and debt Policy with Endogenously
    Imperfect Creditworthiness", Journal of International Trade & Economic Development, 9 (4), 367 – 395.

Aizenman, J., and I. Noy (2004) "Endogenous Financial and Trade Openness: Efficiency and Political
    Economy Considerations", manuscript.

Albuquerque, R., N. Loayza, and L Servén (in press). World market integration through the lens of foreign
    direct investment. Journal of International Economics.

Arteta, C., and B. Eichengreen (2002). "Banking Crises in Emerging Markets: Presumptions and
    Evidence." In: M. Blejer and M. Skreb. (eds.) Exchange Rate and Financial Vulnerability in Emerging
    Markets. Cambridge, MA, MIT Press.

Aviat A. and N. Coeurdacie (2004), “The Geography of Trade in Goods and Asset Holdings,” manuscript,
    Cnrs–Ehess–Ens.

Blonigen, Bruce A. and Miao Wang (2004). “Inappropriate Pooling Of Wealthy And Poor Countries In
    Empirical FDI Studies.” NBER Working Paper #10378.

Blyde, J. and Natalia S. Sinyavskaya (2004). “The Impact of Liberalizing Trade in Services on Trade in
    Goods: An Empirical Investigation.” Paper presented at the LACEA 2004 conference in San José,
    Costa Rica.

Calderón, César and Lin Liu (2003). “The direction of causality between financial development and economic
    growth.” Journal of Development Economics, 72, 321– 334.

Caprio Gerard and Daniela Klingebiel (1999). Episodes of Systemic and Borderline Financial Crises.
    Manuscript (October).

Chan, Kitty K. and Edward R. Gemayel (2004). Risk Instability and the Pattern of Foreign Direct
   Investment in the Middle East and North Africa Region. IMF Working paper 04/139.

Chong, Alberto and César Calderón (2000). “Causalilty and Feedback Between Institutional Measures and
   Economic Growth.” Economics and Politics, 12(1), 69-81.

Do, Quy-Toan and Andrei A. Levchenko (2004). Trade and Financial Development. Paper presented at LACEA
    2004, San Jose, Costa Rica.

Dreher, Axel and Lars-H.R. Siemers (2003). “The Intriguing Nexus Between Corruption and Capital Account
    Restrictions”, mimeo, June.

Feenstra, R. (2003). Advanced International Trade: Theory and Evidence, Princeton Press.

Gavin, M., R. Hausmann, R. Perotti and E. Talvi (1996) 'Managing Fiscal Policy in Latin America and the
   Caribbean: Procyclicality, Volatility, and Limited Creditworthiness', mimeo, Inter-American Development
   Bank.

Geweke, John (1982). “Measurement of Linear Dependence and Feedback Between Multiple Time Series.”
   Journal of the American Statistical Association, 77(378), 304-313.
                                                   24


Glick, Reuven and Michael Hutchison (forthcoming). “Capital Controls and Exchange Rate Instability in
    Developing Economies.” Journal of International Money and Finance.

Geweke, John (1984). “Measures of Conditional Linear Dependence and Feedback Between Time Series.”
   Journal of the American Statistical Association, 79(388), 907-915.

Granger, Clive W. J. (1969). “Investigating Causal Relations by Econometric Models and Cross-spectral
    methods.” Econometrica, 37(3), 424-438.

Granger, Clive W. J. (1988). “Some recent developments in a concept of causality," Journal of Econometrics,
    39, 199-212.

Gordon H. Hanson, G. H., R. J. Mataloni and M. J. Slaughter (2001). “Expansion Strategies of U.S.
   Multinational Firms,” NBER Working paper 8433.

Harrison, Ann E., Inessa Love, and Margaret S. McMillan (2004). Global capital flows and financing
    constraints. Journal of Development Economics 75, 269– 301.

Helpman E. and A. Razin (1978). A Theory of International Trade Under Uncertainty, Academic Press.

Hoover K. (2001). Causality in Macroeconomics. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.

Hutchison, Michael and Ilan Noy (2002). "Output Costs of Currency and Balance of Payments Crises in
    Emerging Markets," Comparative Economic Studies, XLIV(2), Summer.

Hutchison, Michael and Ilan Noy (forthcoming). "How Bad Are Twins? Output Costs of Currency and
    Banking Crises" Journal of Money, Credit and Banking.

Lane, Philip R., and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti (2004). International Investment Patterns. IMF Working
    Paper WP/04/134.

Marshall, Monty and Keith Jaggers (2000). “POLITY IV PROJECT - Political Regime Characteristics and
   Transitions, 1800-1999: Dataset Users’ Manual”. Mimeo, University of Maryland.

Portes, R. and H. Rey (2003), “The Determinants of Cross Border Equity Flows,” manuscript, Princeton
    University.

Rajan, G. R. and L. Zingales (2003). “The Great Reversals: The Politics of Financial Development in the 20th
    Century,” forthcoming, Journal of Financial Economics.

Razin, Assaf, Yona Rubinstein and Efraim (2003). “Which Countries Export FDI, And How Much?”
    NBER Working Paper 10145.

Rose, Andrew K., and Mark M. Spiegel (2004). A Gravity Model of Sovereign Lending: Trade, Default, and
    Credit. IMF Staff Papers, 51, 50-63.

Sims, Christopher A. (1972). “Money, Income, and Causality.” American Economic Review, 62(4), 540-552.

Swenson, Deborah L. (2004). Foreign Investment and the Mediation of Trade Flows. Review of International
   Economics, 12(4), 609–629.

Talvi, Ernesto, and Carlos A. Vegh (2000). “Tax Base Variability and Procyclical Fiscal Policy.” NBER
    Working Paper No. W7499, January.

Wei, Shang-Jin (2000). "How Taxing is Corruption on International Investors?" The Review of Economics
    and Statistics, 82(1):1-11, February.
                                                          25


                                                     Appendix A

                           Heterogeneous supply of labor and switching costs


         This Appendix outlines a model where the supply of labor in each sector is
determined by the anticipated wage path. We consider the case where workers in the
emerging markets are drawn from the unity interval, j ∈ [0, 1] . Agent j can switch to the
heterogonous sector, Y, only after spending switching cost θ j ; 0 ≤ j ≤ 1 . This cost

represents investment in human capital and other costs associated with moving from Z to Y.
Workers are ordered according to the switching costs from sector Z to sector Y. Hence,
for 1 ≥ l > h ≥ 0 , θ l > θ h . We simplify by assuming that the switching cost is known to each

agent, and that it takes one period to make the switch. We assume that the productivity in sector
Y increases overtime due to learning by doing and technological improvements, while labor
productivity in the homogenous sector remains constant at a * . Recalling that the production

function in sector Z is Ricardian, wages there are determined by productivity, wZ* , t = a* . In

contrast, productivity improvements in sector Y imply w*y , t ≤ w*y ,t +1 ≤ w*y , t + 2 ... . In a rational

expectation equilibrium where the anticipated path of wages in sector Y is w *y ,t ; w*y ,t +1 ; w*y ,t + 2 ... ,

agent j will switch at a time t where


                   (A1)       θ j − a* = NPV [ w*y ,t +1 − a* ; w*y ,t + 2 − a* ,...] .


We denote by j (t ) the marginal agent that is indifferent between switching at time t and time t+1.
The anticipation of further increases in the wage offered in sector Y implies
 j (t ) ≤ j (t + 1) ≤ j (t + 2)... In a discrete time model, the mass of workers reallocating to sector
Y at t is j (t ) − j (t − 1) , and the supply of labor in the two sectors is


                   (A2)      L*y ,t = j (t − 1); L*z ,t j = 1 − j (t ) .


Let the aggregate demand for labor in sector Y at time t be DL* y ,t . It can be verified that
                                                       26


                                                       +          +       +
                   (A3)          D *
                                   L y ,t   =D
                                             *
                                             L y ,t
                                                           *
                                                      ( w ; b ; n)
                                                           y ,t
                                                                      *
                                                                      t




where n denotes the number of Y activities located in the emerging market at time t, and the signs
above the variables correspond to the sign of the partial derivatives. Hence, w*y ,t is determined

by the condition


                   (A4)          DL* y ,t = j (t − 1) .


Learning by doing and technological improvement in sector Y would induce higher wages,
attracting more workers to switch to sector Y. These trends will also increase the multinationals
investment in the economy, increasing n overtime.
                                                          27


                               Appendix B – Data Sources and Samples
    Code      Source                                      Description
    KTOTAL    IMF-BOP statistics a                        Sum of capital inflows and outflows (% of GDP)
    FDITOT    IMF-BOP statistics                          Sum of FDI inflows and outflows (% of GDP)
    TRADTOT   IMF-BOP statistics                          Sum of trade credit inflows and outflows (% of GDP)
    LOANTOT   IMF-BOP statistics                          Sum of loan inflows and outflows (% of GDP)
    EQTOT     IMF-BOP statistics                          Sum of portfolio inflows and outflows (% of GDP)
    TRADG     WB-WDI b                                    Sum of exports and imports (% of GDP)
    SERVG     WB-WDI                                      Sum of service exports and imports (% of GDP)
    GOODG     WB-WDI                                      Sum of goods exports and imports (% of GDP)
    INCOMG    WB-WDI                                      Sum of trade in incomes (% of GDP)
    FUELG     WB-WDI                                      Sum of trade in fuels (% of GDP)
    MANUG     WB-WDI                                      Sum of trade in manufacturing(% of GDP)
    FOODG     WB-WDI                                      Sum of trade in foodstuffs (% of GDP)
    METALG    WB-WDI                                      Sum of trade in metals and ores (% of GDP)
    GDPPCPP   WB-WDI                                      GDP per capita, PPP (current int’l $)
    DLCPI     WB-WDI                                      Inflation, consumer prices (annual %)
    BDGTG     WB-WDI                                      Overall budget deficit (% of GDP)
    USTBILL   IMF-IFSc                                    Interest rate on U.S. Treasury bill
    CORRUPT   PRS: International Country Risk Guide       Level of Corruption d
    POLITY2   POLITY IV project                           Political regime type e
    KKCCAR    IMF- EAER f                                 Binary measure for current and/or capital account restrictions
                                               Samples (1982-1998) g
    ALL         All countries for which data was available (81 countries)
    IND         Industrialized countries (21 countries)
    DEV         Developing countries – defined as all countries excluding OECD member countries (60 countries)
a
  The IMF’s Balance-of-Payments Statistics.
b
  The World Bank’s World Development Indicators.
c
  The IMF’s International Finance Statistics.
d
  This index runs from -6 (low probability/risk of encountering corruption) to 0 (highly corrupt).
e
  The index runs between -10 (fully autocratic) to +10 (fully democratic).
f
  The IMF’s Annual Report on Exchange Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions; extended to 1998 by
   Glick and Hutchison (forthcoming).
g
  Data availability further constrained our samples. Thus, the numbers reflect countries for which data
were available for the aggregate financial flows but not necessarily for specific components (and not
necessarily for the whole 1982-1998 time period).
                                                    28


Table 1A. Financial Openness By Type – Descriptive Statistics
                                Developing countries              Industrialized countries
                             1980s                1990s           1980s            1990s
 FDI                            1.71              3.44             1.97             3.76
       FDI inflows              1.07              2.85             1.03             1.87
       FDI outflows             0.29              0.40             1.13             1.92
       FDI net-flows            0.92              2.60             0.13             0.06
 Trade Credits                  1.49              1.68             0.67             0.51
 Portfolio Flows                1.18              2.20             2.90             6.41
 Loans                          5.97              5.44             3.26             3.18
The table presents averages of sum of financial inflows and outflows (divided by types) as
percent of GDP. Data from the Balance of Payments Statistics.




Table 1B. Trade Openness By Type – Descriptive Statistics
                                       Developing countries        Industrialized countries
                                          1980s           1990s           1980s        1990s

 Trade in Incomes                          9.14            9.07            9.19        12.51

 Trade in Services                        20.79           22.76           15.36        17.36

 Trade in Goods                           66.31           61.69           52.25        51.80

       Trade in manufacturing             28.84           37.78           34.85        38.95

       Trade in foodstuffs                13.42           11.19            7.73            6.95

       Trade in fuels                     24.09            9.82            6.94            3.37

     Trade in metals/ores               2.98           2.46           2.09           1.79
The table presents averages of sum of commercial inflows and outflows (divided by types) as
percent of GDP. Data from the World Development Indicators.
Table 2. Correlations For Trade And Financial Flows

                                                                        Developing Countries
                     Equity       Trade      Loan     FDI        Trade       Trade in       Trade in   Trade in         Trade in      Trade in      Trade in
                     flows        credits    flows    flows      in goods    services       incomes    manufactures     foodstuffs    fuel          metals
 Equity flows                 1      0.06      0.40       0.23        0.21          0.23        0.26             0.13         -0.04          0.13         -0.02
 Trade credits                           1     0.02       0.18        0.07          0.07        0.02             0.07          0.12          0.07         -0.03
 Loan flows                                       1       0.15        0.13          0.21        0.72            -0.05          0.03          0.01         -0.07
 FDI flows                                                   1        0.60          0.55        0.22             0.60          0.23          0.46          0.22

                                                                       Industrialized Countries
                                                                             Trade
                     Equity       Trade      Loan     FDI        Trade       in            Trade in    Trade in         Trade in      Trade in      Trade in
                     flows        credits    flows    flows      in goods    services      incomes     manufactures     foodstuffs    fuel          metals
 Equity flows                 1      0.03      0.26       0.63        0.13         0.09         0.30            0.34           0.03         -0.20          0.01
 Trade credits                           1     0.13       0.04        0.15         0.15        -0.16            0.20           0.03          0.23          0.07
 Loan flows                                       1       0.30        0.17         0.17         0.44            0.28           0.04         -0.07        -0.01
 FDI flows                                                   1        0.20         0.05         0.33            0.36           0.17         -0.01          0.15
Table 3A. Estimation of FDI Openness Index
                                     (1)                (2)                (3)                (4)
                                    DEV                IND                DEV                IND
                                       0.25***            0.17***            0.28***           0.17***
 Per capita GDP
                                        (3.97)             (6.06)             (5.32)            (4.72)
                                       0.71***              -0.24            0.72***              0.38
 The 1990s
                                        (3.98)             (1.05)             (4.10)            (1.11)
 Trade openness
 index…                                0.02***                  0.01
   (Average for t-1,…,t-4)              (6.98)                (1.53)
           …for services                                                        0.00              0.00
                                                                              (0.27)            (0.06)
             …for incomes                                                      0.01*            0.07**
                                                                              (1.62)            (2.06)
               …for goods                                                    0.02***           0.10***
                                                                              (3.39)            (5.37)
 Akaike IC                                 4.70                3.25             4.78              4.30
 Observations                              1341                 318              1446               468
 Adjusted R2                                 0.47              0.63               0.47              0.52
t-statistics for all variables are given in parentheses. We denote significance levels at the 10%, 5% and
1% with *, ** and *** respectively. The LHS variable is the sum of FDI net inflows and outflows (as %
of GDP). Estimation using least squares with country fixed effects. For definitions of variables, see
Appendix B.
                                                               1


Table 3B. Estimation of FDI Openness Index – Full Specification
                                      (1)                (2)               (3)                (4)
                                     DEV                IND               DEV                IND
                                        0.35***            0.28***           0.40***           0.32***
 Per capita GDP
                                         (3.30)             (4.95)            (3.62)            (5.19)
                                          -0.08              0.10*             -0.09              0.03
 Interest rate spread
                                         (0.76)             (1.57)            (0.81)            (0.36)
                                         0.20**              -0.12           0.26***             -0.05
 Foreign growth rate
                                         (1.96)             (1.48)            (2.53)            (0.53)
                                          -0.04               0.05             -0.02             -0.19
 Democratic regime
                                         (1.04)             (0.09)            (0.36)            (0.29)

 Corruption                              -0.37*              -0.01             -0.13              0.03
                                         (1.60)             (0.05)            (0.54)            (0.11)
                                          0.61*           -0.91***            0.75**            -0.61*
 The 1990s
                                         (1.80)             (2.63)            (2.18)            (1.57)
 Trade openness index…                  0.02***             0.02**
    (Average for t-1,…,t-4)              (3.84)             (2.53)
            …for services                                                      -0.06               0.06
                                                                              (1.49)             (0.71)
                  …for incomes                                               0.05***               0.00
                                                                              (4.48)             (0.05)
                   …for goods                                                 0.03**               0.04
                                                                              (1.98)             (1.33)
 Akaike IC                                  4.72               3.22             4.74               3.58
 Observations                               533                193               541                235
              2
 Adjusted R                                    0.58             0.71              0.55              0.67
t-statistics for all variables are given in parentheses. We denote significance levels at the 10%, 5% and
1% with *, ** and *** respectively. The LHS variable is the sum of FDI net inflows and outflows (as %
of GDP). Estimation using least squares with country fixed effects. For definitions of variables, see
Appendix B. In an initial specification, we also included the government’s budget surplus (as % of GDP),
the inflation rate (CPI), a world interest rate (U.S 1-year T-bill rate), government consumption (as % of
GDP).
                                                 2


Table 4. Robustness for FDI Openness Index
                                 (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)
                                DEV          IND          DEV          IND          DEV          IND
                                0.31***      0.31***        0.24*      0.22***        0.25*      0.20***
 Per capita GDP
                                 (3.25)       (4.60)       (1.70)       (3.68)       (1.77)       (3.28)
                                                             0.00         0.04         0.00         0.05
 Interest rate spread
                                                           (1.04)       (0.61)       (0.73)       (0.65)
                                                          0.36***         0.01      0.35***        -0.03
 Foreign growth rate
                                                           (3.82)       (0.21)       (3.68)       (0.36)
                                                            -0.04        -0.45        -0.04        -0.55
 Democratic regime
                                                           (0.93)       (1.04)       (0.92)       (1.29)
                                                             0.10        -0.06         0.13        -0.02
 Corruption
                                                           (0.41)       (0.33)       (0.56)       (0.10)

 The 1990s                      0.86***      -1.05**      1.45***       -0.61*      1.27***     -0.90***
                                 (3.49)       (2.49)       (3.63)       (1.79)       (3.16)       (2.57)
 Capital account                                                                    -1.00**     -0.84***
 restrictions                                                                        (2.34)       (3.12)
 Trade openness in…
 (Average for t-1,…,t-4)
              …services        -0.12***         0.14        -0.07        -0.02       -0.08*        -0.03
                                 (3.42)       (1.52)       (1.45)       (0.24)       (1.59)       (0.35)
                  …incomes         0.01         0.06       0.03**         0.02       0.03**         0.00
                                 (1.14)       (1.43)       (2.49)       (0.51)       (2.48)       (0.04)
    …goods (foodstuffs)         0.28***         0.22      0.21***         0.18      0.20***         0.26
                                 (4.96)       (1.13)       (2.89)       (0.92)       (2.69)       (1.38)
           …goods (fuel)       -0.06***        -0.12     -0.12***        -0.09     -0.12***       -0.13*
                                 (3.31)       (1.51)       (3.96)       (1.35)       (3.88)       (1.92)
  …goods (metals/ores)             0.09        1.08*         0.14        -0.32         0.17        -0.22
                                 (0.89)       (1.69)       (1.03)       (0.61)       (1.30)       (0.41)
              …goods              0.02*      0.15***         0.00      0.10***         0.00       0.10**
        (manufacturing)          (1.86)       (4.93)       (0.01)       (2.62)       (0.24)       (2.55)
 Akaike IC                         4.54         4.40         4.70         3.54         4.69         3.49
 Observations                       685         330          437          260          437          251
              2
 Adjusted R                            0.58        0.55        0.61         0.67         0.62        0.69
t-statistics for all variables are given in parentheses. We denote significance levels at the 10%, 5% and
1% with *, ** and *** respectively. The LHS variable is the sum of FDI inflows and outflows (as % of
GDP). Estimation using least squares with country fixed effects. For definitions of variables, see
Appendix B. Two additional variables that are never significant in this specification for developing
countries are a financial crisis dummy (CCBC) and a dummy for current account restrictions (CAR).
CCBC is negative and significant for industrialized countries sample.
                                                          3


Table 5. Estimation for the FDI Inflows/Outflows
                                      (1)                (2)                 (3)                (4)
                                      FDI               FDI                  FDI               FDI
                                  net inflows       net outflows         net inflows       net outflows
                                     DEV                DEV                 IND                IND
                                         0.24***          -0.27***              0.10***          -0.20***
 Per capita GDP
                                          (2.57)           (10.84)               (4.32)             (6.05)
                                            0.00               0.01                0.03               0.00
 Interest rate spread
                                          (1.30)             (1.20)              (1.02)             (0.07)
                                            0.06              -0.01               -0.01               0.00
 Foreign growth rate
                                          (0.97)             (0.23)              (0.41)             (0.03)
                                            0.03              0.02*               -0.15              -0.47
 Democratic regime
                                          (0.85)             (1.68)              (0.70)             (0.77)
                                            0.27           0.18***                -0.04              -0.03
 Corruption
                                          (1.48)             (2.91)              (0.41)             (0.24)
                                          0.62**               0.01                0.10           0.66***
 The 1990s
                                          (2.09)             (0.05)              (0.55)             (2.60)
 Trade openness in…
 (Average for t-1,…,t-4)
                …services                 -0.03                 0.01              0.01               -0.06
                                         (0.91)               (0.83)            (0.18)              (0.95)
                  …incomes                 0.01                 0.00              0.02                0.01
                                         (0.79)               (0.00)            (1.37)              (0.48)
                   …goods               0.06***                 0.00           0.04***                0.01
                                         (4.66)               (0.74)            (2.73)              (0.66)
 Akaike IC                                 4.81                 1.90              2.43                2.98
 Observations                               635                 318                283                254
              2
 Adjusted R                                0.39                0.66               0.58               0.59
t-statistics for all variables are given in parentheses. We denote significance levels at the 10%, 5% and 1%
with *, ** and *** respectively. The LHS variable is either FDI net inflows or net outflows (as % of GDP).
Estimation using least squares with country fixed effects. For definitions of variables, see Appendix B.
                                                            4


Table 6. Reverse Specifications for Goods/Services Trade Openness Indices
                                           (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)
                                         Goods            Goods            Goods            Goods
                                          DEV              IND              DEV              IND
                                            2.18***          0.92***          1.21***          0.94***
 US Treasury bill rate
                                             (4.98)           (6.65)           (6.44)           (8.21)
 Real exchange rate                        -0.15***         -0.24***         -0.11***         -0.22***
 appreciation index                          (2.65)           (7.02)           (6.34)           (7.87)
                                            1.25***             1.73          0.38***            -0.11
 Democratic regime
                                             (3.85)           (1.00)           (3.21)           (0.10)
                                               4.00           1.97**          7.24***            1.27*
 The 1990s
                                             (1.55)           (2.21)           (6.72)           (1.84)
 Financial openness in…
        (Average for t-1,…,t-4)
                                              -0.04               0.39        0.80***          0.79***
                            …FDI
                                             (0.05)             (1.17)         (2.62)           (3.11)
                                           -0.44***              -0.09       -0.30***            -0.04
                          …loans
                                             (4.91)             (0.81)         (5.94)           (0.32)
                                             0.79**               0.30
                         …equity
                                             (2.12)             (1.55)
                                               0.91               0.51
                  …trade credits
                                             (0.62)             (0.67)
 Akaike IC                                     7.22               5.27           7.05             5.31
 Observations                                   203               261             801              372
             2
 Adjusted R                                    0.97              0.89            0.93             0.89
t-statistics for all variables are given in parentheses. We denote significance levels at the 10%, 5% and
1% with *, ** and *** respectively. The LHS variable is the sum of imports and exports of goods or
services (as % of GDP). Estimation using least squares with country fixed effects with a correction for
an autocorrelation (AR1). For definitions of variables, see Appendix B. Similar estimation for trade in
services does not yield any significant coefficients for the financial flows variables.
                                                   5


Table 7. Decomposition of Causality – Full Sample
                                                       Percent of overall linear feedback a

                                             FDI gross flows      FDI net flows       FDI inflows

From FDI openness to commercial
                                                    50                  58                 57
openness ( FFO→CO )

From commercial openness to FDI
                                                    31                  34                 32
openness ( FCO→FO )

Simultaneous feedback ( FFO•CO )                    19                  8                  11
a
  Using the methodology outlined in Geweke (1982) and defined in equations (15)-(23). The overall
linear feedback is defined in equation (20).
