                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 THEY DON’T INVENT THEM LIKE THEY USED TO:
            AN EXAMINATION OF ENERGY PATENT CITATIONS OVER TIME

                                               David Popp

                                          Working Paper 11415
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w11415


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       June 2005




The author would like to thank Adam Jaffe, William Nordhaus, Joel Waldfogel, Robert Evenson, Ariel Pakes
and three anonymous referees for helpful comments on earlier versions of this work. Despite their helpful
suggestions, however all mistakes are solely the responsibility of the author. In addition, the assistance of
Adam Jaffe, Robert Evenson, Jon Putnam, and Samuel Kortum in locating patent data is gratefully
acknowledged. Partial financial support for this paper comes from DOE grant 593A3142017. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

©2005 by David Popp. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
They Don’t Invent Them Like They Used To: An Examination of Energy Patent Citations Over
Time
David Popp
NBER Working Paper No. 11415
June 2005
JEL No. O330, O380, Q400

                                             ABSTRACT


This paper uses patent citation data to study flows of knowledge across time and across institutions
in the field of energy research. Popp (2002) finds the level of energy-saving R&D depends not only
on energy prices, but also on the quality of the accumulated knowledge available to inventors. Patent
citations are used to represent this quality. This paper explores the pattern of citations in these fields
more carefully. I find evidence for diminishing returns to research inputs, both across time and
within a given year. To check whether government R&D can help alleviate potential diminishing
returns, I pay special attention to citations to government patents. Government patents filed in or
after 1981 are more likely to be cited. More importantly, descendants of these government patents
are 30 percent more likely to be cited by subsequent patents. Earlier government research was more
applied in nature and is not cited more frequently.

David Popp
Assistant Professor of Public Administration
Syracuse University
The Maxwell School
400 Eggers
Syracuse, NY 13244-1090
and NBER
dcpopp@maxwell.syr.edu
        How do the returns to research and development (R&D) evolve over time?                                This

fundamental question lies at the heart of several important questions in economics. Several

studies have addressed the returns to R&D by looking at the value of the output of R&D. They

do this either directly, by including R&D expenditures in the production function of a firm, or

indirectly, by estimating the value of holding patent rights.1 Empirical evidence presented in

Popp (2002) suggests that the returns to R&D inputs vary over time as well. That paper finds

that the level of energy-saving R&D depends not only on energy prices, but also on the quality

of the accumulated knowledge available to inventors. It uses stocks of knowledge constructed

from previous patents in the same field, weighted by citations to those patents, to proxy for the

quality of accumulated knowledge. Moreover, within each field, the likelihood of citations to

new patents falls over time, even after for controlling for the number of subsequent patents that

could make a citation. Popp (2002) suggests that this is evidence of diminishing returns to

research within a field over time.2

        This paper addresses the issue of knowledge quality more formally. Given that the

quality of available knowledge can be important to future inventors, I ask how this quality, as

measured by patent citations, varies over time. This contrasts with much of the previous

literature using patent citations, which focuses on the flow of knowledge across institutions (such

as from universities or government laboratories to private industry), across regions, and across




1
  Examples of the first type of study include Griliches and Mairesse (1984), Clark and Griliches (1984) and Scherer
(1982, 1984). See Griliches (1995) for a survey of this work. Examples of the second type of work include Putnam
(1996), Lanjouw (1993), Pakes (1986), and Pakes and Schankerman (1984). See Lanjouw, Pakes, and Putnam
(1998) for a review of this literature.
2
  Note that claims of diminishing returns to research within a field need not be inconsistent with the more general
notion that there are increasing returns to research. As new research makes the technologies in a given field
obsolete, research efforts should switch to other, more productive areas. Such a general equilibrium analysis is
beyond the scope of this paper.
Energy Patent Citations Over Time                                                                                   p. 2


nations.3 Most similar in spirit to this paper is Caballero and Jaffe (1993), who use citations in a

macro growth model both to study the diffusion and obsolescence of knowledge, and to study the

productivity of knowledge. However, this paper takes a more micro-oriented approach by

studying citations in several different energy technology areas.

           The paper makes use of an updated version of the data set in Popp (2002), which looks at

U.S. patenting activity for 11 energy-related technologies. In contrast to Popp (2002), I use a

generalized negative binomial regression to look at the likelihood of citation to individual

patents. I include two controls for potential diminishing returns. One, the number of other

patents granted in a specific field at a given time, tests for diminishing returns to research inputs

within a given year by asking whether there are less citation per patent as the number of patents

granted per year in a given field increases. That is, do new patents contribute less to the

knowledge stock as contemporaneous research efforts increase? As a second control, a stock of

patents granted within the field in previous years tests for diminishing returns across time. That

is, do new innovations become less useful (as measured by subsequent patent citations) as the

knowledge base within the field grows? Intuitively, such an effect could be seen as the “fishing

out” of viable research ideas within a field.

           In addition to examining the changing contributions of new patents to the stock of

knowledge over time, I also look at the contribution made by patents issued to the U.S.

government. I separately identify patents assigned to the U.S. government, as well as privately-

assigned patents that cite these government patents. I show that both types of patents are cited

more frequently, and that citations to these patents are most likely after policy changes in the

1980s designed to enhance technology transfer.                    Given the importance of the quality of

3
    Examples include Jaffe, Fogarty, and Banks (1998), Jaffe and Trajtenberg, (1996), and Jaffe, Trajtenberg, and
Energy Patent Citations Over Time                                                                             p. 3


knowledge to future researchers, these results suggest that government-sponsored research can

support future research by providing an enhanced knowledge base on which future inventors can

build.

         Following the work in Popp (2002), this paper focuses on innovations in energy supply

(such as solar energy) or energy efficiency (such as recapturing waste heat from industrial

processes). Studying such innovations is of interest because of the insight they provide into the

role that technological change can play in alleviating many of today’s environmental problems.

Many of these, such as global warming, are long-term problems. Technological change is likely

to play a key role in alleviating them. In addition, several papers show that policymakers can

induce environmentally-friendly innovation with policies such as a carbon tax or a regulation

restricting emissions.4 Understanding how the productivity of such research varies over time is

important to understanding just how important a role technological change will play in easing

environmental concerns. For example, Popp (2004) simulates the role of technological change in

climate policy, and finds that diminishing returns to research limit the potential impact of

innovation. Moreover, examining the role that government research can play in improving the

productivity of research provides a possible avenue for policy makers concerned about inducing

additional energy efficiency R&D.



I. Patent Citations and the Returns to R&D

         When a patent is granted, it contains citations to earlier patents related to the current

invention. The citations are placed in the patent after consultations among the applicant, his or


Henderson (1993). A detailed review of the use of patent citations appears in Jaffe and Trajtenberg (2002).
4
  Empirical works demonstrating the effect of prices or regulation on innovation include Popp (2002), Newell, Jaffe
and Stavins (1999), Jaffe and Palmer (1997), and Lanjouw and Mody (1996). Theoretical models include Milliman
Energy Patent Citations Over Time                                                                                   p. 4


her patent attorney, and the patent examiner. It is the applicant’s responsibility to list any related

previous patents of which he or she is aware, and the examiner, who specializes in just a few

patent classifications, will add other patents to the citations as well as subtracting any irrelevant

patents cited by the inventor. Patent citations narrow the reach of the new patent by placing the

patents cited outside the realm of the current patent, so it is important that all relevant patents be

included in the citations.5 For the same reason, inventors have an incentive to make sure that no

unnecessary patents are cited. As a result, the previous patents cited by a new patent should be a

good indicator of previous knowledge that was utilized by the inventor. In recent years, many

economists have made use of patent citation data to track knowledge flows.

         This paper looks at the flow of patent citations within a given field across time. The

motivation for doing so is to consider how the quality of knowledge available for inventors to

build upon changes over time. Citations made by subsequent patents suggest that the previous

patent provided technological knowledge upon which the current inventor could build. Frequent

citations to a patent provide evidence that the knowledge embodied in that invention has been

particularly useful to other inventors.6




and Prince (1989, 1991) and Jung, Krutilla, and Boyd (1996). Jaffe, Newell, and Stavins (2003) provide a review
of this literature.
5
   “Outside the realm” means that the patent holder cannot file an infringement suit against someone whose
invention infringes on qualities of the patented invention that were also included in patents cited by the patent
holder.
6
  Jaffe, et al. (1998) examined the relationships between knowledge flows and patent citations. Their research
included interviews with scientists, R&D directors, and patent attorneys. They found that, at the level of individual
patents, not all citations are indicative of knowledge flows, as other concerns, such as strategically including
irrelevant patents to satisfy the patent examiner, affected the citation process. However, on more aggregate levels,
such as the patents for an organization or a firm, they found that patent citations are an indicator of knowledge
flows, albeit a noisy indicator. Lanjouw and Mark Schankerman (2004) find that forward citations (citations made
by future patents to an existing patent) are one of the least noisy indicators of the quality of an existing patent. In
this paper, the focus is on the quality of knowledge embodied in a patent, rather than a specific knowledge flow.
Thus, while a citation may not indicate a direct knowledge flow, the fact that it provides a measure of quality upon
which future inventors are building is sufficient.
Energy Patent Citations Over Time                                                              p. 5


       The notion that this supply of knowledge, or technological opportunity, matters to

inventors can be traced back to early papers by Scherer (1965, 1982) and Schmookler (1966). At

the macroeconomic level, Caballero and Jaffe (1993) link patent citations to the returns to R&D

over time. They define the stock of knowledge available to an inventor at any given time as the

sum of previous ideas, represented by patents.       They use patent citations to measure the

usefulness of patents from any given time. They find the probability of citation to a patent falls

over time, and that changes in this probability coincide with macroeconomic trends such as the

productivity slowdown of the 1970s.

       At the microeconomic level, Popp (2002) shows that both supply and demand side

factors influence energy R&D. Like Caballero and Jaffe (1993), that paper uses patent data to

create stocks of knowledge available for inventors to build upon, where the patents in the stock

are weighted by their propensity to be cited. Frequent citations to a patent provide evidence that

the knowledge embodied in that invention has been particularly useful to other inventors. The

paper finds that the weighted patents stocks have a significant positive effect on energy R&D

activity. Moreover, regressions using unweighted patent stocks do not provide reliable results.

Inventors “stand on the shoulders” of their predecessors. As a result, the quality of the existing

knowledge on which an inventor can build is an important, positive contributor to the level of

innovative activity in a given year.

       Furthermore, the patterns of citation found in Popp (2002) suggest that diminishing

returns to the quality of existing knowledge are important. The likelihood of citations to new

energy patents falls over time, suggesting that the quality of knowledge available for inventors to
Energy Patent Citations Over Time                                                                                     p. 6


build upon also falls.7 The intuition here is that, as more and more discoveries are made, it gets

harder to develop a new innovation that improves upon the existing technology. Since the

quality of the knowledge stock is an important determinant of the level of innovative activity,

decreasing quality of the knowledge stock over time means that diminishing returns to R&D

investment will result in lower levels of induced R&D over time. This paper examines this claim

more closely. I look for changes in the likelihood of future citations to a patent both across time

– that is, is the additional new knowledge embodied in a patent less valuable when the stock of

knowledge is larger – and within time – that is, is additional research less valuable when lots of

R&D is done at a given time.

           The notion that the returns to R&D may fall over time can be linked to other branches in

the economic literature. For example, Evenson (1991) offers invention potential exhaustion

(IPE) as a possible explanation for the fall in patenting activity during the 1970s and 1980s.

Using the search model of R&D (Evenson and Kislev 1975) as a starting point, Evenson argues

that inventors have a limited pool of possible inventions from which new innovations are drawn.

As more inventions are created, fewer possibilities for future success exist. The search for new

ideas gets harder and harder. The analysis that follows is similar in nature, as it focuses solely

on citations within a group of energy technologies. In addition to being consistent with the data

used in Popp (2002), limiting the analysis to patents within a group (say, for example, solar

energy patents citing other solar energy patents), is necessary to be able to define the pool of

potentially citing and cited patents in a manageable way. As such, citations made outside the

group (e.g. citations made by a solar energy patent to a chemistry patent) are not included. Thus,

this paper is limited to examining the research trends for a given technology, and does not

7
    Note that since the probability of a patent being cited depends not only on the quality of the patent, but also on the
Energy Patent Citations Over Time                                                                               p. 7


explore the possibility that new technologies from outside the field (such as the general purpose

technologies discussed in Helpman 1998) may provide new research opportunities, either by

providing new options within a technology group (referred to as recharge in Evenson, 1991) or

by providing completely new areas to explore.



II. Estimation Framework

         This paper builds on the work of Popp (2002) by more carefully examining changes in

the likelihood of citation to energy patents over time. That paper introduces a database of all

patents falling into one of 11 energy technology categories granted in the United States between

1970 and 1994. This paper extends the data through 1999. In addition, while Popp (2002)

examined citations using cohorts of patents from individual years, this paper looks at citations to

individual energy patents. By doing so, I am able to not only examine changes in the likelihood

of a patent receiving citations over time, but can also ask what individual patent characteristics

affect the likelihood of citation.

         A notable feature of patent citation data is that most patents are rarely cited. Thus,

generalized negative binomial estimation of count data is used. The data to be used in this study

include potentially cited patents granted between 1975 and 1996, and citing patents with

application years between 1976 and 1997. Following Popp (2002), I only consider citations

made by patents from U.S. applicants. Thus, the results can be interpreted as examining how the

stock of knowledge available to American inventors changes over time.8 Because citations to



number of patents that follow, it is important to look at probability of citation, rather than raw citation counts.
8
  Popp (2002) considers the stock of knowledge available to inventors as just one of several factors, such as energy
prices and government-sponsored energy R&D, influencing energy research. Since foreign inventors are likely to
be influenced by conditions not included in that analysis, that paper focuses on citations made by U.S. assignee
patents.
Energy Patent Citations Over Time                                                                                  p. 8


earlier patents as interpreted a proxy for the knowledge available to inventors when the research

was carried out, citing patents are sorted by the year of application.9

          In contrast, the available knowledge upon which inventors may build includes patents

from both the U.S. and abroad. Thus, the data for cited patents include both domestic and

foreign patents.       Cited patents are sorted by the grant year of the patent.                        Since patent

applications were not published in the United States during the time frame of this study, the

publication date represents the date in which the invention first entered the public record. Note

that only cited patents within the same energy technology group are considered. These patents

can be considered as representing the state of knowledge within the technological field.

         The dependent variable is a patent/citing year pair.10 As much research has shown (see,

for example, the papers in Jaffe and Trajtenberg 2002), the probability of a patent being cited

falls over time, as the ideas embodied in the patent become obsolete. I create a variable citelag,

defined as the difference between the citing patent’s application year and the cited patent’s grant

year, to control for time effects.11 That is, for a patent granted in 1993, separate observations

occur in the data set for the total number of citations received from patents with application years

of 1994, 1995, 1996, and 1997, respectively.

         Because in most years, the number of citations will be 0, I use generalized negative

binomial regression. Generalized negative binomial regression builds upon the basic Poisson

regression framework.           In a Poisson regression, the probability of a specific number of

9
  Several researchers have found that grouping patents by the date of application is a good indicator of R&D activity
(for example, see Griliches 1990). Moreover, since, before 2001, information on patents was not made public in the
United States until the patent was granted, only successful patent applications are included in the data set.
10
   Note that there are a few cases where a patent appears in more than one technology group. When this occurs,
only citations within that group are considered, so that for each patent/citing year pair there are two records (one for
each technology group).
11
   While negative lags are possible (e.g. a patent granted in 1990, but first filed in 1987, citing a patent granted in
1989), such patents rarely occur in the database. Including the possibility of negative lags greatly expands the set of
Energy Patent Citations Over Time                                                                               p. 9


occurrences, y, of the dependent variable occurring can be written as:

                                  e − λi λiyi
(1)               Pr(Yi = y i ) =             ,   y i = 0,1, 2, K
                                      yi !

        Typically, λi is specified as a function of a vector of independent variables, so that

        ln λi = β’Xi

        One restriction of the Poisson model is that it assumes the mean and variance of the

dependent variable are the same:

(2)               E[ y i | X i ] = Var[ y i | X i ] = λi = e β'Xi

        Typically, this assumption breaks down when the data are overdispersed – that is, when

the variance of the dependent variable is greater than the mean. As shown in section III, that is

the case here.12        Negative binomial models extend the Poisson model by including an

overdispersion term that allows the variance to increase faster than the mean used (see, for

example, Cameron and Trivedi, 1998 and Winkelmann and Zimmermann, 1995):

(3)              ln λi = β’Xi + εi

where exp(εi) has a gamma distribution with mean one and variance α. The generalized negative

binomial regression extends this further by allowing α to vary as a linear combination of

covariates. In the models that follow, I allow for different α for each of the technology groups.

Such a model can be estimated using standard maximum likelihood techniques.13

        In this model, ln λi predicts the number of citations to patent i based on its characteristics.

Of course, the number of citations depends not only on these characteristics, but also on the


possibly citing patents set while adding little new information, since few citations occur with negative lags. Thus,
such observations are deleted.
12
   Moreover, in each model that follows, hypothesis tests reject the null hypothesis that the Poisson model assuming
equal mean and variance is appropriate.
13
   For this paper, estimation is carried out using the gnbreg command in Stata.
Energy Patent Citations Over Time                                                                       p. 10


number of opportunities to be cited. Defining citesi,j,s,t as the number of citations made to patent

i in technology group j and granted in year s, by patents with application year t, the total number

of citations to each patent/year pair are:

                                                        ln( NCTG j ,t ) +β'Xi , j,s,t +ε i , j , s ,t
(4)             citesi , j ,s ,t = NCTG j ,t e λi = e

NCTGj,t represents the number of successful patent applications filed by U.S. inventors in

technology j in year t, which is the application year for the citing patent. This variable controls

for the opportunities for citation available to each patent.

        The vector X controls for other factors that affect the probability of citation to each

patent/year pair. Most importantly, I include two tests for diminishing returns. First, I ask

whether the likelihood of citation falls when more patents are granted within a specific

technology group in a given year. This variable, NCTDj,s, tests for diminishing returns to

research within a given year. A negative coefficient on this variable suggests any individual

patent will receive fewer citations, after controlling for each patent’s characteristics, if it is

granted in a year with many other patents in the same technology. Diminishing returns here may

imply that the additional research done in such years is of lower quality. The assumption is that

researchers choose the most fruitful projects first. When the demand for energy R&D increases

(for example, when energy prices are higher), marginal projects that weren’t viewed as profitable

before now appear worthwhile. Alternatively, it may be the case that there are fewer citations

per patent because the patents overlap. This suggests that the extra research done in years with

many patents is of less social value, since the unique contribution of each patent is smaller.

        Second, I ask whether the probability of citation falls as the cumulative number of

patents in a field increases. This variable, defined below, tests for diminishing returns across

time.   Diminishing returns across time could occur if there is a limited pool of potential
Energy Patent Citations Over Time                                                               p. 11


inventions in a given field.           As the technological frontier moves outward, it becomes

increasingly difficult to create new inventions that exceed the current standard. To test this, I

create a stock of existing patents for each technology, using patent data from 1900-1997. In any

year s, the stock of existing patents is calculated as:

                         s
(5)             K j , s = ∑ PAT j ,l exp[− β 1 ( s − l )]{1 − exp[− β 2 ( s − l )]}
                        l =0



       In this equation, β1 represents a rate of decay, and β2 a rate of diffusion. In Popp (2002),

I use similar stocks (with patent counts weighted by citations) to represent the supply of

knowledge available to inventors. In that paper, I first use citation data to estimate rates of decay

and diffusion. The rates found there (β1 = 0.353483 and β2 = 0.001991) are used in this paper.

That work finds that this supply is important. Thus, the question here is whether it becomes more

difficult to add to the stock of knowledge over time. As a sensitivity check, I also calculate

stocks using two other sets of rates. One is a decay rate of 0.1 and a rate of diffusion of 0.25.

Such rates are commonly found in the literature on technological change, and imply that a patent

has its maximum effect on the stock about 4 years after grant (see, for example, Griliches 1995).

Finally, I include a third stock that assumes no decay and instantaneous diffusion, so that the

stock is simply the sum of all patents granted in a class between 1900 and year s.

       In addition to these controls for the returns to research over time, I also consider several

variables that control for the characteristics of individual potentially cited patents. In particular,

as one variable over which policy makers have control is the level and direction of government-

sponsored R&D, I include two variables to ascertain the effect of government research on the

knowledge stock. The first is a dummy variable set equal to 1 if the cited patent is assigned to

the U.S. government. This includes patents assigned to a government laboratory. The second is
Energy Patent Citations Over Time                                                                               p. 12


a dummy variable set equal to 1 if the cited patent is a child of a U.S. government patents. These

are defined as patents that are not assigned to the U.S. government, but that cite at least one

patent assigned to the U.S. government.14 In addition, I include controls for patent features such

as the number of claims and the number of citations made by the patent. The complete list of

explanatory variables appears below:

             •    NCTGj,t represents the total number of successful U.S. patent applications per

                  citing year: This controls for opportunities for future citations. Separate counts

                  are made for each technology group, j.

             •    NCTDj,s represents the total number of patents granted in the technology

                  group in the same year as the cited patent.                      As noted, this controls for

                  diminishing returns within a given year.

             •    Kj,s-1 is the lagged value of the stock of accumulated patents granted in

                  technology j by year s, where year s represents the issue year of the cited patent.

                  This controls for diminishing returns across time.

             •    GOVTPATi is a dummy variable equal to one if the cited patent is assigned to the

                  US government (including government laboratories).

             •    GOVT_CHILDi is a dummy variable equal to one if the cited patent is a child of a

                  government patent, as defined above.

             •    CLAIMSi represents the number of claims on each cited patent. Other things

                  equal, patents with more claims should be cited more frequently.


14
  I label these patents as “children” so as to provide a short label for discussion. It need not be the case, however,
that child patents are direct descendants of government research, meaning that they need not result from work
directly related to the government’s research efforts. Citations may result simply because both patents are in similar
areas, so that there is an indirect knowledge spillover, but no intentional technology transfer between the
government and the private patent.
Energy Patent Citations Over Time                                                            p. 13


          •   CITEMADEi is the number of citations made by the cited patent. Patents may

              generate more subsequent citations simply because they are in more crowded

              areas. The number of citations made by these patents controls for this.

          •   CITELAGs,t is the difference between the citing patent’s application year, t, and

              the cited patent’s grant year, s. This allows for declining probabilities of citation

              over time, as the cited patents gradually become obsolete.

          •   ORIGi is a measure of originality of the cited patent.         I use the index on

              originality contained in the NBER Patent-Citations Data File (Hall et al. 2002).

              This measure is a Herfindahl concentration index of whether the patent cites other

              patents from a wide range of technology classes, or from only a select group of

              technologies. It is defined as:

                                                                 ni
                                              Originalityi = 1 − ∑ sik2
                                                                  k


              where sij denotes the percentage of citations made by patent i to patents in patent

              class k, out of a total of ni patent classes.

          •   CTRYi is a vector of dummy variables for the country of origin of the cited

              patents. Cited patents are assigned to one of eight country groups – United States,

              Japan, Germany, France, United Kingdom, Canada, Other member states of the

              European Patent Organization, or Other countries. This control is important, as

              most patent citations are between patents originating from the same country (Jaffe

              and Trajtenberg 1996)
Energy Patent Citations Over Time                                                                                  p. 14


              •   CITEDYRi is a vector of year dummies defined based on the year of grant of the

                  cited patent. 1975 is the excluded year. This captures any fixed effects in

                  citations common to a grant year.

              •   CITINGYRs is a vector of year dummies defined based on the application year of

                  the citing patents. 1975 is the excluded year. This captures any fixed effects in

                  citations common to a grant year. Over time, the number of citations per patent

                  have increased due to changes in citing behavior.15

              •   TECHGRPj is a vector of energy technology group dummies. About half of all

                  patent citations are to patents in the same classification (Jaffe et al. 1993).

                  However, the technology groups in this paper range from groups with one or two

                  subclassifications to groups with patents from many different broad

                  classifications. Technology groups with broad definitions are more likely to

                  include subclasses that are not strongly related, which means that citations to

                  other patents in the group are less likely in those groups. The excluded group is

                  continuous casting.

         Using these variables, ln λi becomes:

(6)      ln λi,j,s,t = β1ln(NCTGj,t) + β2NCTDj,s + β3Kj,s-1 + β4GOVTPATi + β5GOVT_CHILDi +
         β6CLAIMSi + β7CITEMADEi + β8ORIGINALi + β9CITELAGs,t + β10CTRYi +
         β11CITEDYRi + β12CITINGYRs + β13TECHGRPj + εi


Referring back to equation (4), note that the estimated coefficient on ln(NCTGi,t) should equal 1.



15
  Changes in citing behavior over time must be accounted for because of institutional changes at the patent office
that make patents more likely to cite earlier patents than was previously true, even if all other factors are equal. In
particular, two changes have played an important role. First, computerization of patent office records has made it
easier for both patent examiners and inventors to locate other patents similar to the current invention. Second,
increasing legal pressure has made it more important for examiners to be sure that all relevant patents are cited.
Energy Patent Citations Over Time                                                                           p. 15


III. Data

        This paper extends the database of energy patents created in Popp (2002) by including

addition years of data and additional descriptive information on each cited patent. Descriptive

data on these patents comes from the NBER Patent-Citations Data File (Hall et al. 2002). Below

I discuss both the creation of the original data set and the modifications added for this paper.

        Creation of the data set begins by identifying patents in relevant energy technology

fields. All patents granted in the United States are given a U.S. classification number. There are

currently over 300 main classification groups and over 50,000 subclassifications. In order to

identify subclassifications pertaining to energy efficiency, I used resources from the Department

of Energy and from the academic sciences to identify several areas of research in the energy

field. Descriptions of these technologies were then matched with U.S. patent subclassifications,

and those technologies for which no clear subclassification existed were eliminated. The

resulting set of subclassifications was then sorted into 11 distinct technology groups, including 6

groups pertaining to energy supply, such as solar energy, and 5 groups relating to energy

demand, such as methods of reusing industrial waste heat. Table 1 lists the 11 technology groups

and shows the number of patent applications from each year. The appendix provides a complete

list of subclassifications included in each technology group.16

        Having identified the relevant subclassifications for each energy technology group, I next

obtain information on the individual patents in these groups. Using data from the MicroPatent

CD-ROM database of patent abstracts and additional data from the U.S. Patent and Trademark

Office, I identified all patents in the 11 technology groups that were granted in the United States



16
  Interested readers may download a more thorough description of the technologies chosen, as well as additional
data on these technology groups, at http://faculty.maxwell.syr.edu/dcpopp/papers/patdata.PDF.
Energy Patent Citations Over Time                                                                               p. 16


between 1900 and 1999.17 The additional descriptive data on these patents needed for the

regression, described in section II, comes from the NBER patent database (Hall et al., 2002).18

The time frame of the study is determined by the availability of these data. In particular, data on

citations are only available for patents granted since 1975.

         Table 2 presents descriptive data for the subsequent citations made to each patent. Data

are presented by technology for the entire sample, as well as for the years 1975, 1980, and 1990.

The table shows the number of patents granted in each group, the percentage assigned to the

government, the percentage that are children of government patents, and the average number of

citations received by these patents.19            Note that the percentage of patents assigned to the

government is highest in 1975.              In general, government patents receive more subsequent

citations. Within a given year, the number of citations received by child patents is also high.

However, this is not true for the sample as a whole, as there are few child patents in the early

years of the data.

         Table 3 presents descriptive data for the other variables. Overall, patents receive an

average of 1.8 subsequent citations. The average number of subsequent citations varies from

0.968 for waste heat patents to 2.8 for solar energy patents. Note that this result is not solely a

function of the size of each group, as the number of potentially citing patents per year for solar

energy is only the fourth highest among the eleven energy technology groups. The average

17
   While the cited patents used in the regression only go back to 1975, data extending back to 1900 are used to
construct the patent stocks described in section II.
18
   In addition to data taken from the NBER data file, I also use additional data on the type of assignee made
available to the author. Unlike the other data, this variable is only complete through 1996. I thank Adam Jaffe for
making these data available.
19
   Note that in this paper, self-citations are included. Self-citations are when the citing and cited patent have the
same assignee. Many papers on knowledge flows across space (e.g. across countries or institutions) do not include
self-citations. However, in this paper, the concern is the usefulness of past research to current inventors. Whether
research was done by one firm or by two separate firms should not matter for the question of whether or not there
are diminishing returns to research over time. As such, it seems theoretically correct to include self-citations.
Energy Patent Citations Over Time                                                                               p. 17


number of claims ranges from 10.5 for waste heat to 13.7 for coal liquefaction. The number of

citations made by these patents ranges from 5.2 for continuous casting to 9.0 for coal

liquefaction. The combination of high claims and citations for coal liquefaction suggests that

patents in this group are broader than other groups. Originality ranges from a low of 0.234 for

continuous casting to a high of 0.459 for using waste as fuel. For the entire sample, 60% of

patents are American.           This ranges from 39% for continuous casting to 80% for coal

liquefaction. Note that solar energy patents are also predominantly American, which is a likely

explanation for the high number of citations for this group. Note also that the size of each group,

defined by the average number of patents per year, varies, with heat exchange being the largest,

and coal gasification, heat pumps, and Stirling engines the smallest.



IV. Results

         I use the data described above to estimate equation (6).                     Because the data include

repeated observations for each potentially cited patent, I calculate robust standard errors using

clustering based on the various cited patents. Moreover, as can be seen from Table 3, the

magnitudes of several key variables vary across groups. For example, 132 patents granted in a

year has a very different interpretation for coal liquefaction, where that is the maximum number

granted in the sample, than in solar energy, where the average number of patents granted per

year is 283. Thus, to aid interpretation, I normalize the stock of patents, number of patents

granted in the cited year, number of claims and citations made, and originality so that a one unit

change in the normalized variable is equivalent to a ten percent change from the mean value for




Nonetheless, the results which follow are essentially the same if self-citations are dropped from the data. Results
are available from the author by request.
Energy Patent Citations Over Time                                                                                p. 18


each technology group.20 Table 4 presents the base regression results, using patent stocks

calculated with the rates of decay and diffusion in Popp (2002). Except where noted, results are

shown as incidence rate ratios, eβ. For example, an incidence rate ratio of 1.2 says that a ten

percent deviation from the mean for that variable results in 20 percent more citations to the

patent.

          The results of the base model are as expected. As a test of the theoretical consistency of

the results, note that the coefficient on ln(NCTGi,t) is not statistically significantly different from

1. Both tests for diminishing returns yield statistically significant results. A 10 percent increase

in the number of patents granted within a given year reduces the number of citations to a patent

by 1.4 percent. A 10 percent increase in the stock of existing patents reduces the number of

patents by 3.4 percent. To help interpret these results, Tables 5 and 6 calculate the range of

change in citations for each technology, based on the maximum and minimum values of the

stock and number of patent grants in a year, respectively. In general, changes in the stocks have

more effect on citations received by a patent. These changes are most significant for the coal

and solar technologies. For example, the highest value of the solar energy knowledge stock is 16

times larger than the smallest value. As such, the effect of changes in the stock of solar energy

patent range from increasing citations by 37% to decreasing them by 23%. The smallest effect is

for heat exchange, for which the stock does not vary much over the data period. There, changes

in the stock affect citations by just a couple of percentage points. Of particular note is that solar

energy was a particularly fast growing technology in the mid-1970s. Referring to Table 1, note


20
  The normalization first divides each continuous variable by its mean, multiplies by 10, and then takes deviations
from the mean by subtracting 10, which results in normalized variables that have a mean of 0. The variables are
normalized to control for differences in the magnitudes across technologies. The number of potentially citing
patents is not normalized because it serves as controls for the number of opportunities for citation that a patent has.
Since the dependent variable is a level, rather than a normalized variable, the level of the number of opportunities is
what matters.
Energy Patent Citations Over Time                                                            p. 19


that solar energy patents doubled between 1974 and 1975, and continued to increase rapidly until

1977. In contrast, growth in heat exchange patents in response to higher energy prices was more

gradual. These results suggest that when rapid spikes occur, such as with solar energy in the

mid-1970s, the potential for diminishing returns to research will be greater.

       In comparison, the potential for diminishing returns within a year is smaller. Even for

solar energy, citations only fall by 10% when patenting peaks in 1977. While there are some

technologies for which the range of the number of other patents granted in year s, NCTDj,s, is

larger than the range of the stock, the smaller coefficient on this variable causes the effect of

diminishing returns to be less important. The highest value of patents per year lowers citations

by 3 to 11 percent, whereas the lowest value of patents per year raises citations from 3 to 13

percent.

       Turning to patent characteristics, most have small effects. Interestingly, government

patents are not significantly more likely to receive future citations than other patents. However,

the children of government patents are 13 percent more likely to receive citations. Traditionally,

government research is thought to be more basic. In this sense, the lack of additional citations to

government patents is a surprise. One possibility is that the nature of government R&D changed

during this period. This result is examined more closely in section V.

       Most important for determining citations is the number of claims. A 10 percent increase

in the number of claims increases citations by just one percent. There is much variation in this

variable, however, so that a one standard deviation change in the number of claims leads to a 10

percent change in the number of subsequent citations received. The number of citations made by

a patent has no effect on future citations. Finally, one surprising result is that originality

decreases the number of citations. However, this magnitude is small (only one-half of one
Energy Patent Citations Over Time                                                                                p. 20


percent). Even for the patent with the maximum originality score in the data (0.91), the number

of citations received falls just 6.7 percent as a result of the originality of the patent. Moreover, it

is important to remember that this regression only looks at citations within an energy technology

group. Patents with higher originality indices are patents that cite other patents from a broader

range of classifications. Thus, these patents themselves are likely relevant to a broader range of

future patents. It may very well be the case that such patents receive more citations overall, but

simply do not receive more citations from other energy patents than do other patents in the same

field.

         For the dummy variables, I find more citations within groups that are more narrowly

defined, such as the coal technologies, as opposed to broader classifications such as heat

exchange.21 Also, as expected, patent citations are less likely to be made to patents of foreign

origin, with German patents receiving the fewest citations from American inventors. Finally, to

save space, Figure 1 presents the time trend dummies over time. As expected, the number of

citations increases over time. Compared to the base year of 1975, citations are between 20 and

40 percent more likely from patent applications in the mid-to-late 1990s.



A. Sensitivity Analysis: Alternative Knowledge Stocks

         Because tests for diminishing returns may be sensitive to the parameters chosen to

construct the stock variable, Table 7 presents results for two alternative stocks, as defined in

section II.22 Note that the results are consistent across specifications, suggesting that the key

results are not sensitive to how the stock is defined. One result of note is that the coefficient on


21
   The heat exchange technology group includes all of patent class 165, while each of the coal technologies include
only a few subclasses.
22
   The table presents results for the individual patent characteristics. Results for the dummy variables are consistent
across specifications, and are available from the author by request.
Energy Patent Citations Over Time                                                               p. 21


ln(NCTGi,t) is significantly different from one when no decay of knowledge is assumed,

suggesting that such a specification may be inconsistent with theory. Note also that the log-

likelihood value is lowest for that specification.

       Tables 5 and 6 examine the diminishing returns estimates for all three knowledge stock

assumptions. There is little difference between the results using the AER rates and results with a

decay rate of 10 percent and rate of diffusion of 25 percent. Assuming no decay rate and

instantaneous diffusion causes the knowledge stocks to have slightly less impact. In particular,

there is less variation in the effect of the knowledge stock in this case, because the timing of

patents matter less. Because knowledge never decays, once a patent is in the knowledge stock,

its effect is permanent. In the other specifications, the effect of a new patent is strongest close to

the date of grant. As a result, the increase in citations from the minimum stock value with no

decay ranges from 8 to 26 percent, compared to 4 to 37 percent for the AER rates.



B. Alternative Specifications

       Having shown that the base results are not sensitive to how the knowledge stock is

defined, I continue by addressing the sensitivity of key results to alternative model

specifications.23 Table 8 shows the base results, along with five regressions omitting various

variables. Omitting the control for other patents granted in the same year (column 2), which

tests for diminishing returns to citations in a given year, has little impact on other variables. In

general, the same is true when omitting the knowledge stock, which controls for diminishing

returns to citations over time. However, while other coefficients are not drastically effected

(either when omitting only the stock in column 3 or omitting both controls for diminishing
Energy Patent Citations Over Time                                                                                      p. 22


returns in column 4), the coefficient on ln(NCTGi,t) is now significantly higher than 1. This

suggests that a model omitting the stocks is misspecified.

            One surprising results above was the negative coefficient on originality. Columns 5 and

6 Table 8 includes two regressions to test the robustness of this result. First, one may be

concerned about correlation between originality and the government patents – perhaps

government patents are more basic, and thus more original. However, as column (5) shows,

there is little change to the other variables when the government patent controls are excluded.

Similarly, omitting originality from the model (column 6) has little effect on the other estimates.



V. The Effect of Government Patents

            One interesting finding is that government patents are not cited more frequently than

other patents. Traditionally, government R&D is thought of as more basic than private R&D,

suggesting that government patents should generate more citations.                                One reason for this

surprising result may be that the nature of government R&D has changed over time.

            Before President Reagan took office in 1981, federal energy R&D policy included the

goal of accelerating the development of new marketable technologies. Support was given to

large research projects, such as a program aimed at creating synthetic fuels from coal. When

supporting research aimed at marketable technologies, federally funded energy R&D could be a

substitute for private innovation, rather than as a source of basic knowledge. If this is the case,

we would not expect private patents to cite government patents more frequently. After Reagan’s

election, government funding for energy R&D was cut significantly. Department of Energy

(DOE) support for research was limited to long-term, high-risk projects (Cohen and Noll 1991).

23
     Given that the results are not sensitive to how the stock is calculated, all regressions in this section use stocks
Energy Patent Citations Over Time                                                                               p. 23


The DOE focused its efforts on the early stages of research and development – basic research to

promote general knowledge and the early stages of applied R&D designed to test the feasibility

of new ideas. It was expected that private firms would continue the R&D process by developing

commercially acceptable products (U.S. Department of Energy 1987). If these goals were

achieved, we should see more citations to government energy patents filed since 1981.24

         In addition to changes in the type of R&D supported, there were also additional policy

changes intended to encourage the transfer of technologies from the public to the private sector.

These include the Stevenson-Wylder Technology Innovation Act of 1980 (P.L. 96-480), the

Bayh-Dole Act of 1980 (P.L. 96-517), and the Federal Technology Transfer Act of 1986 (P.L.

99-502). The Technology Innovation Act declared technology transfer a mission of all federal

laboratories, and required all major federal laboratories to establish a technology transfer office.

The Bayh-Dole Act, best known for facilitating patenting of federally funded university R&D,

also gave government laboratories permission to grant exclusive licenses to government-owned

patents. The hope was that exclusive licenses would entice firms to be more willing to partner

with government laboratories.            Finally, the Technology Transfer Act of 1986 established

cooperative R&D arrangements (CRADAs) between government-run laboratories and private

industry. Thus, at the same time that energy R&D policy was shifting to focus on more basic

research, broader policy initiatives were established to encourage the transfer of government

research results to the private sector.

         To examine the effect of these policy shifts, I rerun the basic regression (using the AER

rates of decay and diffusion) with an additional variable interacting the government patent

dummy with a dummy variable for patents applied for in 1981 or later. These results are shown


calculated with the AER decay and diffusion rates. As above, results using alternative specifications are similar.
Energy Patent Citations Over Time                                                                                 p. 24


in column 2 of Table 9. I find that pre-1981 patents are no more or less likely to be cited than

other patents. However, post-1981 patents are 12.5 percent more likely to be cited.25 This is

consistent with results in Jaffe and Lerner (2001), who find that both patenting and the number

of citations received per patent increased at DOE laboratories since the policy shifts of the

1980s.26 Children of government patents remain important, as they generate 13 percent more

citations.

         That children of government patents are cited more often than government patents may

suggest that transferring technology to the private sector is important. Although government

patents may represent more basic scientific knowledge, the results may not be appropriate for

commercialization. It may be that the child patents, which are held by the private sector, provide

more commercial value by developing applications for knowledge generated in the government

sector. While a complete examination of such a hypothesis is beyond the scope of this paper, I

include a couple of regressions that suggest the technology transfer intended by the policy shifts

in the 1980s may indeed be taking place.

         First, in column 3, I interact the child patent dummy with a dummy for patents assigned

to U.S. inventors. If technology transfer is important, we would expect that U.S. inventors should

be generating particularly useful results from government patents, but should not expect that to

be the case for foreign patents. That is not the case in column 3, as US children are no more




24
   Additional support for the change in the nature of government R&D comes from Popp (2002), which finds that
government-sponsored energy R&D substitutes private energy R&D before 1981, but is a complement afterwards.
25
   The combined effect equals exp(βgov + βinteract).
26
   Their database differs from the data in this paper in two respects. First, it contains both patents assigned directly
to the laboratories and patents assigned to private contractors who collaborated on research at the DOE labs. In this
paper, such patents are assigned to the private sector. Second, Jaffe and Lerner do not limit their study to a subset
of energy technologies, as is the case here. Thus, this paper focuses on how the usefulness of R&D within a
specific technology changes, whereas in Jaffe and Lerner’s work, the types of R&D performed at the laboratories
may also be changing. For example, federal R&D spending on renewable energy fell during this period.
Energy Patent Citations Over Time                                                            p. 25


likely to be cited than other patents. This also holds true in column 4, where I include both the

interaction for US children and the interaction for post-1981 government patents.

       Finally, column 5 includes three interactions. As before, I consider pre- and post-1981

government patents, as well as U.S. and foreign child patents. I also include interact a dummy

variable for child patents based on whether the patent is a child of a government patent that filed

its application since 1981. These results suggest that technology transfer may be important, but

not until the policy shift that occurred in 1981. As before, government patents granted since

1981 are more frequently cited, with such patents receiving 13 percent more citations. Overall,

child patents are cited 10 percent more frequently. Of particular note, however, are the results

for patents that are children of government patents filed since 1981. Here, we find that foreign

children of such patents are just two percent more likely to be cited than other patents. However,

U.S. children of these government patents are 29 percent more likely to be cited. The finding

that only U.S. children of government patents generate more citations after the shift in U.S.

energy R&D policy suggests that technology transfer, rather than indirect knowledge spillovers,

may be a driving force behind the importance of child patents. While these results are only

suggestive, they do imply a fruitful avenue for future research.       It also supports evidence

provided in Jaffe and Lerner (2001), who supplement the patent citation analysis discussed

above with case studies of two DOE laboratories, Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory and

Idaho National Engineering and Environmental Laboratory, where technology transfer efforts

increased in the 1980s and 1990s.

VI. Conclusion

       This paper examines trends in citations to energy patents granted between 1975 and

1996. In previous work (Popp 2002), I demonstrate that accumulated patent stocks, weighted by
Energy Patent Citations Over Time                                                                p. 26


the frequency of citation to these patents, can serve as a proxy for the supply of knowledge

available to inventors. Moreover, this supply of knowledge is an important determinant of the

level of innovative activity in a given year. As such, understanding changes in the number of

citations received by a patent can provide insight into how the quality of the stock of knowledge

on which inventors build changes over time.

         Using generalized negative binomial regression, I find evidence of diminishing returns to

the usefulness of new patents to subsequent inventors. Across time, I find that a 10 percent

increase in the stock of previous patents reduces subsequent citations from 3 to 5 percent. Given

the variation in the size of stocks observed in the data, this can lead to variations in citation rates

of up to 60 percent. Within a given year, I find that patents are less likely to be cited, and thus

contribute less to the knowledge stock, when the number of other patents granted in the field is

high. However, the magnitude of this effect is about half that of the effect of stocks on citation

rates.

         Given the importance of the quality of knowledge for future R&D found in Popp (2002),

this result may leave policy makers discouraged, as it suggests that successful energy R&D (or

R&D programs concentrated in other specific fields) will become less productive over time.

This paper suggests that government sponsored R&D can help offset these declines. I find that

government patents filed since 1981 are 12 percent more likely to be cited than other patents.

Notably, this is not true for government patents applied for before 1981, when government

sponsored R&D focused more on applied, rather than basic, research. This result suggests that

government sponsored R&D can best contribute to the knowledge stock, and thus best induce

future R&D, if it focuses on more basic research that is unlikely to be done elsewhere.

Moreover, I find that private patents that cite these government patents are themselves cited 30%
Energy Patent Citations Over Time                                                        p. 27


more often.   This evidence suggests that technology transfer, or at least indirect flows of

knowledge, from government research programs to the private sector are needed to fully realize

the benefits of government research.
Energy Patent Citations Over Time                                                           p. 28


                                        REFERENCES

Caballero, Ricardo J. and Adam B. Jaffe (1993), “How High are the Giants’ Shoulders: An
       Empirical Assessment of Knowledge Spillovers and Creative Destruction in a Model of
       Economic Growth,” in Olivier J. Blanchard and Stanley Fischer, eds., NBER
       Macroeconomics Annual 1993, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

Cameron, A. Colin and Pravin K. Trivedi (1998), Regression Analysis of Count Data,
      Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.

Clark, Kim B. and Zvi Griliches (1984), “Productivity growth and R&D at the business level:
       results from the PIMS data base,” in Zvi Griliches, ed., R&D, Patents and Productivity,
       University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 375-92.

Cohen, Linda R. and Noll, Roger G. (1991), The Technology Pork Barrel, Washington, DC: The
       Brookings Institution.

Evenson, Robert E. (1991), “Patent Data by Industry,” Cowles Discussion Paper no. 620, Yale
      University.

Evenson, Robert E. and Yoav Kislev (1975), Agricultural Research and Productivity, Yale
      University Press, New Haven, CT.

Griliches, Zvi (1995), “R&D and Productivity: Econometric Results and Measurement Issues,”
       in Paul Stoneman, ed., Handbook of the economics of innovation and technological
       change, Blackwell Publishers, Cambridge, MA, 52-89.

Griliches, Zvi (1990), “Patent statistics as economic indicators,” Journal of Economic Literature,
       28, 1661-1707.

Griliches, Zvi and Jacques Mairesse (1984), “Productivity and R&D at the firm level,” in Zvi
       Griliches, ed., R&D, Patents and Productivity, University of Chicago Press, Chicago,
       339-74.

Hall, Bronwyn, Adam B. Jaffe, and Manuel Tratjenberg (2002), “The NBER Patent Citation
       Data File: Lessons, Insights and Methodological Tools,” in Adam B. Jaffe and Manuel
       Trajtenberg, Patents, Citations, and Innovations: A Window on the Knowledge Economy,
       MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

Helpman, Elhanan ed. (1998), General Purpose Technologies and Economic Growth, MIT
      Press, Cambridge, MA.

Jaffe, Adam B., Michael S. Fogarty, and Bruce A. Banks (1998), “Evidence from Patents and
        Patent Citations on the Impact of NASA and Other Federal Labs on Commercial
        Innovation,” Journal of Industrial Economics, 46, 183-205.
Energy Patent Citations Over Time                                                        p. 29


Jaffe, Adam B. and Josh Lerner (2001), “Reinventing public R&D: patent policy and the
       commercialization of national laboratory technologies,” RAND Journal of Economics,
       32(1), 167-198.

Jaffe, Adam B., Richard G. Newell, and Robert N. Stavins (2003), “Technological change and
        the environment,” in K.G.Mäler & J. Vincent (Eds.), Handbook of Environmental
        Economics, (pp. 461-516). Amsterdam: North Holland.

Jaffe, Adam B. and Karen Palmer (1997), “Environmental Regulation and Innovation: A Panel
        Data Study,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 79, 610-619.

Jaffe, Adam B. and Manuel Trajtenberg (2002), Patents, citations, and innovations: A window
        on the knowledge economy, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

Jaffe, Adam B. and Maneul Trajtenberg (1996), “Flows of Knowledge From Universities and
        Federal Labs: Modeling the Flow of Patent Citations Over Time and Across Institutional
        and Geographic Boundaries,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 93,
        12671-77.

Jaffe, Adam B., Manuel Trajtenberg and Rebecca Henderson (1993), “Geographic Localization
        of Knowledge Spillovers as Evidenced by Patent Citations,” Quarterly Journal of
        Economics, 108, 577-598.

Jung, Chulho, Krutilla, Kerry, and Roy Boyd (1996), “Incentives for Advanced Pollution
      Abatement Technology at the Industry Level: An Evaluation of Policy Alternatives,”
      Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 30, 95-111.

Lanjouw, Jean O. (1993), “Patent Protection: Of What Value and For How Long?” NBER
      Working Paper no. 4475.

Lanjouw, Jean O. and Ashoka Mody (1996), “Innovation and the International Diffusion of
      Environmentally Responsive Technology,” Research Policy, 25, 549-571.

Lanjouw, Jean O. and Mark Shankerman (2004), “Patent Quality and Research Productivity:
      Measuring Innovation with Multiple Indicators,” Economic Journal, 114(495), 441-465.

Lanjouw, Jean O., Ariel Pakes and Jonathan Putnam (1998), “How to Count Patents and Value
      Intellectual Property: Uses of Patent Renewal and Application Data,” The Journal of
      Industrial Economics, 46(4), 405-433.

Milliman, Scott R. and Raymond Prince (1989), “Firm Incentives to Promote Technological
       Change in Pollution Control,” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management,
       17, 247-265.

Milliman, Scott R. and Raymond Prince (1991), “Firm Incentives to Promote Technological
       Change in Pollution Control: Reply,” Journal of Environmental Economics and
       Management, 22, 292-296.
Energy Patent Citations Over Time                                                             p. 30


Newell, Richard G., Adam B. Jaffe, and Robert N. Stavins (1999), “The Induced Innovation
      Hypothesis and Energy-Saving Technological Change,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
      114, 941-975.

Pakes, Ariel (1986), “Patents as options: some estimates of the value of holding European patent
       stocks,” Econometrica, 54, 755-84.

Pakes, Ariel and Mark Schankerman (1984), “The rate of obsolescence of knowledge, research
       gestation lags, and the private rate of return of research resources,” in Zvi Griliches, ed.,
       R&D, Patents and Productivity, University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 73-88.

Popp, David (2004), “ENTICE: Endogenous Technological Change in the DICE Model of
      Global Warming,” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 48(3), 742-
      768.

Popp, David (2002), “Induced Innovation and Energy Prices,” American Economic Review,
      92(1), 160-180.

Putnam, Jonathan (1996), The Value of International Patent Protection, Ph.D. Thesis, Yale
      University.

Scherer, Frederic M. (1984), “Using Linked Patent and R&D Data to Measure Interindustry
       Technology Flows,” in Zvi Griliches, ed., R&D, Patents and Productivity, University of
       Chicago Press, Chicago, 417-461.

Scherer, Fredric M. (1982), “Interindustry technology flows and productivity growth,” Review of
       Economics and Statistics, 627-34.

Scherer, Frederic M. (1965), “Firm size, market structure, opportunity and the output of patented
       inventions,” American Economic Review, 55, 1097-1123.

Schmookler, Jacob (1966), Invention and Economic Growth, Harvard University Press,
     Cambridge, MA.

U.S. Department of Energy (1987), Energy Conservation: Multi-Year Plan FY 1989-93,
      Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.

Winkelmann, Rainer and Klaus F. Zimmermann (1995), “Recent Developments in Count Data
      Modelling: Theory and Application,” Journal of Economic Surveys, 9(1), 1-24.
Energy Patent Citations Over Time                                                                         p. 31


                                                        Figure 1 – Citing and Cited Year Fixed Effects



                                  1.6


                                  1.4


                                  1.2
        Effect on citation rate




                                   1


                                  0.8


                                  0.6


                                  0.4


                                  0.2


                                   0
                                   1975   1977   1979    1981    1983     1985          1987    1989      1991    1993   1995   1997
                                                                                 year

                                                                 Cited dummies           Citing dummies


      The figure plots citing year and cited year fixed effects. 1975 is the excluded year in the regressions. In addition,
      because all patents granted in 1996 are cited in 1997 in this data, the cited year 1996 dummy is also excluded.
Energy Patent Citations Over Time                                                        p. 32


         Table 1 – Successful U.S. Patent Applications by Year

               Coal        Coal       Solar    Solar      Fuel    Waste     Waste     Heat        Heat   Stirling Continuous
  year     Liquefaction Gasification Energy   Batteries   Cells   as Fuel   Heat    Exchange     Pumps   Engines   Casting
  1974          52         41         106        36        28       49       27       382          8       18        50
  1975          44         36         225        73        40       28       25       415          8       13        44
  1976         107         42         324        97        34       30       35       450          20      17        44
  1977          92         45         375       131        56       35       29       504          17      11        38
  1978         117         56         340       149        44       42       16       488          33      13        41
  1979          84         35         305       129        44       44       28       476          24      12        45
  1980         100         40         283       119        57       50       26       456          23      18        44
  1981         105         31         220       125        62       44       23       399          30      22        43
  1982          83         29         165       105        82       59       31       399          18      35        49
  1983          75         25         104        85        59       53       22       322          11      21        61
  1984          73         18         106        92        49       43       26       350          8       20        64
  1985          35         19          87        87        61       47       17       293          14      13        46
  1986          23         11          45        79        81       62       13       330          15      13        83
  1987          13         17          38        55        68       84       13       307          11      19        41
  1988          17         12          46        66        65       70       26       327          5       11        60
  1989          23         14          33        46        58       84       24       318          14      12        39
  1990          19         10          28        46        60      101       24       344          19      18        35
  1991          10          5          34        52        52       95       19       391          22      12        38
  1992          10          5          29        52        58       85       21       413          12      11        30
  1993          10          6          33        43        66       72       28       410          18       8        39
  1994          10         11          32        56        67       76       24       360          15      14        32
  1995          10          6          33        53        91       67       22       367          16       4        38
  1996           8          6          32        46        75       57       25       340          13      18        29
  1997          10          2          13        34        86       32       22       307          17      14        15



The table shows the number of successful U.S. patent applications in each of the 11 energy technology groups. Only applications
made by domestic inventors are included. The data contain all patents granted through the end of 1999.
Energy Patent Citations Over Time                                                      p. 33


                Table 2 – Descriptive Data: Granted Patents and Citations
Entire Sample                                                        mean cites by type
                             N      % gov   % child   ave cites   Private   Govt.     Child
Coal liquefaction        1,369      3.73%   18.92%        2.41       2.47    3.33      2.02
Coal gasification          776      5.03%   15.34%        1.05       1.05    1.21      1.03
Solar Energy             3,850      2.96%   16.78%        2.81       2.92    3.56      2.15
Solar Batteries          2,694      6.01%   20.16%        2.03       1.95    2.03      2.30
Fuel Cells               2,061      6.11%   22.46%        2.71       2.66    4.02      2.50
Waste Fuel               2,110      1.33%   10.33%        2.38       2.31    1.54      3.10
Waste Heat               1,240      0.81%    2.66%        0.97       0.98    0.60      0.48
Heat Exchange           13,798      1.84%    9.00%        1.58       1.54    2.03      1.80
Heat Pump                  572      1.05%    3.50%        1.09       1.12    0.67      0.55
Stirling Engines           585      2.91%   16.24%        1.34       1.22    3.71      1.52
Continuous Casting       2,558      0.55%    3.09%        0.97       0.97    1.36      1.04
1975
Coal liquefaction          29    13.79%      0.00%        6.41      5.24    13.75     0.00
Coal gasification          26     3.85%      0.00%        2.77      2.80     2.00     0.00
Solar Energy               50     4.00%      0.00%       14.88     14.94    13.50     0.00
Solar Batteries            37    18.92%      0.00%        5.65      6.00     4.14     0.00
Fuel Cells                 72     8.33%      0.00%        2.40      2.47     1.67     0.00
Waste Fuel                 93     1.08%      0.00%        3.54      3.45    12.00     0.00
Waste Heat                 28     3.57%      0.00%        1.79      1.85     0.00     0.00
Heat Exchange             531     3.39%      0.00%        2.10      2.08     2.78     0.00
Heat Pump                   7     0.00%      0.00%        4.00      4.00     0.00     0.00
Stirling Engines           23     0.00%      0.00%        1.78      1.78     0.00     0.00
Continuous Casting        137     0.00%      0.00%        1.61      1.61     0.00     0.00
1980
Coal liquefaction          99       4.04%   20.20%        3.30      3.35     0.50     3.70
Coal gasification          61       3.28%   16.39%        0.93      0.86     1.00     1.30
Solar Energy              370       3.24%   20.00%        2.76      2.70     3.42     2.86
Solar Batteries           150       6.67%   25.33%        2.71      2.57     2.10     3.24
Fuel Cells                 67       4.48%    5.97%        4.19      4.35     3.00     2.75
Waste Fuel                 64       3.13%   15.63%        3.86      3.23     3.50     7.20
Waste Heat                 48       0.00%    2.08%        1.25      1.28     0.00     0.00
Heat Exchange             696       2.16%   10.06%        1.94      1.91     1.67     2.24
Heat Pump                  33       3.03%    3.03%        1.06      1.06     1.00     1.00
Stirling Engines           23       4.35%    0.00%        2.26      1.95     9.00     0.00
Continuous Casting        109       0.00%    0.00%        1.65      1.65     0.00     0.00
1990
Coal liquefaction          20     5.00%     25.00%        0.35      0.29     0.00     0.60
Coal gasification          29     0.00%     13.79%        0.45      0.52     0.00     0.00
Solar Energy               75     0.00%     18.67%        0.45      0.41     0.00     0.64
Solar Batteries            98     4.08%     18.37%        1.21      1.03     1.00     2.06
Fuel Cells                 98    12.24%     29.59%        2.62      1.79     3.25     4.00
Waste Fuel                136     0.00%      8.82%        2.58      2.49     0.00     3.50
Waste Heat                 61     0.00%      0.00%        1.00      1.00     0.00     0.00
Heat Exchange             620     2.26%      8.23%        1.57      1.52     0.71     2.27
Heat Pump                  24     0.00%      0.00%        1.00      1.00     0.00     0.00
Stirling Engines           20     0.00%     15.00%        1.20      1.35     0.00     0.33
Continuous Casting        133     1.50%      1.50%        0.93      0.86     6.50     0.00
Energy Patent Citations Over Time                                                         p. 34


                            Table 3 – Other Descriptive Data

                                                                                    # citing    # cited
                                                      Cites                   US   pats per    pats per
                              Citations     Claims    Made     Original   dummy        year        year
Coal liquefaction   mean         2.414      13.747    9.023      0.329     0.807    26.551      92.139
                      sd         3.398      10.398    6.968     0.266      0.395    28.622      37.897
                     max             29        108      103      0.889         1        117         132
                     min              0          1        1          0         0           8          9
Coal Gasification   mean         1.052      11.451    7.153     0.419      0.653    12.693      47.012
                      sd         1.644       9.013    5.676     0.265      0.476    10.336      16.277
                     max             11         67      103      0.860         1          56         66
                     min              0          1        1          0         0           2          7
Solar Energy        mean         2.806      11.332    7.650      0.345     0.760    61.189     283.024
                      sd         4.518      10.050    5.217     0.266      0.427    66.510     133.064
                     max             46        184      120      0.885         1        375         504
                     min              0          1        1          0         0          13         41
Solar Batteries     mean         2.026      14.008    6.128      0.407     0.634    57.349     137.524
                      sd         3.208      12.273    5.754     0.277      0.482    21.539      31.655
                     max             62        164      120      0.909         1        149         184
                     min              0          1        1          0         0          34         41
Fuel Cells          mean         2.709      14.008    6.611     0.291      0.605    70.410     101.606
                      sd         3.998      10.818    6.167     0.277      0.489    12.867      24.784
                     max             60        110       83      0.887         1          91        141
                     min              0          1        1          0         0          34         57
Waste Fuel          mean         2.383      13.396    8.625     0.459      0.605    66.111     107.349
                      sd         3.617      13.035    6.967     0.262      0.489    19.737      28.662
                     max             35        279       80      0.886         1        101         142
                     min              0          1        1          0         0          28         44
Waste Heat          mean         0.968      10.502    6.229     0.302      0.397    22.734      66.591
                      sd         1.535       8.785    5.763     0.272      0.489     3.815      22.938
                     max             16        103      126      0.862         1          35        121
                     min              0          1        1          0         0          13         31
Heat Exchange       mean         1.577      10.736    7.663     0.411      0.595   356.379     660.036
                      sd         2.436       8.807    5.877     0.274      0.491    42.421      65.192
                     max             32        184       95      0.905         1        504         816
                     min              0          1        1          0         0        293         517

                               Table continued on next page
Energy Patent Citations Over Time                                                        p. 35


                       Table 3 – Other Descriptive Data (continued)

                                                                                   # citing    # cited
                                                      Cites                  US   pats per    pats per
                              Citations     Claims    Made    Original   dummy        year        year
Heat Pump            mean        1.093      10.731    7.316    0.274      0.596    15.114      29.042
                       sd        2.018       7.816    4.877    0.259      0.491     4.058       7.786
                      max            17         51       34     0.864         1          30         41
                      min             0          1        1         0         0           5          7
Stirling Engines     mean        1.340      11.670    5.588     0.272     0.556    13.410      30.465
                       sd        2.119      11.133    6.278    0.264      0.497     5.334       9.300
                      max            25         92       52     0.833         1          35         47
                      min             0          1        1         0         0           4         12
Continuous Casting   mean        0.974      11.251    5.220    0.234      0.387    37.646     134.397
                       sd        2.195       9.834    4.203    0.274      0.487    13.986      33.328
                      max            39        111       45     0.880         1          83        192
                      min             0          1        1         0         0          15         63
Total                mean        1.830      11.676    7.274     0.371     0.605   182.810     367.780
                       sd        3.070      10.027    5.884    0.279      0.489   158.110     272.318
                      max            62        279      126     0.909         1        504         816
                      min             0          1        1         0         0           2          7
Energy Patent Citations Over Time                                                                p. 36


                                    Table 4 – Base Regression Results

         Patent characteristics                         Cited country dummies
         ln(# of citing patents)*           1.024       United States                     N/A
                                           1.282†
         # of patents in cited yr.          0.986       Japan                           0.686
                                           -3.552                                     -12.906
         Stock of patents                   0.966       Germany                         0.520
                                           -9.527                                     -17.754
         Government patent                  1.038       France                          0.584
                                            0.778                                     -11.438
         Government child                   1.131       United Kingdom                  0.595
                                            4.757                                      -8.244
         # of claims                        1.011       Canada                          0.712
                                           11.928                                      -5.595
         # of citations made                1.001       Other EPO                       0.571
                                            1.358                                     -14.298
         Originality                        0.995       Other                           0.653
                                           -4.315                                      -7.193
         Cite lag                           0.937       Constant                        0.003
                                          -15.612                                     -44.670
         Technology dummies                             Dispersion coefficients*
         Coal liquefaction                  2.078       Coal liquefaction               0.461
                                           13.206                                      -6.700
         Coal gasification                  2.217       Coal gasification               0.460
                                           11.172                                      -3.783
         Solar energy                       0.849       Solar energy                    0.158
                                           -3.328                                     -16.992
         Solar batteries                    1.079       Solar batteries                 0.373
                                            1.469                                      -8.564
         Fuel cells                         1.563       Fuel cells                      0.455
                                            8.322                                      -7.122
         Waste as fuel                      1.470       Waste as fuel                   0.413
                                            7.306                                      -7.840
         Waste heat                         1.870       Waste heat                      0.731
                                           10.322                                      -2.124
         Heat exchange                      0.157       Heat exchange                   0.469
                                          -30.913                                      -7.772
         Heat pumps                         2.748       Heat pumps                      0.502
                                           11.994                                      -3.467
         Stirling engines                   3.713       Stirling engines                0.605
                                           17.317                                      -2.713
         Continuous casting                   N/A       Continuous casting                N/A

                                                        Constant                         4.586
                                                                                        16.481
                                                        num. of obs.                   404497
                                                        log-likelihood             -156031.51
        * For these parameters, actual values, rather than exponential values, are presented.
        †: null hypothesis for this coefficient is that the coefficient equals 1.
  Energy Patent Citations Over Time                                                            p. 37


                                 Table 5 – The Effect of Knowledge Stocks

                                                                                           %         %
                                                                                       change change
                                                                     % Dev   % Dev         in        in
                                                                      from    from     citations citations
                                                                     Mean:   Mean:       from      from
                                    Std.                     Max/      Min    Max         min       max
AER Rates                Mean      Dev.      Min      Max     Min    Value   Value       value     value
Coal liquefaction        1.474     0.530   0.780    2.296     2.94   -47%     56%       118%        82%
Coal gasification        0.800     0.275   0.250    1.147     4.58   -69%     43%       127%        86%
Solar Energy             3.696     2.018    0.399    6.414   16.07   -89%     74%       137%        77%
Solar Batteries          2.382     0.939    0.744   3.393     4.56   -69%     42%       127%        86%
Fuel Cells               2.002     0.250   1.659    2.500     1.51   -17%     25%       106%        92%
Waste Fuel               1.802     0.540   1.151    2.748     2.39   -36%     53%       113%        83%
Waste Heat               1.173     0.372   0.646     1.600    2.48   -45%     36%       117%        88%
Heat Exchange           14.224     0.897   12.526   15.177    1.21   -12%      7%       104%        98%
Heat Pump                0.486     0.166   0.220    0.647     2.95   -55%     33%       121%        89%
Stirling Engines         0.614     0.077   0.459    0.730     1.59   -25%     19%       109%        94%
Continuous Casting       2.907     0.235   2.428    3.243     1.34   -16%     12%       106%        96%
Decay = 0.1, Diffusion = 0.25
Coal liquefaction       414.17     131.8   185.01   565.75   3.06    -55%    37%        121%       87%
Coal gasification       211.95     78.9    54.64    285.46   5.22    -74%    35%        130%       88%
Solar Energy            973.92     471.5   171.37   1465.4   8.55    -82%    50%        133%       83%
Solar Batteries         604.23     272.6   195.03   906.24   4.65    -68%    50%        127%       83%
Fuel Cells              597.01     67.9    501.75   742.34   1.48    -16%    24%        106%       91%
Waste Fuel              470.15     153.6   250.87   753.48   3.00    -47%    60%        118%       80%
Waste Heat              334.72      95.4   214.44   463.62   2.16    -36%    39%        113%       87%
Heat Exchange           4499.3     438.0   3701.1   4990.1   1.35    -18%    11%        106%       96%
Heat Pump               146.44     37.31    97.01   195.64   2.02    -34%    34%        113%       88%
Stirling Engines        173.06     35.82   102.14   212.92   2.08    -41%    23%        115%       92%
Continuous Casting      848.04     112.2   609.45   985.05   1.62    -28%    16%        110%       94%
No Decay
Coal liquefaction       1695.3     495.7    855     2235     2.61    -50%    32%        119%       86%
Coal gasification       1059.4     268.9    571     1366     2.39    -46%    29%        117%       87%
Solar Energy            4159.3     1405     1710     5605    3.28    -59%    35%        123%       84%
Solar Batteries         2026.8     913.8     685    3382     4.94    -66%    67%        126%       72%
Fuel Cells              2176.0     600.2   1314     3271     2.49    -40%    50%        115%       78%
Waste Fuel              2235.5     639.3    1379     3411    2.47    -38%    53%        114%       77%
Waste Heat              2101.2     428.0   1502     2775     1.85    -29%    32%        110%       86%
Heat Exchange           32409      4337    25545    39302    1.54    -21%    21%        108%       90%
Heat Pump                759.4     182.1     499    1052     2.11    -34%    39%        113%       83%
Stirling Engines         709.6     190.0     415    1002     2.41    -42%    41%        116%       82%
Continuous Casting      3417.7     842.4   2096     4748     2.27    -39%    39%        114%       83%
          The table includes descriptive statistics for the knowledge stock, for each of the
          three alternative combinations of decay and diffusion used in the paper. The last
          two columns present the change in citations based on either the highest and
          lowest value of each stock, compared to the number of citations received when
          the stock is at its mean value for the respective technology.
Energy Patent Citations Over Time                                                              p. 38


                                       Table 6 – The Effect of Other Patents in a Given Year



                                                                                      %              %            %
                                                                                   change         change       change            %
                                                                         %            in             in           in        change        %
                                                 % Dev    % Dev      change in    citations:     citations:   citations:        in    change in
                                                  from     from      citations:      max            min          max       citations: citations:
                                                 Mean:    Mean:      min value      value          value        value      min value     max
                                                   Min     Max         (AER         (AER         (β1=0.1;     (β1=0.1;         (no    value (no
# patents/cited year   mean      min     max     Value    Value        rates)       rates)       β2=0.25)     β2=0.25)      decay)     decay)
Coal liquefaction      92.14       9     132     -90%      43%          113%         94%           122%          91%          118%       92%
Coal gasification      47.01      7      66      -85%      40%          112%         95%           121%          91%          117%       93%
Solar Energy           283.0      41     504     -86%      78%          113%         90%           121%          84%          117%       87%
Solar Batteries        137.5      41     184     -70%      34%          110%         95%           117%          93%          114%       94%
Fuel Cells             101.6     57      141     -44%      39%          106%         95%           110%          92%          108%       93%
Waste Fuel             107.4     44      142     -59%      32%          109%         96%           114%          93%          111%       94%
Waste Heat             66.59     31      121     -53%      82%          108%         89%           113%          83%          110%       86%
Heat Exchange          660.0     517     816     -22%      24%          103%         97%           105%          95%          104%       96%
Heat Pump              29.04       7     41      -76%      41%          111%         94%           119%          91%          115%       93%
Stirling Engines       30.46      12      47     -61%      54%          109%         93%           115%          89%          112%       91%
Continuous Casting     134.4     63      192     -53%      43%          108%         94%           113%          91%          110%       93%
       The table provides descriptive statistics for the number of patents granted in each technology per year, along with the
       range of results pertaining to diminishing returns within a year. These results are presented for each alternative stock
       of patents. These results are the change in citations based on either the highest and lowest value of patents granted
       each year, compared to the number of citations received when the number of patents granted is at its mean value for the
       respective technology.
Energy Patent Citations Over Time                                                             p. 39


                    Table 7 – Sensitivity to Rates of Decay and Diffusion


                                                               Decay
                                                                 0.1;
              Variable                      AER Rates         Diff. 0.25     No Decay
              ln(# of citing patents)*        1.024            1.018           1.047
                                              1.282†           0.935†          2.502†
              # of patents in cited yr.        0.986            0.978           0.982
                                              -3.552           -5.673          -4.628
              Stock of patents                 0.966            0.963           0.952
                                              -9.527           -9.295          -7.028
              Government patent                1.038            1.040           1.041
                                               0.778            0.812           0.840
              Government child                1.131            1.132           1.135
                                               4.757            4.786           4.891
              # of claims                      1.011           1.011            1.012
                                              11.928           11.963          12.022
              # of citations made              1.001           1.002            1.001
                                               1.358            1.390           1.345
              Originality                      0.995            0.995           0.995
                                              -4.315           -4.367          -4.448
              Cite lag                         0.937           0.932            0.953
                                             -15.612          -16.366          -9.829
              Num. of obs.                   404497           404497          404497
              log-likelihood                -156031.5        -156039.9       -156075.6
        * For this parameter, actual values, rather than exponential values, are presented.
        †: null hypothesis for this coefficient is that the coefficient equals 1.
  Energy Patent Citations Over Time                                                               p. 40


                              Table 8 – Sensitivity to Model Specification



                                                                                          (5)
                                (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)         Omit          (6)
                               Base           Omit           Omit          No Dim.       Govt.       Omit
Variable                       Model         NCTD            Stock         Returns      Patents    Originality
ln(# of citing patents)*       1.024          1.008          1.113          1.097        1.022       1.024
                              1.282†         0.442†         6.301†         5.547†       1.188†      1.266†
# of patents in cited yr.      0.986                         0.980                       0.987       0.986
                              -3.552                        -5.060                      -3.389      -3.545
Stock of patents               0.966          0.963                                      0.965       0.966
                              -9.527        -10.088                                     -9.591      -9.527
Government patent              1.038          1.040          1.048           1.052                   1.038
                               0.778          0.826          0.975           1.066                   0.772
Government child               1.131          1.127          1.134           1.129                  1.127
                               4.757          4.629          4.840           4.663                   4.640
# of claims                    1.011          1.011          1.011           1.011        1.012      1.011
                              11.928         11.902         11.960          11.926       11.991     11.910
# of citations made            1.001          1.001          1.001           1.001        1.002     1.000
                               1.358          1.351          1.217           1.190        2.204      0.028
Originality                    0.995          0.995          0.995           0.995        0.995
                              -4.315         -4.306         -4.303          -4.290       -4.177
Cite lag                       0.937          0.938          0.943           0.946        0.937      0.938
                             -15.612        -15.326        -14.172         -13.527      -15.742    -15.553
Num. of obs.                  404497         404497         404497          404497       404497     404497
log-likelihood               -156032        -156048        -156139         -156174      -156062    -156056
  * For this parameter, actual values, rather than exponential values, are presented.
  †: null hypothesis for this coefficient is that the coefficient equals 1.
Energy Patent Citations Over Time                                                    p. 41


                                Table 9 – Government Patents


                                                                   (4)        (5)
                                                                   US         US
                                              (2)         (3)     Child      Child
                                  (1)        1981        US        and       Post
    Variable                     Base      Interact   Children    1981       1981
    ln(# of citing patents)*     1.024      1.024       1.024     1.024      1.025
                                1.282(a    1.297(a    1.286(a    1.301(a   1.315(a
                                   )           )           )        )          )
    # of patents in cited yr.    0.986       0.986      0.986     0.986      0.986
                                -3.552      -3.561     -3.551    -3.561     -3.524
    Stock of patents             0.966       0.966      0.966     0.966      0.966
                                -9.527      -9.548     -9.527    -9.548     -9.532
    Government patent            1.038       0.978      1.038     0.978      0.977
                                 0.778      -0.359      0.790    -0.351     -0.377
    Govt. pat 1981 or later                  1.151                1.151      1.157
                                             1.497                1.499      1.556
    Government child             1.131      1.132      1.112      1.113      1.145
                                 4.757       4.790     2.163      2.175      2.418
    Govt. child 1981 or later                                                0.890
                                                                            -1.127
    Child with US assignee                             1.022      1.022      0.965
                                                       0.383      0.391     -0.550
    US child 1981 or later                                                   1.312
                                                                             2.273
    # of claims                   1.011      1.011      1.011      1.011     1.011
                                 11.928     11.925     11.928     11.925    11.927
    # of citations made           1.001      1.001      1.001      1.001     1.001
                                  1.358      1.339      1.350      1.330     1.272
    Originality                   0.995      0.995      0.995      0.995     0.995
                                 -4.315     -4.309     -4.312     -4.307    -4.280
    Cite lag                      0.937      0.938      0.937      0.938     0.938
                                -15.612    -15.574    -15.612    -15.574   -15.410
    Num. of obs.                 404497     404497     404497     404497    404497
    log-likelihood              -156032    -156028    -156031    -156028   -156020
Energy Patent Citations Over Time                                                             p. A1


                     APPENDIX: U.S. patent classifications related to energy

Guide to definitions: The first phrase is the main classification. For example, class 208 contains
patents for Mineral Oils: Processes and Products. These are followed by the various
subclassifications, listed in descending order of precedence.

Supply Technologies:
Coal Liquefaction:
208/400-435          Mineral Oils: Processes and Products/By treatment of solid material (e.g.
                     coal liquefaction)

Coal Gasification:
48/200                  Gas: Heating and Illuminating/Processes/Coal, oil and water
48/201                  Gas: Heating and Illuminating/Processes/Coal and oil
48/202                  Gas: Heating and Illuminating/Processes/Coal and water

48/210                  Gas: Heating and Illuminating/Processes/Coal
48/71                   Gas: Heating and Illuminating/Generators/Cupola/Coal, oil and water
48/72                   Gas: Heating and Illuminating/Generators/Cupola/Coal and oil
48/73                   Gas: Heating and Illuminating/Generators/Cupola/Coal and water
48/77                   Gas: Heating and Illuminating/Generators/Cupola/Producers/Coal
48/98                   Gas: Heating and Illuminating/Generators/Retort/Coal, oil and water
48/99                   Gas: Heating and Illuminating/Generators/Retort/Coal and water
48/100                  Gas: Heating and Illuminating/Generators/Retort/Coal and oil
48/101                  Gas: Heating and Illuminating/Generators/Retort/Coal

Solar Energy:
60/641.8-641.15         Power Plants/Utilizing natural heat/Solar
62/235.1                Refrigeration/Utilizing solar energy
126/561-568             Stoves and Furnaces/Solar heat collector for pond or pool
126/569-713             Stoves and Furnaces/Solar heat collector
126/903                 Stoves and Furnaces/Cross-Reference Art/Solar collector cleaning device
126/904                 Stoves and Furnaces/Cross-Reference Art/Arrangements for sealing solar
                        collector
126/905                 Stoves and Furnaces/Cross-Reference Art/Preventing condensing of
                        moisture in solar collector
126/906                 Stoves and Furnaces/Cross-Reference Art/Connecting plural solar
                        collectors in a circuit
126/910                 Stoves and Furnaces/Cross-Reference Art/Heat storage liquid
Energy Patent Citations Over Time                                                         p. A2

Solar Energy – Batteries:
136/206               Batteries: Thermoelectric and Photoelectric/Thermoelectric/Electric power
                      generator/ Solar energy type
136/243               Batteries: Thermoelectric and Photoelectric/Photoelectric
136/244-251           Batteries: Thermoelectric and Photoelectric/Photoelectric/Panel
136/252-265           Batteries: Thermoelectric and Photoelectric/Photoelectric/Cells

Fuel Cells:
429/12-46            Chemistry: Electrical Current Producing Apparatus, Product, and
                     Process/Fuel cell, subcombination thereof or method of operating

Using waste as fuel:
110/235-259          Furnaces/Refuse incinerator
110/346              Furnaces/Incinerating refuse


Demand Technologies:
Waste heat:
122/7R            Liquid Heaters and Vaporizers/Industrial/Waste heat
  7A              Liquid Heaters and Vaporizers/Industrial/Waste heat/Steel converter
  7B              Liquid Heaters and Vaporizers/Industrial/Waste heat/Additional burner
  7C              Liquid Heaters and Vaporizers/Industrial/Waste heat/Waste sulfate
  7D              Liquid Heaters and Vaporizers/Industrial/Waste heat/Carbon monoxide
60/597-624        Power Plants/Fluid motor means driven by waste heat or by exhaust
                  energy from internal combustion engine

Heat exchange:
165                  Heat Exchange

Heat pumps:
62/238.7             Refrigeration/Disparate apparatus utilized as heat source or absorber/With
                     vapor compression system/Reversible, i.e. heat pump
62/324.1-325         Refrigeration/Reversible, i.e., heat pump

Stirling engine:
60/517-526           Power Plants/Motor operated by expansion and/or contraction of a unit of
                     mass of motivating medium/Unit of mass is a gas which is heated or
                     cooled in one of a plurality of constantly communicating expansible
                     chambers and freely transferable therebetween
Energy Patent Citations Over Time                                                         p. A3


Continuous casting:
148/541             Metal Treatment/Process of modifying of maintaining internal physical
                    structure (i.e. microstructure) or chemical properties of metal, process of
                    reactive coating of metal and process of chemical-heat removing (e.g.,
                    flame-cutting, etc.) or burning of metal/With casting or solidifying from
                    melt/Iron(Fe) or iron base alloy/Continuous casting
148/551             Metal Treatment/Process of modifying of maintaining internal physical
                    structure (i.e. microstructure) or chemical properties of metal, process of
                    reactive coating of metal and process of chemical-heat removing (e.g.,
                    flame-cutting, etc.) or burning of metal/With casting or solidifying from
                    melt/Aluminum (Al) or aluminum base alloy/Continuous casting
164/263             Metal Founding/With product severing or trimming means/Associated
                    with continuous casting means
164/268             Metal Founding/With coating means/associated with a continuous or
                    semicontinuous casting means
164/415             Metal Founding/Means providing inert or reducing atmosphere/In
                    continuous casting apparatus
164/416             Metal Founding/Including vibrator means/In continuous casting mold
164/417             Metal Founding/Combined/Including continuous casting apparatus
164/418-444         Metal Founding/Means to shape metallic material/Continuous or
                    semicontinuous casting
164/445-446         Metal Founding/Starter bar
164/447-448         Metal Founding/Product supporting or withdrawal means for continuous
                    casting apparatus
164/449.1-450.5     Metal Founding/Control means responsive to or actuated by means
                    sensing or measuring a condition or variable (i.e., automatic
                    control)/Control of feed material enroute to shaping area/Responsive to
                    material level/In continuous casting apparatus
164/451-455         Metal Founding/Process/With measuring, testing, inspecting, or condition
                    determination/Of continuous or semicontinuous casting
164/459-491         Metal Founding/Process/Shaping liquid metal against a forming
                    surface/Continuous or semicontinuous casting
164/502-504         Metal Founding/Including means to directly apply magnetic force to work
                    or to manipulate or hold shaping means/In continuous casting apparatus
164/505-509         Metal Founding/Means to directly apply electrical or wave energy to
                    work/In continuous casting apparatus
164/154.4           Metal Founding/Control means responsive to or actuated by means
                    sensing or measuring a condition or variable (i.e., automatic
                    control)/Responsive to position or spatial dimension/Responsive to rate of
                    change/Continuous casting
164/154.5           Metal Founding/Control means responsive to or actuated by means
                    sensing or measuring a condition or variable (i.e., automatic
                    control)/Responsive to position or spatial dimension/Continuous casting
