                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             LIQUIDITY AND EXPECTED RETURNS:
                             LESSONS FROM EMERGING MARKETS

                                             Geert Bekaert
                                           Campbell R. Harvey
                                           Christian Lundblad

                                          Working Paper 11413
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w11413


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       June 2005




We thank Dixon Lin and Sam Henkel for providing helpful research assistance. This paper has benefitted
from discussions with and comments from Laurie Hodrick, Chuck Trzcinka, Costas Constantinou, Marco
Pagano, Mark Seasholes, Darius Miller, Maureen O’Hara, and participants at the 2003 European Finance
Association Meetings, 2004 UCLS CIBER Doctoral Internationalization Consortium in Finance, and the 2005
Darden Emerging Marker Finance Conference. Send correspondences to: Campbell R. Harvey, Fuqua School
of Business, Duke University, Durham, NC 27708. Phone: +1 919.660.7768. E-mail: cam.harvey@duke.edu.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by Geert Bekaert, Campbell R. Harvey, and Christian Lundblad. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Liquidity and Expected Returns: Lessons from Emerging Markets
Geert Bekaert, Campbell R. Harvey, Christian Lundblad
NBER Working Paper No. 11413
June 2005
JEL No. G12, G14, G15, F30, F36, F02

                                           ABSTRACT

Given the cross-sectional and temporal variation in their liquidity, emerging equity markets provide
an ideal setting to examine the impact of liquidity on expected returns. Our main liquidity measure
is a transformation of the proportion of zero daily firm returns, averaged over the month. We find
that our liquidity measures significantly predict future returns, whereas alternative measures such
as turnover do not. Consistent with liquidity being a priced factor, unexpected liquidity shocks are
positively correlated with contemporaneous return shocks and negatively correlated with shocks to
the dividend yield. We consider a simple asset pricing model with liquidity and the market portfolio
as risk factors and transaction costs that are proportional to liquidity. The model differentiates
between integrated and segmented countries and periods. Our results suggest that local market
liquidity is an important driver of expected returns in emerging markets, and that the liberalization
process has not eliminated its impact.

Geert Bekaert                                         Christian Lundblad
Graduate School of Business                           Department of Finance
Columbia University                                   Kelley School of Business
3022 Broadway, 802 Uris Hall                          Indiana University
New York, NY 10027                                    1309 E. Tenth Street
and NBER                                              Bloomington, IN 47405
gb241@columbia.edu                                    clundbla@indiana.edu

Campbell R. Harvey
Fuqua School of Business
Duke University
Durham, NC 27708-0120
and NBER
cam.harvey@duke.edu
1        Introduction

It is generally acknowledged that liquidity is important for asset pricing. Illiquid assets and
assets with high transaction costs trade at low prices relative to their expected cash flows,
that is, average liquidity is priced, see, for example, Amihud and Mendelson (1986), Bren-
nan and Subrahmanyam (1996), Datar, Naik and Radcliffe (1998), and Chordia, Roll and
Anshuman (2001). Liquidity also predicts future returns and liquidity shocks are positively
correlated with return shocks (see Chordia, Roll and Subrahmanyam (2002), Jones (2002),
and Amihud (2002)). Furthermore, if liquidity varies systematically (see Chordia, Roll, and
Subrahmanyam (2000) and Huberman and Halka (1993)), securities with returns positively
correlated with market liquidity should have high expected returns (see Pastor and Stam-
baugh (2002) and Sadka (2005) for recent empirical work). Acharya and Pedersen (2002)
develop a stylized model that leads to three different risk premia associated with changes in
liquidity and find these risk premia to be highly significant in U.S. data.1
        Surprisingly, the growing body of research on liquidity primarily focuses on the United
States, arguably the most liquid market in the world. In contrast, our research focuses on
markets where liquidity effects may be particularly strong, namely emerging markets. In
a 1992 survey by Chuhan, poor liquidity was mentioned as one of the main reasons that
prevented foreign institutional investors from investing in emerging markets. If the liquidity
premium is an important feature of these data, the focus on emerging markets should yield
particularly powerful tests and useful independent evidence.
        In addition, many emerging markets underwent a structural break during our sample that
likely affected liquidity, namely equity market liberalization.2 These liberalizations give for-
eign investors the opportunity to invest in domestic equity securities and domestic investors
    1
        There is a vast theoretical literature on liquidity which starts with Kyle (1985), Glosten and Milgrom
(1985), Easley and O’Hara (1987) and Admati and Pfleiderer (1988). Models linking liquidity to expected
returns and other variates include Amihud and Mendelson (1986), Constantinides (1986), Grossman and
Miller (1988), Heaton and Lucas (1996), Vayanos (1998), Lo, Mamaysky and Wang (2001), Holmstrom and
Tirole (2002), Eisfeldt (2002), Huang (2003), and O’Hara (2003).
   2
     Bekaert, Harvey, and Lumsdaine (2001) show that many macroeconomic and financial time-series show
evidence of a break around such liberalizations.




                                                        1
the right to transact in foreign equity securities. This provides an additional verification of
the importance of liquidity for expected returns, since, all else equal (including the price of
liquidity risk), the importance of liquidity for expected returns should decline post liberal-
ization. This is important, since when focusing on the U.S. alone, the finding of expected
return variation due to liquidity can always be ascribed to an omitted variable correlated
with a liquidity proxy. After all, there are a priori reasons to suspect relatively small liquidity
effects in the U.S. The U.S. market is vast in the number of traded securities and it has a very
diversified ownership structure, combining long-horizon investors (less subject to liquidity
risk) with short-term investors. Hence, we may observe clientele effects in portfolio choice
that mitigate the pricing of liquidity. Such diversity in securities and ownership is lacking
in emerging markets, potentially strengthening liquidity effects. Moreover, as an important
side-benefit, we can test whether improved liquidity contributes to the decline in the cost of
capital post-liberalization that is documented by, for example, Bekaert and Harvey (2000).
   There are some serious obstacles to our analysis. First, the data in emerging markets are
of relatively poor quality, and detailed transaction data (bid-ask spreads, for example) are
not widely available. For example, Domowitz, Glen, and Madhavan (2001) explore trading
costs and liquidity in an international context for many countries, but they are forced to focus
on trade level data, provided by Elkins/McSherry Inc., over a two year period. Similarly,
Jain (2002) explores the relation between equity market trading design and liquidity across
various countries, but uses a hand collected time-series of bid-ask spreads spanning only
several months. Second, from the perspective of traditional asset pricing empirics, we have
relatively short time-series samples making pure time-series country-by-country tests less
useful, especially given the volatility of emerging market returns.
   To overcome the first problem, we use liquidity measures that rely on the incidence of
observed zero daily returns in these markets. Lesmond, Ogden and Trzcinka (1999) argue
that if the value of an information signal is insufficient to outweigh the costs associated
with transacting, then market participants will elect not to trade, resulting in an observed
zero return. The advantage of this measure is that it requires only a time-series of daily
equity returns. Given the paucity of time-series data on preferred measures such as bid-
ask spreads or bona-fide order flow (following Kyle (1985)), this measure is an attractive


                                                2
empirical alternative. To overcome the second problem, we impose cross-country restrictions
on the parameter space when examining the dynamics of expected returns and liquidity.
    Our analysis is organized into three sections. The second section of the paper introduces
and analyzes our two measures of (il)liquidity. The first measure is simply the proportion
of zero daily returns. We demonstrate that this measure is highly correlated with more
traditional measures of transaction costs for emerging equity markets for the limited periods
when overlapping data are available. Lesmond (2005) provides a detailed analysis of emerging
equity market trading costs, and confirms the usefulness of this measure. We also provide
a case study of how the measure compares to more standard liquidity measures using U.S.
data. Our second measure attempts to incorporate potential price impact by using the length
of the non-trading (or zero return) interval.
    Section 3 characterizes the dynamics of returns and liquidity using various vector au-
toregressions (VARs). We devote special attention to the hypothesis developed and tested
in Amihud (2002) for U.S. data: if liquidity is priced and persistent, liquidity should pre-
dict future returns and unexpected liquidity shocks should co-move contemporaneously with
unexpected returns. We also contrast global and local components of predictability (see
Bekaert (1995) and Harvey (1995) for earlier work).
    Section 4 outlines a simple pricing model that we use to interpret the liquidity effects on
expected returns. As in Acharya and Pedersen (2005), the model accounts for both liquidity
effects though transaction costs and for potential covariation of returns with systematic
liquidity. We show that in such a model, local liquidity variables may affect expected returns
even under full market integration. We provide an exploratory empirical analysis using
country portfolios and the VAR estimates to describe the dynamics of expected returns.
    The concluding section summarizes our results and draws lessons for future research.


2     Liquidity Measures for Emerging Markets

2.1    Data and summary statistics

Our empirical evidence focuses on 19 emerging equity markets. Table 1 reports summary
statistics for all data. From Standard and Poor’s Emerging Markets Database (EMDB), we

                                                3
collect monthly returns (U.S. dollar), in excess of the one-month Treasury bill return, and
dividend yields for the S&P/IFC Global Equity Market Indices.3
       Before introducing our preferred measures of liquidity, we construct a measure of equity
market turnover (TO) from the same data set: the equity value traded for each month,
divided by that month’s equity market capitalization. Amihud and Mendelson (1986) show
that turnover is negatively related to illiquidity costs. Zimbabwe exhibits the lowest level
of average equity market turnover at 0.9% per month, whereas Taiwan exhibits the highest
level at 20.9% per month.
       Given the paucity of realized transaction cost data for emerging equity markets, our main
liquidity measure exploits the effect transactions costs may have on daily returns. Following
Lesmond, Ogden and Trzcinka (1999) and Lesmond (2005), we construct the proportion
of zero daily returns (ZR) observed over the relevant month for each equity market. We
obtain daily returns data in local currency at the firm level from the Datastream research
files starting from the late 1980’s. For each country, we observe daily returns (using closing
prices) for a large collection of firms. The total number of firms available from the Datastream
research files accounts for about 90%, on average, of the number of domestically listed firms
reported by the World Bank’s World Development Indicators. We also present the average
number of firms across the sample and the total used at the end of the sample. The difference
between the two reflects both increased Datastream coverage and actual equity issuance in
these countries. For each country, we calculate the proportion of zero daily returns across
all firms, and average this proportion over the month.4
       As can be seen, zeros are fairly persistent. Some of these equity markets exhibit a very
large number of zero daily returns; Colombia, for example, has a 74% incidence of zero daily
returns, on average, across domestically listed firms, and the smallest incidence of zero daily
returns is 11%, on average, in Taiwan. Given data limitations associated with the firm-level
daily returns, we focus on a sample that covers January 1993 to December 2003.
   3
       As a robustness check, we also measure returns in local currency, and the results (not reported) are
broadly similar.
   4
     We also construct capitalization-weighted liquidity measures for each country. Moreover, we computed
the zero measure using the Standard and Poor’s EMDB daily data over the period from 1996-2003 for which
they are available. We find these alternative zero measures to be highly correlated with our.


                                                      4
      The zeros measure ignores price impact. Imagine a situation in which a stock trades
every other day versus a stock that does not trade for the first 15 days of the month and
then trades every day until the end of the month. For both stocks, the zero measures indicate
a value of 0.5 for the month. However, the potential price impact after the lengthy non-
trading interval in the second case appears to present a much worse instance of illiquidity.
Our alternative measure of liquidity attempts to take price impact into account.5
      Using N stocks in country i, each indexed by j, we create a daily price impact measure
as follows:                                            PN
                                                         j=1  wj δj,t |rj,t,τ |
                                          PIi,t = PN                            ,                                (1)
                                                            j=1 wj |rj,t,τ |
                                                                                                  1
where wj represents the weighting of the stocks in the index. We use wi =                         N
                                                                                                    ,   representing
an equally-weighted measure, but we also compute a capitalization-weighted price impact
measure as a robustness check.
                                                    1, if rj,t or rj,t−1 = 0
                                                (
                                       δj,t =                                       .                            (2)
                                                    0, otherwise
Hence, δj,t indicates no trade days (as proxied by zero return days) and the first day after a
no trade interval when the price impact is felt. Also,
                                       
                                        rj,t ,                              if rj,t−1 6= 0
                            rj,t,τ =                                                          .                  (3)
                                        Qτ −1
                                            k=0 (1    + ri,t−k ) − 1, if rj,t−1 = 0
Here τ represents the number of days the stock has not been trading and rj,t,τ is an estimate
of the return that would have occurred if the stock had traded. Because market-wide factors
may dominate return behavior more than idiosyncratic factors in emerging markets, we use
the value-weighted market return, ri,t , as our proxy for the unobserved return. Note that
when a stock does not trade for a lengthy interval, rj,t,τ may become quite large and PIi,t
may move to 1.0.
      Our (il)liquidity measure is then PIi,t averaged across all days in a particular month for
each country. Table 1 illustrates that the salient features of the data are very similar for
the PIi,t measure and the proportion of zero returns. The least liquid country is now Brazil
instead of Colombia. From these two measures, we create two liquidity proxies, `n(1 − ZR)
and `n(1 − P I).
  5
      We are grateful to Marco Pagano for comments that inspired the development of this measure.

                                                             5
2.2       Do zeros measure illiquidity?

Liquidity and transactions costs are notoriously difficult to measure [see O’Hara (2003),
Stoll (2000), and Hodrick and Moulton (2003) for discussions]. The availability of detailed
microstructure data in the U.S. market allows for the construction of sharper measures
of liquidity. For example, Chordia, Roll and Subrahmanyam (2000, 2002, 2004) calculate
daily measures of absolute and proportional bid-ask spreads, quoted share and dollar depth
for 1988-1998. Unfortunately, such data are not generally available for emerging markets.
Hence, we must rely on an indirect measure. Even for studies focusing on the U.S., indirect
measures, starting with the seminal work of Roll (1984)6 , have been and remain popular.
      There are a number of other possible liquidity measures. For example, Amihud (2002)
examines the average ratio of the daily absolute return to the dollar trading volume on that
day. This ratio delivers the absolute (percentage) price change per dollar of daily volume.
This is interpreted as the daily price impact of order flow. Pastor and Stambaugh (2002),
construct a firm specific liquidity measure by regressing a firm’s return minus the market
return on the lagged firm return and the lagged signed dollar volume of trading using daily
data. The greater the price reversal on the next day, the more negative the coefficient on
signed dollar volume and the more illiquid is the stock. The regression is repeated every
month for every firm. Each month, the coefficient on the signed volume is averaged to
provide a market wide liquidity measure. The measure is adjusted for the time-trend in
market capitalization. Their final liquidity measure is the innovation from a regression of
changes in the market-wide liquidity measure on lagged changes and the lagged level. While
these two measures are straightforward to apply, we do not have dollar volume data on a daily
basis in emerging markets. Moreover, volume data are very challenging, and are plagued
by trends and outliers – problems that are likely exacerbated in our emerging market data.
Finally, both measures require positive volume during the sampling interval, which might be
problematic for some emerging markets where non-trading problems are particularly acute.
      Nevertheless, it is important to be aware of the limitations of our zeros and price impact
measures. First, information-less trades (such as a trade by an index fund) should not
  6
      See Ghysels and Cherkoaui (2003) for an application to an emerging market.




                                                     6
give rise to price changes in liquid markets. The market reaction to such a trade may
also depend on the particular trading mechanism in place. Whereas trading mechanisms
vary substantially across emerging markets, we do not think that noise trades dominate the
behavior of our measure. The fact that the zero measure correlates negatively with turnover
is indirect evidence supportive of this view. The cross-sectional correlation between the
average levels of turnover and the average incidence of zero daily returns (presented in Table
1) across our sample countries is −0.44, indicating that the zeros measure is potentially
reflecting relative levels of liquidity across the equity markets in our study. Table 2 presents
correlations of these two liquidity measures across time within each country. On average, the
correlation between the proportion of zero daily returns and equity market turnover within
a country is −0.36. Similar numbers are presented for the price impact measure. If positive
volume zero returns do occur, we can still interpret zeros as a measure of the lack of informed
trading (see Lesmond, Ogden and Trzcinka (1999) for further discussion).
      Second, another concern is that there is a zero return (no trading) because of a lack
of news. Empirically, shocks or news generate persistent volatility patterns. In addition,
higher volatility is likely associated with a higher compensation for providing liquidity, see
for instance Vayanos (2004). However, Table 2 indicates that there is no consistent pattern
in the correlation between estimates of conditional volatility and the liquidity measure.7 The
correlation is more often positive than negative, though economically small in most cases.
On average, the correlation is effectively zero. Perhaps this is not so surprising, as alternative
theories (see for example Pagano (1989)) predict a positive relation between volatility and
market thinness or illiquidity.
      As an alternative, we also construct a measure of within-month volatility as in French,
Schwert, and Stambaugh (1987). First, we sum the squared returns at the firm level within
the month, and then average this sum across firms for that month. Table 2 presents corre-
lations between the incidence of zeros and the within-month volatility across time for each
  7
      We obtain estimates of the conditional volatility by maximum likelihood for both symmetric
GARCH(1,1) and asymmetric threshold GARCH(1,1) models of the measured monthly equity returns for
each market. The threshold GARCH model is developed by Zakoian (1994) and Glosten, Jagannathan, and
Runkle (1993).



                                                7
country. On average, the average correlations between the proportion of zero daily returns
and the price impact measures with within-month volatility are −0.06 and −0.04, still sug-
gesting that the two liquidity measures are capturing unique aspects of liquidity not entirely
driven by the presence or absence of news in a particular period. Nevertheless, given the
somewhat larger correlations between the incidence of zeros and both turnover and volatil-
ity, we also consider (but do not report) an alternative measure of liquidity that reflects
the “residuals” from country-by-country projections of the proportion of zero returns on
both turnover and within-month volatility. While these regressions yield R-squares typically
between 0.25 and 0.40, the general predictability and asset pricing implications of using
the “residual” rather than the liquidity level (as presented in the subsequent sections) are
unaffected.
   Third, it is possible that our zeros measure artificially reflect other characteristics of
the stock market. For example, markets with many small stocks may automatically show a
higher level of non-trading compared to markets with larger stocks. Since these small stocks
only represent a minor part of the market, the zeros measure may not reflect market-wide
transactions costs. This concern is mitigated by the fact that Table 1 reveals a negative rela-
tion between the number of companies used in the computation and the average proportion
of daily zero returns, with the cross-sectional correlation being -0.52. A larger number of
firms covered by Datastream seems to be associated with a lower incidence of zero returns.
   Perhaps the most compelling diagnostic is to explore the relationship between the returns-
based measure of transaction costs and more standard measures. To this end, Table 2 also
presents correlations with available bid-ask spreads. Bid-ask spread data for domestic firms
are obtained from the mid to late 1990’s for a few countries from the Datastream research
files. We find that the proportion of daily zero returns measure is highly correlated, 60% on
average, with the mean bid-ask spread across all countries and time-periods for which bid-
ask spreads are available. Datastream supplied bid-ask spread data availability are limited;
however, Lesmond (2005) also documents that the proportion of zero daily returns is highly
correlated with hand-collected bid-ask spreads for a broader collection of emerging equity
markets. The correlation between equity market turnover and the bid-ask spread is only
about -0.20, on average, but there are some countries (Korea, Malaysia, and Mexico) for


                                              8
which the negative correlation is more pronounced. Taken together, this suggests that the
proportion of zero daily returns appears to be picking up a component of liquidity and
transaction costs that turnover does not.
      Finally, recent research by Lowengrub and Melvin (2002), Karolyi (2005), and Levine and
Schmukler (2005) suggests that the trading activity of cross-listed securities may migrate to
foreign markets. Firms trading across markets will have price series reported in Datastream
in each of the markets in which the asset trades. Because we obtain local market prices, our
liquidity measure does not reflect activity in the foreign listed market. If a cross-listed stock
trades abroad but not locally, our zeros measure is biased upward. As a robustness check,
we recalculate the zeros and price impact measures excluding any firms that are also listed
in the U.S. by means of an ADR according to Datastream. The resulting measures are very
highly correlated with our original measures, with the correlation exceeding 0.99 in almost
every case.


2.3       A case study using U.S. Data

For the United States, we explore the relationship between our first measure, the proportion
of zero daily returns, and three other measures of transaction costs/liquidity common in the
literature. Hasbrouck (2004, 2005) constructs a Bayesian estimate of effective trading costs
from daily data using a Gibbs-sampler version of the Roll model.8 This method yields a
posterior distribution for the Roll-implied trading costs from the first-order autocorrelation
in returns. For U.S. equity data, Hasbrouck (2005) shows that the correlations between
the Gibbs estimate and estimates of trading costs based upon high frequency Trade and
Quote (TAQ) data are typically above 0.90 for individual securities in overlapping samples.
Hasbrouck (2005) argues that Hasbrouck’s (2004) effective cost and Amihud’s (2002) price
impact measures are, among standard transaction costs estimates based on daily data, most
closely correlated with their high-frequency counterparts from TAQ data.
      Figure 1a compares the effective cost and price impact measures for the aggregate NYSE
and AMEX markets with the incidence of zero daily returns in these markets at the annual
  8
      Also see Harris (1990) for an analysis of the Roll estimator.




                                                        9
frequency from 1962-2001. The correlation between the proportion of zero daily returns and
Hasbrouck’s effective costs and Amihud’s price impact are 0.42 and 0.40, respectively. While
the major cycles nicely coincide during most of the sample, there is some divergence in the
last 5-years. There are a sharp declines in the incidence of zero returns which coincides with
the NYSE’s move to 1/16th in 1997 and decimalization in 2000, but which are absent from the
effective costs and price impact measures. For comparison, we also plot the equally-weighted
proportional bid-ask spreads on DJIA stocks from Jones (2001) in Fig. 1a. Interestingly,
unlike the other measures of transaction costs, the proportional spread data do exhibit the
sharp declines in the late 1990’s in accordance with the reduced incidence of zero daily
returns. The overall correlation between bid-ask spreads and the proportion of zeros is
30%. Taken together, this evidence suggests that the proportion of zero daily returns for the
United States is, at the very least, associated with time-series variation in other measures of
transaction costs used in this literature.
   Our use of zeros in emerging markets is predicated on the assumption that zero returns
proxy for no volume zero returns in these relatively illiquid markets. For the U.S., we can
actually construct a no-volume zeros measure. Figure 1b compares the same measures with
zero returns observed on pure zero volume days. In this case, the correlation between the
proportion of zero daily returns on zero volume days and Hasbrouck’s effective costs and
Amihud’s price impact are much higher at 0.81 and 0.91, respectively. This distinction may
be important as zero returns in emerging markets are more likely associated with non-trading
than in the U.S. where a significant number of trades are processed with no associated price
movement.
   We also compare the incidence of zero returns with the reversal measure suggested by
Pastor and Stambaugh (2002) (PS). For the PS measure, we consider two alternative con-
structions. The first conducts firm-level regressions on daily data over each month, averages
the reversal coefficients across all firms, and then averages within the year. The second
method conducts the firm-level regression on daily data over each year, and averages the
reversal coefficient across all firms. Interestingly, these two measures show little correlation
with one another and only the first method leads to correlations with Hasbrouck’s (2005)
effective costs, the Amihud (2002) price impact measure and bid-ask spreads that have the


                                              10
right sign. The Pastor-Stambaugh measure, which measures liquidity, is positively correlated
with the proportion of zero daily returns for both methods. Consequently, our measure does
not capture aspects of liquidity reflected in the reversal measure.9


3        Liquidity and Expected Asset Returns: A VAR Analysis

Amihud (2002) finds evidence that expected excess returns in the U.S. reflect compensation
for expected market illiquidity. As illiquidity is persistent, this implies that measures of
liquidity should predict returns with a negative sign. Similarly, unexpected market liquidity
should be contemporaneously positively correlated with stock returns because a shock to
liquidity raises expected liquidity, which in turn lowers expected returns, and hence prices.
Amihud finds evidence of this effect in U.S. data as well. In this section, we formulate
various simple VAR systems that allow us to test these hypotheses for emerging markets.
We are careful to distinguish between local and global liquidity, and allow for time-varying
degrees of integration in the model specification. In the next section, we formulate a formal
pricing model that differentiates between two main channels through which liquidity can
affect expected returns, the transaction cost channel and liquidity as a systematic risk factor
channel. The resulting model for expected returns is very similar to the model Acharya and
Pedersen (2005) obtain using a simple overlapping generation’s economy with time-varying
liquidation costs. Acharya and Pedersen show that under mild conditions the Amihud pricing
hypotheses are maintained in this model. We will use the expected returns identified by the
VARs in this section to test the pricing implications of the model.


3.1         VAR benchmark specification

For our benchmark specification, we define the liquidity measure Li,t = ln(1 − ZRi,t ), with
ZRi,t the equally weighted zero return measure for country i in month t. Below, we consider
other specifications using alternative liquidity measures. Also, define ri,t , the value-weighted
    9
        We thank Lubos Pastor for making the average of the monthly PS measure available, Charles Jones for
the bid-ask spread data and Joel Hasbrouck for providing both the Amihud price impact, the Hasbrouck
Gibbs sampled, and the annual PS measures (the second PS measure).



                                                      11
excess return on country index i (measured in dollars). We assume that returns, the liquidity
measure, and potentially other instruments follow a (restricted) vector autoregressive system.
For the benchmark specification, the VAR variables, xi,t , consist of [ri,t , Li,t ]. However, we
also consider other VAR specifications including [ri,t , Li,t , dyi,t ] and [ri,t , Li,t , T U RNi,t ]. For
country i, the base VAR(1) model is as follows:

                    xi,t = µi,t−1 + (A0 + Libi,t−1 A1 )(xi,t−1 − µi,t−1 )
                                                                             1/2
                              +(B0 + Libi,t−1 B1 )(xw,t−1 − µw,t−1 ) + Σi,t−1 i,t .                   (4)

    The first special feature of the VAR is the presence of the interaction variable Libi,t . We
define Libi,t as the proportion of local market capitalization not subject to foreign ownership
restrictions, which was proposed as a time-varying measure of market integration by Bekaert
(1995), Edison and Warnock (2003) and De Roon and De Jong (2005). Equity market lib-
eralization takes place when a country first provides foreign investors access to the domestic
equity market. Libi,t is a continuous measure of equity market “openness” designed to reflect
the gradual nature of the increasing foreign “investability” of these markets. The measure is
based on the ratio of the market capitalization of the constituent firms comprising the S&P-
IFC Investable Index to those that comprise the S&P-IFC Global Index for each country.
The Global Index, subject to some exclusion restrictions, is designed to represent the overall
market portfolio for each country, whereas the Investable index is designed to better repre-
sent a portfolio of domestic equities that are available to foreign investors. Hence, a ratio
of one means that all of the stocks are available to foreign investors (an extreme example of
full integration), whereas a ratio of zero is an extreme example of full market segmentation.
Generally, the investability measure is somewhere between 0 and 1. The variable allows us
to make the VAR dynamics dependent on the state of market integration in a particularly
parsimonious manner.
    The constant term is modeled as µi,t = (α0,i +α1 ∗Libi,t ) and α0,i denotes a country-specific
fixed effect for each variable; α1 denotes a vector of cross-sectionally restricted liberalization
coefficients for each variable. Essentially, we assume that country specific factors may lead
to unmodeled differences in expected returns and liquidity (for example, due to the effects
of differing market structures), but capture the change upon liberalization with the function

                                                    12
α1 Libi,t . Analogously, the VAR conditional variance-covariance matrix for country i is Σ i,t ,
                                                                                          1
where the Cholesky decomposition of the variance-covariance matrix, Σi,t
                                                                     2
                                                                         , is Σ0 + Libi,t Σ1 .
Both Σ0 and Σ1 are lower triangular matrices and are restricted to be identical across
countries and time. We estimate the Cholesky decomposition to ensure that the variance-
covariance matrix is always positive semi-definite. Finally, given the small time-series nature
of our data sample, A0 , A1 , B0 , and B1 , the predictability matrices, are also restricted to
be identical across countries. Note that we allow both local and global variables to affect
expected returns and expected liquidity, and that, logically, we expect this dependence to
vary with the degree to which the local market is integrated in global capital markets.
   Additionally, we specify the VAR dynamics for the U.S. market (as a proxy for global
factors):
                                  xw,t = µw + Aw (xw,t−1 − µw ) + Σ1/2
                                                                   w w,t .                               (5)

We collect the relevant VAR innovations, i,t , from (4) for each country as follows:
                                                                
                                                         w,t 
                                                              
                                                      
                                                         1,t 
                                                               
                                               t =   
                                                          .. 
                                                               ,                                         (6)
                                                      
                                                           .   
                                                                
                                                          N,t

where N denotes the number of countries in our sample. Let Ωt denote the conditional
variance-covariance matrix for the entire cross-section as follows:
                                                                                                    
                            Σw             β1,t · diag(Σw )         ···     βN,t · diag(Σw )        
                                                                                                    
                   
                      β1,t · diag(Σw )          Σ1,t                · · · β1,t · diag(Σw ) · βN,t
                                                                                               0     
                                                                                                     
            Ωt =   
                               ..
                                                                                                     .
                                                                                                         (7)
                   
                                .                                                                   
                                                                                                     
                                                                                                    
                       βN,t · diag(Σw ) βN,t · diag(Σw ) · β1,t
                                                            0
                                                                ···                ΣN,t

   Here, diag(·) takes the U.S. variance-covariance matrix, but zeros out the off-diagonal
elements. Accordingly, βi,t = β0 + Libi,t β1 represents a matrix of betas – covariances of the
country specific shocks with the U.S. shocks divided by the variances of the U.S. shocks. The
matrices, β0 and β1 , are full matrices assumed identical across countries, while the overall
betas do vary with the liberalization regime. The rationale for this covariance matrix is a
factor structure where global factors affect both the mean and the conditional variance of

                                                      13
the emerging market variable dynamics. If two emerging markets are both exposed to global
factors they must also show cross-correlations, but we restrict these covariances to come
from the factor structure. From a panel data perspective, this means that we accommodate
complete within-country and across-country SUR effects with parameter restrictions.


3.2    Estimation

The parameters to be estimated are the country-specific fixed effects, α0,i ; the liberalization
effect, α1 ; the cross-sectionally restricted matrices A0 , A1 , B0 , and B1 ; the components
of the Cholesky decomposition of the VAR innovation variance-covariance matrix, Σ 0 and
Σ1 ; the parameters of the U.S. market process; and the beta matrices. The log likelihood
function for a the full panel can be expressed as follows:
                    T                                   T
                    X              k · (N + 1)         X   1          1
               L=         lt = −               ln(2π) − ( ln |Ωt−1 | − 0t Ω−1
                                                                            t−1 t )         (8)
                    t=1                  2             t=1 2          2

where k is the number of endogenous variables, and k · (N + 1) is the number of individual
equations. For a base specification of 2 variables, this involves 39 parameters. We estimate
the parameters describing the VAR process using a quasi-maximum likelihood (QMLE)
methodology, reporting robust standard errors as in Bollerslev and Wooldridge (1992).
   There is a large literature on statistical inference problems with respect to establishing re-
turn predictability (see Stambaugh (1999) and Hodrick (1992)). The results in that literature
are not directly applicable to our framework because we have a panel set-up. Nevertheless,
the amount of time series information is limited and we must recognize that the asymp-
totic distribution of t-tests may poorly approximate the true finite sample distribution. We
therefore conduct a Monte Carlo experiment to examine the small sample properties of the
pooled time-series cross-sectional VAR estimator. We focus on the bivariate VAR, including
returns and liquidity.
   Let the simulated series be denoted as x̃i,t = [ri,t , Li,t ]. The base VAR(1) model we
simulate is as follows:

                  x̃w,t = µw + Aw (x̃w,t−1 − µw ) + Σ1/2
                                                     w  ˜w,t .

                   x̃i,t = µi,t−1 + (A0 + Libi,t−1 A1 )(x̃i,t−1 − µi,t−1 )

                                                  14
                                                                           1/2
                            +(B0 + Libi,t−1 B1 )(x̃w,t−1 − µw,t−1 ) + Σi,t−1 ˜i,t .           (9)

where ˜w,t and ˜i,t are drawn from the standard normal distribution, Libi,t represents the ob-
served liberalization indicators, and the first row of A0 , A1 , B0 , B1 , and Aw is constrained to
be a row of zeros, so that under the null, lagged endogenous variables do not predict returns
for emerging markets or the U.S. (and that is true across liberalization regime). The innova-
tion covariance matrix is as in (7) with the correlations across emerging markets zeroed out.
However, the innovations of all variables are allowed to be correlated within countries as in
the observed data. The panel effects across emerging markets greatly complicate the esti-
mation of the model and turn out to be of second order importance. Therefore, the Monte
Carlo (and some other systems we will estimate) focus on a system where the cross-country
correlation among emerging markets is set to zero. For each replication (with the identical
number of time-series observations as we have in the observed data), we estimate the uncon-
strained VAR(1) for returns and liquidity using the pooled MLE methodology presented in
(8). We also consider a simulation under the alternative of return predictability, where the
simulated data are drawn in exact accordance with our parameter estimates obtained below.
   The appendix table presents some relevant percentiles of the empirical distribution for
the coefficient describing the predictive nature of liquidity for future returns, one of the key
parameters of interest if liquidity is priced. Under the null of no predictability, the mean
coefficient is -0.0092, and the t-statistic is -0.42, indicating some negative estimation bias for
the observed liquidity effect. This is quite common in univariate time-series contexts when
the innovations between the two variables are correlated and the predictive variable displays
significant persistence. The distribution of the t-statistic is similarly biased, meaning that for
a two-sided test at the 5% level, the critical value is -2.45. Under the alternative hypothesis
of return predictability, this bias remains with the mean coefficient estimate at -0.062, while
the data generating process used the data estimate of -0.053. However, one can easily detect
predictability under the alternative that it is valid, as the right-hand tail of this distribution
is generally well below zero. More precisely, the power of a test of the null hypothesis of
liquidity not predicting future returns is 0.73 for a 5% and 0.81 for a 10% two-sided test
(using the Monte Carlo critical values). We use the Monte Carlo evidence for all subsequent
tests.

                                                 15
3.3      Specification tests

In Table 3, we present some simple specification tests on the residuals from the bivariate
VAR. We report the first-order autocorrelation coefficient for each country’s residuals. We
find that the simple bivariate VAR model suffices to generate white noise return residuals.
We also present asymptotic p-values, country by country, for a Wald test that the first three
autocorrelations are jointly zero. For only two countries do we find the first-order autocorre-
lation coefficient of the return residuals to be above 0.2 (Colombia and Malaysia) and, using
the asymptotic test, we only reject the null of no serial correlation for one country (Colom-
bia). With Monte Carlo based critical values, the test continues to reject for Columbia.
The model is less successful with respect to liquidity. There are five countries with residual
autocorrelation coefficients over 0.2 in absolute value, with the autocorrelation coefficient
close to -0.4 for Indonesia. We also conduct a joint Wald test where the null hypothesis is
that all of the first three autocorrelations across countries are jointly zero (with 18 × 3 = 54
restrictions); the test is not rejected for the return residuals, but is strongly rejected for
the liquidity residuals. While the joint test is significant at the 5% level under the Monte
Carlo critical value, there are only three countries for which the test rejects the null of no
serial correlation at the 5% level using the Monte Carlo distribution. Use of the asymp-
totic distribution would have resulted in rejections for eight countries. Hence, the standard
asymptotic tests over-reject and paint too negative a picture of the VAR’s ability to cap-
ture return-liquidity dynamics. Nevertheless, the predominance of negative autocorrelations
suggests that the estimated and cross-sectionally constrained autocorrelation coefficient for
local liquidity is somewhat too high for these countries. The specification tests results are
robust to the inclusion of additional instruments, such as market turnover or the dividend
yield.


3.4      Empirical results

3.4.1      Bivariate VAR, benchmark

In Table 4, we present estimation results for the bivariate VAR(1), which includes excess
returns and market liquidity, as specified in equations (4)-(7). First, we display the VAR

                                              16
dynamics in the form of the own-country effects, A0 and A1 , as well as the predictability
effects associated with lagged U.S. variables, B0 and B1 , where the A1 and B1 matrices
measure the liberalization effects.
   We start the discussion by investigating the predictive power of local variables for returns.
Excess returns display positive autocorrelation, on average across the countries, consistent
with Harvey (1995); however, the coefficient is not statistically significant. Return autocor-
relation does not seem to be affected by the liberalization regime. The return coefficient
on lagged local liquidity (in segmented markets) is statistically significant, -0.053 (with a
standard error of 0.020); however, the coefficient becomes less negative in integrated mar-
kets, though the change is not significant. Hence, we confirm Amihud’s (2002) results for
segmented markets, but not for integrated markets.
   An interesting possibility is that liquidity spuriously predicts returns because it is a
non-trading measure. When there is significant non-trading, information only slowly gets
impounded in prices which may lead to autocorrelated returns. In periods of very high
illiquidity (low liquidity), news will take longer to affect returns, and this might be what
the regression picks up. If this is the main mechanism driving our negative return-liquidity
coefficients, the true autocorrelation coefficient should be higher than the 0.0524 feedback co-
efficient we measure here, as we now partially control for non-trading. To investigate this, we
also run the VAR with the liquidity variable zeroed out, we find the average autocorrelation
coefficient to be lower (0.049) – not higher. As a result, it seems unlikely that non-trading
is the reason we observe return predictability.
   We also present several Wald tests on return predictability, split up over local versus
global instruments. For the tests with local factors, the null hypothesis is that the first row
of A0 = 0 under segmentation and A0 + A1 = 0 under integration. For segmented countries,
the test rejects the null of no predictability with a p-value of 0.03; however for integrated
countries, the test fails to reject (p-value of 0.15). For the tests on return predictability using
global factors, the null hypothesis is that the first row of B0 = 0 under segmentation and
B0 + B1 = 0 under integration. Both tests fail to reject the null hypotheses, with p-values
of 0.51 and 0.78, respectively. Under the Monte Carlo distribution, the null hypothesis of no
predictability for segmented countries is also rejected, while all other tests fail to reject under


                                                17
the Monte Carlo distribution. Taken together, this evidence suggests that local variables play
the dominant role in emerging market return predictability. We also investigate the effects of
change in financial openness on return predictability testing the null hypotheses that A1 = 0
or B1 = 0. Both hypotheses are not rejected with an asymptotic p-values of 0.62 and 0.49,
respectively.
   Turning to the liquidity equations, we see that the liquidity variable displays signifi-
cant autocorrelation, with an estimated coefficient on lagged liquidity of 0.91. Acharya and
Pedersen (2005), working with a liquidity measure proposed by Amihud (2002), find a per-
sistence level of 0.94 for U.S. data. Lagged returns significantly affect future liquidity for
segmented markets; the estimated coefficients is positive and statistically significant. High
returns in one month predict improved subsequent market liquidity. Griffin, Nardari and
Stulz (2004) examine the relationship between past returns and future trading activity in
45 countries, measured by turnover, and also find a positive effect. Interestingly, a detailed
analysis of their results reveals that the effect is less strong for some more developed markets
and nonexistent for the U.S. (at least over the full sample). We also find that liberalization
reduces the coefficient. For the U.S., we find the effect to be borderline significant. Griffin
et al. speculate that a costly stock market participation story is behind the results, but it
would appear difficult to explain our findings with such a story. While the empirical standard
deviations computed from the Monte Carlo are slightly larger than the asymptotic standard
errors for these parameter estimates, the conclusions are qualitatively unchanged. We return
to these findings when we add turnover to the VAR.
   Next, we examine how U.S. returns and liquidity affect local variables. A 1% increase
in U.S. market returns predicts a 22 basis point increase in local returns in segmented
markets; however, the coefficient is not significant. Such a cross-serial correlation would
be consistent with a market where securities trade infrequently and world or U.S. news is
slowly affecting prices. If liquidity improves upon liberalization, the effect may diminish;
however, the importance of global factors should also increase upon liberalization. We find
that the coefficient slightly decreases upon liberalization, but the change in coefficients is
insignificant. U.S. market returns do affect liquidity positively and significantly, but the effect
is dramatically reduced upon liberalization. Overall, we find the relationship between returns


                                                18
and future liquidity to be much weaker, economically at least, for liberalized markets. Global
liquidity also affects local returns negatively but the effect is insignificant and disappears all-
together for liberalized countries.
   It is also of interest to investigate how liberalization affects the unconditional means of
returns and liquidity. The critical parameters are the coefficients on Libi,t−1 , α1 , reported in
Table 4. Both coefficients have unexpected signs. If liberalizations reduce the cost of capital,
we would expect a negative coefficient in the return equation, but we find a positive coeffi-
cient. Bekaert and Harvey (2000) discuss extensively the difficulty in finding a liberalization
effect using return measures in emerging markets. However, the coefficient is not significant.
Similarly, if liberalizations improve liquidity, we would expect a positive liquidity coefficient,
but the coefficient is negative. Again, the coefficient is not significantly different from zero.
A joint Wald test for α1 = 0 is not rejected with a p-value of 0.58. Taken together, the role
for the liberalization state in the mean effects governing the VAR dynamics appears limited.
   We also present evidence on the U.S. market VAR dynamics. U.S. market returns do not
display economically or statistically significant autocorrelation. Further, while the return
predictability coefficient on lagged liquidity is nearly identical to the pooled coefficient for
segmented emerging markets, it is not statistically significantly different from zero. Lagged
U.S. market returns do significantly predict future U.S. market liquidity, as discussed before.
Finally, U.S. market liquidity is very persistent, with an autocorrelation coefficient near 1;
this reflects the sharp declines in illiquidity (and bid-ask spreads) over the last 15 years. A
Wald test of the null hypothesis that the U.S. dynamics are equivalent to the VAR dynamics
of a fully integrated emerging market, Aw = A0 + A1 , is rejected with a p-value less than
0.01
   Next, we explore the contemporaneous relationships between our variables. Table 4 dis-
plays the two pieces, Σ0 and Σ1 , that make up the Cholesky decomposition of the VAR
innovation variance-covariance matrix. Each matrix is lower triangular. Of main interest
is the off-diagonal component that describes the average within country contemporaneous
relationship between innovations in excess returns and liquidity, c21 . The coefficient is pos-
itive and highly statistically significant for segmented markets (the off-diagonal element for
Σ0 ). It is not significantly affected by the liberalization state (the off-diagonal element for


                                                19
Σ1 ). Consequently, shocks to liquidity are positively correlated with return shocks, which
in conjunction with the significantly negative lagged liquidity coefficient, is consistent with
the Amihud hypothesis that liquidity is priced. In both cases, this is more pronounced in
markets with lower levels of foreign investability. While the liberalization effects are not
significant, the standard deviation of both the excess returns and the liquidity variable falls
sharply and in a statistically significant manner following equity market liberalization. A
simple Wald test of the null hypothesis that Σ1 = 0 is sharply rejected with a p-value of less
than 0.01. For the U.S. market equations, we find c21 to be significantly negative. Note that
the asymptotic standard errors used here are very close to the empirical standard deviations
computed from the Monte Carlo, so that the evidence regarding c21 is robust to finite sample
inference.
   Finally, we present evidence on the contemporaneous covariances between local and U.S.
shocks. In segmented markets, the beta reflecting the covariance between U.S. and local
returns is positive and not significant; however, as the degree of investability increases, the
betas become highly significant, and exceeds one. The majority of the other beta coefficients
are not statistically significant with two exceptions. Local liquidity surprisingly has a positive
beta with respect to U.S. returns, but the coefficient is only marginally significant and goes to
zero post liberalization. Also, the beta of local returns with respect to U.S. liquidity switches
from positive to negative upon liberalization. While the change is statistically significant,
the resulting beta for a fully liberalized economy is not. A Wald test of the null hypothesis
that U.S. covariances do not vary with the liberalization state, β1 =0, is rejected with a p-
value less than 0.01, but this is driven by the strong positive local return beta with respect
to the U.S.
   In sum, the bivariate VAR of local returns and equally-weighted liquidity suggests that
the degree of equity market liquidity predicts future excess returns and that shocks to returns
and liquidity are positively correlated. These effects are strongest for markets with lower
levels of foreign investor access. Moreover, local sources of predictability are stronger than
global sources.




                                               20
3.4.2     Alternative VAR specifications

In this section, we consider two alternative VAR specifications that either facilitate the
dividend yield or equity market turnover as additional endogenous variables. Table 5 presents
several key parameters of interest from these additional specifications for comparison with the
bivariate VAR presented in Table 4 (full results are available upon request). The benchmark
bivariate case is labeled Case A, where as the additional cases with the dividend yield or
turnover are labeled Case B or C, respectively.
   It is interesting to consider dividend yields from at least two perspectives. First, suppose
dividend growth rates are stochastic but are not very predictable. In this case, variation in
the dividend yield will primarily reflect variation in discount rates. Consequently, if liquidity
is priced and persistent, it will generate time-variation in dividend yields. In particular,
because improved liquidity lowers expected returns, we expect the innovations in liquidity
and dividend yields to be negatively correlated. In addition, dividend yields may therefore
help capture the predictive power of liquidity, so their inclusion in the VAR may decrease
the magnitude of the coefficient on L in the return regression. Second, the dividend yield
may capture other predictable components in returns. While dividend yields have long
been viewed as particularly strong predictors of equity returns, some recent work (e.g. Ang
and Bekaert (2004), Engstrom (2003), and Goyal and Welch (2003)) demonstrates that
this predictive power may not be statistically robust. Investigating the relative predictive
power of the dividend yield and liquidity measures for emerging markets, which show little
correlation with established markets, is therefore interesting in its own right.
   Turning to the table (Case B), dividend yields do not significantly predict returns, re-
gardless of the liberalization regime consistent with the recent mixed evidence. Further, the
U.S. dividend yield does not significantly predict future returns either. Still, the inclusion
of these additional variables does increase the parameter associated with the predictability
of returns from lagged liquidity, so that it is no longer statistically significant. As men-
tioned, this could be completely consistent with an important role for liquidity in pricing. If
dividend yields and liquidity are negatively correlated, the trivariate coefficient on liquidity
should be smaller than the bivariate coefficient reported here. The contemporaneous covari-



                                               21
ance between liquidity and dividend yield shocks reported in the table is indeed negative
and highly significant for segmented countries, but the estimate becomes less negative as
investability rises. Note that this represents the correlation purged of return effects because
of the Cholesky decomposition formulation Conversely, because dividend yield variation par-
tially reflects variation in liquidity, the univariate coefficient on the dividend yield is higher
(0.0933) and is significantly different from zero. As is true in the trivariate VAR, investa-
bility substantially undermines the predictive power of the dividend yield but increases the
coefficient on the U.S. dividend yield. However, these interaction effects are not significant.
Finally, in the trivariate system, liquidity also negatively and significantly predicts future
dividend yields (but only in segmented markets).
   As in the bivariate case, we also present several Wald tests on return predictability.
Recall, the null hypotheses are that the first row of A0 = 0 under segmentation and A0 +
A1 = 0 under integration, when local instruments are considered. As in the bivariate case,
the first test rejects the null of no predictability with a p-value of 0.02, even though none
of the individual estimates are significant. This suggests a degree of colinearity between
liquidity and dividend yields, consistent with priced liquidity. The null hypothesis of no
return predictability from local factors under integration is not rejected at the 5% level,
though it is at the 10% level. The tests fail to reject the null hypothesis of no return
predictability using global factors under either segmentation or integration.
   Given that equity market turnover is a natural candidate for local market trading activity,
we also consider a specification which includes turnover. In Case C in Table 5, lagged local
or U.S. equity market turnover do not significantly predict future excess returns and their
inclusion does not drive out the predictive power of the liquidity measure. The predictability
of future returns by lagged local market liquidity is actually more pronounced in Case C for
segmented markets, although the coefficient increases significantly for countries with greater
degrees of investability. This evidence is consistent with the idea that the proportion of zero
daily returns is picking up a feature of market liquidity and transaction costs not related
to equity market turnover and is more important for expected returns. Finally, there also
appears to be a positive contemporaneous relation between returns and turnover shocks for
segmented countries which is relatively unaffected by the liberalization state.


                                               22
   We also investigate whether past returns predict future turnover as suggested by Griffin,
Nardari, and Stulz (2004). The estimated coefficient is positive and significant, but it is
reduced considerably for higher levels of investability. In contrast, the coefficient on past
local returns in the liquidity equation is 0.111 with a t-statistic of 3.865, quite similar to
the bivariate estimate. It is not affected by the inclusion of turnover. The Wald tests on
return predictability continue to exhibit significant predictive power for local factors under
market segmentation. However, there is also marginal predictive power for local factors
under market integration and the integration state significantly affects predictability.


3.4.3     VARs with alternative liquidity measures

Table 6 investigates the robustness of our results across liquidity measures. We report results
for bivariate VARs including returns and three different liquidity measures: one based on
value-weighted zero returns, the equally-weighted price impact based measure, and the value-
weighted price impact measure. In the discussion, we only focus on the salient features of
the dynamics.
   First, the coefficient on past liquidity in the return equation is consistently negative.
The predictability is much stronger for the value-weighted measure based on zeros, but it is
weaker for the price impact measure. In fact, the coefficient is no longer significant for the
equal-weighted price impact measure, but the in value-weighted case, it is significant at the
5% level even when the Monte Carlo critical values are used. Consistent with the benchmark
case, the coefficients are much smaller for liberalized countries. One of the main hypotheses
underlying the article is thus confirmed: variation in the degree of market integration affects
the predictive power of liquidity in the expected direction, but the change in the coefficient
is only statistically significant for the value-weighted zero return measure. For the U.S., we
find consistently negative, but insignificant coefficients.
   Second, equally-weighted liquidity measures are significantly more persistent than value-
weighted measures, with the differences being smaller for liberalized markets. Third, the
predictive power of returns for future liquidity for segmented markets is restricted to the
equally-weighted zeros based measure, but the coefficient is consistently positive. Inter-
estingly, for liberalized markets, the coefficient becomes more positive for all alternative

                                               23
measures.
    Fourth, we also report the effect of liberalization on the unconditional averages in Table 6.
For returns, the effects are not robust across measures. We observe a significant increase for
the value-weighted zero return measure, and insignificant coefficients with opposite signs for
the price impact measures. However, if we investigate trivariate VARs with dividend yields,
the dividend yield consistently decreases but the effect is mostly not significant. For liquidity,
the value-weighted measures show significant improvements in liquidity post-liberalization
whereas the equally weighted measures show insignificant negative coefficients.
    Fifth, we always observe a positive correlation between return and liquidity shocks, but
it is not significantly different from zero in the case of the equally-weighted price impact
measure. For the U.S. VAR dynamics, the negative return-liquidity correlation seems robust
to the measure even though it is not always significantly different from zero.
    Sixth, in terms of the beta exposures, there is one result that is very robust across the
different measures. The return beta with respect to the U.S. market return is around 0.35
to 0.4 for segmented countries and rises with about 0.85-0.90 for a fully liberalized country.


4     Liquidity and Expected Asset Returns: A Simple Pricing Model

4.1    Transactions costs and liquidity

In this section, we set out a simple model that considers two channels through which liquidity
may affect expected returns: as a transaction cost and as a systematic risk factor. We
contrast the implications of liquidity pricing under international market integration and
segmentation.
    Assuming exogenously determined but proportional transaction costs as in Jones (2002),
poor liquidity or high transaction costs drive a wedge between the gross returns that we
measure in the data and the actually obtained returns (“net returns”), that is:
                                                        gross
                                         net       exp(rt+1   )
                                    exp(rt+1 )   =              ,                            (10)
                                                     T Ct+1

where T Ct+1 ≥ 1 presents a transaction cost measure (if T C = 1, there are no transaction
             net      gross
costs), and rt+1 and rt+1   are continuously compounded returns.

                                                 24
       We postulate that the log of the transaction cost measure is proportional to the liquidity
measure, L, that is:
                                        `n(T Ct+1 ) = v Lt+1 (v < 0),                                      (11)

(10) and (11) hold for each market, i, and for the U.S., w. Recall that our liquidity measure,
L, is defined as `n(1 − ZR), so that a greater incidence of zero returns is associated with a
reduction in market liquidity. In general, the coefficient v will be market specific, vi . Note
that we implicitly assume that everybody has the same one-year or one-month horizon in
which they trade once. Of course, in reality, the trading frequency is endogenous. It is likely
that an asset with high transaction costs will be traded less frequently and held longer.10
The total transaction cost associated with an asset could be measured as the turnover in a
given year times the transaction cost, including fixed costs and the bid-ask spread (see Jones
(2002)). Unfortunately, we cannot measure transaction costs that precisely since we do not
have complete bid-ask spread data. Further, while these explicit costs of transacting in
equity markets are important, they do not reflect the implicit costs associated with trading,
such as the price impact. These additional costs may be particularly important in emerging
equity markets. However, a zero daily return may reflect the presence of all transaction costs
market participants face.
       While the transaction cost channel suffices to induce predictable variation in gross ex-
pected returns, a rapidly growing literature asserts liquidity is priced. For liquidity to be
priced at the aggregate level, there must be a systematic component to liquidity variation,
and overall, stocks must perform poorly when liquidity dries up. In this case, the expected
equity premium is negatively linked to liquidity, and shocks to liquidity change expected
returns and hence prices. It is informative to explore a simple pricing model where the
transactions cost effect and “liquidity risk” interact. In particular, the pricing model should
apply to net returns but we only observe gross returns. Hence, the pricing relations be-
come quite complex even under simple assumptions. We start with a model imposing the
assumption of global market integration and then consider the case of perfectly segmented
markets.
  10
       See Amihud and Mendelson (1986) for an interesting analysis of the resulting potential clientele effects.
Also, see Huang (2003).


                                                        25
4.2      Pricing under global market integration

We ignore currency effects, measuring all returns in dollars and assuming a dollar risk-free
rate. We assume that there are two risk factors affecting the world pricing kernel: net U.S.
                 net
market returns (rw,t+1 ) and U.S. liquidity (Lw,t+1 ). We assume that the log pricing kernel
under market integration is given by:

                             mIt+1 = `n(Mt+1
                                         I            net
                                             ) = −γw rw,t+1 − γL,w Lw,t+1 ,                                 (12)

where γw is the world price of market risk and γL,w is the world price of liquidity risk. It
                          net
follows for all returns, ri,t+1 ,
                                                   net     I
                                          Et [exp(ri,t+1 )Mt+1 ] = 1,                                       (13)

holds under global market integration.
    Let rtf be the continuously-compounded risk free interest rate. Assume that all continuously-
compounded returns and Lw,t+1 are jointly normally distributed. Then,

                                                         1
                                      rtf = −Et [mt+1 ] − Vart [mt+1 ].                                     (14)
                                                         2

Hence,

                          1
           net
      Et [ri,t+1 ] = rtf − Vart [ri,t+1
                                  net                 net
                                        ] + γw Covt [ri,t+1    net
                                                            , rw,t+1                  net
                                                                     ] + γL,w Cov t [ri,t+1 , Lnet
                                                                                               w,t+1 ].     (15)
                          2

Equation (15) follows from the main pricing equation (13) and the normal distributional
assumption, after substituting in (14). Markets that do well when the world market performs
well or liquidity is high, require high expected net returns.
    To express the model in terms of gross observed returns, we need to solve for the variances
and covariances in terms of moments for gross returns in equation (15):

                          net              gross
                   Vart [ri,t+1 ] = Vart [rt+1   − vi Li,t+1 ]                                              (16)
                                             gross                                      gross
                                    = Vart [ri,t+1 ] + vi2 Vart [Li,t+1 ] − 2vi Cov t [ri,t+1 , Li,t+1 ],
                  net      net               gross                gross
          Cov t [ri,t+1 , rw,t+1 ] = Cov t [ri,t+1 − vi Li,t+1 , rw,t+1 − vw Lw,t+1 ]                       (17)
                                              gross gross
                                    = Cov t [ri,t+1 , rw,t+1 ] + vi vw Covt [Li,t+1 , Lw,t+1 ]
                                                            gross               gross
                                        −vi Covt [Li,t+1 , rw,t+1 ] − vw Covt [ri,t+1 , Lw,t+1 ],


                                                        26
and
                         net                        gross
                 Cov t [ri,t+1 , Lw,t+1 ] = Cov t [ri,t+1 , Lw,t+1 ] − vi Covt [Li,t+1 , Lw,t+1 ].   (18)

Combining (10), (11), (15)-(17), we obtain,

       gross
  Et [ri,t+1 ] − rtf = γw Covt [ri,t+1
                                 gross gross
                                       , rw,t+1 ] ← [world market risk]                              (19)
                                                 gross
                         +(γL,w − γw vw )Cov t [ri,t+1 , Lw,t+1 ] ← [world liquidity risk]
                                                               gross
                         +vi Et [Li,t+1 ] + vi Covt [Li,t+1 , ri,t+1 ] ← [local liquidity risk]
                                                gross
                         −vi γw Covt [Li,t+1 , rw,t+1 ] ← [cross liquidity-return effect]

                         +(γw vi vw − γL,w vi )Covt [Li,t+1 , Lw,t+1 ] ← [liquidity covariation effect]
                          1        gross    1
                         − Vart [ri,t+1  ] − vi2 Vart [Li,t+1 ] ← [Jensen’s inequality terms]
                          2                 2

The simple pricing relation in (15) for net returns with two risks and a Jensen’s inequality
term turns into a pricing equation with eight terms.
   The first term in equation (19) reflects world market risk; the second term reflects world
liquidity risk but the price of world liquidity risk is γL,w − γw vw , not γL,w . Assuming positive
prices of risk, and with vw likely negative, this exposure is larger than reflected in the world
price of liquidity risk. The extra terms arise because correlation between gross returns and
world liquidity contributes to the correlation between net U.S. and local returns. It is useful
                                                                            h                             i
                                                                                         gross
to immediately contrast this term with the third line: vi Et [Li,t+1 ] + Covt [Li,t+1 , ri,t+1 ].
These terms reflect pure local liquidity risks. The first component simply captures the
assumption that illiquid securities must have higher expected returns because of transactions
costs; the second that this expected return must be even higher when that market is subject
to local liquidity risk. The latter seems counter intuitive as it lowers the expected return for
securities with positive liquidity risk. However, in a world of full integration, local liquidity
                                                                         net
risks are not likely to influence net returns, that is, Cov t [Li,t+1 , ri,t+1 ] = 0 is a fair assumption.
                                                gross
If this is the case, we obtain Cov t [Li,t+1 , ri,t+1 ] = −vi Vart [Li,t+1 ], indicating that the local
liquidity term mitigates the transactions cost effect.
   The fourth line shows that a positive covariation between local liquidity and the market
return implies a higher expected return. This term also arises in the Acharya and Pedersen
(2005) model, and they offer an extensive economic motivation for why investors may accept

                                                       27
a lower return on a security that is liquid in a down market. The fifth line shows that the ex-
pected return increases with the covariance between local market liquidity and world market
liquidity. This essentially is the commonality-in-liquidity effect referred to by Chordia, Roll,
and Subramanyam (2001), Hasbrouck and Seppi (2000), and Huberman and Halka (1999).
The term also arises in the Acharya and Pedersen (2005) framework. In the context of our
global pricing framework, applied to emerging markets, both the cross-liquidity return and
liquidity covariance effects may be expected to be small. It is not likely that, for emerging
markets, local liquidity covaries much with U.S. returns or U.S. liquidity. The final line
represents the Jensen’s inequality terms. What is most striking about the pricing framework
developed here is that even under global market integration, local factors enter the asset
pricing equation.


4.3       Pricing under market segmentation

Under segmentation, the price of local liquidity and the local equity return enter the pricing
kernel:
                              mSt+1 = `n(Mt+1
                                          S            net
                                              ) = −γi ri,t+1 − γL,i Li,t+1                             (20)

Under joint normality,
                                 1
                  net
             Et [ri,t+1 ] = rtf − Vart [ri,t+1
                                         net                 net
                                               ] + γi Vart [ri,t+1                 net
                                                                   ] + γL,i Covt [ri,t+1 , Lnet
                                                                                            i,t+1 ].   (21)
                                 2
Notice that rtf is a domestic interest rate and the model would normally apply to local excess
returns. However, the use of local excess returns in emerging markets is hampered by the
presence of extreme returns and interest rates in the data. Therefore, we follow most of the
literature and formulate the model in U.S. dollars. If uncovered interest rate parity holds
or exchange rate shocks are uncorrelated with the kernel formulated in equation (20), our
expected excess return expressions are identical for local currency or dollar returns. Again,
we must transform net into gross returns. We use:

                              net                       gross
                      Cov t [ri,t+1 , Li,t+1 ] = Covt [ri,t+1 , Li,t+1 ] − vi Vart [Li,t+1 ]           (22)

                              net
and the expression for Vart [ri,t+1 ] in Equation (16):
                                          1
                     gross
                Et [ri,t+1 ] − rtf = (γi − )Vart [ri,t+1
                                                   gross
                                                         ]                                             (23)
                                          2

                                                       28
                                                      1              gross
                                     [γL,i − (γi − )2vi ]Covt [ri,t+1      , Li,t+1 ]
                                                      2
                                                                   1
                                     vi Et [Li,t+1 ] + vi [vi (γi − ) − γL,i ]Vart [Li,t+1 ]
                                                                   2

While the same risks are present in the integrated model as well, now they have different
                              1
coefficients. Assume, γi >    2
                                  and γL,i > 0. The variance of liquidity then features a posi-
tive coefficient even when the Jensen’s inequality is accounted for. Whereas the covariance
between local returns and local liquidity surprisingly receives a negative coefficient in the
integrated model, it has the expected positive coefficient here as it represents a genuine liq-
uidity risk. However, the price of risk is not γL,i , but potentially larger due to the relation
between transaction costs and liquidity variation. Again, the expression for expected returns
contains a transactions cost term, vi Et [Li,t+1 ], a term in the variance of liquidity representing
the Jensen’s inequality effect, and covariation terms that arise from the correlation between
transaction costs and aggregate risks. These terms simplify because we use aggregate coun-
try portfolios. The indirect transaction costs term features a positive coefficient under the
assumptions above and counter-balances the direct transactions costs effect.


4.4    Model estimation

Before the models in equations (10)-(23) become estimatible, we must make a few auxiliary
assumptions. First, the models feature a number of country-specific parameters which give
rise to a rather large parameter space. We resolve this by making country-specific parameters
a function of the liberalization state, for example, the transactions costs parameter is:

                                         vi = v0 + v1 Libi,t                                   (24)

vi only depends on two common parameters which distinguish transaction cost effects across
liberalized and non-liberalized markets. Consistent with this assumption, we let γi = γS and
                                                                                     j
γL,i = γL,S . We formulate an encompassing model that is still parsimonious. Define θi,t as a
parameter function for the j th priced risk in country i that could in principle depend on the
liberalization intensity measured at time t:

                                          j
                                         θi,t = θ0j + θ1j Libi,t                               (25)


                                                   29
   Our models are nested in the following model:

                     gross
                Et [ri,t+1 ] − rtf = vi Et [Li,t+1 ] + θi,t
                                                        1          gross
                                                            Vart [ri,t+1 ]
                                            2                     3                   gross
                                          +θi,t Vart [Li,t+1 ] + θi,t Covt [Li,t+1 , ri,t+1 ]
                                            4                   gross      5
                                          +θi,t Covt [Li,t+1 , rw,t+1 ] + θi,t Covt [Li,t+1 , Lw,t+1 ]
                                            6          gross               7           gross gross
                                          +θi,t Covt [ri,t+1 , Lw,t+1 ] + θi,t Cov t [ri,t+1 , rw,t+1 ].            (26)

Such a formulation does not impose the theoretical restrictions implied by the model derived
in Section 3. We investigate three restricted models, which are summarized in the following
table.

                              Mixed model                              Full integration         Full segmentation
   vi                          v0 + v1 Libi,t                                 v1                         v0
    1
   θi,t            (− 12 )Libi,t + (γi − 21 )(1 − Libi,t )                   − 21                     γS −     1
                                                                                                               2
    2
   θi,t   (− 12 )vi2 Libi,t + vi [(γS − 21 )vi − γL,S ](1 − Libi,t )        − 21 vi2        vi [vi (γS − 12 ) − γL,S ]
    3
   θi,t      vi Libi,t + [γL,S − (γS − 21 )2vi ](1 − Libi,t )                 vi                γL,S − (γS − 21 )2vi
    4
   θi,t                        −vi γw Libi,t                                −vi γw                         0
    5
   θi,t                  (γw vw − γL,w )vi Libi,t                      (γw vw − γL,w )vi                   0
    6
   θi,t                    (γL,w − γw vw )Libi,t                       (γL,w − γw vw )                     0
    7
   θi,t                           γw Libi,t                                   γw                           0

The fully segmented model has only three parameters, the fully integrated model has four
parameters and the mixed model has seven parameters. The mixed model reduces to one of
the extreme models when the liberalization intensity indicator is either 0 or 1. Consequently,
these are very parsimonious models. Of course, the underlying assumptions are extreme: no
temporal or cross-sectional variation in the prices of risk. We also investigate the relative
role of the transaction cost channel versus the systematic liquidity risk exposure through
which liquidity can affect expected returns. To focus on the first, we set γL,w = γL,S = 0; to
focus on the latter, we set vw = vi = 0.
   Our second set of auxiliary assumptions concern the dynamics of expected returns and
conditional second moments. Our model essentially constrains the relation between the two
but to test the model restrictions, we must exogenously specify either volatility or expected
return dynamics. We choose to follow the pricing framework of Campbell (1987) and Harvey

                                                             30
(1989, 1991) in which expected returns are assumed to be exact linear functions of a set of
instruments. Denote the residuals from these projections as

                            ut = [ui,t , uw,t , uLi ,t , uLw ,t ] for i = 1, . . . , N.                     (27)

We make the assumption that
                                               E[ut |It−1 ] = 0.                                            (28)

This is a strong assumption, as it requires returns and the liquidity measure (zero returns)
to exhaust the information set (see Harvey (1991) for further discussion).
   The model can be estimated in two steps. First, our previously estimated vector autore-
gressive systems determine the ut . Second, we estimate the following pricing moments using
panel GMM:

           ew,t = rw,t − rf,t−1 − vw Lw,t − γw u2w,t − γL,w uw,t uLw ,t
                                             1
           ei,t = ri,t − rf,t−1 − vi Li,t − θi,t−1          2
                                                   u2i,t − θi,t−1 uL2i ,t − θi,t−1
                                                                             3
                                                                                   uLi ,t ui,t
                       4                    5                      6                    7
                     −θi,t−1 uLi ,t uw,t − θi,t−1 uLi ,t uLw ,t − θi,t−1 ui,t uLw ,t − θi,t−1 ui,t uw,t .

The orthogonality conditions to estimate this system can be summarized as follows:
                                                                           
                                                   ew,t ⊗ xw,t−1
                                   gt =                                    .                              (29)
                                                                           
                                              ei,t ⊗ (xi,t−1 , Libi,t−1 )

In our empirical work, we primarily focus on the benchmark case, xi,t = [ri,t , Li,t ], corre-
sponding to the bivariate VAR. We also consider several robustness checks. For the emerging
markets, the system has 72 orthogonality conditions, where our least parsimonious model has
only 16 parameters (the U.S. system has 3 additional conditions). We report the standard
test of over-identifying restrictions. We also consider a comparison across models by eval-
uating the Hansen and Jagannathan (1991) distance metric, which measures the (squared)
distance that the implied pricing kernel is from the region of acceptable pricing kernels.
This amounts to a simple re-weighting of the moment conditions by the inverse of the inner
product of the raw returns with the lagged instrument set. In contrast to the optimal GMM
weighting matrix which is model specific, this weighting scheme is constant across all mod-
els, and facilitates an interesting means of model comparison (see Jagannathan and Wang
(1996)).

                                                       31
4.5        Empirical results

Our bivariate VAR, described above, using returns and equal-weighted zero returns as our
measure of liquidity acts as the first stage that defines unexpected return and liquidity shocks
for each country. We decided to pre-estimate the U.S. parameters using a longer sample from
1962-2003 from CRSP. This ensures that the world parameters are identical across models. 11
       Table 7 presents the results for several pricing models, detailed above. First, in Panel
A, we present evidence on the three basic theoretical models associated with either a fully
integrated case, a fully segmented case, or a mixed variant. In this case, we consider some
alternatives as robustness checks. In Panel B, we present evidence on the unrestricted case
where the coefficients associated with various covariances are left unrestricted. To begin, it
is important to note that all models we consider are rejected with p-values below 0.01 based
upon the tests of over-identifying restrictions. While the J-test is known to over-reject the
null hypothesis in small samples, these statistics are quite large suggesting that asset pricing
in the emerging market context is very challenging. For this reason, we focus instead on the
economic information that can be extracted from these cases.
       To begin, we present the fully integrated case, for which we estimate three parameters,
v1 – the gross to net return adjustment, γw – the price of world market risk, and γL,w – the
price of world market liquidity risk. In all cases, we constrain the various local prices of
risk to be identical across countries. The gross to net adjustment parameter is negative and
significant. Evaluated at the average zero, this term represents about 20 basis points per
month, a reasonable estimate. The pre-estimated prices of world market and world liquidity
risk are positive and statistically significant, though the latter is only borderline significant.
It is important to note that the standard errors reported in the table ignore the sampling
error associated with the first stage VAR that generate the return and liquidity shocks that
enter this analysis, and hence likely underestimate the true standard error. Further, of the
models under consideration, the fully integrated model has one of the largest HJ-distances,
suggesting that this model does a relatively poor job of explaining emerging markets returns.
       Next, we consider the case of full segmentation. This model involves the estimation of
  11
       The vw estimate proved unrealistically large, so we set it to zero. The resulting model fits the data as
well the model with non-zero vw and has positive prices of risk.


                                                       32
three parameters as well: v0 – the gross to net return adjustment, γs – the price of local
market risk, and γL,S – the price of local market liquidity risk. The sign of the gross to net
return parameter is positive and significant, which is not the direction expected, suggesting
higher levels of liquidity are associated with a higher gross to net adjustment. Second, the
local price of market risk is not significant; however, the price of local liquidity risk is positive
and significant, almost four standard errors from zero. Of the main models considered, the
fully segmented model is associated with the lowest HJ-distance metric. These estimates
suggest a 45 and 85 basis point per month compensation for local market and liquidity risk,
respectively.
   As the markets under exploration in this study are neither fully segmented nor integrated,
we also consider the mixed model where risk compensation varies over the liberalization
process. This model requires the estimation of six parameters, aggregating the two extreme
versions above. In this case, the gross to net adjustment parameter is positive and significant
for fully segmented markets, but moves to zero for markets displaying greater foreign investor
access. The pre-estimated prices of world market and liquidity risk are necessarily identical to
the fully integrated case. The price of local market risk is not significant; however, the price
of local liquidity risk has the right sign and is highly significant. The HJ-distance associated
with the mixed model is not as small as the full segmentation model. For segmented markets,
these estimates suggest a -31 and 106 basis point per month compensation for local market
and liquidity risk, respectively. For integrated markets, these estimates suggest a -4 and
27 basis point per month compensation for global market and liquidity risk, respectively.
Across the three models considered, the only robust result seems to be that the price of local
liquidity risk is an important driver of expected returns.
   As an additional check, we consider three alternative specifications. In the first and
second, we consider alternatives where we shut down either the gross to net return transaction
costs adjustments, vi , or the prices of risks associated with local and global systematic
liquidity, γL,S and γL,w respectively. The removal of a transaction costs effect still yields a
positive and significant price of local liquidity risk. However, this model has a larger HJ
distance. The removal of all systematic liquidity pricing does not have a large effect on the
price of world market risk, but it does yield a negative estimate for v0 . This model actually


                                                 33
yields the lowest HJ distance.
       Finally, we also estimate the general mixed model, but we replace the equally weighted
zero return liquidity measure with its value-weighted counterpart. The pre-estimated U.S.
pricing evidence is very similar to the equal-weighted liquidity case. Here, the gross-to-net
return transaction cost adjustment is not significant, but the price of local liquidity risk
is strongly significant, reinforcing the notion that local liquidity risk is important in the
determination of expected returns for emerging markets.
       Finally, Panel B considers two unrestricted models that facilitate a separate coefficient for
each of the various conditional variances and covariances presented free of any theoretical
restrictions. In the first, case we assume that there is no sensitivity to the liberalization
regime, whereas the second case allows the parameters to vary across liberalization state.
These models involves the estimation of eight and sixteen parameters, respectively. In the
first case, only four of the parameters in this model are statistically significant. Both the
prices of world market, θ6 , and world liquidity risk, θ7 , are negative and significant, but in
an unexpected direction. The price of risk associated with commonality in liquidity, θ5 , is
positive and significant. The price of local market liquidity risk, θ3 , is positive and highly
significant, consistent with the theoretically restricted models. The HJ-distance associated
with this model is relatively large in comparison to the theoretical models that facilitate
local risks. In the second case, only four of the parameters are statistically significant:
the two associated with the price of local liquidity, θ3,0 and θ3,1 , and the two associated
with the price of world market risk, θ7,0 and θ7,1 . The price of local liquidity is positive,
but significantly reduced with greater degrees of liberalization (but still positive). The
price of world market risk is negative under segmentation, but significantly increased with
liberalization, and positive for integrated markets. The HJ distance associated with this
model is also quite large.
       Taken together, it is very clear that the various channels for risk compensation are ex-
tremely difficult to estimate with precision.12 However, the evidence on the price of local
  12
       We also considered the shocks associated with the alternative VARs presented in Table 5 that include
either dividend yields or turnover; the pricing evidence (not reported) across these alternatives is very similar
with a significant role for local liquidity risks in all cases. However, when we use the price impact measure,



                                                       34
market risk is fairly robust across the cases considered here, strongly suggesting that local
market liquidity is an important driver of expected returns in emerging markets, and that
the liberalization process has not eliminated its impact. Models with an important role for
local liquidity risks and allowing segmentation do not only out-perform on the HJ distance
measure criterion, but also generate by far the highest cross-sectional correlation between
average returns over the sample with the expected returns generated by the various models.
The best models here are the market segmentation (panel A) and unrestricted (with no role
for liberalization) (panel B) models, for which the correlations between expected and average
returns are 0.51 and 0.61, respectively.


5     Conclusions

There is a growing consensus that systematic variation in liquidity matters for expected
returns. We examine this issue for a set of markets where liquidity ought to be particularly
important – emerging markets. We start by proposing a measure of liquidity and transaction
costs, first analyzed by Lesmond (2005) and Lesmond, Ogden and Trzcinka (1999): the pro-
portion of daily zero firm returns averaged over the month. The measure is easy to compute
and, as expected, is indeed positively correlated with bid-ask spreads (where available) and
negatively correlated with equity market turnover. We find that the zero measure captures
an aspect of liquidity that is not present in turnover. In all of our analysis, turnover has an
insignificant impact on returns in the presence of the zero measure. We also show that the
zero measure significantly predicts returns in emerging markets, and unexpected liquidity
shocks are positively correlated with returns and negatively correlated with dividend yields.
    Finally, if liquidity is priced, a model with market and liquidity risk may be a good
description of expected returns. For emerging markets, there is the added complication
that the market may be segmented or integrated. Many of the markets that we examine
underwent a liberalization process and liberalization may affect the dynamic relation between
returns and liquidity. We consider several models that allow for local or world market and
liquidity risks depending on whether a country is integrated or segmented. We also separate
local liquidity risk is less important.



                                              35
the transaction cost and systematic risk effects of liquidity variation on expected returns,
leading to a model where local factors matter even under the hypothesis of global market
integration. Whereas our analysis is exploratory in nature, we find a very clear evidence
that local liquidity risk is important.
   In future work, we intend to apply our asset pricing framework to developed markets.
While we expect less cross-country variation in liquidity in these markets, the richer data
will allow us to build more intricate measures of liquidity and construct powerful tests of
whether liquidity is globally and locally priced.




                                              36
  6    References


Acharya, V.V. and L.H. Pedersen, 2005, Asset Pricing with Liquidity Risk, Journal of Financial
  Economics, forthcoming.
Amihud, Y., 2002, Illiquidity and Stock Returns: Cross Section and Time Series Effects, Journal
  of Financial Markets 5, 2002, 31-56.
Amihud, Y. and H. Mendelson, 1986, Asset Pricing and the Bid-Ask Spread, Journal of Finan-
  cial Economics 17, 223-249.
Ang, A. and G. Bekaert, 2004, Stock Return Predictability: Is it There?, working paper,
  Columbia Business School.
Atje, R., and B. Jovanovic, 1989, Stock Markets and Development, European Economic Review
  37, 632-640.
Bekaert, G., 1995, Market Integration and Investment Barriers in Emerging Equity Markets,
  World Bank Economic Review 9, 75-107.
Bekaert, G. and C. R. Harvey, 1995, Time-varying World Market Integration, Journal of Fi-
  nance 50, 403-444.
Bekaert, G. and C. R. Harvey, 1997, Emerging Equity Market Volatility, Journal of Financial
  Economics 43, 29-78.
Bekaert, G. and C. R. Harvey, 2000, Foreign Speculators and Emerging Equity Markets, Journal
  of Finance 55, 565-614.
Bekaert, G., C. R. Harvey and R. Lumsdaine, 2002, Dating the Integration of World Capital
  Markets, Journal of Financial Economics 65:2, 2002, 203-249.
Bekaert, G., C. R. Harvey and C. Lundblad, 2005, Does Financial Liberalization Spur Growth?,
  Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.
Bessembinder, H. 2003, Issues in Assessing Trade Execution Costs, Journal of Financial Mar-
  kets, 6, 233-257.
Biais, B., 1993, Price Formation and Equilibrium Liquidity in Fragmented and Centralized
  Markets, Journal of Finance, 48, 157-185.
Bollerslev, T. and J. Wooldridge, 1992, Quasi-maximum likelihood estimation of dynamic mod-
  els with time varying covariances, Econometric Reviews 11, 143-172.
Brennan, M.J., T. Chordia and A. Subrahmanyam, 1998, Alternative factor specifications,
  security characteristics, and the cross-section of expected stock returns, Journal of Financial
  Economics 49, 345–373.
Brennan, M.J. and A. Subrahmanyam, 1996, Market microstructure and asset pricing: On the
  compensation for illiquidity in stock returns, Journal of Financial Economics 41, 441-464.
Campbell, J.Y., 1987, Stock Returns and the Term Structure, Journal of Financial Economics


                                                37
Chalmers, J. M. and G. B. Kadlec, 1998, An Empirical Examination of the Amortization
  Spread, Journal of Financial Economics 48, 159-188.
Chordia, T., R. Roll and A. Subrahmanyam, 2000, Commonality in liquidity, Journal of Fi-
  nancial Economics 56, 3–28.
Chordia, T., R. Roll and A. Subrahmanyam, 2001, Market liquidity and trading activity, Jour-
  nal of Finance 56, 501–530.
Chordia, T., R. Roll and A. Subrahmanyam, 2004, Order imbalance, liquidity, and market
  returns, Journal of Financial Economics, 72, 485-518.
Chordia, T., R. Roll and V. R. Anshuman, 2001, Trading activity and expected stock returns,
  Journal of Financial Economics 59, 3–30.
Chordia, T., Sarkar, A. and A. Subrahmanyam, 2005, An Empirical Analysis of Stock and Bond
  Market Liquidity, Review of Financial Studies, 18, 85-129.
Chuhan, P., 1992, Are Institutional Investors and important source of portfolio investment in
  emerging markets?, World Bank Working Paper N. 1243.
Constantinides, G., 1986, Capital Market Equilibrium with Transactions Costs, Journal of
  Political Economy 94, 842-862.
Datar, V. T., N. N. Naik, and R. Radcliffe, 1998, Liquidity and asset returns: An alternative
  test, Journal of Financial Markets 1, 203–219.
Domowitz, I., Glen J., and A. Madhavan, 2001, Liquidity, Volatility, and Equity Trading Costs
  Across Countries and Over Time, International Finance, 221-255.
Easley, D. and M. O’Hara, 1987, Price, Trade Size, and Information in Securities Markets,
  Journal of Financial Economics 19, 69-90.
Easley, D., Hvidkjaer, S. and M. O’Hara, 2002, Is Information Risk a Determinant of Asset
  Returns? Journal of Finance, 2185-2221.
Edison, H. and F. Warnock, 2003, A Simple Measure of the Intensity of Capital Controls,
  Journal of Empirical Finance 10, 81-104.
Eisfeldt, A. L., 2004, Endogenous liquidity in asset markets, Journal of Finance, 59, 1-30.
Engstrom, E. 2003, The Conditional Relationship Between Stock Returns and the Dividend
  Price Ratio, Working paper, Board of Governors, Federal Reserve System, Washington,
  D.C.
Fiori, F., 2000, Liquidity premia in the equity markets: An investigation into the characteristics
   of liquidity and trading activity, Working paper, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL.
French, K., G. Schwert, and R. Stambaugh, 1987, Expected Stock Returns and Volatility,
   Journal of Financial Economics, 19, 3-30.
Glosten, L.R., R. Jaganathan, and D. Runkle, 1993, On the Relation between the Expected
  Value and the Volatility of the Normal Excess Return on Stocks, Journal of Finance, 48,
  1779-1801.



                                                 38
Glosten, L. and P. Milgrom, 1985, Bid, Ask and Transaction Prices in a Specialist Market with
  Heterogeneously Informed Traders, Journal of Financial Economics, 14, 71-100.
Goyal, A., and I. Welch, 2003, The Myth of Predictability: Does the Dividend Yield Forecast
  the Equity Premium?, Management Science, 49, 639-654.
Grossman, S.J. and M.H. Miller, 1988, Liquidity and market structure, Journal of Finance 43,
  617-633.
Hansen L., 1982, Large Sample Properties of Generalized Method of Moments Estimators,
  Econometrica, 50, 1029-1054.
Harris, L., 1990, Statistical Properties of the Roll Serial Covariance Bid/Ask Spread Estimator,
  Journal of Finance 45, no. 2, 579-590.
Harvey, C.R., 1989, Time-Varying Conditional Covariances in Tests of Asset Pricing Models,
  Journal of Financial Economics 24, 289-317.
Harvey, C.R., 1991, The World Price of Covariance Risk, Journal of Finance 46 (1991): 111-157.
Harvey, C.R., 1995, Predictable risk and returns in emerging markets, Review of Financial
  Studies 8, 773–816.
Hasbrouck, J., 2004, Liquidity in the futures pit: Inferring market dynamics from incomplete
  data, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 39, 305-326.
Hasbrouck, J., 2005, Trading costs and returns for US equities: the evidence from daily data.
  Unpublished working paper, New York University.
Hasbrouck, J. and D. J. Seppi, 2000, Common factors in prices, order flows and liquidity,
  Journal of Financial Economics 59, 383–412.
Heaton, J. and D. Lucas, 1996, Evaluating the Effects of Incomplete Markets on Risk Sharing
  and Asset Prices, Journal of Political Economy 104, 443-487.
Henry, P., 2000, Stock Market Liberalization, Economic Reform, and Emerging Market Equity
  Prices, Journal of Finance 55, 529-564
Hodrick, L.S. and P.C. Moulton, 2003, Liquidity, Unpublished working paper, Columbia Uni-
  versity.
Hodrick, R., 1992, Dividend Yields and Expected Stock Returns: Alternative Procedures for
  Inference and Measurement, Review of Financial Studies 5, 3, 357-386.
Holmstrom, B. and J. Tirole, 2002, LAPM: A liquidity-based asset pricing model, Journal of
  Finance.
Huang, M., 2003, Liquidity shocks and equilibrium liquidity premia, Journal of Economic
  Theory 109, 104–129.
Huberman, G. and D. Halka, 2001, Systematic liquidity, Journal of Financial Research 24,
  161-178.
Jain, P., 2002, Institutional design and liquidity on stock exchanges, Working paper, Indiana
   University.


                                                39
Jain-Chandra, S., 2002, The Impact of Stock Market Liberalization on Liquidity and Efficiency
   in Emerging Equity Markets, working paper.
Jones, C., 2002, A century of stock market liquidity and trading costs, Working paper, Columbia
  University, NY.
Koren, M. and A. Szeidl, 2002, Portfolio choice with illiquid assets, Working paper, Harvard
  University, Cambridge, MA.
Kyle, A. P., 1985, Continuous Auctions and Insider Trading, Econometrica 1315-1336.
Lesmond, D. A., 2005, The costs of equity trading in emerging markets, Journal of Financial
  Economics, forthcoming.
Lesmond, David A., J. P. Ogden, C. Trzcinka, 1999, A New Estimate of Transaction Costs,
  Review of Financial Studies 12, 1113-1141.
Levine, R. and S. Zervos, 1998, Stock Markets, Banks, and Economic Growth, American Eco-
  nomic Review 88:3, 537–558.
Lo, A.W., H. Mamaysky and J. Wang, 2001, Asset prices and trading volume under fixed
  transactions costs, Working paper, MIT.
Lowengrub, P. and M. Melvin, 2002, Before and after international cross-listing: an intraday ex-
  amination of volume and volatility, Journal of International Financial Markets, Institutions
  and Money, 12, 139-155.
Newey, W., and K. West, 1987, A Simple, Positive Semi-Definite, Heteroskedasticity and Au-
  tocorrelation Consistent Covariance Matrix, Econometrica, 55, 703-708.
O’Hara, M., 2003, Liquidity and Price Discovery, Journal of Finance 58, 4 1335-1354.
Pagano, M, 1989, Endogenous Market Thinness and Stock-price Volatility, Review of Economic
  Studies, 56, 269-288.
Pastor, L. and R.F. Stambaugh, 2002, Liquidity risk and expected stock returns, Journal of
  Political Economy forthcoming.
Roll R. 1984, A Simple Implicit Measure of the Effective Bid-ask spread in an Efficient Market,
  Journal of Finance 39, 1127-1140.
Sadka, R., 2005, Liquidity Risk and Asset Pricing, Journal of Financial Economics, forthcom-
  ing.
Spiegel, M. and A. Subrahmanyam, 1992, Informed Speculation and Hedging in a Noncompet-
  itive Securities Market, Review of Financial Studies 5(2), 307-329.
Stambaugh, R.F., 1999, Predictive Regressions, Journal of Financial Economics 54, 375-421.
Vayanos, D., 1998, Transactions Costs and Asset Prices: A Dynamic Equilibrium Model, Review
  of Financial Studies 11, 1-58.
Vayanos, D., 2004, Flight to Quality, Flight to Liquidity, and the Pricing of Risk, working
  paper, London School of Economics.
Wang, J., 1993, A Model of Inter-temporal Asset Prices Under Asymmetric Information, Review

                                                40
  of Economic Studies 60, 249-282.
Zakoian, J. M., 1994, Threshold Heteroskedastic Models, Journal of Economics Dynamics and
  Control, 18, 931-955.




                                            41
Table 1
Summary statistics
Sample: 1987:01 2003:12




                                                                                                                                                                               s




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           la
                                                                                                                                                                                e
                                            a




                                                                                a




                                                                                                                 sia




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     bw
                                                                                                                                        ia




                                                                                                                                                                              in
                                         tin




                                                                                                                                                                                                                nd
                                                                              bi




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ue
                                                                                                                                                                an




                                                                                                                                                                                             l




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ge
                                                                                                                                                                                          ga
                                                                                                                                                    o




                                                                                                                                                                                                      an
                                                                                                                                      ys




                                                                                                                                                                            pp




                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ey
                                                                                        e




                                                                                                              ne
                                                                           m




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ba
                                                                                                                                                  ic




                                                                                                                                                                                                               la




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ez
                                       en



                                                    il




                                                                                                                          ea




                                                                                                                                                                st




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ra
                                                                                       ec
                                                             ile




                                                                                                                                                                                       rtu
                                                                                                    a




                                                                                                                                       a




                                                                                                                                                                                                   iw
                                                                         lo




                                                                                                                                                                                                                         rk
                                                   az




                                                                                                                                                                        ili




                                                                                                                                                                                                             ai
                                                                                                            do




                                                                                                                                                ex



                                                                                                                                                             ki




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 m


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ve
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     en
                                                                                                 di




                                                                                                                                    al
                                     rg




                                                                                                                        or
                                                                                     re
                                                           Ch


                                                                       Co




                                                                                                                                                                                                           Th



                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Tu
                                                                                                                                                                      Ph



                                                                                                                                                                                     Po


                                                                                                                                                                                                 Ta
                                                                                                                                                           Pa
                                                 Br




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Zi
                                                                                                                                  M



                                                                                                                                              M
                                                                                               In


                                                                                                          In
                                   A




                                                                                    G




                                                                                                                       K




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   V




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            A
Monthly Return (US$)
Mean                               0.031         0.023    0.018       0.015         0.018     0.010      0.005         0.011     0.009        0.021       0.014       0.008         0.014        0.016     0.014      0.030       0.016         0.026       0.017
Standard deviation                 0.211         0.168    0.078       0.088         0.115     0.091      0.139         0.121     0.100        0.118       0.103       0.104         0.101        0.134     0.123      0.199       0.140         0.167       0.128
Autocorrelation                   -0.066        -0.011    0.212       0.397         0.082     0.107      0.195         0.023     0.103        0.270       0.034       0.263         0.250        0.058     0.091      0.101       0.045         0.174       0.129
Observations                        204           204      204         204           204       204        168           204       204          204         204         204           204          204       204        204         204           204         202

Return (Local Currency)
Mean                               0.098        0.133     0.023       0.028         0.022     0.017      0.010         0.011     0.010        0.032       0.019       0.012         0.014        0.016     0.015      0.067       0.038         0.047       0.034
Standard Deviation                 0.362        0.232     0.071       0.088         0.115     0.094      0.107         0.104     0.090        0.110       0.100       0.096         0.099        0.130     0.116      0.195       0.127         0.144       0.132
Autocorrelation                    0.241        0.227     0.214       0.389         0.109     0.107      0.111         0.074     0.077        0.289       0.026       0.203         0.272        0.046     0.029      0.061       0.119         0.122       0.151
Observations                        204          204       204         204           204       204        168           204       204          204         204         204           204          204       204        204         204           204         202

Dividend yield
Mean                              0.0022        0.0032    0.0038     0.0037      0.0033      0.0015     0.0014      0.0013       0.0019      0.0016      0.0047      0.0010         0.0021       0.0007    0.0022    0.0029       0.0030      0.0039       0.0025
Standard deviation                0.0016        0.0026    0.0019     0.0017      0.0018      0.0006     0.0009      0.0006       0.0007      0.0006      0.0028      0.0005         0.0008       0.0003    0.0013    0.0019       0.0031      0.0023       0.0014
Autocorrelation                    0.828         0.871    0.969      0.977        0.897      0.933      0.957        0.776        0.924       0.907      0.953        0.948         0.913         0.898     0.856     0.855        0.978       0.948        0.910
Observations                        204           204      204        204          204        204        168          204          204         204        204          204           204           204       204       194          204         204          201

Turnover (Value Traded/MCAP) (TO)
Mean                     0.035    0.050                   0.010       0.007         0.033     0.094      0.049         0.141     0.028        0.038       0.278       0.024         0.032        0.209     0.074      0.113       0.017         0.009       0.069
Standard deviation       0.021    0.025                   0.006       0.004         0.034     0.099      0.027         0.108     0.018        0.017       0.448       0.014         0.024        0.090     0.057      0.114       0.017         0.008       0.063
Autocorrelation          0.739    0.816                   0.423       0.474         0.788     0.844      0.710         0.877     0.725        0.649       0.920       0.668         0.798        0.641     0.685      0.842       0.674         0.553       0.712
Observations              204      204                     204         204           204       204        169           204       204          204         204         204           204          204       204        204         204           204         202

Proportion of daily (local currency) zero returns in that month (ZR)
Mean                         0.426     0.692     0.692     0.740    0.343                     0.336      0.640         0.180     0.307        0.600       0.600       0.633         0.601        0.112     0.543      0.267       0.443         0.576       0.485
Standard deviation           0.190     0.072     0.068     0.090    0.196                     0.062      0.073         0.076     0.085        0.058       0.097       0.122         0.077        0.029     0.066      0.116       0.269         0.120       0.104
Autocorrelation              0.968     0.935     0.849     0.838    0.984                     0.700      0.811         0.892     0.799        0.859       0.881       0.899         0.830        0.491     0.819      0.927       0.962         0.889       0.852
Observations                  186       168       174       144      192                       168        165           204       204          189         138         196           192          196       204        192         168           132         178

Price pressure of non-trading (PI)
Mean                        0.557               0.833     0.809       0.830         0.411     0.435      0.726         0.246     0.362        0.709       0.732       0.697         0.679        0.157     0.614      0.339       0.546         0.653       0.574
Standard deviation          0.229               0.063     0.063       0.085         0.257     0.145      0.082         0.110     0.107        0.091       0.138       0.127         0.084        0.046     0.077      0.118       0.286         0.139       0.125
Autocorrelation             0.949               0.740     0.641       0.586         0.975     0.625      0.743         0.857     0.780        0.800       0.794       0.794         0.614        0.424     0.576      0.877       0.930         0.895       0.756
Observations                 192                 168       174         144           192       168        165           194       202          192         149         196           169          196       202        192         168           132         178
Ave. number of firms          43                 307       162          35           239       713        183           666       470          92          167         135           159          257       379        180         26            30          236
Total number of firms         83                 572       227          53           380       892        308          1612       815          163         240         217           271          562       401        295         53            89          402
The monthly returns (U.S.$) and dividend yields are from the S&P/IFC. Equity market turnover for each month is the equity value traded for that month, divided by that month's equity market capitalization from Standard and Poor's. Finally, the proportion of zero
daily (local currency) returns and price impact of non-trading observed over the month for each equity market use daily returns data at the firm level which are obtained from the Datastream research files starting from the late 1980's. For each country, we observe
daily returns (using closing prices) for a large collection of firms listed on a domestic exchange. For each country, we calculate the proportion of zero daily returns and price impact across all firms, and average these figures over the month.
Table 2
Correlations of percentage of zero daily returns with alternative measures of liquidity
                                                                                                                     Bid-ask
                                                                                                                    spread and                     GARCH                         TARCH                         Within
                                   Bid-ask                                                                           turnover                     conditional                   conditional                    month
                                   spread                Turnover (TO)               Price Impact (PI)                 (TO)                        volatility                    volatility                   volatility

Argentina                                                      -0.24                        0.95                                                      -0.43                         -0.31                       -0.23
Brazil                               0.12                      -0.22                        0.42                        0.06                          0.65                          0.74                        -0.09
Chile                                                          -0.04                        0.64                                                      -0.01                         -0.29                       0.07
Colombia                                                       -0.04                        0.68                                                      -0.30                         -0.32                       0.09
Greece                                                         -0.55                        0.97                                                      0.38                          0.13                        -0.09
India                                                          -0.57                        0.69                                                      0.08                          -0.29                       0.10
Indonesia                            0.72                      -0.31                        0.79                        -0.05                         -0.20                         -0.13                       0.06
Korea                                0.77                      -0.54                        0.96                        -0.25                         0.14                          0.15                        -0.23
Malaysia                             0.51                      -0.41                        0.81                        -0.54                         -0.21                         -0.19                       -0.10
Mexico                               0.60                      -0.28                        0.48                        -0.09                         -0.12                         -0.12                       -0.11
Pakistan                                                       -0.41                        0.87                                                      0.22                          0.12                        -0.02
Philippines                          0.88                      -0.38                        0.82                        -0.33                         -0.23                         -0.09                       -0.08
Portugal                             0.42                      -0.33                        0.25                        -0.19                         -0.37                         -0.39                       -0.01
Taiwan                                                         -0.48                        0.76                                                      -0.38                         -0.36                       -0.60
Thailand                             0.79                      -0.12                        0.60                        -0.59                         0.40                          0.43                        -0.07
Turkey                               0.56                      -0.51                        0.91                        0.19                          0.09                          0.43                        -0.05
Venezuela                                                      -0.56                        0.97                                                      -0.03                         0.00                        -0.01
Zimbabwe                                                       -0.27                        0.88                                                      -0.18                         -0.18                       0.19
Cross-sectional average                                        -0.44                        0.99
Time-series average                  0.60                      -0.35                        0.74                        -0.20                         -0.03                         -0.04                       -0.07
For each country, we calculate the proportion of zero daily returns (ZR) and price impact of non-trading (PI) across all firms, and average this proportion over the month. Bid-ask spreads at the firm level are obtained
from the Datastream research files (where available) for the countries shown here. Equity market turnover (TO) is the value traded for that month divided by that month's equity market capitalization. Estimates of
conditional volatility are obtained for each country by maximum likelihood estimation of a symmetric GARCH(1,1) and an asymmetric threshold GARCH(1,1) (TARCH). Following French, Schwert, and Stambaugh
(1987), within-month volatility is constructed by first summing the squared returns for each firm within the month, and then averaging across firms for that month.
Table 3
Specification tests of the bivariate VAR system

                                        Returns                                                         Liquidity
                                              Wald Test: first three                                           Wald Test: first three
                          First-order         autocorrelations = 0                        First-order           autocorrelations = 0
                        autocorrelation        asymptotic p-value                       autocorrelation         asymptotic p-value

Argentina                    -0.007                            0.903                            -0.017                       0.096
Brazil                       -0.030                            0.621                            -0.103                       0.067
Chile                         0.042                            0.804                            -0.227                      <0.001*
Colombia                      0.279                           0.015*                            -0.239                       0.045
Greece                       -0.095                            0.586                             0.138                       0.821
India                         0.036                            0.043                            -0.382                      <0.001*
Indonesia                     0.162                            0.084                             0.021                       0.086
Korea                         0.052                            0.854                             0.016                       0.041
Malaysia                      0.048                            0.030                            -0.096                       0.192
Mexico                        0.084                            0.800                            -0.173                       0.039
Pakistan                     -0.043                            0.761                            -0.146                       0.046
Philippines                   0.129                            0.441                            -0.135                       0.461
Portugal                      0.007                            0.793                            -0.059                       0.730
Taiwan                       -0.055                            0.390                            -0.330                      <0.001*
Thailand                      0.025                            0.160                            -0.247                       0.046
Turkey                       -0.073                            0.451                            -0.191                       0.188
Venezuela                    -0.161                            0.260                            -0.056                       0.916
Zimbabwe                     -0.066                            0.710                            -0.140                       0.261
Joint test (all countries)                                     0.937                                                        <0.001*
United States                 0.003                            0.847                            -0.031                       0.640
This table presents several specification tests based upon on the residuals from the benchmark bivariate VAR for returns and liquidity.
We report the first-order autocorrelation coefficient for each country's return and liquidity residuals. We also present asymptotic p-
values, country-by-country, for a Wald test that the first three autocorrelations are jointly zero. Finally, we also conduct a joint Wald
test where the null hypothesis is that all of the first three autocorrelations across countries are jointly zero (with 18x3=54 restrictions);
asymptotic p-values are reported. A * indicates the test statistic exceeds the Monte Carlo critical value for significance at the 5% level.
We also report similar evidence for the U.S.
Table 4
Vector autoregression of returns and liquidity
1993-2003

VAR dynamics:
                                                 Standard                                                               Standard
A0                                 Estimate        Error               A1                                  Estimate       Error
Rt           Rt-1                    0.0524       0.0419               Rt            Rt-1                   -0.0104      0.0542
             L t-1 (ZR)             -0.0531       0.0200                             L t-1 (ZR)              0.0316      0.0254
L t (ZR) Rt-1                        0.1144       0.0287               L t (ZR) Rt-1                        -0.0463      0.0402
         L t-1 (ZR)                  0.9085       0.0141                        L t-1 (ZR)                  -0.0042      0.0187

B0                                                                     B1
Rt           Rw,t-1                  0.2172       0.1659               Rt            Rw,t-1                 -0.0150      0.2064
         L w,t-1 (ZR)               -0.0535       0.0834                        L w,t-1 (ZR)                 0.0441      0.1135
L t (ZR) Rw,t-1                      0.2865       0.1309               L t (ZR) Rw,t-1                      -0.1857      0.1669
         L w,t-1 (ZR)                0.0220       0.0588                        L w,t-1 (ZR)                -0.1046      0.0803

Rt           Libt-1                  0.0170       0.0382
L t (ZR) Libt-1                     -0.0270       0.0271

U.S. VAR dynamics:
Aw                                                                     Σw
Rw,t    Rw,t-1                      0.0092        0.1001                             c11 (Return)           0.0389       0.0024
        L w,t-1 (ZR)                -0.0501       0.0381                             c21 (Return and L )    -0.0024      0.0011
L w,t (ZR) Rw,t-1                   0.0672        0.0328                             c22 (L )               0.0144       0.0009
           L w,t-1 (ZR)             0.9986        0.0144

Cholesky decomposition of variance-covariance matrix:
Σ0       c11 (Return)     0.1568 0.0043           Σ1                                 c11 (Return)           -0.0525      0.0051
             c21 (Return and L )    0.0277        0.0043                             c21 (Return and L )    -0.0041      0.0056
             c22 (L )               0.0995        0.0034                             c22 (L )               -0.0141      0.0045

Exposures to world shocks:
β0                                                                     β1
Rt       Rw,t             0.3101                  0.1822               Rt            Rw,t                    0.9111      0.2180
L t (ZR) Rw,t             0.1199                  0.0531               L t (ZR) Rw,t                        -0.1031      0.0691
Rt       L w,t (ZR)                 0.1676        0.3452               Rt       L w,t (ZR)                  -0.9232      0.4401
L t (ZR) L w,t (ZR)                 0.1319        0.3476               L t (ZR) L w,t (ZR)                   0.1217      0.4504
Local return predictability        Wald Test      p-value              Global return predictability        Wald Test      p-value
  Segmented                          7.13          0.03*                 Segmented                           1.36          0.51
  Integrated                         3.73           0.15                 Integrated                          0.49          0.78
Change in predictability             2.64           0.62               Change in predictability              3.41          0.49
This table presents bivariate VAR maximum likelihood estimates, including excess returns and L . We include the lagged
U.S. return, lagged U.S. liquidity, and lagged Liberalization Intensity indicator as additional exogenous variables, as well as
fixed effects (not reported). We parameterize the Cholesky decomposition of the VAR innovation covariance as Σ0 + LibitΣ1,
where c ij denotes the i,j th element of these two lower triangular matrices. We present Bollerslev and Wooldridge (1992)
robust standard errors. In Nov 2001, S&P/IFC removed Colombia, Pakistan, Venezuela, and Zimbabwe from the
Investability classification, forcing our investability measure to zero; we retain these values for our measure, but our evidence
is similar over the earlier period that excludes this later period.
Finally, we present several Wald tests on return predictability. For the first tests on return predictability from local factors, the
null hypothesis is that the first row of A0=0 under segmentation and A 0+A1=0 under integration. For the tests on return
predictability from global factors, the null hypothesis is that the first row of B0=0 under segmentation and B 0+B1=0 under
integration. For the tests on the overall changes in predictability in each case, the null hypotheses are that A1=0 or B1=0. The
test statistics have Χ2 distributions under the null with 2 degrees of freedom. For the predictability tests, a * indicates the test
statistic exceeds the Monte Carlo critical value for significance at the 5% level.
Table 5
Alternative VAR specifications for returns, liquidity, turnover, and dividend yields
1993-2003

Dependent variable: Rt                          Case A             Case B            Case C             Dependent variable: Rt                           Case A            Case B             Case C
A0                                                                                                      A1
L t-1 (ZR)                                      -0.0531            -0.0224           -0.0731            L t-1 (ZR)                                       0.0316            -0.0036             0.0519
                                                0.0200             0.0250            0.0267                                                              0.0254            0.0328             0.0338
DYt-1 or TOt-1                                                      0.0758            0.0116            DYt-1 or TOt-1                                                     -0.0576            -0.0084
                                                                   0.0462            0.0078                                                                                0.0602             0.0098

Dependent variable: Rt                          Case A             Case B            Case C             Dependent variable: Rt                           Case A            Case B             Case C
B0                                                                                                      B1
Rw,t-1                                           0.2172            0.2367             0.2431            Rw,t-1                                           -0.0150           -0.0454            -0.0360
                                                0.1659             0.1907            0.1997                                                              0.2064            0.2408             0.2481
L w,t-1 (ZR)                                    -0.0535            0.0695            -0.1702            L w,t-1 (ZR)                                      0.0441            0.0440             0.2201
                                                0.0834             0.1401            0.1467                                                              0.1135            0.1733             0.1814
DYw,t-1 or TOw,t-1                                                 0.3906             0.0213            DYw,t-1 or TOw,t-1                                                  0.0880            -0.0436
                                                                   0.2994            0.0413                                                                                0.3677             0.0501

Dependent variable: DYt-1 or TOt-1                                 Case B            Case C             Dependent variable: DYt-1 or TOt-1                                 Case B             Case C
A0                                                                                                      A1
Rt-1                                                               -0.0182           0.3072             Rt-1                                                               0.0250             -0.2609
                                                                   0.0162            0.1295                                                                                0.0222             0.1718
L t-1 (ZR)                                                         -0.0331           0.1268             L t-1 (ZR)                                                         0.0312             -0.1333
                                                                   0.0096            0.0798                                                                                0.0127             0.1012
DYt-1 or TOt-1                                                      0.8851           0.8075             DYt-1 or TOt-1                                                     0.0331             -0.0579
                                                                   0.0176            0.0234                                                                                0.0234             0.0294

Cholesky decomposition of variance-covariance matrix
Σ0                                 Case A       Case B                               Case C             Σ1                                               Case A            Case B             Case C
(Return and L )                                 0.0277              0.0260           0.0264             (Return and L )                                  -0.0041           -0.0015            -0.0019
                                                0.0043             0.0042            0.0042                                                              0.0056            0.0053             0.0053
(Return and DY or TO)                                              -0.0162           0.0824             (Return and DY or TO)                                              -0.0062            -0.0178
                                                                   0.0024            0.0191                                                                                0.0030             0.0233
(L and dy or TO)                                                   -0.0132           0.0824             (L and dy or TO)                                                    0.0098            -0.0178
                                                                   0.0026            0.0191                                                                                0.0034             0.0233

Local return exposures to world shocks
β0                                  Case A                         Case B            Case C             β1                                               Case A            Case B             Case C
Rw,t                                0.3101                         -0.2274           -0.2357            Rw,t                                              0.9111            0.7094             0.7209
                                    0.1822                         0.1638            0.1679                                                              0.2180            0.2061             0.2103
L w,t                               0.1199                          0.4421            0.3628            L w,t                                            -0.1031           -0.6582            -0.5464
                                    0.0531                         0.4261            0.4305                                                              0.0691            0.5373             0.5444
DYw,t-1 or TOw,t-1                                                  3.0170           -0.0391            DYw,t-1 or TOw,t-1                                                 -4.3340             0.0448
                                                                   2.7940            0.0466                                                                                3.5090             0.0586
Local return predictability                                          Wald Tests                       Global return predictability                                           Wald Tests
  Segmented                                       7.13      0.03    10.29 0.02         11.26     0.01   Segmented                                          1.36     0.51     1.59   0.66       3.51       0.32
  Integrated                                      3.73      0.15    6.56    0.09       7.63      0.05   Integrated                                         0.49     0.78     0.49   0.92       3.46       0.33
Change in predictability                          2.64      0.62    12.13 0.21         22.22     0.01 Change in predictability                             3.41     0.49     7.57   0.58       21.01      0.01
This table presents maximum likelihood estimates for three alternative VAR specifications: our benchmark bivariate VAR including excess returns and L ; a trivariate VAR including excess returns, L ,
and dividend yields; as well as a trivariate VAR including excess returns,L , and market turnover. As in Table 4, the Liberalization Intensity indicator is included in all cases as an additional exogenous
variable. Due to computation limitations, the trivariate VARs do not incorporate the full cross-country covariances implied by the factor structure; within-country covariances are included. To conserve
space, we only present select estimates of interest. We present return predictability coefficients, as well as the predictability coefficients for dividend yields and turnover. We parameterize the Cholesky
decomposition of the VAR innovation covariance as Σ 0 + LibitΣ 1, where c ij denotes the i,j th element of these two lower triangular matrices.
We highlight the contemporaneous relation between returns, L, turnover, and dividend yields (plus dividend yields and turnover with L), which are assumed to differ across liberalization state. We also
present Bollerslev and Wooldridge robust standard errors below each estimate in italics. Finally, we present several Wald tests on predictability. For the first tests on return predictability from local
factors, the null hypothesis is that the first row of A0=0 under segmentation and A0+A1=0 under integration.
For the tests on return predictability from global factors, the null hypothesis is that the first row of B0=0 under segmentation and B0+B1=0 under integration. For the tests on the overall changes in
predictability in each case, the null hypotheses are that A1=0 or B1=0. The test statistics have Χ distributions under the null with 2 (bivariate) or 3 (trivariate) degrees of freedom.
                                                                                                        2
Table 6
VARs for returns and alternative liquidity measures
1993-2003

                                   L t (ZR) Value-                    L t (PI) Equal-                  L t (PI) Value-
VAR dynamics:                         Weighted                         Weighted                         Weighted
                                           Standard                        Standard                         Standard
A0                               Estimate    Error                Estimate   Error                 Estimate   Error
Rt         Rt-1                  0.0548        0.0430              0.0496       0.0419              0.0526        0.0434
           L t-1                 -0.1321       0.0302              -0.0177      0.0150              -0.0323       0.0130
Lt         Rt-1                  0.0296        0.0393              0.0390       0.0560              0.0209        0.0915
           L t-1                 0.6415        0.0275              0.8360       0.0215              0.6185        0.0301
A1
Rt         Rt-1                  -0.0185       0.0567              -0.0074      0.0541              -0.0148       0.0576
           L t-1                 0.1255        0.0354              0.0070       0.0186              0.0263        0.0158
Lt         Rt-1                  0.0281        0.0506              0.1395       0.0841              0.1962        0.1350
           L t-1                 0.2389        0.0319              -0.0635      0.0287              0.0535        0.0390
B0
Rt         Rw,t-1                0.2157        0.2112              0.1920       0.1866              0.2125        0.2263
           L w,t-1               -0.4416       0.1736              -0.0095      0.0377              -0.0520       0.0651
Lt         Rw,t-1                0.2422        0.1712              0.0542       0.2672              1.0680        0.4258
           L w,t-1               -0.8978       0.1565              0.0319       0.0532              -0.1320       0.1472
B1
Rt         Rw,t-1                -0.0119       0.3208              0.0208       0.2162              -0.0093       0.3540
           L w,t-1               0.4042        0.2272              0.0150       0.0499              0.0433        0.0874
Lt         Rw,t-1                -0.1588       0.2090              0.0850       0.3588              -1.3180       0.5641
           L w,t-1               0.5369        0.1965              -0.0655      0.0752              -0.1294       0.2075

Rt         Libt-1                0.0805        0.0322              -0.0070      0.0345               0.0204       0.0273
Lt         Libt-1                0.1835        0.0289              -0.0853      0.0511               0.1664       0.0647

Cholesky decomposition of variance-covariance matrix:
Σ0      c11 (Return)    0.1554     0.0042         0.1571                        0.0043               0.1567       0.0043
           c21 (Return and L )   0.0331        0.0059              0.0013       0.0086               0.0415       0.0138
           c22 (L )              0.1404        0.0044              0.1963       0.0072              0.3180        0.0105
Σ1         c11 (Return)          -0.0511       0.0051              -0.0527      0.0051              -0.0524       0.0051
           c21 (Return and L )   -0.0251       0.0072              0.0271       0.0117              -0.0286       0.0186
           c22 (L )              -0.0498       0.0054              0.0107       0.0098               0.0082       0.0140

U.S. VAR dynamics:
Aw
Rw,t    Rw,t-1                   0.0085        0.1048              0.0059       0.0832              0.0072        0.1067
           L w,t-1               -0.0974       0.0713              -0.0228      0.0177              -0.0405       0.0303
L w,t      Rw,t-1                0.0226        0.0192              0.2780       0.0875              0.1021        0.0584
           L w,t-1               0.9876        0.0155              0.9936       0.0178              0.9784        0.0201

Σw         c11 (Return)          0.0396        0.0025              0.0392       0.0024               0.0395       0.0024
           c21 (Return and L )   -0.0013       0.0008              -0.0124      0.0030              -0.0048       0.0020
           c22 (L )              0.0084        0.0005              0.0369       0.0023               0.0255       0.0016

Exposures to world shocks:
β0
Rt      Rw,t            0.3430                 0.1829              0.3792       0.1864              0.3745        0.1809
Lt      Rw,t            0.0785                 0.0626              0.0244       0.1065              0.2457        0.1597
Rt      L w,t           -0.6951                0.7131              -0.1964      0.1470              -0.3766       0.2247
Lt      L w,t           -0.4985                0.6998              0.1255       0.1287              -0.2033       0.5554
β1
Rt      Rw,t            0.9112                 0.2224              0.8521       0.2257              0.8869        0.2169
Lt      Rw,t            -0.0656                0.0801              0.0890       0.1465              -0.2197       0.2047
Rt      L w,t           -0.3017                1.1110              -0.2421      0.1945              0.0106        0.2853
Lt      L w,t           0.9078                 0.8964              0.0004       0.1087              0.3593        0.7890
This table presents bivariate VAR maximum likelihood estimates, including excess returns and L . In contrast to the
benchmark case presented in Table 3, we consider three alternative liquidity measures: value-weighted zero return, equally-
weighted price impact, and value-weigthed price impact. We include the lagged U.S. return, lagged U.S. liquidity, and
lagged Liberalization Intensity indicator as additional exogenous variables, as well as fixed effects (not reported). We
parameterize the Cholesky decomposition of the VAR innovation covariance as Σ0 + LibitΣ1, where c ij denotes the i,j th
element of these two lower triangular matrices. We present Bollerslev and Wooldridge (1992) robust standard errors.
Table 7
Liquidity pricing
1993-2003
                                                                                                                           Mixed (value-
  Panel A:                                                                        Mixed (no              Mixed (no          weighted                       Panel B:
 Theoretical            Full               Full                                transaction cost          systematic          liquidity                    Unrestricted          Model (no            Model (with liberalization)
   models           integration        segmentation            Mixed             adjustment)              liquidity)        measure)                        models            liberalization)        segmented       integrated

       v0                                  0.0064              0.0217                                       -0.0044             0.0002                           v                 -0.0089             0.0001              -0.0052
                                          (0.0024)            (0.0083)                                     (0.0039)            (0.0053)                                           (0.0092)            (0.0246)            (0.0277)
                                                                                                                                                                θ
                                                                                                                                                                    1
       v1              -0.0028                                 -0.0217                                      0.0047              0.0030                                              0.362              -0.237               -0.259
                      (0.0015)                                (0.0088)                                     (0.0043)            (0.0060)                                            (0.481)            (0.430)              (0.579)
       γs                                   0.268               -0.420                -0.957                0.086                -0.373                         θ2                  -1.877             -1.116               -0.060
                                           (0.215)             (0.600)               (0.630)               (0.232)              (0.429)                                            (0.881)            (1.890)              (2.316)
                                                                                                                                                                θ
                                                                                                                                                                    3
      γL ,s                                 2.660               9.577                 5.531                                      4.518                                              4.652             11.850                -9.277
                                           (0.675)             (2.348)               (1.723)                                    (1.611)                                            (1.584)            (3.139)              (4.136)
       γw              2.292*                                  2.292*                2.292*                2.678*               2.848*                          θ4                  5.894              -0.598               5.644
                       (1.106)                                 (1.106)               (1.106)               (1.128)              (1.100)                                            (3.943)            (9.087)             (11.000)
     γL ,w             35.91*                                  35.91*                35.91*                                     57.24*                          θ5                 34.710              15.010              12.630
                      (18.450)                                (18.450)              (18.450)                                   (41.080)                                           (15.820)            (36.710)            (43.730)
                                                                                                                                                                θ
                                                                                                                                                                    6
                                                                                                                                                                                   -40.550             -6.269              -30.060
                                                                                                                                                                                  (17.440)            (31.380)            (41.640)
                                                                                                                                                                θ
                                                                                                                                                                    7
                                                                                                                                                                                    -9.198            -13.410              17.730
                                                                                                                                                                                   (4.258)            (5.865)              (8.929)


    J -Test             302.8               227.6               182.9                247.9                  254.0                217.0                        J -Test               205.9                         117.2
     p-value           <0.001              <0.001              <0.001                <0.001                <0.001               <0.001                         p-value             <0.001                         <0.001

 HJ-distance            123.0                94.0               128.2                 121.1                  87.6                96.7                      HJ-distance              149.9                         183.6
This table presents evidence on liquidity pricing effects. Panel A contains evidence on our theoretical models: full integration, full segmentation, and mixed. The * indicates that the prices of world market and liquidity risk, γw and
γL ,w, are pre-estimated using GMM from the US CRSP data over 1962-2003; for the pre-estimation, we set v w = 0. Taken the US estimates as given, we estimate each model using the investability measure to represent financial
integration for the mixed model. We also consider three alternative mixed models that allow both global and local risk sources. In the first and second, we consider alternatives where we shut down either the gross to net return
transaction costs adjustments or the prices of risks associated with local and global systematic liquidity, respectively. Finally, we also estimate the general mixed model, but we replace the equally weighted zero return liquidity
measure with the value-weighted counterpart. In Panel B, we present estimates for two unrestricted model: one where all prices of risk are constant across liberalization state, and the other where prices of risk vary.
In all cases, we report the standard test of over-identifying restrictions, and we also consider a comparison across models by evaluating the Hansen and Jagannathan (1991) squared-distance metric. Asymptotic standard errors are
reported in parantheses.
Appendix Table
Monte Carlo analysis of return predictability

                                                DGP: no return
                                              predictability (null)
                                              Rt+1 on LIQ t
                                           CoefficientT-statistic
                            Median          -0.0109     -0.51
                            Mean            -0.0110     -0.51
                            2.5%            -0.0546     -2.37
                            5.0%            -0.0450     -2.14
                            95.0%           0.0220      1.04
                            97.5%           0.0277      1.39
For our sample of 18 emerging markets, plus the U.S., we simulate from the estimated bivariate
VAR, including returns and liquidity, except that under the null, returns are not predicted by
lagged variables. However, the innovations of all variables are allowed to be correlated as in
the observed data within but not across emerging markets. The observed fixed effects are
randomized across the sample for each replication. We employ the observed liberalization
indicators for each replication. For each replication, we then estimate the unconstrained
VAR(1) for returns and liquidity using our pooled MLE methodology. This table presents the
mean and three relevant percentiles of the empirical distribution for the coefficients and robust t -
statistics of excess returns on lagged LIQ.
                                 Figure 1a
  Comparison of Transaction Costs/Liquidity Measures using U.S. Data

                  Correlation:
                  Amihud-Zeros=0.40
                                                         Correlation:
                                                         Hasbrouck-Zeros=0.42
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969
1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979
1980
1981
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
                                                           Correlation:
                                                           Jones-Zeros=0.30




Zero Returns          Hasbrouck (2003)          Amihud (2002)                 Jones (2001)
                                             Figure 1b
Comparison of Transaction Costs/Liquidity Measures using U.S. Data: Zero Volume

                               Correlation:
                               Amihud-Zeros=0.91

                                                                      Correlation:
                                                                      Hasbrouck-Zeros=0.81
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969
1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979
1980
1981
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
                                                               Correlation:
                                                               Jones-Zeros=0.35




  Zero Returns (Zero Volume)             Hasbrouck (2003)   Amihud (2001)          Jones (2001)
