NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ESTABLISHING CREDIBILITY:
THE ROLE OF FOREIGN ADVISORS
Sebastian Edwards
Working Paper 11429
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11429
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2005

This is a revised version of a paper presented at the National Bureau of Economic Research’s Inter-American
Seminar on Economics to be held at the Colegio de Mexico, December 2-4, 2004. I thank Roberto Alvarez
for his comments and assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by Sebastian Edwards. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Establishing Credibility: The Role of Foreign Advisors
Sebastian Edwards
NBER Working Paper No. 11429
June 2005
JEL No. F30, F32
ABSTRACT
In this paper I analyze the role of foreign advisors in stabilization programs. I discuss from an
analytical perspective why foreigners may help a developing country's government put in place a
successful stabilization program. This framework is used to analyze Chile's experience with antiinflationary policies in the mid 1950s. In 1955-58 Chile implemented a stabilization package with
the advice of the U.S. consulting firm of Klein-Saks. The Klein-Saks program took place in a period
of acute political confrontation. After what was considered to be an initial success -- inflation
declined from 85% in 1955 to 17% in 1957 -- the program failed to achieve durable price stability.
I argue that the foreign advisors of the Klein-Saks Mission gave initial credibility to the stabilization
program launched in 1955. But providing initial credibility was not enough to ensure success.
Congress failed to act decisively on the fiscal front. Consequently the fiscal imbalances that had
plagued Chile for a long time were reduced, but not eliminated. I present empirical results on the
evolution of inflation, exchange rates and interest rates that support my historical analysis.
Sebastian Edwards
UCLA Anderson Graduate School of Business
110 Westwood Plaza, Suite C508
Box 951481
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481
and NBER
sebastian.edwards@anderson.ucla.edu

1

I.

Introduction
The adoption of stabilization programs is usually a painful process, both

politically and economically. History is replete with instances where, even at the light of
obvious and flagrant macroeconomics disequilibria, the implementation of stabilization
programs is significantly delayed. Why do policymakers and/or politicians prefer to live
with growing inflationary pressures and implement price and other forms of highly
inefficient controls, instead of tackling the roots of macroeconomic imbalances? Is the
prolongation of inflation the consequence of mistaken views on the mechanics of fiscal
deficits and money creation, or is it the unavoidable result of the political game? Why
after months of apparent political stalemate, all of a sudden stabilization programs that
closely resemble others proposed earlier are adopted? These questions are at the heart of
the political economy of stabilization and inflationary finance.1 In recent years the
analysis of these issues has attained new interest, as a number of authors have applied the
tools of game theory to the study of macroeconomic policymaking. Although important
theoretical progress has been achieved in the explanation of some of these phenomena,
the amount of empirical and historical work on the subject is still rather limited.2
The purpose of this paper is to investigate an important historical stabilization
episode in Chile, one of the countries with the longest history of chronic inflation in the
world. Starting in the late 19th century, Chile suffered recurrent and increasingly
frequent inflationary outbursts. Of the many stabilization programs adopted to tackle this
problem, the 1955-58 package implemented with the advice of the U.S. consulting firm
of Klein-Saks, is, undoubtedly, one of the most fascinating ones.3 Its interest is based on
a number of factors: first, at the time the program was put in place inflation had reached
the extremely high annual level (for that time) of 85% (see Table 1). Second, the policies
adopted contradicted the newly dominant orthodoxy in Latin America that associated

1Latin

American debates on inflation and stabilization have traditionally emphasized political economy
angles. It is only recently, however, that these issues have begun to be tackled using a formal economics
framework.
2

For a masterful presentation of recent advances on the political economy of macroeconomics policy
making see Drazen (2000).
3It is certainly a stabilization attempt that has attracted considerable attention from academic economists.
See, for example, Hirshman (1963), Felix (1960), Edwards (1986).

2

inflation to structural problems.4 Third, the Klein-Saks program took place in a period of
acute political confrontation. Fourth, the episode is interesting because after what was
considered to be an initial success -- inflation declined to 38% in 1956, and was further
reduced to 17% in 1957 -- the program failed to achieve durable price stability (see
Figure 1). Finally, what makes this episode particularly noteworthy is that the program
proposed by the Klein-Saks mission was very similar to anti-inflationary plans that had
been previously elaborated by several government agencies, including the Ministry of
Finance and the Central Bank, in the period 1954-55. However, while these earlier
stabilization efforts were rejected by Congress, most (but not all) of the Mission’s
program was approved by Congress. This characteristic of the episodes raises the issue
of the role of foreign advisors in the design (and implementation) of economic policy.
In this paper I argue that the foreign advisors of the Klein-Saks Mission gave
initial credibility to the stabilization program launched in 1955. These foreign advisors
played the role of independent, non-partisan, technocratic arbiters. It was precisely
because they were foreigners that they could raise above the political fray, and suggest a
specific program, whose main components were rapidly approved by a highly divided
Congress. The fact that the program was very similar to one proposed earlier by the
government – and that was rejected by Congress -- underscores the view that, while
locals are suspect of being excessively partisan, foreigners are often (but not always) seen
as independent policy brokers. But providing initial credibility was not enough to ensure
success. In spite of supporting trade reform, foreign exchange rate reform, and the deindexation of wages, Congress failed to act decisively on the fiscal front. Consequently
the fiscal imbalances that had plagued Chile for a long time were reduced, but not
eliminated. In 1957 a sharp drop in the international price of copper – the country’s main
export – resulted in a major decline in fiscal revenue and in an increase in the fiscal
deficit. The Mission recommended a series of belt-tightening measures, but politicians
had had enough of orthodoxy. No adjustment was made, and inflationary expectations
once again shifted for the worse. By October of 1958 the Mission had left the country,
and an opportunity for achieving stability had been lost.

4On

the structuralist view of inflation see, for example, Sunkel (1958).

3

The rest of the paper is organized as follows: In Section II I provide a broad
historical background on the Ibañez del Campo presidency in Chile during 1952-1958. In
Section III I present the analytical framework for interpreting the Klein-Saks episode.
This framework is based on the modern theory of credibility, and makes use of concepts
such as war of attrition and external enforcers. Section IV focuses on Chile’s inflationary
experience. Here I discuss in great detail economic conditions in the early 1950’s and I
focus on the mechanisms behind the country’s increasing rate of inflation. I discuss
President Ibañez del Campo original populist program, and I deal with two failed
stabilization programs implemented during the early 1950s. In Section V I discuss in
detail the program proposed by the Klein-Saks Mission, focusing on two of its main
components: wage de-indexation and the reform of the exchange rate system. In Section
VI I focus on the role played by the Klein-Saks Mission in the stabilization effort
launched in late 1955. In this part of the paper I concentrate on three inter-related issues:
First, I analyze whether the diagnosis of inflation causes differed significantly from
previous analyses. That is, I investigate whether from a purely technical perspective the
Mission provided new approaches and insights. Second, I explore the extent to which the
Mission'
s program was credible; more specifically, I investigate the presence of the
external advisors provided a pre-commitment technology. And third, I use congressional
records and correspondence files to analyze the political process -- including the
formation of alliances and coalitions -- that led in early 1956 to the adoption of the socalled “stabilization package”. In Section VII I use time series econometric techniques
to analyze whether the work Mission’s Stabilization Program was credible to the public.
Finally, in Section VIII I present some concluding remarks.
II.

Historical Background
In 1952 former army general Carlos Ibañez del Campo was elected president of

Chile by a significant margin.5 His campaign had been carried out on the basis of a “new
beginning” -- he was called by his supporters “the General of Hope” (El General de la
Esperanza) -- and as a reaction against the political establishment. He was supported by
5Ibañez

del Campo obtained 47% of the votes. The right-wing candidate Arturo Matte got 28%, while the
radical Pedro Enrique Alfonso obtained 20%. The socialist candidate, and future president, Salvador
Allende obtained less than 6%.

4

a loosely knit coalition of populists, nationalists and socialists. The general himself,
however, was not a member of any political party, and from the very beginning of his
campaign stated his intentions of being highly independent from the parties. His
program’s rhetoric was decisively populist and had an anti-establishment content. The
presence of socialists in the coalition was not window dressing; they participated in the
first Ibañez del Campo cabinet with three ministers, including finance.6 As time
progressed however, it became apparent that Ibañez del Campo personalistic approach to
government was increasingly incompatible with the socialist program. In October of
1953, less than a year after Ibañez del Campo had taken office, the socialist party
abandoned the governing coalition.7
Carlos Ibañez del Campo inherited a country with serious macroeconomic
disequilibria, stemming mostly from significant fiscal imbalances financed by the Central
Bank. During the first two years of the Ibañez del Campo presidency no serious attempt
at fighting inflation was made. Quite the contrary, influenced by a combination of
populist views and an approach to monetary policy based on the “real bills doctrine,”
monetary policy became increasingly lax, generating a rapid acceleration of inflation.
The propagation of price increases was greatly helped by the existence of a broad-based
wage indexation system that mandated wage adjustments by the amount of accumulated
past inflation.8
After a failed stabilization attempt, in 1955 inflation surged towards the 100%
level. Politically, Ibañez del Campo became increasingly isolated as both the right
(conservative and liberal), the centrist Radical Party and the left stepped up their
opposition tactics. Labor unrest was mounting and a generalized political dissatisfaction
was apparent. It was at this juncture of Chile’s political and economic history that the
men of the Klein-Saks mission arrived in Chile.9 Their task was to tame inflation, attain
stability, and help set the stage for a recovery program.

6

In Chile the socialist party had strong Marxist inclinations. It was not a social democratic party.
for example, Ampuero (1969) and Jobet (1971).

7See,

8This

process of backward looking indexation was informally initiated in the late 1950s and legalized
through Law 10,343 in mid-1952.
9The

Mission was hired in July 1955; the five-man team arrived in Santiago in September. Their first
memorandum was delivered to the president in November. The mission was led by Mr. Preston Carter, a

5

The emphasis in this paper is not on the actual policies and results of the KleinSaks mission, but rather on the political economy process that led to the hiring of these
consultants and to the (at least partial) adoption of their policies. That is, I am interested
in understanding what was the role of the external advisors, and, in particular, whether
their advice helped the Ibañez del Campo administration solve its credibility and
commitment problem. I also investigate whether the fact that the Mission was hired
affected how different players perceived the costs of delaying the resolution of the
inflationary pressures.
III.

The Basic Analytics of the Political Economy of Inflation and Stabilization
Since the early 1990s there has been renewed interest in analyzing the political

economy dimensions of macroeconomics policymaking. Many of these theoretical
developments have formally used game theory to describe the way in which different
actors interplay in the policymaking process. The purpose of this section is to provide an
analytical framework for the historical analysis that follows. I briefly review some of the
most important features of the theoretical literature on inflation, placing particular
emphasis on stabilization programs.
Generally speaking, political economy models of macroeconomic policymaking
stress the distributional impact of both inflation and stabilization. The existence of
distributional and political conflict fuels the inflationary process. There are many
possible channels through which political conflict may result in higher inflation.
Cuikerman, Edwards and Tabellini (1991), for instance, have suggested a model where
politicians have different preferences and act strategically. This strategic interaction
results in an inefficient tax system, and in the inflationary finance of the fiscal deficit. In
this type of models, a higher degree of political instability will result in higher seignorage
and higher inflation; a greater degree of political polarization – measured as the
difference in political parties’ preferences --, will also result in higher inflation.
Interestingly, this approach not only explains the origin of inflation, but it also
provides insights about the timing of the stabilization. In this framework, stabilizing the
man with ample practical experience both in the private and government sector. His colorful Spanish and
straightforward manners rapidly established him as a trusted advisor. See Correa Prieto (1962).

6

price level means changing the political status-quo. This, in turn, may generate new
disputes among political groups about the share of the burden of the fiscal adjustment.
These political disputes are likely to take the form of a “war of attrition,” during which
all the conflicting groups wait for one of them to finally give up. The group that “blinks
first” is forced to bear a disproportionate burden of the adjustment.10 This “war of
attrition” results in a delay of the stabilization. A particularly interesting feature of these
models is that this delay takes place even in situations where there is general agreement
among conflicting groups about the overall form of the adjustment policies needed to
stop inflationary pressures. Of course, postponing stabilization will usually increase the
size of the adjustment effort needed, and thus exacerbates the political conflict.11
Existing theoretical models based on the war of attrition concept have been quite
general, and have not always specified the precise mechanism (or mechanisms) through
which the conflict finally is resolved. What makes one of the players retreat? Why at
some point the perceived cost of waiting exceeds the benefit? What is the role of
political negotiations? Can a third party, or mediator, help bring the conflict to a faster
end? Addressing these issues at a theoretical level is well beyond the scope of this paper.
However, in discussing and interpreting the Klein-Saks episode I consider some
(possible) complications of the straightforward war of attrition model.
A somewhat different, although not contradictory, approach to inflation and
stabilization is based on the role of institutions and credibility. After the rational
expectations revolution, many authors emphasized the importance of expectations during
stabilization episodes. A number of them, and most notably Sargent, concluded that in
order to put an end to any inflationary process, a “credible” change of the monetary and
fiscal regimes was needed.12 To the extent that stabilization is not credible -- that is, the
stabilization program is not expected to achieve the intended results -- the costs of
adjustment escalate and the probability of a successful stabilization becomes smaller.13
This view led naturally to look for ways of modifying and influencing expectations
10For

more details on this outcome, see Alesina and Drazen (1989), and Drazen (2000).

11For

an early study on the effects of a postponed adjustment, see, Edwards and Montiel (1990). See also
Drazen (2000).
12This

was the message of Sargent (1983,1986).

13Along

similar lines see Dornbusch (1991).

7

during a stabilization program. The role of “policy announcements” has been analyzed as
possible means of affecting inflationary expectations. In this connection, however, it has
been stressed that in order for these announcements to be “credible” -- and thus to
actually affect expectations -- it is necessary for the government to be able to precommit
itself to a given course of action. This, of course, turns out to be difficult to do, since
societies many times lack the institutional setup required for government to credibly
precommit itself.
Credibility-based models have also emphasized the role of reputation as a
substitute for precommitment. According to this approach the desire of governments to
preserve their reputation -- or even, possibly, to improve it -- provides them with a
constrained set of policy options.14 Some authors have suggested that expectations can
be coordinated and that credibility can be established if it is supported by an external
institution, such as the League of Nations in the 1920s and the International Monetary
Fund after 1950.15 The reason is that by granting its “seal of approval” to a stabilization
plan, an external institution enhances the confidence in the program. In principle, this
“seal of approval” is independent of the financing that the external institution can
provide.16 In fact, the presence of external involvement can endow the stabilizing
government with a “commitment technology” that gives an assurance that the announced
program will indeed be fully carried out.
IV.

Inflation in the Early 1950s in Chile
In this section I provide some background information on the Chilean inflationary

process before the arrival of the Klein-Saks Mission. I concentrate on the path leading to
very rapid inflation in 1954-55 and I discuss the characteristics of the most important
stabilization attempts undertaken during the years prior to the arrival of the Mission.

14See

Persson and Tabellini (1990, 2000).

15See

Sachs (1989), Edwards (1989) and Santaella (1993).

16Accounts

of the support given by external credits and loans to stabilizing countries are in the League of
Nations (1946), Dornbusch and Fischer (1986) and Persson and Tabellini (2000). On the IMF as a provider
of a “seal of approval” see Boughton (2002, 2003) and Vreeland (2003).

8

IV.1

The End of the “Radical” Presidencies
During the years 1938 to 1952 the centrist Radical Party was the dominant

political force in Chile. Throughout this period the country underwent a rapid
industrialization process based on import substitution policies, and experienced a fairly
rapid rate of growth.17 Gabriel Gonzalez-Videla, the third Radical President, came into
power in 1946 supported by a coalition of Radicals, Socialists, and Communists. The
Communist Party, however, had a short stay in office: in 1948 the so-called “Law of
Defense of Democracy,” which outlawed the Communist Party was enacted. For the rest
of its period, Gonzalez-Videla governed with the support of the rightist liberal and
conservative parties.
During the Gonzalez-Videla presidency, Chile experienced increasingly large
macroeconomic imbalances that led to rapid inflation, low savings and investment and
recurrent external sector difficulties. Wages were under continuous pressure, monetary
policy was dominated by supporters of the “real bills doctrine” that believed that money
creation channeled towards industry was not inflationary, and public finances became
extremely fragile. In spite of the fact that after the expulsion of the communists, the
Ministry of Finance was controlled by austere conservative politicians, the rate of money
creation was extremely high. For instance, between 1945 and 1951 the stock of highpowered money increased at a rate that exceeded 30% per year.18
These inflationary pressures resulted in two important macroeconomic
developments that shaped many of the policies that were to be taken in the next ten years:
first, in order to deal with external sector imbalances and to fight tendencies towards real
exchange rate overvaluation, a system of multiple nominal exchange rates was
developed. While during the first year of the Gabriel Gonzalez-Videla there were three
official exchange rates ranging from 37 to 31 pesos per U.S. dollar, by 1952 the number
of official rates had increased to five with their range going from 19.37 to 60 pesos per

17See,
18

for instance, Mamalakis (1976).

The two most important Finance Ministers were Jorge Alessandri (who in 1958 became President of the
Republic) and Carlos Vial. As Felix (1960), they did not always agree on the causes behind the country’s
rapidly increasing rate of inflation.

9

U.S. dollar (see Table 2).19 However, in spite of the adoption of this discriminatory
exchange rate system and of the imposition of generalized controls and trade restrictions,
the external sector was under continuous pressure during this period. Not surprisingly,
the foreign exchange parallel (or black) market premium increased from a level of around
30% in 1946 to almost 400% towards the end of the Gonzalez-Videla administration (see
Figure 2). As a result of this situation, increasing amounts of resources left the country in
the form of capital flight.20
The second important macroeconomic development of this period was the
institutionalization of a wage rate indexation mechanism. As inflation increased, a 1941
law mandating the yearly adjustment of minimum wages for white collar workers became
a more and more important piece of the existing economic legislation. Although this law
did not specify all the details of this adjustment process -- it did not say, for example, in
what percentage wages should be adjusted relative to past inflation --, actual mandated
wage increases became de facto fully linked to past inflation. Moreover, in some years
(1949-50, for instance) the wage adjustment decreed by the government greatly exceeded
accumulated inflation during the preceding year.21 These automatic wage adjustments
fed back into prices, generating a high self-feeding process that was constantly validated
by the Central Bank. The process became more entrenched in late 1952, when a law
mandating an automatic backward-looking wage adjustment for public sector wages of
90% of past inflation was enacted. Initially this legislation applied only to public
servants. By 1954, however, its reach had increased greatly; approximately half a million
public and private sector workers’ salaries were adjusted according to the mechanism
determined by this law.
The combination of this indexation mechanism with the increasing importance of
the parallel market for foreign exchange resulted in a highly inertial inflationary process,
as well as important distortions in the external sector. The contribution of the indexation
19These

rates were “official” in the sense of being sanctioned by the authorities. However, one of them
only received the technical name of “official exchange rate.” What made things more complicated was that
there were also a number of "mixed" rates, corresponding to weighted averages of the six “official” rates.
20See,

for example, the United Nation'
s 1951 Technical Assistance report on Chile'
s inflation (p. 3). This
report was written by a team of foreign experts led by Erik Lindahl from the University of Upsala.
21See

Hirshman (1963). The Chilean indexation scheme of this period is described, in a comparative
setting, in Sen Gupta (1958).

10

mechanism to inflation was understood early on by many (but not all) Chilean
economists. In fact, in the period 1949-55 the elimination, or at least partial control, of
this indexation procedure was at the center of policy discussion and was considered an
essential component of most stabilization attempts. In 1949 the government requested
two foreign advisory reports on the causes of inflation and on possible ways to stop it.
Although these two reports -- by a United Nations team and by the staff of the
International Monetary Fund -- differed in many respects, they agreed that an elimination
of the inflationary pressure would require dealing with wage adjustments.22
IV.2

Ibañez del Campo’s Populist Program
In 1952 Carlos Ibañez del Campo became the candidate of the disillusioned. The

72 year old retired army general captured voters’ frustration and disappointment with the
traditional political parties. Not being himself a member of a political party, he was
supported by a loose coalition of personal followers (Ibañistas), nationalists (Partido
Agrario Laboristas, (PAL) and Socialists. From early on the Agrario Laboristas became
the backbone of the coalition, helping determine the main social, foreign and economic
policies.23
Although during the presidential campaign Ibañez del Campo was (deliberately)
vague regarding the details of his economic program, his discourse had a clear populist
tone.24 He promised to eliminate inflation, to increase the standard of living, to create a
strong government-owned bank, and to put an end to corruption. The Partido Agrario
Laborista (PAL), however, had a more clearly defined economic program that explicitly
called for increased subsidized credit for productive purposes; higher public investment
in transportation and other forms of infrastructure, modernization of agriculture, the
encouragement of exports, and the creation of a heavy industry.25
After taking power on November, 1952, Ibañez del Campo named Juan B.
Rosetti, a socialist, to the Ministry of Finance. In spite of the government'
s statements
22These

two reports differed, however, in their emphasis. While the Fund considered the elimination of
indexation as the center of a stabilization program, the U.N. proposal revolved around a price freeze and an
obligatory savings scheme.
23

On the PAL, see Garay Vera (1990).

24

Interestingly enough, and contrary to other populist experiences in Latin America, in addition to
courting the urban masses, Ibañez del Campo sought (and obtained) support among the rural voters.
25

On the PAL economic program see Garay Vera (1990).

11

that defeating inflation was a high priority, during the period 1952-55 the fiscal deficit
and money creation reached record proportions.26 Wage increases, higher transfers, and
growing bank credit were rapidly feeding higher price increases. Between December of
1951 and December of 1954 the Central Bank credit to the government increased by
430% (see Figure 3 on monetary growth).
In 1953, Minister of Finance Felipe Herrera, a socialist who later became the
president of the Interamerican Development Bank, put together a stabilization program
based on a devaluation of the peso, credit controls, and higher income taxes. No effort
however was made to put an end to the wage indexation scheme. Quite on the contrary,
the devaluation -- most commercial transactions became subject to a 110 pesos per dollar
rate -- was accompanied by a 15% increase in the so-called Family-Allowance, a per head
bonus paid to each worker. Moreover, the program was not fully implemented; after an
intense debate, Congress refused to increase taxes, with inflation continuing its rapid
acceleration.
Instead of following up on the Herrera program and trying to work out a political
solution to the impasse, President Ibañez del Campo decided to alter the course of
economic policy. Herrera was replaced by an Ibañez del Campo supporter of clear
populist inclinations, who immediately eliminated credit controls, increased government
expenditures and wage adjustments.27 Undoubtedly Ibañez del Campo'
s own personality
affected the nature of the inflationary process. His sudden changes of heart, his political
gyrations and his stubborn independence from political and economic advisors, more
often than not added fuel to inflation.
A second stabilization attempt took place in mid-1954 under the leadership of
Jorge Prat, a nationalist politician that had been a member of the conservative party until
1947. This program was even broader and more ambitious than that proposed by Felipe
Herrera. Its main components included:
•

government austerity through lower expenditures;

•

a new devaluation;

26

Ffrench-Davis (1973) points out that the rate of money expansion during this period had only been
exceeded during the Socialist Republic of 1932.
27See

Hirshman (1963) and Ffrench-Davis (1973) on this episode.

12

•

higher taxes;

•

the reestablishment of credit controls;

•

reforming the system of wage indexation by reducing the extent of the
adjustment to 60% of accumulated past inflation;

•

increasing the coverage of the minimum wage;

•

imposing a forced profits reinvestment policy on corporations.

This program -- which was known as the “Program of Economic Rectification”
(Programa de Rectficación Económica) -- received some initial political support by
Congress, and some of its components including the devaluation and a partial adjustment
of taxes were undertaken. Once again, however, the complete program was not approved
by Congress, and once again taxes and wages were at the heart of the political impasse:
the right, the radicals and the left voted against tax increases, and the wage de-indexation
rules. At that point, political bickering increased significantly, with the opposition parties
stepping up their anti-government campaign. In December, Congress stripped the
government of executive privileges and put an end to a state of emergency imposed
earlier that year. A succession of Finance Ministers went in and out of office in rapid
succession.28 The leftist opposition rapidly began to gather momentum, and major labor
conflicts ensued. A number of major strikes took place, with political dissatisfaction
becoming ever more apparent. The government was clearly on the defensive.
In January 1955, under the fifth Minister of Finance of the Ibañez del Campo
administration, a 60% generalized wage adjustment was granted. In that month inflation
reached an annual rate of almost 57% and the premium in the parallel market for foreign
exchange surpassed the 70% mark, almost doubling from its level in November of 1954
when the Prat devaluation was engineered.
As the year 1955 began, the political situation became increasingly fragile, with a
group of Ibañez del Campo supporters -- including the so-called “grey wolves” (lobos
grises) -- discussing with some high military officers -- the “Straight Line” (Linea Recta)
group -- the possibility of staging a coup that would have dissolved Congress, while
28

A drastic decline in the price of copper, made things more complicated, Zahler (1978). See FfrenchDavis (1973).

13

retaining Ibañez del Campo as the head of state. The extent of the plot, and the
vulnerability of the democratic system, became starkly clear when Senator Guillermo
Izquierdo, the Chairman of the Partido Agrario Laborista, recognized that he himself had
been involved in discussions with the military from “Straight Line” group.29
V.

The Klein-Saks Mission: Diagnosis and Policy Recommendations
On July of 1955 the government of Chile hired the Klein-Saks consulting firm to

evaluate the economic conditions of the country and to provide a set of recommendations
regarding anti-inflationary policy.30 Two months later the five men mission arrived in
Santiago for what was originally supposed to be a six-month visit. Things, however,
were not so simple; the Mission worked continuously in Chile until September of 1958.
By then, however, inflation had not been tamed. In October of 1958 the 12 months rate
of inflation was 16%, significantly higher than what the Mission had expected when it
had arrived in Chile three years earlier. 31 But the worst was yet to come. By December
1958 inflation had climbed to 33%, and by mid-1959 it was almost 45%. By then the
Klein-Saks Mission had been added to a long list of Chile’s failed stabilization programs.
In this section I discuss the diagnosis made by the Mission, as well as its original
policy recommendations. I also analyze the political discussion that surrounded the first
year of the Mission’s work. Although the main interest of this paper is on the adoption
and implementation of the Mission’s program, in subsection V.2 I briefly deal with the
final phases of the program, and I discuss the reasons behind its eventual failure.
V.1

Diagnosis
Approximately 45 days after its arrival, on November 19, 1955 the Mission

delivered its first policy memorandum to President Ibañez del Campo, stating its overall
view on the economic conditions, and sketching some of its most important policy
recommendations. The Mission'
s diagnosis of Chile’s inflationary pressures revolved
29See

Garay Vera (1990, p. 178).

30

Government leaders debated intensively on who could provide the best advice. The candidates included
Dr. Dagmar Schacht, of Nazi fame, and the French economist Pierre Mendes-France. A number of
elements seem to have determined the selection of the Klein-Saks group, including the fact that this was a
U.S. firm and that it had help implementing a successful (or so perceived) program in Peru in 1949.
31

According to the Mission’s program, price stability would have beenn achieved by 1958-59. See
Ffrench-Davis (1973, p. 27).

14

around four basic areas: (1) fiscal deficit, (2) monetary expansion, (3) exchange rate
policy, and (4) wage rate policy.
The Mission forcefully argued that the state of government finances and, in
particular, the extremely high fiscal deficit was at the heart of the inflationary process. It
was suggested that this problem was to be tackled by a combination of higher revenues,
to be obtained via the combination of a tax reform that would include stiff penalties for
tax evasion and payment delays, and reduced expenditures. Among the specific measures
recommended to cut down public expenditures the Mission included the “suppression of
foreign travel by public functionaries,” the “elimination, if possible, of subsidies to public
railways, maritime freight, airlines, buses, and electricity”, and the reduction (again if
possible) “of the acquisition of arms and weapons.”32
The Mission also pointed out that while fiscal laxity was the main cause of
inflation, price increases themselves had helped to further weaken the efficiency of the
tax system:33
“The entire tax system had become distorted, with the incidence of taxes
being far different from the intentions of the legislators. All taxes fixed in
numbers of peso and all taxes paid with a time lag had a lesser incidence
than had been intended ... As a consequence tax revenue had become
insufficient to finance even a constant level of real expenditures...” (Klein &
Saks, 1958, p. 3) [Emphasis added].
Of course, the statement in italics means that the Mission recognized what in time
has come to be known as the Olivera-Tanzi effect: lagged tax collection in an
inflationary environment can greatly erode tax revenues. Consequently, an important
recommendation of the Mission was to replace specific taxes for ad-valorem ones and to
reduce the tax collection lag.
With respect to credit policy, the Mission argued that excessive money creation,
mostly (but not exclusively) devoted to finance government expenditures constituted an
important element fueling inflation. Their monetary analysis was traditional and strictly
32Letter
33Most

from the Mission to the President of the Republic dated November 19, 1955.

letters and memoranda from the Mission to the government were in Spanish. This and other quotes
correspond to my own translation.

15

based on the quantity theory of money. For instance, in evaluating Chile'
s capacity to
conduct noninflationary monetary creation a Mission report stated:34
“Considering that the Chilean economy is fully employed, that population
grows at a 1.6% annual rate and that national income has rarely exceeded
3.5%, it is not justifiable to expend liquidity at a rate exceeding 5 to 6% per
annum.”
And the letter went on to say:
“It is, thus, not surprising that with an increase in monetary means of almost 70%
in 1955, price increases had reached almost 80%.”
In terms of policy, the Mission suggested imposing quantitative credit limits to the
banking system, and urged the Central Bank to make use of the control attributions that a
new charter had provided in 1953. Additionally, it recommended that the Central Bank
charged an interest rate close to the market rate for its own loans and other operations.
Much of the Mission’s early work on monetary policy consisted of persuading the public,
and especially some prominent group of industrialists, that money creation devoted to
increasing credit to industry was still inflationary. In fact, as was suggested earlier, at the
time Chilean entrepreneurs were highly influenced by the real bills doctrine and argued
that it was crucial to distinguish between “speculative” and “productive” credit.
With respect to exchange policy, the Mission argued that under a situation of
multiple exchange rates and severe overvaluation, as the one prevailing in Chile in late
1955, the rest of the anti-inflationary measures would be self-defeating. Without
introducing rapid and substantial corrective measures in the foreign sector it was clear
that the public would continue to speculate against the peso, introducing a dangerous
instability into the financial and banking sectors.
In a letter to the Minister of Finance dated January 16, 1956, the Mission argued
that it was urgent to implement in the very short run a reform of the exchange rate
system:

34Letter

to the Minister of Finance dated December 27, 1955.

16

“An anti-inflationary program that excludes a reform of the exchange rate
system will, at best, generate a temporary and short run reduction of
inflation. It would fail, however, to provide the country with a solid base for
future economic growth and development...”
In April of 1956, and after the IMF had granted its approval, a new exchange rate
system consisting of a single fluctuating exchange rate for commercial transactions and a
freely floating rate for capital movements was adopted. In fact, this dual floating
exchange rate system was vintage Klein. In 1949, Julius Klein, one of the principal
partners of the consulting firm had advised the government of Peru recommending,
among other things, the adoption of a dual rate fluctuating system. This regime lasted in
Peru from November 1949 to December 1954.35
Initially it was thought that the Central Bank would occasionally intervene in the
foreign exchange market in order to smooth excessive fluctuations. In fact, with the aid
of the IMF the government created a U.S. $70 million stabilization fund for this purpose.
Rather quickly, however, the government began to intervene in the market a direct way,
by de facto pegging the commercial rate. By 1957 the exchange rate became a serious
area of disagreement between the government and the Mission. While the latter argued
that new world and national conditions required a substantial depreciation of the peso, the
government refused to do it on the grounds that it would increase inflation.
The exchange system reform of 1956 was accompanied by a series of measures
geared at organizing the control of international trade systems. The most important
elements of the new foreign trade regime were the existence of a list of forbidden
commodities which could not be imported into the country and the implementation of a
system of previous import deposits whereby, at the time of requiring an import license,
importers had to make a deposit (in the Central Bank) equivalent to a percentage of the
merchandise to be imported.
Although the Mission’s reports recognized from the beginning that the antiinflationary policy should be seen as a package with multiple interrelated components,
they also stressed that limiting the extent of wage indexation was the most important
35The

Peruvian program can be found in Klein (1949). See also Edwards (1983).

17

short run measure. This position was based on both economic and strategic
considerations. First, the Mission recognized that the automatic wage adjustment
mechanism introduced inertia into the system through both cost pushes and higher
inflationary expectations. Thus, eliminating (or even limiting) indexation would provide
an important blow to inflationary psychology and to cost increases. Second, according to
the existing legislation the annual wage adjustment was due at the end of January of
1956. When the Mission issued its first report in mid-November 1955, Congress was
already devoted to the discussion of the nature of the upcoming wage bill. It was, thus,
fundamentally important to handle this situation head on, without much delay. It was
considered that tackling the wage adjustment issue could not wait until a consistent and
comprehensive package was fully available.
The central role given by the Mission to limiting the extent of indexation is
apparent in the following quote from a letter to the Minister of Finance dated December
17, 1955:
“[I]t is clear that unless the current system of automatic wage readjustments
is eliminated (or at least modified), it will be impossible to have a successful
implementation of the restrictive credit and budget policies...”
In a grave and fateful mood the letter stated that:
“[t]he country is now a prisoner of a past that invented the current automatic
[wage] adjustment system.”
A large fraction of the Mission'
s efforts during the first few months in Santiago
were devoted to convincing government officials, politicians and civic leaders of the
necessity of limiting wage adjustment for 1956 to no more than 50% of accumulated past
inflation.36 The specific proposal (Law 12,006) was presented to Congress in November
of 1955 and was approved by the Lower House (the Cámara de Diputados) on December
22 by a comfortable margin.37 The PAL, other Ibañista groups and the right wing parties
36

Law 12,006 also established that during 1956, prices of basic goods and necessities – which were
controlled by the government – would only increase by 40%.
37The vote was 56 in favor and 48 against.

18

(conservatives and liberals) voted for its approval, with the left and the radicals opposing
it.
The Senate, however, was a different story; the government and its new allies did
not have a clear majority in the higher chamber of congress. The 3rd of January of 1956
was probably one of the most memorable days in Senate history. The debate was long
and intense and after two votes a nineteen-nineteen draw persisted. It was only on the 6th
of January that this piece of legislation, known as the “Stabilization Program” (Programa
de Estabilización), was approved when ailing Senator and former Presidential candidate,
Cruz-Coke was brought to the Senate floor to participate in the third vote.
From a political economy perspective, perhaps the most important aspect of this
episode is that Law 12,006 and, more generally, the Klein-Saks stabilization package as a
whole was supported by the conservative and liberal parties. These were the same parties
that had so vehemently opposed Ibañez del Campo in the past. Not only that, but these
were the same politicians that in November of 1954 -- during the Prat stabilization
attempt -- had refused to support legislation that would put an end to indexation. Why
did they support this legislation in early 1956, and not in 1954? Was it only because
inflation has crossed some threshold number that made it so costly as to make some
political parties change their position?38 Did the presence of the Klein-Saks Mission
have anything to do with this change in the right'
s position? Some of these issues are
addressed in Sections VI and VII of this paper.
V.2

The End of the Affair: Unraveling and Departure
As soon as Law 12,006, that restricted wage indexation, was approved, the Mission

turned its efforts to the fiscal deficit. In a letter addressed to the Minister of Finance
dated January 16, 1956 the Mission said:
“We need to note that…the limits on wage indexation and the control of credit
would loose their effectiveness unless they are immediately followed by…[the]
control of fiscal expenditure…[and]…tax measures…” [Emphasis in the original]

38This

is unlikely, since in November of 1954, when the Prat program was rejected, inflation was already
70%. It is difficult to think that some magic threshold is crossed when inflation moves from 70 to 80%.

19

Among the expenditure-related measures the Mission recommended putting an end
to low income housing subsidies, canceling public construction projects, reducing the
personnel in diplomatic missions, increasing the price of postage, and suspending
military purchases. In terms of tax measures the Mission suggested to levy taxes on the
bases of current (as opposed to last year’s) income, raise fuel taxes, enforcing the tax
code, and sending tax evaders to prison.39
The fiscal accounts, however, did not evolve in the way the Mission had envisaged
them. On the one hand, Congress was reluctant to enact a major tax reform; on the other,
the Ibañez del Campo administration was unwilling to reduce expenditures in a
significant way. Paradoxically, the IMF program of 1956 – under which the country
borrowed US$ 81.3 million – had a negative effect on fiscal austerity. The reasons for
this were simple: at that time the IMF had yet developed the concept of conditionality
and, thus, there were no formal (and legal) austerity conditions attached to the program.
Once the IMF funds became available, the administration felt that a serious financial
constraint had been lifted, and considered that there was no need to reduce expenditures
drastically.40 After declining in 1956, the fiscal deficit again increased in 1957; in 1958 it
experienced a slight decline, but is was still being financed mostly by money creation
(See Table 3).
A drastic drop in the price of copper in late 1956 and 1957 greatly affected fiscal
revenues, and contributed to the higher deficit in 1957 and 1958 (See Figure 3 on the
price of copper). The government reacted to the lower price of copper by increasing its
indebtness form abroad and, especially, by money creation. In a Report to Congress’
Joint Budget Committee, the Mission argued that the negative effects of a lower copper
price had been amplified because the country lacked sufficient international reserves:
“The lack of a policy aimed at accumulating reserves…during periods when the
price of copper was high, has implied that during the current year the monetary
authorities have had to make a major effort to maintain the foreign exchange
situation under control…Thus, it has been impossible to provide fiscal or credit
assistance…to depressed regional industries…”41
39

Missioin letter to the Minister of Finance, January 16, 1956.
See Remmer (1986) on the IMF programs in Latin America during the 1950s.
41 Report to the Congress’ Joint Budget Committee, November 7, 1957

40

20

As the fiscal imbalance increased, the stabilization program unraveled. In 1957 the
wage rule was weakened, and a general wage increase equal to 80% of accumulated
inflation was decreed. Moreover, credit controls were relaxed and the money supply
started to expand at a more rapid pace. As a result of the decline in the price of copper the
peso became under pressure. The authorities reacted negatively to the faster depreciation
of the peso, and responded by increasing trade barriers. More specifically, during the
second half of 1957, and against the Mission’s recommendations, prior import deposits
were increased very significantly.42
By early 1958 the Mission’s program was rapidly loosing political support and
credibility. In May of that year the Mission issued a report of its work, including a set of
recommendation for the future. Many of these had to do with fiscal policy, foreign
exchange policy and the creation of strong public institutions.43 But perhaps the most
important set of recommendations had to do with inflation. The Mission insisted that
inflationary financing would not provide a path to prosperity. By October of that year the
Mission’s work came to an end; inflation was rapidly creeping up. By December of 1958
it was 33%, and by June of 1959 it had already reached the 50% mark.
VI.

The Politics of Credibility and the Klein-Saks Mission
In order to understand fully the sequence of events that led to the adoption of the

1955-56 stabilization program it is necessary to explain the role played by the Klein-Saks
Mission. What was the actual contribution of these foreign advisors in the
implementation of this specific program? How does their work fit, if at all, within the
political discussions and debates of that time? In what follows I look at these questions
from three different perspectives. I first analyze what was new in the Mission'
s
recommendations. I then investigate the political reception of the Mission'
s proposals,
and I finally deal with the issue of the Mission'
s work and credibility.
42

Ffrench-Davis (1973).
Interestingly, the Mission made two recommendations that were considered to be extremists at the time,
but that today are at the core of Chile’s economic institutions: a (relatively) independent central bank,
governed buy a small technical board; and, the reform of social security where “the individual himself
would make decisions regarding the disposition of a substantial part of his income” Klein-Saks (1958, p.
48).
43

21

VI.1 The Klein-Saks Mission as a Technocratic Team
The simplest explanation of the Mission'
s role is the purely technical one.
According to this view, foreign consultants would provide policymakers with a type of
expertise unavailable in the country. Once the technical diagnosis work is done,
domestic politicians and policymakers will have a clearer view of the problems at hand
and, with the help of the advisors, could proceed to design a specific stabilization
program. This interpretation of foreign advisors as providing technical expertise not
available in the country does not require that all participants in the debate agree on the
causes of inflation, and on the most desirable course of action. In fact, it is perfectly
possible to think that this technical knowledge is more in line with a particular political
view of the world than with others.44
Some authors have endorsed the view of the Klein-Saks Mission as technocrats
providing expertise not available in Chile at that time. In fact, this was the way the
Mission was presented by the government in 1955: repeatedly, administration
spokesmen and (part of) the media referred to the Mission as a group of politically
neutral foreign experts that, as medical doctors, were coming to the country to provide a
diagnosis of the nature of the sickness and suggest a specific treatment. This is, for
example, the view of Correa Prieto (1963), who argues that the display of technical
knowledge made by the Mission'
s Chief, Preston Carter, greatly contrasted with the low
level of preparedness of the local technocrats.45 While Ffrench-Davis (1973) has rejected
the view that the Mission was political neutral, he has argued that it did indeed provide a
type of technical expertise unavailable at that time in Chile. According to him most
economists were then of a leftist-structuralist persuasion and, consequently, a government
that wanted to pursue an orthodox type of adjustment program could not elaborate such a
program with local experts.
Although there is little doubt that the Mission was formed by experienced
professionals that contributed with a number of technical details in the design of policies,
it is also true that their overall contribution to the diagnosis and formulation of policy was
limited. As we have already seen, the Prat failed stabilization proposal (the “Program of
44

See Felix (1960).
Prieto (1963, p. 50); Wurth Rojas (1958).

45Correa

22

Economic Rectification”) of November of 1954 included a large number of the
components of the Klein-Saks program, including limiting the extent of indexation, fiscal
austerity, and higher taxes.
A lengthy report presented by the Central Bank to the Chamber of Deputies in July
of 1955 clearly indicates that at that time, at least part of the economics profession in
Chile had understood the country'
s inflationary problems in a way that fully coincided
with that later developed by the Mission. For example, the proposed Central Bank
program called for fiscal restraint, for the elimination of legislation that allowed the
Treasury to borrow from the Central Bank, for the adoption of a freely fluctuating
exchange rate, and for the implementation of an imports deposit scheme to control
foreign trade. With respect to wages, the report argued that controlling their rate of
increase was an essential component of the stabilization program.46 It is interesting,
however, to note that the report was not as forceful regarding wage deindexation as it was
with respect to the other component of adjustment policies. This may be explained by the
fact that it was at that time an exceedingly sensitive political issue, which the Bank Board
tried to avoid to the extent possible.
From the analysis of both the Prat 1954 program and the Central Bank 1955
document, it is clear that, at least in terms of diagnosis and broad policies, the Klein-Saks
program did not add novel aspects. Hirschman (1963) has argued that the only new
device suggested by the mission was the system of advanced deposits on imports. This,
however, it not completely correct. The Central Bank program specifically proposed
“requiring [to importers] a deposit in domestic currency in the Central Bank” (Banco
Central 1956, p. 77). What was new in the Mission’s program was the suggestion of a
dual floating rate system. The Central Bank program and other proposals that circulated
at the time called for a unique floating rate. The absence of spectacular (and almost
mythical) new policy propositions in the Mission program contrasts sharply with the UN
report of 1950, which suggested a forced savings scheme as a sort of panacea that would
quickly, and with little cost, help solve most (if not all) economic problems in Chile.47

46Banco
47See

Central de Chile (1956).

United Nations (1951).

23

The fact that the Mission had not suggested significant new perspectives or policy
measures was a source of some irritation in Chile. Many felt that national pride was at
stake since foreigners were coming into the country, recommending measures already
discussed many times in the past. As Hirshman has pointed out, many considered the
Mission'
s program as a (convex) combination of the Herrera and Prat programs of 1953
and 1954. The resentful sentiments of a large number of Chileans towards the Mission
are captured from the opening statement from then Senator, and eventually President of
the Republic, Salvador Allende during the debate of Law 12,006:
“[I] have stated that there are Chilean professionals with the required knowledge
and ability to design, on the basis of an organic plan, the measures to be taken.”48
VI.2 War of Attrition, Umpires and Mediators
A popular interpretation of the role of foreign advisors and foreign agencies is that
of an umpire that helps the locals select one of many alternative proposals for action.
Hirshman (1963), for example, offers this explanation with respect to the role of the
Kemmerer 1925 Mission that resulted in the foundation of Chile'
s Central Bank.
According to him, when Kemmerer arrived, so many proposals for monetary reform had
been discussed that the politicians and the public had become utterly confused.
According to this view the role of the foreign advisors is just to pick one of the many
proposals and, thus, help solve an impasse. It is worth quoting Hirshman on this point:
“Examination of the many proposals that were put forward with everincreasing frequency in the period 1913-25 makes it clear that the final
Kemmerer bills did not contain any substantial innovations with respect to
the crucial topics of restoration of the gold standard and the establishment of
the Central Bank. The conclusion is therefore inescapable that the mission
served principally as an umpire…” (Hirshman, 1967, pp. 176-77; emphasis
added).
Alternatively, one can think that foreign advisors provide new information to the
different groups on the costs and consequences of the crisis, thus convincing some of
48Congreso

Nacional de Chile, Diario de Sesiones del Senado, January 3rd, 1955, p. 1137.

24

them that they should give up their “extreme” positions. According to this interpretation,
by pointing out angles previously unseen by the different groups, the foreign advisor
contributes to obtaining an earlier end to the “war of attrition.” Players that would have
refused to give up in the absence of this new information, decide to compromise earlier
on. This interpretation is close to that provided by the Klein-Saks Mission itself in 1958.
In a summary document published in May of that year, it is said:
“[T]he only program with a chance of success was deemed to be a broad
attack on many fronts, in which all factions would contribute, through a
gradual retreat from their previous extreme positions ...
In attempting to aid in the implementation of such a program, the Mission
has always seen its main contribution is acting as an objective advisor on the
over-all aspects of a balanced program…” (Klein-Saks, 1958, p. 6).
Although the interpretation of the role of the Klein-Saks Mission as an umpire and
a mediator is quite appealing, it presents some problems.49 First, and as it has already
been established, the Mission contributed very little in terms of new perspectives, and
provided little new information to what already was on the table in mid-1955. This casts
serious doubt on the interpretation based on additional information being provided in the
context of a war of attrition.
A second problem is that war of attrition models assume that, although different
groups struggle to obtain larger fractions of national income and try to avoid paying a
large fraction of the costs of stabilization, they basically agree on what should be done to
eliminate inflation. In these models there is no “ignorance” or disagreement with respect
to the way in which the world works. Inflation, and the inability to put together a timely
stabilization program, is the unavoidable result of a distributive conflict; in these models
there is no room for dissenting approaches to stabilizing. The only source of conflict is
who pays a larger share of the costs of reducing inflation. This important assumption of
the war of attrition models is flatly contradicted by the history of the Klein-Saks program.

49

In fact, in light of the previous discussion, if one were to replace the reference to Kemmerer for KleinSaks and monetary reform for a stabilization program, the quote from Hirshman would appear quite
plausible.

25

The Congressional debate that preceded the approval of Law 12,006 shows that
different groups and parties strongly disagreed on what was the most adequate course of
action to defeat inflation. For example when explaining his negative vote Senator
Ampuero, the former Secretary-General of the Socialist Party, argued that the proposed
fluctuating exchange rate was contrary to the goal of solving inflation and staging a
recovery problem. Another opposition senator expressed:50
“Honorable Senate, we should remember that even before any wage
adjustment law was enacted, Chile already suffered from high inflation ....
Consequently to argue that the law of wage adjustment is the main engine of
inflation contradicts, in my view, Chile'
s economic and history
experience…” (Diario del Senado, January 3, 1956, p. 1181)
But it is perhaps the statement by radical deputy Muñoz-Horz the one that more
vividly captures the opposing views on the mechanics of inflation:
“[T]he inflationary process has ... increased in an exaggerated way profits of
productive firms. This demonstrates that the automatic increase of wages is
not precisely the engine of inflation… From what has been said it follows
that in order to end this serious inflationary process it is necessary, first and
foremost, to fix and freeze prices and immediately to increase salaries, wages
and pensions so that they achieve parity with prices.” (Diario de la Cámara
de Diputados, Dec. 22, 1955, pp. 2549-50)
It is evident, then, that the views prevailing at the time regarding the causes of
inflation, and the most appropriate course for the stabilization program, were
significantly different. It is difficult, consequently, to agree with the view that the KleinSaks Mission acted as a mediator that helped all factions decide how much to contribute
towards the achievement of the stability growth. Indeed, the Mission approach was
considered to be completely erroneous by a large group of politicians, economists and
journalists.

50Socialist

Senator Luis Quinteros.

26

VI.3 Credibility and the Klein-Saks Mission
As was pointed out in Section II, modern theories of inflation and stabilization
have emphasized the role of credibility in achieving a rapid and (relatively) costless
adjustment process. To the extent that governments are able to affect expectations, and
persuade the private sector that a change of regime will be engineered, the disinflation
process will have a higher probability of success. The problem, however, is that
governments tend to have difficulties in making credible promises. That is, there are
usually few institutional arrangements that can assure the public that the government will
not renege on its promises after the private sector has already made important decisions.
A key issue in establishing credibility, then, is to design mechanisms that will allow the
government to precommit itself.
An interesting line of analytical reasoning postulates that reputational constraints
can sometimes act as good substitutes for precommitment technology.51 Policymakers
afraid to damage their reputation will tend to stick to their promises. This is an elegantly
plausible idea, but the Ibañez del Campo administration had very little reputational
capital to protect. In late 1955 and early 1956, the Ibañez del Campo government was
particularly non-credible. The general had changed alliances, denounced former collaborators and gyrated too rapidly to give any confidence to the public.
The Ibañez del Campo credibility problem is neatly evidenced in the speech given
by Senator Luis Bossay, chairman of the opposition Radical Party, during the debate on
Law 12006 on the Stabilization of Prices and Wages. After arguing that wage
deindexation constituted only an isolated measure that did not go to the heart of the
problem, he said:
“It is true that [Finance] Minister Herrera Palacios ... referred to the adoption
of complementary measures… Do we have any assurance that after
approving one measure, the rest of them will be implemented? ...[T]he cruel
experience of three years shows that this hesitant, incoherent and
contradicting government is unable of designing and maintaining, with
perseverance, a financial and economic policy; we have no confidence that it
51

See, for example, Drazen (2000) and Person and Tabellini (2000).

27

is committed today of implementing a coherent plan that would put an end to
the inflationary process…” (Diario de Sesiones del Senado, 3rd January
1956, p. 1152).
In fact, the Ibañez del Campo administration announcements and promises had
become non-credible for every political party in the opposition. Not only were the center
and left skeptical regarding the government’s ability to deliver on its promises, but the
right wing, which the President was seeking as a new ally, was equally doubtful. Senator
Moore, from the liberal party, described the government as following a “zig-zagging
approach full of contradictions and incomplete attitudes.”52 On the other hand, Senator
Marin, from the liberal party, questioned the government'
s ability to maintain an
announced course of action.
The credibility problem had been compounded by the fact that after the abortion of
the Prat Stabilization Program in November of 1954, there had been four different
ministers of finance that had taken half-baked and often contradictory measures, while
inflation continued its rampant pace.
In some way the Central Bank was the only public institution that had some
credibility. Its professional staff was well respected and as we have seen its proposed
stabilization program of July 1955 was sophisticated and suggested a number of
fundamental measures. The Bank, however, was handicapped by its lack of
independence from the government. In spite of a reform to its Charter in 1953, the Board
was still dominated by representatives of the executive. This lack of independence was
so evident that during his short tenure as minister of finance the populist Guillermo del
Pedregal strongly maneuvered to oust the Central Bank Governor Arturo Maschke.53

52Diario
53For

Sesiones del Senado, January 3, 1955, p. 1146.

a fascinating insider’s view of economic policy making during this period, see Maschke'
s memoirs
(Maschke 1990). I had the opportunity to interview Mr. Mascke in 1991, when I first got interested in
studying this period of Chile’s economic history. I must say that I had the most wonderful and interesting
time talking with him at his Providencia apartment. That same year I also interviewed Dr. Anibal Pinto,
one of Chile’s most influential academic economists during the time of the Klein-Saks Mission, and Mr.
Arturo Fontaine Aldunate, who had been the Under Secretary of Finance during Jorge Prat’s tenure as
minister. These interviews were extremely useful in helping me understand better the politics and
economics of the second Ibañez administration.

28

When looked at from the perspective of a government with total lack of credibility
and virtually no reputational capital, recurring to an external advisor begins to make
sense. By taking this measure the government was signalling its intentions of altering its
behavior. It is also possible that the government officials expected that by hiring the
Mission they were acquiring some reputational capital. Additionally, by doing this, a
sense of continuity was introduced into the program. Even if Ibañez del Campo decided
to replace the minister of finance, the mission technocrat were still around to carry on the
battle.

A number of authors have recently argued that external agencies, such as the

World Bank and the International Monetary Fund, can provide credibility to adjustment
and stabilization programs.54 This can happen in two related ways: first, by violating
agreements with these agencies the country in question will incur in costs that will
usually come in the form of losses of resources obtained through specific programs.
These costs, of course, will make policy changes less probable than otherwise. Second,
through the monitoring of the country'
s economic performance the external agencies
provide information to other (external) actors, including foreign government, and private
creditors. In a way, through the provision of information these external institutions make
the country'
s reputation more transparent and easy to control, thus making this constraint
more binding.
Although the Klein-Saks mission did not have funds of its own to provide to the
Chilean government, its connections with the international financial community and the
U.S. government made its role rather effective. In fact, after putting together the most
important element of the stabilization program, the mission helped the government obtain
U.S. $70 million in fresh resources. Additionally, the mission'
s work during late 1955
and early 1956 paved the path for Chile'
s stand-by agreement with the IMF in April of
1956. This, however, leaves open the question of why the Chilean government decided
to hire private advisors rather than going directly the IMF. There are two explanations
for this decision. First, at this time the IMF had relatively little experience in setting up
programs with the developing countries. For instance during 1953-1955 a total of only

54

Edwards (1989), Drazen (2000).

29

five stand by agreements had been signed, with most of them being with European
nations. Additionally, the fact that the Klein mission to Peru in 1949-1954 had been well
received by the international community made the Washington consultants natural
candidates for this job. Second, hiring a private advisory group that would take residency
in Santiago, and would provide a daily monitoring of the economic situation, helped the
government to gain political credibility with the domestic right, whose support it required
to approve the key elements of the program.
The mounting political tension of 1955 greatly influenced the right'
s decision to
change its strategy and to support the Ibañez del Campo administration anti-inflation
program. It became apparent at that time that the increasing economics chaos had
generated serious anti-democratic sentiments among sectors of the military. The
“Straight Line” (Linea Recta) movement was acting openly and a number of nationalistic
elements were calling Ibañez del Campo to close Congress, and to establish himself as an
autocratic ruler that would return order and put an end to inflation. This possibility
represented great political danger for the rightist politicians who clearly remembered the
setbacks suffered during the first Ibañez del Campo authoritarian rule in 1924.
Moreover, at this point the conservative-liberal coalition had great expectations that their
candidate could win the upcoming Presidential election in 1958.55 In a way, then, the
right was caught between two undesirable alternatives: to continue opposing Ibañez del
Campo at all costs and, thus, risking a coup that would seriously jeopardize their chance
of getting the presidency; or to support an untrustworthy administration that was well
known for its gyrations and changes in policies.
The fact that the right weighted the political consequences of not supporting the
stabilization program is apparent from liberal Senator Moore'
s speech on the 3rd of
January, 1955.56 He candidly stated:
“The liberal Party does not favor a coup d'
etat; it does not expect ... to
resolve this issue by force and by spilling blood ... We desire that Mr. Ibañez
serves his full term…” (p. 1147).
55Jorge
56The

Alessandri, the right candidate, in fact won that election.

quotes that follow come from the Diario de Sesiones del Senado, 1/3/55.

30

And he went on to say:
“We do not favor a coup ... Should we, then, blindly oppose the government
from Congress? No. That would damage even more the reputation of the
political parties; it would offer a motive to finish them and to close
Congress…” (p. 1148)
And, he referred to the dilemma faced by his party in the following way:
“We will continue to defend legality, and we are demonstrating this by
providing Mr. Ibañez with a legal tool. We place a delicate tool in clumsy
hands…” (p. 1148).
However, one thing was to weight the costs of not supporting the government and
seeing the economic situation further deteriorate, and a different thing to provide Mr.
Ibañez del Campo with a blank check. In order to support the government, the right
required certain guarantees that the overall package would include policies particularly
important for this group. Among these policies, perhaps the most controversial one
referred to the reform of the exchange rate system, including the adoption of a freely
fluctuating rate. The key importance attached by the right to the exchange rate policy is
manifest in a number of interventions in the Congressional debate of that time. For
instance, conservative Senator Prieto stated:
“[T]here is no possibility of expanding production if the [foreign exchange law]
retains ... fixed and discriminatory rates ...” (Diario de Sesiones del Senado, 1/3/55,
p. 1167.)

In this regard, then, the Klein-Saks Mission, with its historical record of supporting
fluctuating rates and its good relation with the International Monetary Fund, provided an
important element in persuading the Right to support the government. The Klein-Saks
Mission provided, to the extent possible, an assurance that the policies were going to be
consistent with what had been (implicitly) agreed upon. In other words, by having hired
the Klein-Saks Mission the government not only sought to obtain domestic and

31

international economic credibility, but it was also trying to credibly precommit to a key
political group that there would be no sudden changes in the future course of action.
But, how credible was the Mission'
s program? Did the Mission'
s work in fact, affect
expectations? And, if it did, was this a short term break in expectations, or was it
relatively long-lasting?57 This, and related issues, are tackled in detail in Section VII of
this paper.
VII. Policy Credibility and Structural Breaks: An Empirical Investigation
In his highly influential work on inflation and stabilization, Sargent (1983,
1986) has argued that a credible anti-inflationary program results in a rapid change
in the monetary and inflationary regimes. If the public believes that the policy will
work – that is, that the policy is credible --, it will incorporate its changed
expectations into its decision making process, including decisions on pricing,
speculation, wage bargaining, capital flows and so on. These changes in
expectations, in turn, will be translated into a change in the behavior of endogenous
variables, such as interest rates, exchange rates and inflation. This, for instance,
was what happened during Raymond Poincare’s stabilization program in France in
the 1920s. It is also what happened with the founding of the Federal Reserve
System, in late 1914.58
From an econometric point of view, credible changes in regime will be
reflected in break points in the time series of the key endogenous variables. For
example, as argued in Edwards (1993, 1998) a credible stabilization program
would be reflected in a decline in the degree of inertia in the rate of inflation. In
this section I use data on the black market exchange rate premium, as well as on
inflation to analyze the extent to which the policies of the Klein-Saks Mission were

57

Of course, we know that it was not that long lasting. After all, the Mission did fail and by December
1958 inflation was already 33%.
58 See Mankiw, Miron and Weil (1987) for an analysis on the change in interest rate behavior after the
founding of the Fed, a policy that the authors (rightly) consider to represent a major change in regime in
U.S. monetary policy. In Edwards (1998) I used short term interest rate data to analyze whether changes in
Chile’s capital controls policy were credible and effective.

32

indeed credible.59 Generally speaking, a credible stabilization program should be
reflected in a very rapid – i.e. instantaneous – break in the time series properties of
financial variables, such as interest rates and (market determined) exchange rates.
A credible stabilization program would also be reflected, although more slowly, on
structural breaks in the time series behavior of inflation. In particular, if the
stabilization program is indeed credible, the rate of persistence (or inertia) would
rapidly decline, as would the expected long term rate of inflation.
VII.1 The Credibility of the Klein-Saks Mission and the Exchange Rate
In Figure 4 I present the evolution of the official exchange rate, as well as the
parallel (i.e. free) market exchange rate for the period January 1953-December 1956. As
may be seen, the month the mission arrived into Chile, September 1955, the parallel
market rate (PER) experienced a drastic decline of 23% -- it went from 770 pesos per
dollar in August, to 595 pesos per dollar in September. This is quite impressive
considering that at that point the Mission had very little to show for its work. In the next
two months, however, the public became increasingly skeptical, with the parallel rate
climbing back to high levels -- although not as high as the maximum attained in August
of 1955. In January of 1956, once Law 12,006 was approved, the parallel rate fell by
24%, and the premium declined by almost 70%. During 1956 the parallel market rate
was rather stable and after the adoption of the new exchange rate regime in April the
premium virtually disappeared (see Figure 4), suggesting that the private sector perceived
the Klein-Saks effort as a serious attempt at changing the nature of the inflationary
process. Interestingly enough, as can be seen from the figure, the only other period with
a significant decline in the free market rate corresponds to Prat’s tenure as Minister of
Finance. However, as soon as it became apparent that his program was not going to be
approved by Congress, the free market rate rapidly climbed to higher levels (see shaded
area in Figure 4). This figure, then, suggests that there was a short-lived break in
expectations that took place at the arrival of the Mission.
In order to analyze formally the extent to which the Mission affected expectations,
I estimated a series of equations for the parallel market exchange rate premium, and I
59

Since there are no data on market-determined interest rates, I have not attempted to analyze structural
breaks in interest rate behavior.

33

analyzed whether the equation had exhibited a structural break around the time the
Mission began its work. The basic equation has the following form:

premiumt = α 0 + α 1 (log OER t − log OERt ) + α 2

(1)

∆M t −1
+ α 3 premiumt −1 + ε t ,
M

Where premium is the parallel market premium; OERt is the official exchange rate;

OERt is the “equilibrium” nominal exchange rate, that would prevail in the absence of
rationing;

∆M t −1
is the excess supply of money M1; and is an error term assumed to
M

have the standard properties. As long as there are exchange restrictions, the intercept will
be significantly positive. Generally speaking, we would expect

1

to be positive,

indicating that a the larger is the gap between the equilibrium and the actual official
nominal exchange rate, the larger will be the premium. Notice, that this means that, to
the extent that the equilibrium nominal exchange rate is unchanged, a nominal
devaluation of the official rate (that is an increase in log OERt ) will result in a decline in
the parallel market premium. The

2 coefficient

is expected to be positive, indicating that

a larger excess supply for money will result in a larger premium. Coefficient

3 is

expected to be positive and smaller than one. This coefficient measures the degree of
inertia of the foreign exchange premium; the closer this coefficient to one, the higher is
the degree of inertia.
A credible stabilization plan is expected to be reflected in a structural beak in
equation (1) governing the foreign exchange premium. More specifically, when a
credible stabilization plan is implemented, it is expected that the values of both

0

and

1

will decline. Indeed, under extreme credibility that eliminates inflationary pressures and
exchange restrictions, it would be expected that

0

and

1

would very rapidly converge to

zero. Notice that in this case the equilibrium (steady state) value of the premium would
be equal to zero.
In order to analyze if the adoption of the Klein-Saks program indeed affected
expectations, I followed the following strategy. First, I use equation stability tests to
analyze whether there is a breakpoint in equations of the type of (1) around the time of

34

the program’s adoption. Second, I add a number of dummy variables to the estimation of
equations of the type of (1), as a way of analyzing this issue in greater detail. I am
particularly interested in investigating whether

0

and

1

experienced a significant decline

at the time of the program. In this analysis I have used the Hodrick-Prescott stochastic
trend component of (the log of) the official exchange rate as a proxy for OERt .60 All the
results discussed in this section were obtained using monthly data. See the Appendix for
exact variables’ definitions and sources.
In Table 4 I present regression results for equation (1). The first column uses a
1948-1958 sample, while in columns (2) the sample covers the 1948-1962 period. The
results are quite similar across these two base equations; all the coefficients have the
expected signs and are significant at conventional levels. These estimates suggest that
during this period the parallel market premium had a very high degree of inertia. Indeed,
the estimated coefficient for the lagged premium is 0.78 and 0.85. In the discussion that
follows I focus on the results obtained when the 1948-1962 sample is used.61 As pointed
out earlier, an important question for the credibility analysis is whether there was a
change of regime at the time of the Mission’s program. An F-test for equation stability
suggests that equation (1) indeed experienced a structural break during the September
1955 and the September 1958 period: the value of the test is 15.8, indicating that the null
hypothesis of no structural breaks is rejected at conventional levels.62
As a way of understanding further the reaction of expectations and of the foreign
exchange market to the Mission’s program, I included dummy variables for the 19551958 in the estimation of equation (1). In total, seven dummies were included: the first
one (D552) takes a value of one for the September-December 1955 period, and zero other
wise. The other dummies – D561, D562, D571, D572, D581, and D582 – take a value of
one for the respective six month period, and a value of zero otherwise (that is, D561 has
ones for January-June 1956). The results, which are in Column (3) of Table 4, indicate
60

I also assumed that for the period under study the equilibrium nominal rate was a constant. In this case
instead of the nominal exchange rate gap, the estimated equation will only have the log of the official rate.
In terms of the credibility analysis, the results obtained when this alternative specification was used were
similar to those discussed here, and have not been reported due to space considerations.
61 This is appropriate, since in 1960-61 a new and bold stabilization program based on the pegging of the
exchange rate and the elimination of all capital account restrictions was put into place. For details see, for
example, Ffrench-Davis (1973).
62 This is a Chow F-test. The null hypothesis is that there are no structural breaks.

35

that the effects of the Mission’s program on expectations and the foreign exchange
market were quite complex. As soon as the Mission arrived – and even before it started
working -- there was a sharp decline in the degree of persistence of the premium: the
coefficient of ( D552 × premiumt −1 ) is -0.721 and significant at the 5% level. This
suggests that by the end of 1955 the parallel market premium had completely lost
persistence – indeed a

2

test indicates that the null hypothesis of equality of coefficients

cannot be rejected at conventional levels. The results also indicate that the coefficient of
( D561 × premiumt −1 ) is significantly negative, with a point estimate of -0.721; moreover,
the null hypothesis that the degree of inertia in the first half of 1956 is zero cannot be
rejected. These results indeed suggest that the hiring of the Mission indeed altered
expectations, and changed the structural behavior of the parallel market premium.
This decline (or disappearance) in the degree of persistence was short lived
however. As may be seen from Table 4, starting in the second half of 1956, the
coefficients of the dummy variables interacted with the lagged premium are not
significantly different from zero, and the degree of persistence in the parallel market for
foreign exchange goes back to what it had been before the Mission’s arrival in Chile. As
may be seen, the intercept dummies are not significantly different from zero.
VII.2 Credibility and Inflationary Inertia
An important question is whether inflationary inertia declined in Chile in the period
surrounding the Klein-Saks stabilization program. In order to do this I estimated a
number of equations of the following type:

(2)

∆M t −1
+ β 2 DevPart −1 + β 3 DevOff t −1 + β 4 Inf t −1 +
M
β 5 ( Dummy × Inf t −1 ) + σ j S j + ψ t

Inf t = β 0 + β 1

Inf is inflation, measured as the percentage change in the CPI relative to the same month
in the prior year;

∆M t −1
is the rate of growth of M1, also measured relative to the
M

previous year; DevPar is the rate of change in the parallel (i.e. free) exchange rate;

DevOff is the rate of change of the official exchange rate; Dummy is a dummy variable

36

that takes the value of one during the stabilization program; Sj are seasonal dummies; and
t

is an AR(12) error term.63 To the extent that the stabilization program has indeed

resulted in a decline in the degree of inertia, the estimated coefficient for

5

would be

significantly negative. As in the analysis of the exchange rate market, in the estimation I
considered several alternative dummy variable that cover different time spans.
In Table 5 I present the results obtained from the estimation of several versions of
equation (2). Since the rate of devaluation in the parallel (i.e. free) market is endogenous,
I used instrumental variables in the estimation; the standard errors were estimated using
the Newey-West procedure.64 The estimates in Column (1) assume that there are no
structural breaks during the period under study. In Column (2) I have used one dummy
variable (DKS) for the complete Klein-Saks period; it takes the value of one for
September 1955-September 1958, and zero otherwise. In Column (2) I have
distinguished seven sub-periods; as in Table 4, the dummies D552, D561, D561, D562,
D571, D572, D581, and D582 refer to six successive six months periods.65 As may be
seen, during the period under study inflation experienced a very significant degree of
inertia. For instance the estimate of the lagged dependent variable in Column (1) is
0.896. The coefficients of money creation and exchange rate changes are positive as
expected, and with the exception of the coefficient of

∆M t −1
are significant at
M

conventional levels. Column (2) suggests that the degree of the Klein Saks program there
was a very small, and statistically significant, decline in inertia: the estimated coefficient
of ( DKS × Inf t −1 ) is equal to -0.044 and has a t-statistic of -2.36. The results in Column
(3) look at this issue in greater detail, by replacing DKS with the array of dummies D551D582. As may be seen, these results give a rather more textured and complex story:
according to these estimates the decline in inflationary inertia was small and very short
lived, and took place during the first half of 1956. This is immediately after Law 12,006

63

Since the monthly rate of inflation is defined as a year over year variable, equation (2) has to be
estimated under the assumption of an AR(12) error.
64 The following instruments were used: xx,xx,xx. Because inflation is computed on a 12 months basis, the
seasonal variables turned out to be non significant, and were excluded in the final estimation. If included
the results are virtually the same as in Table 5.
65 A preliminary analysis indicates that the intercept did not change during the period under study.
Consequently, no dummies for the intercept were included in the regressions reported in Table 5.

37

that reduced the extent of wage indexation was approved by congress. If the program had
been credible, one would have expected that during the next few months inertia would
have fallen further. According to the results in column (3) the opposite, actually
happened: beginning in the second half of 1956 the degree of inflationary inertia was
back to the level it had had prior to the program.
As a final step in this analysis I used a Kalman-Filter approach to estimate a timevarying coefficient version of equation (2). In the estimation I assumed that the
coefficient of Inft-1 was the only time-varying coefficient. As before, I assumed that the
error term was characterized by an AR(12) process. The result obtained for the inertia
coefficient is displayed in Figure 5. This figure shows very clearly that in the months
preceding the arrival of the Klein-Saks mission the degree of inflationary inertia in Chile
was increasing rapidly. Indeed, the coefficient of Inft-1 climbed from 0.81 in mid 1953 to
0.92 by mid 1955. This figure also confirms the findings in Table 5: immediately after
the Klein-Saks mission began its work there was a very small reduction in inertia. This,
however, did not gather force, nor was it very significant. By late 1958, the degree of
inertia continued to be substantial; indeed much higher that in mid 1953.
VIII. Concluding Remark
In this paper I have analyzed Chile’s experience with anti-inflationary policies in
the mid 1950s. In 1955-58 Chile implemented a stabilization package with the advice of
the U.S. consulting firm of Klein-Saks. The Klein-Saks program took place in a period
of acute political confrontation. After what was considered to be an initial success -inflation declined to 38% in 1956, and was further reduced to 17% in 1957 -- the program
failed to achieve durable price stability. I have argued that the foreign advisors of the
Klein-Saks Mission gave initial credibility to the stabilization program launched in 1955.
The Mission’s foreign advisors played the role of independent, non-partisan, technocratic
arbiters. It was precisely because they were foreigners that they could raise above the
political fray, and suggest a specific program, whose main components were rapidly
approved by a highly divided Congress. The fact that the program was very similar to
one proposed earlier by the government – and that was rejected by Congress -underscores the view that, while locals are suspect of being excessively partisan,

38

foreigners are often (but not always) seen as independent policy brokers. But providing

initial credibility was not enough to ensure success. In spite of supporting trade reform,
foreign exchange rate reform, and the de-indexation of wages, Congress failed to act
decisively on the fiscal front. Consequently the fiscal imbalances that had plagued Chile
for a long time were reduced, but not eliminated. In 1957 a sharp drop in the
international price of copper – the country’s main export – resulted in a major decline in
fiscal revenue and in an increase in the fiscal deficit. The Mission recommended a series
of belt-tightening measures, but politicians had had enough of orthodoxy. No adjustment
was made, and inflationary expectations once again shifted for the worse. In Section VII
I presented empirical results on the evolution of inflation, exchange rates and interest
rates that support my historical analysis.

39

References
Alesina, A. and A. Drazen (1991): Why are Stabilizations Delayed?, American Economic
Review, 81 (5): 1170-1188.
Ampuero, R. (1969): La Izquierda en Punto Muerto. Editorial Orbe, Santiago, Chile.
Boughton, J. (2003): Who'
s in Charge? Ownership and Conditionality in IMF-Supported
Programs, IMF Working Paper No. 03/191, September
Correa Prieto, L. (1962): El Presidente Ibáñez: La Política y los Políticos. Editorial Orbe,
Sanatiago, Chile.
Cukierman, A., Edwards, S. and G. Tabellini (1992): Seigniorage and Political
Instability, American Economic Review, 82 (3): 537-555.
Diario de Sesiones del Senado, Congreso Nacional, Santiago de Chile. (Various Issues).
Dornbusch, R. (1991): Credibility and Stabilization, Quarterly Journal of Economics,
106 (3): 837-850.
Dornbusch, R. and S. Fischer (1986): Stopping Hyperinflations Past and Present,
Weltwirtschaftliches-Archiv, 122(1): 1-47.
Drazen, A. (2000): The Political Economy in Macroeconomics, Princeton: Princeton
University Press.
Edwards, S. (1983): Floating Exchange Rates in Less Developed Countries: A Monetary
Analysis of the Peruvian Experience, 1950-1954, Journal of Money, Credit and
Banking, 15(1): 73-81.

__________ (1989): Real Exchange Rates, Devaluation, and Adjustment: Exchange Rate
Policy in Developing Countries, Cambridge, Mass. and London: MIT Press
__________ (1994): The Political Economy of Inflation and Stabilization in Developing
Countries, Economic Development and Cultural Change, 42(2): 235-266.
__________ (1998): Capital Flows, Real Exchange Rates, and Capital Controls: Some
Latin American Experiences, NBER Working Paper No. w6800.
Edwards, S. and P. Montiel (1989): Devaluation Crisis and the Macroeconomic
Consequences of Post-pone Adjustment in Developing Countries, IMF Staff Papers,
36(4): 857-903.

40

Felix, D. (1960): Structural Imbalances, Social Conflict, and Inflation: An Appraisal of
Chile'
s Recent Anti-Inflationary Effort, Economic Development and Cultural
Change, 8(2): 113-147.
French Davis, R. (1973): Políticas Económicas en Chile: 1952-1970. Santiago, Centro de
Estudios de Planificación Nacional, Ediciones Nueva Universidad.
Garay Vera, C. (1990): El Partido Agrario Laborista, 1945-1958, Editorial Andrés Bello,
Santiago, Chile.
Hirschman, A. (1963): Journeys Towards Progress: Studies of Economic Policy-Making
in Latin America.W. W. Norton.
Jobet, J. C. (1971): El Partido Socialista de Chile. Santiago: Eds. Prensa
Latinoamericana.
Klein, J. (1949): Reforma Monetaria en el Perú, El Trimestre Económico, 16: 600-619.
Klein-Saks Mission (1958), The Chilean Stabilization Program and the Work of the Klein
and Saks Economic and Financial Mission to Chile. Santiago, Chile. (This volume
contains copies of most of the correspondence sent by the Mission to the Chilean
authorities).
League of Nations (1946): The Course and Control of Inflation, Geneva, League of
Nations.
Mamalakis, M. (1976): The Growth and Structure of the Chilean Economy, From
Independence to Allende, Yale Economic Growth Center. Yale University Press.
Mankiw, G. N. Miron, J. A. and D. N. Weil (1987): The Adjustment of Expectations to a
Change in Regime: A Study of the Founding of the Federal Reserve. American
Economic Review, 77: 358-374.
Persson, T. and G. Tabellini. (1990): Macroeconomic Policy, Credibility and Politics.
New York and Melbourne: Harwood Academic.
______________________ 2000: Political Economics. Explaining Economic Policy.
MIT Press.
Sachs, J. (1989): Conditionality, Debt Relief, and the Developing Country Debt Crisis, in
Developing Country Debt and Economic Performance, ed. J. Sachs, National
Bureau of Economic Research: University of Chicago Press: 255-295
Santaella, J. A. (1993): Stabilization Programs and External Enforcement: Experience
from the 1920s, IMF Staff-Papers, 40(3): 584-621.

41

Sargent, T. (1983): The End of Four Big Inflations, in Inflation, ed. R. E. Hall,
University of Chicago Press: 124-179.
______________________(1986): Stopping Moderate Inflation, in Inflation, Debt and
Indexation, ed. R. Dornbusch and M. Simonsen, MIT press: 54-95.
Sunkel, O. (1958): Inflation in Chile: An Unorthodox Approach, Trimestre Económico,
100.
United Nations (1951): Technical Assistance Reports on Chile’s Inflation.
Vreeland, J. R. (2003): "Why Do Governments and the IMF Enter into Agreements?
Statistically Selected Cases, International Political Science Review, 24(3): 321-343.
Würth Rojas, E. (1958): Ibáñez: Caudillo Enigmático. Editorial del Pacífico, Santiago,
Chile.

42
Table 1
Inflation Rate: 1946-1958

(Dec. to Dec. CPI % change)
Year
Inflation rate
1946
30.1
1947
23.1
1948
16.8
1949
20.4
1950
16.7
1951
22.8
1952
12.0
1953
56.6
1954
71.0
1955
84.0
1956
37.8
1957
17.1
1958
32.5
1959
32.9
1960
5.4
1961
10.2
1962
26.7
Source: International Financial Statistics, IMF.
Table 2
Multiple Exchange Rates: 1947-1955

(Chilean Pesos per U.S. Dollar at End of Year)
Government
Preferential
Official
1947
19.37
25
31
a
1948
19.37
25
31
1949
19.37
25
31
1950
19.37
25
31
1951
19.37
31
1952
19.37
31
1953
110b
1954
200f
1955
200
Source: Pick’s Currency Yearbook, several issues.
a
Discontinued January 9th
b
Devaluation October 5th
c
Beginning February 4th
d
Beginning August 1st
e
Beginning January 10th
f
Devaluation November 10th

Banking
.
43c
43
43
43
43
-

Special
.
.
.
50d
50
50
-

Commercial
.
.
.
60e
60
60
-

43
Table 3
Fiscal Deficit: 1952-1964

1952

Deficit Fiscal
(% GDP)
4.3

1953

4.9

1954

4.0

1955

4.2

1956

2.2

1957

3.6

1958

3.2

1959

3.9

1960

5.3

1961

5.1

1962

6.2

1963

5.5

1964

4.9

Source: Ffrench Davis (1973) and IMF.

44
Table 4
Credibility and Exchange Rate Premium: Regression Analysis

Constant
Nominal exchange rate disequilibrium
M1 excess of supply
Lagged Premium

(1)
0.283

(3.896)***

1.771

(7.355)***

0.020

(1.905)*

0.779

(2)
0.139

(3.028)***

1.494

(7.477)***

0.016

(2.109)**

0.847

(3)
0.208

(3.913)***

1.657

(8.167)***

0.018

(2.329)**

0.827

(21.772)***

(32.252)***

D552* Lagged Premium

-

-

D561*Lagged Premium

-

-

D562*Lagged Premium

-

-

D571*Lagged Premium

-

-

D572*Lagged Premium

-

-

D581*Lagged Premium

-

-

D582*Lagged Premium

-

-

D552

-

-

D561

-

-

D562

-

-

-

-

(-0.730)

-

-

(-0.527)

-

-

(-0.619)

D571
D572
D581
D582
Adjusted R-squared
Durbin-Watson
Akaike info criterion
Schwarz criterion
F-statistic
Prob(F-statistic)
Sample
Observations

(29.473)***

-0.721

(-2.113)**

-0.721

(-1.993)**

-1.107

(-0.425)

1.865

(0.408)

-0.409

(-0.225)

-0.277

(-0.294)

-0.414

(-0.191)

1.162

(1.531)

0.163

(0.620)

0.133

(0.390)

-0.426
-0.175
-0.183
-0.165

(-0.221)

0.88
1.67
10.41
10.50
313.28
0.00
48-3: 58-12
130

0.90
1.80
10.18
10.25
535.78
0.00
48-3: 62-12
178

0.91
1.73
10.21
10.53
100.34
0.00
48-3: 62-12
178

t-statistics in parentheses. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.

45

Table 5
Credibility and Inflation Inertia: Regression Analysis (IV)

(1)
Constant
Lagged inflation
Lagged M1 growth
Lagged free exchange rate growth
Lagged official exchange rate growth

0.096

(0.123)

0.896

(26.801)***

0.028

(0.689)

0.045

(4.330)***

0.021

(3.018)

DKS*Lagged inflation

(2)
-0.583

(-0.702)

0.938

(31.188)***

0.037

(0.922)

0.043

(4.098)***

0.013

(1.601)

-0.067

-0.071)

0.940

(26.370)***

0.020

(0.555)

0.035

(2.884)***

0.014

(1.386)

-0.044

(-2.358)**

D552* Lagged inflation

0.007

(0.237)

D561* Lagged inflation

-0.052

(-1.738)*

D562* Lagged inflation

-0.036

(-1.217)

D571* Lagged inflation

-0.017

(-0.658)

D572* Lagged inflation

-0.088

(-1.082)

D581* Lagged inflation

0.002

(0.039)

D582*Lagged inflation
AR(12)

(3)

0.042

(0.355)

-0.400

(-4.479)***

-0.423

(-4.999)***

-0.413

(-4.113)***

Adjusted R-squared
0.97
0.98
0.97
Durbin-Watson
1.44
1.56
1.56
F-statistic
1158.96
1023.07
496.10
Prob(F-statistic)
0.00
0.00
0.00
Sample
50:2-62:12
50:2-62:12
50:2-62:12
Observations
155
155
155
t-statistics in parentheses. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.

46

Figure 1
Inflation Rate

90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

1948

1950

1952

1954

1956

1958

1960

1962

1960

1962

Figure 2
Black Market Premium

700
600
500
400
300
200
100
0

1948

1950

1952

1954

1956

1958

47

Figure 3
M1 Growth
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

1948

1950

1952

1954

1956

1958

1960

1962

Figure 4
Parallel and Official Exchange Rate
800
700
600
500
400

Prat's Program

Sep. 55

300
200
Jan. 56

100
0

1953

1954
OER

1955
PER

1956

48

Fugure 5
Inflationary Inertia Coefficient: Kalman Filter Estimation
1.00
0.95
0.90
0.85
0.80
0.75
0.70

1952 1953 1954 1955 1956 1957 1958 1959
INF_INERTIA

SV1_P2SE

SV1_M2SE

49
Appendix
Monthly Data
Variable
Inflation
Official exchange rate
Market exchange rate
Money supply

Definition
Rate of growth of
Consumer Price index
Chilean pesos per U.S.
dollar
Chilean pesos per U.S.
dollar
Monetary base: M1

Source
International Financial Statistics, IMF,
various issues.
Monthly bulletin, Central Bank of Chile,
various issues.
Pick’s Currency Yearbook, Pick
Publishing Corporation, New York,
various issues.
Mamalakis, M. J. (1983): Historical
statistics of Chile. Money, Prices, and
Credit Services. Vol. 4. Greenwood Press.

