                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          INVESTOR COMPETENCE, TRADING FREQUENCY, AND HOME BIAS

                                           John R. Graham
                                          Campbell R. Harvey
                                             Hai Huang

                                         Working Paper 11426
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w11426


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       June 2005




We thank Itzhak Ben-David, Alon Brav, Craig Fox, Simon Gervais, Chip Heath, John Lynch, Terry Odean,
John Payne and seminar participants at Duke University for helpful comments. The views expressed herein
are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

©2005 by John R. Graham, Campbell R. Harvey, and Hai Huang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Investor Competence, Trading Frequency, and Home Bias
John R. Graham, Campbell R. Harvey, and Hai Huang
NBER Working Paper No. 11426
June 2005
JEL No. G11, G15, F30

                                            ABSTRACT

People are more willing to bet on their own judgments when they feel skillful or knowledgeable

(Heath and Tversky (1991)). We investigate whether this "competence effect" influences trading

frequency and home bias. We find that investors who feel competent trade more often and have a

more internationally diversified portfolio. We also find that male investors, and investors with higher

income or more education, are more likely to perceive themselves as competent investors than are

female investors, and investors with lower income or less education. Our results are unlikely to be

explained by other hypotheses, such as overconfidence or information advantage. Finally, we

separately establish a link between optimism towards the home market and international portfolio

diversification.

John R. Graham
Duke University
john.graham@duke.edu

Campbell R. Harvey
Fuqua School of Business
Duke University
Durham, NC 27708-0120
and NBER
cam.harvey@duke.edu

Hai Huang
Duke University
hai.huang@duke.edu
                                        I. INTRODUCTION

      Investor competence is a common thread that ties together two important puzzles in

international and financial economics – the home bias problem (too little is invested outside of

the home market) and the trading frequency problem (investors trade far too often). In a world

where investors’ subjective probability distributions are ambiguous, psychological factors such as

perceived competence can play an important role in explaining investor behavior. Using survey

data, we measure perceived competence and show that it is an economically important variable

that helps explain these important puzzles.

      A large literature in psychology has studied behavior when the probability distribution of

the outcome of a lottery is ambiguous (Camerer and Weber (1992)). Ellsberg (1961) identifies

the concept of ambiguity aversion, which occurs when people prefer to bet on lotteries with

known probabilities of winning, rather than lotteries with ambiguous outcome distributions.

Heath and Tversky (1991) identify a related concept, the competence effect, which posits that

ambiguity aversion is affected by the subjective competence level of participants. When people

feel skillful or knowledgeable in an area, they would rather bet on their own judgment (even

though it is ambiguous) than on an equiprobable chance event (e.g., drawing balls from an urn

with known contents), even though the outcome of the chance event has an unambiguous

probability distribution. However, when participants do not feel competent, they prefer to bet on

the unambiguous chance event. Therefore, the effects of ambiguity aversion are conditional on

the subjective competence level of participants.

      The competence effect is best illustrated using an example (from Heath and Tversky

(1991)). In their experiment, a participant answers a set of knowledge questions concerning

history, geography, or sports. For each question, the participant is asked to report his or her

confidence in the answer, i.e., the subjective probability that his or her given answer is correct.




                                                   2
Finally the participant is presented with two choices, either to bet on his or her own answer, or to

bet on a lottery in which the probability of winning is the same as the stated confidence. Heath

and Tversky find that when people feel very knowledgeable about the subject matter (i.e., they

feel ‘competent’), they are more likely to bet on their own judgments rather than the matched-

chance lottery. When people feel less knowledgeable, however, they tend to choose the matched-

chance lottery.

      The competence effect is particularly relevant to investor behavior. In financial markets,

investors are constantly required to make decisions based on ambiguous, subjective probabilities.

It is likely that their educational background and other demographic characteristics make some

investors feel more competent than others in understanding the array of financial information and

opportunities available to them. In the first part of this paper, we explore the relation between

investor characteristics and self-rated competence. In most behavioral economics research, the

underlying psychological bias is not observed directly, and therefore, these studies have to proxy

for the bias. A well-known example is found in Barber and Odean (2001), where gender is used

as a proxy for degree of overconfidence. Ours is among the few behavioral finance papers that

directly measure the underlying psychological bias. Using data from several UBS/Gallup Investor

Surveys, we measure investor competence through survey responses. This allows us to

empirically model competence as determined by a set of investor characteristics, e.g., gender,

education, and income. We find that male investors, and investors with higher income and more

education, are more likely to believe they are competent than are female investors, and those with

less income and education.

      We also study the link between competence and investor behavior.             Most empirical

behavioral economics research studies one psychological bias to explain one type of investor

behavior. While these studies provide important insights, they do not directly compare which

biases are relatively more important in affecting investor behavior. Furthermore, if a



                                                 3
psychological bias is deeply ingrained, it should affect multiple aspects of investor decision-

making. Our paper takes a first step towards addressing these issues. We study two types of

investor behavior, namely trading frequency and home bias. Although there exist extensive

literatures on both trading frequency and home bias, these two phenomena have always been

treated separately. In this paper, we argue that these two aspects of behavior are driven (at least in

part) by the same underlying psychological bias, namely, the competence effect.1

      With regard to trading frequency, we hypothesize that investors who feel more competent

tend to trade more frequently than investors who feel less competent. This occurs because

investors who feel more knowledgeable in making financial decisions should be more willing to

act on their judgments (Heath and Tversky (1991)). Our empirical results are consistent with this

hypothesis.

      We argue that the competence effect also contributes to home bias. Home bias refers to the

tendency to overweight domestic equities and underweight international equities in investment

portfolios (see, e.g., French and Poterba (1991)). When an investor feels competent about

understanding the benefits and risks involved in investing in foreign assets, he is more willing to

invest in foreign securities. In contrast, when an investor feels less competent, he is more likely

to avoid foreign assets. Consistent with these predictions, our results suggest that investors with

more competence are more likely to invest in international assets.

      We are careful to investigate alternative behavioral mechanisms that could account for

similar effects. Our results suggest that overconfidence, while correlated with competence, does

not subsume the competence effect. We also investigate a measure of optimism in the context of

the home bias problem. We provide what we believe is the first evidence of a direct link between




1
 Kumar and Lim (2004) argue that one psychological bias, narrow framing, is responsible for two
biases, namely the disposition effect and underdiversified portfolios.


                                                  4
optimism towards the domestic market and home bias. While the optimism factor is important,

the evidence on the importance of competence is robust to including optimism in the model.

      The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II reviews related literature and

develops our hypotheses in more detail. Section III discusses the data. Section IV presents the

empirical analysis. Some concluding remarks are offered in the final section.




                                 II. THEORY AND HYPOTHESES

II.A. Ambiguity Aversion and the Competence Effect

      The classic example of ambiguity aversion is found in Ellsberg (1961). Consider two urns,

one containing 50 red balls and 50 black balls, and the other containing 100 balls in unknown

combination of red and black. A participant can choose to draw one ball from either urn, and

guess its color. The participant receives a positive payoff if and only if he guesses correctly.

Ellsberg finds that people would rather bet on the first urn (the known probability event) than on

the second urn (the ambiguous event).

      In the Ellsberg setting, participants are asked to choose between two chance events, with

no subjectivity involved. In financial markets, however, investors make decisions based on

subjective probabilities. For example, an investor might need to determine the probability of

IBM’s stock price decreasing by at least $1 if the Fed raises short-term interest rates by 25 basis

points. Does ambiguity aversion hold under subjective probabilities? According to Heath and

Tversky (1991), the answer to this question depends on the investor’s subjective competence

level. When people feel skillful or knowledgeable, they prefer to bet on their own judgment (an




                                                5
ambiguous event) versus betting on an equiprobable chance event (a known probability event).

In contrast, when they do not feel skillful or knowledgeable, they prefer the chance event.2

       The competence effect can be illustrated with an experiment. Participants first report their

subjective knowledge level about the game of football. Next, they are asked to predict the winner

of a football game and also report their subjective probabilities of the predictions being correct.

Then they are asked to choose between two bets, either to bet on their own judgment, or a lottery

that provides an equal chance of winning. In this example, subjective competence is captured in

two dimensions: the self-rated knowledge level, and the subjective probability of the football

prediction being correct. The results of this experiment are shown in Figure I (adapted from

Heath and Tversky (1991)).       The percentage of participants choosing to bet on their own

judgments increases with both measures of subjective competence. When subjects feel that they

are highly competent in predicting the results of football games, they prefer to bet on their own

judgment. In fact, even when presented with a lottery with a greater chance of winning, they

would still prefer to bet on their football predictions. In other words, they are willing to pay a

premium to bet on their own judgments. When people do not feel competent, however, they

prefer the matched chance lotteries.

       In the long-established economic tradition of expected utility theory, only the probability

distribution of the payoff matters; the confidence that the agent has over the distribution is

irrelevant.   In other words, preferences and probability distributions are assumed to be

independent of each other. The psychology literature cited above offers evidence to the contrary.

People are more willing to act on their judgments when they feel more competent in the area. In

other words, beliefs and preferences are not independent, they are entangled.3



2
  Fox and Tversky (1995) and Fox and Weber (2002) provide further evidence that subjective
feeling of competence plays a role in the willingness to act on one’s own judgment.
3
  See review papers by see Shoemaker (1982), Camerer (1995), and Starmer (2000) for summaries
of other challenges to expected utility theory and new types of preferences that have been


                                                 6
      In financial markets, not all investors feel equally competent in making investment

decisions. In general, an investor with a high school education and annual income of less than

$25,000 may feel less competent as an investor relative to a highly-educated investor with a much

higher income. It is worthwhile emphasizing that competence is a self-perceived skill or

knowledge, not necessarily the investor’s true level of skill or information. For example, an

advanced degree in any subject might make a person feel smart and insightful, and such a person

might therefore feel competent towards many things in general, including making financial

decisions.

      There is an avenue for overconfidence to affect investment decisions within the framework

of competence theory (in addition to overconfidence potentially having an independent effect).

Within the context of the football betting example mentioned above, consider a bettor whose

empirical success in picking winners is 70 percent. If the bettor is not overconfident, he would

correctly perceive himself to be accurate 70 percent of the time. The competence effect states

that the bettor would prefer to bet on his football picks versus being rewarded for selecting a red

ball from an urn with 70 red balls out of a total of 100 balls. Overconfidence can distort an

investor’s subjective probabilities, which accentuates the competence effect. For example,

overconfidence might inflate the investor’s subjective probability that he will pick a winner from

70 percent to 80 percent.4 In this case, the overconfident bettor would prefer to a greater degree

to bet on his football picks versus picking from an urn with 70 red balls. In fact, the bettor would

prefer his picks relative to being rewarded for selecting a red ball from an urn with 80 red balls.




proposed in light of these challenges. In a recent paper, Polkovnichenko (2005) uses new
preferences to explain household portfolio allocations.
4
  In the psychology literature, overconfidence can mean either believing that the distribution of
your knowledge is tighter than it actually is or, believing that your mean skill is higher than it
actually is. In the text, we use the term overconfidence in a general sense, though the meaning
should be clear by the context of the surrounding text. As explained in the next footnote, when
we explicitly refer to distributions that are too tight, we use the term miscalibration.


                                                 7
In the empirical analysis that follows, we test for the effects of overconfidence that flow through

the competence channel, and also test for a separate overconfidence effect.

      As described next, we argue that the level of competence an investor feels in making

financial decisions changes his willingness to act on his judgments, and therefore is an important

determinant of investor choices. We focus on two well-documented investment anomalies: too

frequent trading and home bias.




II.B. Competence and Trading Frequency

      Odean (1999) and Barber and Odean (2000, 2002) argue that investors tend to trade too

often. In addition, the evidence suggests that single, young, male investors trade the most

frequently (Barber and Odean (2001)). This high trading activity is usually attributed to the

psychological bias of investor overconfidence. In the finance literature, overconfidence is usually

defined as overestimating the precision of information about the value of a financial security

(Odean (1998), Gervais and Odean (2001)). This ‘miscalibration’ leads to intensified differences

of opinion among investors, which in turn causes trading (Varian (1989), Harris and Raviv

(1993)).5

      The empirical link between overconfidence and trading frequency has been studied

extensively in recent research. Existing studies disagree on how overconfidence is defined and

measured. Deaves, Luedes and Luo (2004) perform an asset market experiment, and find that

overconfidence, measured as miscalibation, leads to higher trading frequency. However, in their

experiment, these authors do not find a correlation between gender and degree of miscalibration.

Combining survey responses and trading records of German retail brokerage investors, Dorn and

5
 In the psychology literature, miscalibration can mean either ‘expected probability not equal to
realized relative frequency’ or ‘believing that the precision of probability distribution is tighter
than it really is.’ In our paper, miscalibration refers to the distribution for subjective probabilities
being tighter than the true probability distribution.


                                                   8
Huberman (2003) show that there is no relation between trading frequency and their measure of

overconfidence, i.e., an investor’s ‘illusion of knowledge,’ measured as the discrepancy between

the investor’s self-assessed knowledge and his or her true knowledge about investments. Glaser

and Weber (2005) argue that there are three aspects of overconfidence, namely miscalibration, the

‘better-than-average’ effect (i.e., people tend to think that they have higher than average skills),

and illusion-of-control (i.e., the tendency to believe that one’s personal probability of success is

higher than an objective probability would warrant). Using data from 215 online investors, they

find that, contrary to the predictions of Odean (1998) and Gervais and Odean (2001),

miscalibation does not lead to high trading frequency. However, the better-than-average effect is

associated with more frequent trading. Glaser and Weber conjecture that an investor who believes

himself to be better than average is more likely to invest according to his opinion about the future

performance of a stock, even though he knows that other market participants disagree with him.

This contributes to differences of opinion about a stock, which leads to trading.

      The competence effect is distinct from overconfidence. In the overconfidence framework,

the traditional paradigm of maximizing expected utility still holds. Overconfidence increases

trading frequency by increasing the heterogeneity of investor beliefs.        We argue that high

competence leads to high trading frequency, through a different mechanism. Investors are more

willing to bet on their judgments when they feel more skillful or knowledgeable. In other words,

they are more likely to act on their beliefs, and trade securities, when they feel more competent,

and vice versa. Therefore, we hypothesize that when investors feel more competent, they tend to

trade more frequently. This ‘willingness to act’ aspect is absent in the overconfidence framework.




II.C. Competence and Home Bias

      We now turn to the link between competence and an investor’s portfolio allocation to

foreign assets. The home bias literature shows that investors tend to allocate too much of their


                                                 9
overall portfolio to domestic equities and too little to international equities (French and Poterba

(1991), Lewis (1999)). Others have documented ‘home bias at home.’ Coval and Moskowitz

(1999) find that U.S. fund managers exhibit a strong preference for firms with local headquarters.

Huberman (2001) reports the geographical bias of regional Bell shareholders, i.e., a larger

proportion of the shareholders of a regional Bell operating company tend to live in its service area

than would be expected. Benartzi (2001) and Huberman and Sengmuller (2004) document that

employees tend to invest a large proportion of the assets of their retirement plans in their own

company’s stock. Home bias at home has also been reported among Finnish (Grinblatt and

Keloharju (2001)), Swedish (Massa and Simonov (2005)), and Chinese (Feng and Seasholes

(2004)) investors.

      What causes home bias? One explanation is information costs. 6 Investing in foreign

equity markets may require understanding foreign accounting standards and legal environments.

Coval and Moskowitz (2001) find that fund managers earn an extra 2.7 percent per year from

their local investments compared to non-local investments. Therefore, they argue that a regional

information advantage leads to ‘home bias at home.’ Vissing-Jørgensen (2004) finds that high

wealth households are more likely to invest in foreign assets than are low wealth households. She

argues that this is consistent with high wealth households paying the information cost associated

with investing in foreign assets. However, several studies present evidence that cannot be




6
 Other potential explanations for home bias include a) domestic equities provide better hedges for
domestic risks; b) high cost of investing in foreign equities, e.g., international taxes, government
capital restrictions, etc.; and c) prevalence of closely held firms in most countries causing the
world float portfolio to be significantly different from world market portfolio. Further, Demarzo
et. al. (2004) argue that frictions in goods markets cause investors in a local community to hold
similar, under-diversified portfolios. Most empirical studies suggest that these effects are either
too small to account for the degree of home bias observed in the data, or actually increase the
degree of the bias (Cooper and Kaplanis (1994), Baxter and Jermann (1997), Tesar and Werner
(1995), and Dahlquist et al. (2003)). See Lewis (1999) for a review.


                                                10
explained by the information cost argument.7 Benartzi (2001) and Huberman (2001) find that

investors who demonstrate local bias do not experience superior returns, nor do they tend to trade

more frequently. These results are not easily explained by an information advantage story. The

behavioral finance literature offers an alternative explanation, namely, people tend to be more

optimistic towards home markets than towards international markets (Kilka and Weber (2000),

Strong and Xu (2003)).

      In this paper, we argue that investor competence plays a role in explaining home bias.

When an investor feels that he fully understands the benefits and risks involved in investing in

foreign assets, he is more willing to take action to invest in foreign assets. On the other hand,

when an investor feels incompetent, he is likely to refrain from taking action, thus leading to

underinvestment in foreign assets. The same argument could be extended to home bias at home.

      Heath and Tversky’s analysis has often been used as evidence of a familiarity effect

(Huberman (2001)). Investors who are primarily familiar with their home country (versus being

familiar with foreign countries) will have a tendency to invest primarily in home country stocks.

But familiarity is not the whole story. Heath and Tversky (1991) emphasize that competence is

more than familiarity. The competence effect also evokes the feeling that an individual is good at

investing in general, and in foreign stocks in particular. A U.S. investor can be unfamiliar with

foreign languages and cultures but if he feels competent in his investing skills, he might be

willing to allocate part of his portfolio to foreign markets.

      One might be concerned that an investor’s self-rated competence is correlated with the

level of information that the investor has. Thus, even if we do find foreign allocation to be

increasing in investor competence, this could indicate an information advantage. To address this

concern, in section IV.B, we show that investor competence is not positively associated with an

7
 Using ownership data of individual Swedish firms, Dahlquist and Robertsson (2001) argue that
foreign investors’ apparent preference for stocks with less information asymmetry is actually due
to these investors being mainly institutional investors, not due to information costs.


                                                  11
investor’s past returns. Therefore, in our sample, it is does not appear that investor competence is

positively associated with the investor’s level of information.




                       III. DATA SOURCES AND MEASURING COMPETENCE

      We use data from the UBS/Gallup Investor Survey. Each month, UBS/Gallup conducts

telephone interviews with approximately 1,000 randomly selected investors. The only criterion

for an investor to be included in the survey is that household total investment be more than

$10,000. The UBS data represent a general investor pool, and this is important because a

particular class of investors might exhibit certain characteristics that distinguish them from the

general population. For example, Odean (1999) and Barber and Odean’s (2000, 2001, 2002)

evidence of excessive trading is obtained from one particular subset of investors – investors who

hold accounts with one discount brokerage firm. Using data from a single 401(k) plan, Agnew et

al. (2003) find that the average number of transactions per year is 0.26, less than one fifth of that

reported in Odean (1999); and the annual asset turnover is 16 percent, less than one fourth of the

turnover reported in Barber and Odean (2000). The large discrepancies between these findings

likely emanate from differences in behavior among different classes of investors. It is also

possible that one investor may have multiple investment accounts, and manage these accounts

differently due to institutional reasons, which might not be detected when studying one type of

account. Using the UBS/Gallup data, we avoid this issue by studying decisions pertaining to an

investor’s aggregate investment portfolio.

      While the UBS data have the advantage of covering a wide range of investor classes and

account types, there are disadvantages to using survey data. One can not be sure that respondents

understand all the questions, nor that they answer truthfully. There can also be issues related to

non-response bias (i.e., whether the respondent’s answers are representative of the views of the

general population). Also, the UBS data do not have detailed portfolio breakdowns at the


                                                 12
individual stock level, and for the most part we do not know respondents’ actual investment

performance. As reported below, when there is overlap, we are able to replicate the existing

results in the literature. This gives us confidence that data deficiencies do not skew our results.

      The survey questions that are of particular interest to us are listed in Table I. In the June

1999 and April 2000 surveys, respondents are asked to report their trading frequencies. The

responses are coded in six categories, ranging from ‘at least once a day’ to ‘less than once a year.’

In the March 2002, June 2002 and September 2002 surveys, participants are asked to report the

percentages of their portfolios currently invested in assets of foreign countries or foreign

currencies.

      Table II reports the characteristics of the investors surveyed by UBS/Gallup. The investors

are on average 49 years old, with median annual income of $67,500.               These numbers are

comparable to that of Barber and Odean (2001), whose sample of investors are on average 50

years old, with median annual income of $75,000. The investors in our sample are well educated:

60 percent have finished college, and 26 percent have post-graduate education.

      To measure investor competence, we use data from the November 1996 survey. In this

survey, investors are asked the following question: ‘How comfortable do you feel about your

ability to understand investment products, alternatives and opportunities?’ The responses range

from 1 (very uncomfortable) to 5 (very comfortable). For the November 1996 survey, the

average self-rated competence is 3.7.

      To perform our empirical analysis, we need simultaneous measures of investor competence

and either trading frequency or the degree of home bias.            The survey question related to

competence only appears in November 1996, which does not coincide with the appearance of

either the trading frequency or the home bias questions. Therefore, we construct an empirical

model for investor competence. In our analysis below, we use the estimated coefficients from




                                                 13
this model to construct predicted competence for each investor on any given survey, including

those surveys that contain the trading frequency and home bias questions.

      We start by investigating the determinants of investor competence using the November

1996 data. We model competence as a function of investor characteristics such as gender,

education, age and income. Using an ordered logit regression, our proposed model includes three

of these characteristics: gender, education, and income. Age is dropped from the specification

because it does not load significantly.    As specification tests, we perform the Pearson and

deviance goodness-of-fit tests. The Pearson goodness-of-fit test yields p-value of 0.29, while the

deviance goodness-of-fit test has p-value of 0.18. Both of these tests fail to provide evidence

against the specification.

        Recall that competence is defined as the subjective skill or knowledge level in a certain

area (Heath and Tversky (1991)). In our setting, investor competence is an investor’s perceived

financial skill or knowledge. We posited in section II.A that higher education and income make a

person feel competent, which might lead to higher perceived competence in all domains,

including financial decisions. As shown in Table III, the estimated coefficients indicate that

investor competence increases in education. For example, consider an average investor in our

sample, a male investor with annual income of $72,640. If his education level were to increase

from college to post-graduate, the predicted competence for this investor would increase from

4.00 to 4.11. Also consistent with our previous conjecture, investor competence increases with

income. For the typical male, college-educated investor in our sample, if his income were to

increase by one standard deviation from $72,640 to $97,835, the expected investor’s competence

would increase from 4.00 to 4.07.

      Table III also shows that male investors are more likely to feel competent than female

investors. Comparing a college educated female investor, with annual income of $72,640, to a

male investor with the same demographics, the gender differential accounts for an increase of



                                               14
0.39 in predicted investor competence, from 3.61 to 4.00. Notice that in previous studies, gender

has been used as a proxy for overconfidence (Barber and Odean (2001)). These authors argue

that male investors are more overconfident than are female investors. If being male indeed

proxies for overconfidence, at least part of the increase in competence from 3.61 to 4.00 reflects

the effect of overconfidence on competence that we described at the end of Section II.A. As

described below, we also include gender as a stand-alone variable in some of the analysis that

follows, to separately identify any effect of overconfidence that occurs outside of the competence

channel. Finally, to investigate whether our competence variable is in fact distinct from

overconfidence, we examine the correlation between competence and gender, which is a dummy

variable, set to 1 if the investor is male, and 0 otherwise. The correlation between competence

and gender is only 0.21 in the November 1996 data, indicating that our competence measure has

unique variation, distinct from overconfidence (as proxied by male gender). We examine

overconfidence more below.




     IV. EMPIRICAL ANALYSIS OF THE EFFECTS OF COMPETENCE ON INVESTOR BEHAVIOR

IV.A. Investor Competence and Trading Frequency

      Using our model of competence, we now investigate the relation between competence and

trading frequency. Barber and Odean (2001) find that young, male investors tend to trade more

frequently than older, female investors. Using Survey of Consumer Finance data, Vissing-

Jørgensen (2004) finds that wealthier households tend to trade more frequently. Therefore, we

control for gender, age, and income when studying trading frequency. We use income to proxy

for wealth because our data do not have a direct measure of wealth.

      Table IV reports univariate relations between trading frequency, investor competence, and

other characteristics. Recall that in Section II.B, we hypothesized that higher perceived




                                               15
competence increases an investor’s propensity to act on his beliefs, and therefore competence

should be positively associated with trading frequency. The results in Table IV are consistent

with this hypothesis. We observe a significant shift in the distribution of trading frequency as

investor competence changes. When competence is less than or equal to 4.0, 27.5 percent of

investors trade at least once a month. When competence is greater than 4.0, 44.8 percent of

investors trade at least once a month. Overall, the average number of days between trading for all

investors is 93.7 days. For those investors with competence less than or equal to 4.0, the average

number of days between trading is 109.3 days. In contrast, for those investors with competence

greater than 4.0, the average number of days between trading is only 67.9 days. This large

difference in days between trading is both economically and statistically significant and is

consistent with more competent investors trading more frequently.

      Given that we use survey data while many existing studies use actual trading data, it is

important to determine whether our sample produces results similar to those in the extant

literature. The results in Table IV indicate that young, male investors and investors with higher

income tend to trade more frequently than older, female investors and investors with lower

income. (These findings are confirmed in a multivariate setting in column 2 of Table V.) These

results are consistent with the findings of Barber and Odean (2001) and Vissing-Jørgensen (2004).

Therefore, we find no evidence that the source of our data (i.e., a survey) is distorting our results.

      So far, we have presented univariate analysis. In Table V, we perform ordered logit

regressions to explore the relative importance of each variable in explaining trading frequency.

We code the six categories of trading frequency as follows: category = 1 if trading frequency is

‘less than once a year’; 2 if ‘at least once a year, but not more than once a quarter’; 3 if ‘at least

once a quarter, but not more than once a month’; 4 if ‘at least once a month, but not more than

once a week’; 5 if ‘at least once a week, but not more than once a day’; 6 if ‘at least once a day.’




                                                  16
The regression results in the first column of Table V suggest that the effect of competence on

trading frequency is positive and highly significant.

      The positive coefficient estimate indicates that trading frequency increases with investor

competence. The effect of competence is very large in magnitude. When investor competence

increases by one standard deviation, from its mean level of 3.75 to 4.07,8 the probability of an

investor trading more than once per week increases from 9.6 percent to 15.5 percent. While this

increase in trading frequency is large, it is consistent with the magnitude of other implications

from the data. Recall that holding income and education constant at the population averages, male

investor competence minus female investor competence equals 0.39. From Table IV, we know

that this 0.39 increase in competence leads to an increase in the proportion of investors who trade

at least once per week from 8.5 percent (for female investors) to 13.4 percent (for male investors).

Thus, the gender effect is on par with the one standard deviation competence effect described

above.

      Next we introduce investor demographics as control variables: gender, education, age and

income. Recall that investor competence is estimated using gender, education, and income;

therefore, competence is highly correlated with these characteristics. To address the issue of

multicollinearity, we orthogonalize the characteristic variables as follows. First, we estimate a

logit regression using Male as the response variable, and investor competence as the explanatory

variable.   A new variable, MaleX, is computed as the residual of this regression.          MaleX

represents the variation in Male that is not captured by investor competence. The same procedure

is repeated several times to produce orthogonalized versions of the College, Post-Graduate, and

Income variables.


8
 Mean competence is 3.68 in November 1996 survey, in which competence is measured by
investors’ actual responses to a survey question. For the two subsets of sample with sufficient
demographic information to perform the regressions in Table V and Table VIII, investor
competence is calculated using the model presented in Table III. For these two sub-samples,
mean competence is 3.75, and standard deviation is 0.32.


                                                 17
      In column 3 of Table V, we regress trading frequency on competence and the

orthogonalized demographic variables. In this specification, the competence variable captures the

effects of gender, education, and income on trading frequency that occur via the competence

channel. The orthogonalized ‘X’ variables capture the effects of gender, education, and income

that are independent of the competence channel.

      In column 3, the coefficient for investor competence is positive and highly significant. The

estimated coefficient is 1.525, which is very similar to 1.697, the coefficient estimate in column 1,

where investor competence is the only explanatory variable. 9 Interestingly, the coefficient for

MaleX is not significant. In other words, investor competence captures most of the variation in

Male that is associated with trading frequency. Barber and Odean (2001) argue that male

investors tend to trade more frequently than female investors because male investors are more

overconfident.   Our results offer an alternative perspective: more frequent trading by male

investors could be driven by investor competence. Neither of the coefficients for CollegeX or

Post-GraduateX is statistically significant, which suggests that investor competence also captures

the effect of education on trading frequency. In other words, it is possible that education leads to

feelings of competence, which in turn lead to an increase in trading frequency – but we find no

evidence of an independent education effect. The coefficient estimate for IncomeX is 0.013 and

is statistically significant. This implies that only part of the effect of income on trading frequency

is due to its effect on investor competence.

      There exists a large and influential literature in financial economics that studies the effect

of overconfidence on trading frequency. For example, as discussed above, Barber and Odean

(2001) argue that male investors tend to be more overconfident than female investors, leading

male investors to trade more frequently than female investors. More recently, Glaser and Weber


9
 Notice that the “X” variables are residuals from logit regressions. They are not linear functions
of Competence. Therefore, as is evident in Table V, column 3, adding the “X” variables as
explanatory variables can change the estimated Competence coefficient.


                                                 18
(2005) report that the ‘better-than-average’ aspect of overconfidence is associated with higher

trading frequency. In Table V, we show that more frequent trading by male investors could be

driven by investor competence, rather than an independent overconfidence effect.            Gender,

however, does not perfectly proxy for overconfidence, so our efforts thus far may not have

completely disentangled the two effects. In the analysis below, we further investigate how our

results hold up when we control for other measures of overconfidence.

      In the first three columns of Table VI, we attempt to control for the ‘better-than-average’

aspect of overconfidence in the multivariate analysis. Here the ‘better-than-average’ effect,

called ‘Overconfidence’ in the regressions, is measured by an investor’s forecast of his own

portfolio return over the next twelve months minus his forecast of the stock market return over

the next twelve months. As shown in Table II, on average, an investor forecasts his own portfolio

return to be 3.2 percent higher than the market return over the next twelve months. For the June

1999 and April 2000 surveys, the correlation between this measure of overconfidence and

investor gender (equal to 1 if the investor is male, 0 if female) is 0.08, which is statistically

significant at 0.05 level. The correlation between constructed competence and overconfidence for

the June 1999 and April 2000 surveys is only 0.04, which is not statistically significant. Therefore,

this measure of overconfidence is consistent with other finance research that documents a male

overconfidence effect, while at the same time it is statistically distinct from the competence effect

that we focus on in this paper. As shown in Table VI, column 1, after controlling for ‘better than

average’ overconfidence, the effect of competence remains highly statistically significant. The

magnitude of the coefficient decreases only slightly, relative to the univariate regression

coefficient reported in Table V, column 1. Better than average overconfidence is positively and

significantly related to trading frequency in column 1.

      So far, we have considered two proxies for overconfidence and have shown that investor

competence is a significant determinant of trading frequency, controlling for these proxies of



                                                 19
overconfidence. Besides using direct proxies for overconfidence, we now consider an indirect

approach, which deals with another aspect of overconfidence. Recall that we define investor

competence as the self-perceived ability to understand investment opportunities. One could think

of overconfidence as the difference between self-perceived investment ability and an investor’s

true ability: Overconfidence = Competence – True Ability. Therefore, if competence drives

trading frequency, we have the ordered logit regression model:


                       ⎛ Pr(TradingFrequencyi ≤ j) ⎞
                    log⎜                           ⎟ = α j + β * Competencei + ε i
                       ⎝ Pr(TradingFrequencyi 〉 j) ⎠

In the UBS surveys, investors are asked to forecast the stock market return over the next twelve

months. We use these forecasts as a measure of “true ability”. Define ForecastError as the

absolute value of the forecasted minus the realized return over the next twelve months. If

overconfidence drives trading frequency, and assuming an investor’s true ability is measured as

(δ0 + δ1*ForecastError), i.e., the smaller the forecast error, the higher the true ability, then the

regression model should be:


       ⎛ Pr(TradingFrequencyi ≤ j) ⎞
    log⎜                           ⎟ = α j + γ * Overconfidencei + ε i
       ⎝ Pr(TradingFrequencyi 〉 j) ⎠

                                      = α j + γ * (Competence i - (δ 0 + δ1 * ForecastErrori )) + ε i


                                      = α j − γ * δ 0 + γ * Competence i - γ * δ1 * ForecastErrori + ε i


Therefore, if competence and forecast error are both included as explanatory variables for trading

frequency, the competence story would predict that only the coefficient estimate for investor

competence is statistically significant, while the coefficient estimate for forecast error should be

statistically indistinguishable from zero. In contrast, the overconfidence story would predict the

coefficient estimate for forecast error to be different from zero. These predictions are tested in

columns 4 and 5 of Table VI. Since we use data from two surveys conducted at different times,


                                                20
i.e., June 1999 and April 2000, forecast errors are de-meaned by survey to avoid the influence of

general market conditions at the time of the survey. In both columns, the coefficient estimate for

forecast error is small in magnitude and statistically insignificant, while the coefficient estimate

for investor competence remains positive and highly statistically significant. These results are

consistent with the prediction of the competence story and inconsistent with the prediction of the

overconfidence explanation.

      The results in Tables IV, V, and VI are consistent with our first hypothesis: trading

frequency increases with investor competence. Now we turn to our second hypothesis: higher

investor competence leads to less home bias.




IV.B. Investor Competence and Home Bias

      In the March 2002, June 2002, and September 2002 surveys, investors report their foreign

asset holdings (see Table I). We use these data to investigate the relation between investor

competence and home bias.

      Vissing-Jørgensen (2004) reports that wealthier households tend to hold more foreign

assets. Therefore, we control for income (our closest proxy to wealth) when we model home bias.

Kilka and Weber (2000) find that people are more optimistic towards their home markets than

they are about international markets. Strong and Xu (2003) simultaneously survey fund managers

around the world and find a strong tendency for managers to be more optimistic about their home

country market than about the rest of the world. The authors of both of these papers suggest that

home bias is driven by this optimism. Therefore, when studying the relation between investor

competence and home bias, we attempt to control for investor optimism towards the U.S. market.

      In February 2002, May 2002, August 2002 and November 2002, investors respond to the

following question: ‘Focus on the financial markets in four areas of the world and rank order



                                                21
them by how optimistic you feel about them. The financial markets are: in the United States, in

Europe, in Japan, in countries often referred to as the emerging markets.’ We define a dummy

variable, OptimismUS, equal to 1 if an investor is the most optimistic towards the U.S. markets,

and zero otherwise. Overall, 72 percent of investors are more optimistic towards the U.S. market

than towards financial markets in other regions of the world.

       Since the optimism question is not asked in March 2002, June 2002, or September 2002

(the surveys that address foreign investing/home bias), we do not have a direct measure for

OptimismUS for these surveys. Therefore, we construct an empirical model of optimism towards

the U.S. market in the same manner as we did for investor competence. We start by investigating

the determinants of investor optimism towards the U.S. market using data from the February

2002, May 2002, August 2002 and November 2002 surveys.             We regress OptimismUS on

investor characteristics, like gender, education, age and income. Then for all other surveys, we

construct predicted optimism towards the U.S. market for each investor, using his individual

characteristics and the coefficients obtained from the regression above. The mean fitted

OptimismUS is 0.72. The correlation between fitted OptimsmUS and fitted investor competence

is 0.27.

      One might think that an investor’s optimism towards the U.S. market is affected by current

performance of the U.S. market, as well as investor demographics. To address this possibility, we

repeat the analysis allowing OptimismUS to be a function of both investor characteristics and

performance of the U.S. market, e.g., the concurrent return of S&P500 index, or University of

Michigan’s consumer sentiment index. The results are very similar to those reported below.

       Table VII reports univariate relations between home bias and investor competence,

optimism towards the U.S. market, gender, education, age, and income. There is significant

home bias in our sample.      Overall, 36.3 percent of all investors hold foreign assets.    The

remaining 63.7 percent of investors do not own any foreign assets. For those investors with



                                                22
competence less than or equal to 4.0, only 31.9 percent hold foreign assets. In comparison, when

investor competence is greater than 4.0, 47.0 percent invest in foreign assets. This increase is

highly significant, both economically and statistically. This evidence is consistent with our

hypothesis that investor competence mitigates home bias.

      The results in the table also permit the analysis of optimism towards the U.S. market. If

home bias is caused by optimism towards the home market, then higher OptimismUS should be

associated with less foreign holdings. Indeed, when fitted OptimismUS is less than its average

value of 0.72, 38.4 percent of investors choose to hold foreign assets.           However, when

OptimismUS is greater than 0.72, only 34.5 percent of investors choose to invest in international

markets. The difference is statistically significant at the 0.05 level. Although not a main focus of

our study, this observed relation between home bias and OptimismUS is important. Existing

papers like Kilka and Weber (2000) and Strong and Xu (2003) focus on optimism only; they do

not study portfolio allocation. Therefore, these papers do not establish a direct link between

optimism towards the home market and actual portfolio allocation. Our study links home market

optimism with foreign asset holdings.

      Multivariate logit regression results are reported in Table VIII. The response variable is a

dummy variable, set to 1 if an investor holds foreign assets. The first column of Table VIII

shows that investors with higher competence are more likely to hold foreign assets, and investors

with higher optimism towards the U.S. market are less likely to hold foreign assets.            The

coefficients for both investor competence and OptimismUS have the predicted signs and are

significant at the 0.01 level. Importantly, the magnitude and significance of the competence

variable is robust to the inclusion of the optimism variable.

      As discussed in Lewis (1999), most of the existing rational models fail to generate effects

large enough to account for the magnitude of home bias observed in the data. Therefore, it is

important to analyze the economic significance of investor competence. It turns out that the



                                                 23
effect of competence is economically very large. Holding OptimismUS constant at its mean of

0.72, when investor competence increases by one standard deviation from 3.75 to 4.07, the

likelihood of an investor holding foreign assets increases from 36.6 percent to 47.1 percent.

Holding OptimismUS at its mean of 0.72, if investor competence increases to its maximum of 5,

the probability that an investor holds foreign assets increases to 75.9 percent. Therefore, our

estimated effects of investor competence on home bias are economically large.

      We next investigate whether the positive association between fitted investor competence

and foreign asset holdings is due to the positive association between competence and education.

It is possible that investors with better education are more likely to learn the benefits of

international diversification, and therefore are more likely to hold foreign assets. To address this

concern, we study whether the effects of investor competence and OptimismUS remain when we

control for other investor characteristics, like gender, education, age and income.

      Similar to the trading frequency analysis, because fitted competence and fitted

OptimismUS are estimated using investor’s gender, education, age, and income information,

these variables are correlated with each other. We repeat the orthogonalization process described

in Section IV.A. For example, we regress Male on Competence and OptimismUS. The residuals

of this regression, called MaleX, represent the variation in Male that is not captured by

Competence and OptimismUS.

      The fourth column of Table VIII reports the effect of Competence on home bias, with

OptimismUS and the orthogonalized investor characteristics as control variables. The estimated

coefficient of the Competence variable is highly significant and has the predicted sign. These

results are consistent with our hypothesis that investors who feel more competent are more likely

to participate in foreign markets. Interestingly, in Column 4, after the orthogonalization, none of

the investor characteristic variables are statistically significant. This result suggests that these

investor characteristics affect home bias via the competence and/or optimism channels.           In



                                                24
particular, both CollegeX and PostGraduateX have statistically insignificant coefficients, so the

only effect of education on home bias that we detect is through the competence and/or optimism

channel.

      As we discussed in Section II.C, an information story might explain home bias. For

example, if the competence variable captures an investor’s information advantage, instead of

perceived knowledge/skills, our results might indicate that an information advantage increases an

investor’s likelihood of holding foreign assets.        To distinguish between competence and

information, one needs to distinguish between perceived knowledge/skills and actual information.

We do this by considering the relation between information and returns. Investors who are better

informed should earn higher returns than those less informed. However, investors who perceive

themselves to be better informed may not earn higher returns. Therefore, if our measure of

investor competence captures subjectively perceived knowledge instead of true information, then

there is no reason for it to be positively associated with realized abnormal returns.

      In Table IX, we study the relation between investor competence and realized portfolio

returns over the twelve months prior to the survey. 10 To control for market conditions, we add

fixed effects for each survey. We find no evidence that investor competence is associated with

higher returns. In fact, the data indicate the contrary: a one-unit increase in investor competence

is associated with decrease in annual returns by more than 7 percent. The evidence in Table IX

suggests that it is unlikely that our investor competence variable is simply capturing an

information effect.




10
  In Table IX, White (1980) heteroskedasticity adjusted standard errors for coefficient estimates
are reported. One might be concerned that investors with similar degree of competence may hold
similar portfolios, which can result in clustered errors in the regressions in Table IX. To deal
with this concern, we repeat the regressions allowing for the model errors to be clustered based
on levels of competence. The resulting standard errors for coefficient estimates are similar to
those reported in Table IX.


                                                 25
      We do not have investors’ actual portfolio holding data; therefore, we do not control for

individual investors’ risk exposure in the regressions in Table IX. Is it possible that investors

with lower competence tend to take on more risk, and therefore earn higher returns on average?

To address this possibility, for each survey, we calculate the mean self-reported portfolio returns

for high and low competence investors. According to the CAPM, if low competence investors

tend to take on more risk than high competence investors, then the mean returns for low

competence investors should be more sensitive to market returns than those of high competence

investors. As we show in Figure II, this is not the case. The mean returns for both low and high

competence investors are equally sensitive to market returns (i.e., the slopes on the lines are

indistinguishable). There is no evidence that low competence investors take on more risk than

high competence investors. Therefore, it does not appear to be the case that risk exposures drive

the results in Table IX.




                                V. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

      The competence effect predicts that the likelihood that a person will invest according to her

own judgment increases with her perceived knowledge about investing. Unlike many empirical

studies of behavioral finance, which rely on proxies for underlying psychological biases, we

directly measure investor competence through survey evidence. We first build an empirical

model to understand the factors that affect investor competence. We find that male investors, and

investors with higher income or more education, are more likely to perceive themselves as

competent investors than are female investors, and investors with lower income or less education.

      We study the effect of competence on investor behavior.           The majority of existing

empirical studies in behavioral finance use one psychological bias to explain one type of investor

behavior. However, if a psychological bias is deeply ingrained, it should affect multiple aspects

of investor behavior. In this paper, we study the effect of investor competence on two types of


                                                26
investor behavior: trading frequency and home bias. Trading frequency and home bias have long

been treated separately in the literature. However, we show in this paper that both of these

behaviors can be linked to investor competence.

      We argue that investors who believe that they are more skillful or knowledgeable in

making financial decisions should be more willing to act on their judgments. Indeed, our results

indicate that investors who feel more competent tend to trade more frequently than investors who

feel less competent. The competence effect also contributes to home bias. When an investor

feels more competent about investing in foreign assets, he is more willing to shift a portion of his

assets overseas. In contrast, when an investor feel less competent, he is more likely to avoid

investing in foreign assets. Consistent with this argument, we find that investors with higher

competence are less likely to exhibit home bias.




                                                27
                                              REFERENCES

Agnew, Julie, Pierluigi Balduzzi and Annika Sunden, 2003, Portfolio choice and trading in a large 401(k)
    plan, American Economic Review 93, 193-215.
Barber, Brad M., and Terrance Odean, 2000, Trading is hazardous to your wealth: the common stock
    investment performance of individual investors, Journal of Finance 55, 773-806.
Barber, Brad M., and Terrance Odean, 2001, Boys will be boys: gender, overconfidence, and common
    stock investment, Quarterly Journal of Economics 116, 261-292.
Barber, Brad M., and Terrance Odean, 2002, Online investors: do the slow die first?, Review of Financial
    Studies 15, 455-487.
Baxter, Marianne, and Urban J. Jermann, 1997, The international diversification puzzle is worse than you
     think, American Economic Review 87, 170-180.
Benartzi, Shlomo, 2001, Excessive extrapolation and the allocation of (401)k accounts to company stock,
    Journal of Finance 56, 1747-1764.
Camerer, Colin, 1995, Individual decision making. In: Kagel, John H., and Alvin E. Roth (Eds.),
    Handbook of Experimental Economics. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, pp. 587-703.
Camerer, Colin and Martin Weber, 1992, Recent Development in Modeling Preferences: Uncerntainty and
    Ambiguity, Journal of risk and uncertainty 5, 325-370.
Cooper, Ian A., and Evi Kaplanis, 1994, Home bias in equity portfolios, inflation hedging, and international
    capital market equilibrium, Review of Financial Studies 7, 45-60.
Coval, Joshua D., and Tobias J. Moskowitz, 1999, Home bias at home: local equity preference in domestic
    portfolios, Journal of Finance 54, 2045-2074.
Coval, Joshua D., and Tobias J. Moskowitz, 2001, The geography of investment: informed trading and
    asset prices, Journal of Political Economy 109, 811-841.
Dahlquist, Magnus, and Göran Robertsson, 2001, Direct foreign ownership, institutional investors, and firm
    characteristics, Journal of Financial Economic 59, 413-440.
Dahlquist, Magnus, Lee Pinkowitz, René Stultz, and Rohan Williamson, 2003, Corporate governance and
    the home bias, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 38, 87-110.
Deaves, Richard, Erik Lueders, and Guo Ying Luo, 2004, An experimental test of the impact of
    overconfidence and gender on trading activity, Working Paper, McMaster University.
Demarzo, Peter M., Ron Kaniel, and Ilan Kremer, 2004, Diversificatio as a public good: community effects
   in portfolio choice, Journal of Finance 59, 1677-1715.
Dorn, Daniel, and Gur Huberman, 2003, Talk and action: What individual investors say and what they do,
    Working Paper, Columbia University.
Ellsberg, Daniel, 1961, Risk, ambiguity, and the Savage axioms, Quarterly Journal of Economics 75, 643-
     669.
Feng, Li and Mark S. Seasholes, 2004, Correlated trading and location, Journal of Finance 59, 2117-2144.
Fox, Craig R., and Amos Tversky, 1995, Ambiguity aversion and comparative ignorance, Quarterly
     Journal of Economics 110, 585-603.
Fox, Craig R., and Martin Weber, 2002, Ambiguity aversion, comparative ignorance, and decision context.
     Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 88, 476-498.
French, Kenneth R., and James M. Poterba, 1991, Investor diversification and international equity markets,
     American Economic Review 81, 222-226.




                                                    28
Gervais, Simon, and Terrance Odean, 2001, Learning to be overconfident, Review of Financial Economics
    14, 1-27.
Glaser, Markus, and Martin Weber, 2005, Overconfidence and trading volume, Working Paper, Universität
     Mannheim.
Grinblatt, Mark, and Matti Keloharju, 2001, How distance, language, and culture influence stock holdings
     and trades, Journal of Finance 56, 1053-1073.
Harris, Milton, and Artur Raviv, 1993, Differences of opinion make a horse race, Review of Financial
     Studies 6, 473-506.
Heath, Chip, and Amos Tversky, 1991, Preferences and beliefs: ambiguity and the competence in choice
     under uncertainty, Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 4, 5-28.
Huberman, Gur, 2001, Familiarity breeds investment, Review of Financial Studies 14, 659-680.
Huberman, Gur, and Paul Sengmuller, 2004, Performance and Employer Stock in 401(k) Plans, Review of
    Finance 8, 403-443.
Kilka, Michael, and Martin Weber, 2000, Home bias in international stock return expectations, Journal of
     Psychology and Financial Markets 1, 176-193.
Kumar, Alok, and Sonya Lim, 2004, One trade at a time: Narrow framing and stock investment decisions
   of individual investors, Working Paper, Notre Dame.
Lewis, Karen, 1999, Trying to explain home bias in equities and consumption, Journal of Economic
    Literature 37, 571-608.
Massa, Massimo and Andrei Simonov, 2005, Hedging, familiarity and portfolio choice, Review of
    Financial Studies, Forthcoming.
Odean, Terrance, 1998, Volume, volatility, price, and profit when all investors are above average, Journal
    of Finance 53, 1887-1934.
Odean, Terrance, 1999, Do investors trade too much?, American Economic Review 89, 1279-1298.
Polkovnichenko, Valery, 2005, Household portfolio diversification: a case for rank dependent preferences,
     Review of Financial Studies, Forthcoming.
Shoemaker, Paul J. H., 1982, The expected utility model: its variants, purposes, evidence and limitations,
    Journal of Economic Literature, 20, 529-563.
Starmer, Chris, 2000, Developments in non-expected utility theory: the hunt for a descriptive theory of
     choice under risk, Journal of Economic Literature, 38, 332-382.
Strong Norman, and Xinzhong Xu, 2003, Understanding the equity home bias: evidence from survey data,
     Review of Economics and Statistics 85, 307-312.
Tesar, Linda and Ingrid Werner, 1995, Home bias and high turnover, Journal of International Money and
     Finance 14, 467-92.
Varian, Hal R., 1989, Differences of opinion in financial markets, Financial risk: theory, evidence and
     implications, Courtenay C. Stone ed. (Proceedings of the eleventh annual economic policy conference
     of the federal reserve bank of St. Louis, Boston, 1989).
Vissing-Jørgensen, Annette, 2004, Perspectives on behavioral finance: does “irrationality” disappear with
     wealth? Evidence from expectations and actions, NBER Macroeconomics Annual 18, 139-194.
White, Halbert, 1980, A heteroskedasticity-consistent covariance matrix estimator and a direct test for
    heteroskedasticity, Econometrica 48, 817-838.




                                                   29
                                             Table I
                       Survey Questions, from UBS/Gallup Investor Survey


                               Survey Questions                            Data Availability
Trading Frequency              In general, how often do you trade in       June 1999
                               the financial markets?                      April 2000

Home Bias                      What percent of your portfolio is           March 2002
                               currently in assets of foreign countries    June 2002
                               or foreign currencies?                      September 2002

Investor competence            How comfortable do you feel about           November 1996
                               your ability to understand investment
                               products,       alternatives       and
                               opportunities?
                               The responses range from 1 (very
                               uncomfortable) to 5 (very comfortable).

Overconfidence                 What overall rate of return do you          June 1999
                               expect to get on your portfolio in the      April 2000
                               next twelve months?                         February 2002
                                                                           March 2002

                               What overall rate of return do you think    May 2002
                               the stock market will provide investors     June 2002
                               during the coming twelve months?            August 2002
                                                                           September 2002
                                                                           November 2002

Optimism toward U.S. market    Focus on the financial markets in four      February 2002
                               areas of the world and rank order them      May 2002
                               by how optimistic you feel about them.      August 2002
                               The financial markets are: in the United    November 2002
                               States, in Europe, in Japan, in countries
                               often referred to as the emerging
                               markets.




                                                30
                                                 Table II
                                         Investor Characteristics

Optimism towards the U.S. market is defined as follows. An investor rank orders financial markets from
four areas of the world by how optimistic he feels about them. The financial markets are: the United States,
Europe, Japan, and emerging markets. Optimism towards the U.S. market is set to 1 if an investor is the
most optimistic towards the U.S. market, set to 0 otherwise. Overconfidence is defined as the margin by
which an investor thinks that his own portfolio return could beat the market return over the next twelve
months. Overconfidence is calculated as follows: (forecast of own portfolio return over the next twelve
months) minus (forecast of stock market return over the next twelve months). Data are from the following
surveys: November 1996, June 1999, April 2000, February 2002, March 2002, May 2002, June 2002,
August 2002, September 2002 and November 2002. The total number of observations is 7,452.

                                                           Percent     Mean (Median)         Std Dev
    Competence (1=low, 5=high)                                          3.68 (4.00)            1.01

    Optimism towards U.S. market                                         0.72 (1.00)           0.45
    (1 = the most optimistic towards U.S. market,
    0 = the most optimistic towards a non-U.S. market)

    Overconfidence (%)                                                   3.20 (0.00)          17.09

    Education
      Less than college                                    40.02%
      College                                              33.76%
      Post-Graduate                                        26.22%

    Investment                                                            $199,643          $254,061
                                                                          ($55,000)
      $10,000 - $100,000                                   58.62%
      $100,000 - $200,000                                  16.45%
      $200,000 - $500,000                                  13.90%
      $500,000 - $1 million                                6.49%
      More than $1 million                                  4.54%

    Income                                                                 $72,640           $25,195
                                                                          ($67,500)
      Less than $50,000                                    23.22%
      $50,000 - $100,000                                   46.07%
      More than $100,000                                   30.70%

    Gender
      Male                                                 59.15%
      Female                                               40.85%

    Age                                                                 48.70 (48.00)         13.95
       < 30                                                 7.63%
      30 – 40                                              22.46%
      40 – 50                                              28.34%
      50 – 60                                              22.31%
      >= 60                                                19.26%

    Self-reported previous one year return (%)
      All surveys                                                        2.09 (5.00)          21.02




                                                    31
                                                Table III
                                   Determinants of Investor Competence

Investor competence is measured as the response to the following survey question: “How comfortable do
you feel about your ability to understand investment products, alternatives and opportunities?” The
responses range from 1 (very uncomfortable) to 5 (very comfortable). An ordered logit regression is
estimated. College and Post-Graduate are dummy variables which are set to 1 if an investor reports an
education level of college and post-graduate respectively, and 0 otherwise. Male is a dummy variable,
equal to 1 if the investor is male; 0 if the investor is female. Income is categorical. We take the mid-point
of each category. The top category for income is “more than $100,000 per year.” Income in this category
is set to equal to $100,000. ***, **, * denote significance at 0.01, 0.05, and 0.10, respectively. Data are from
the November 1996 survey.

                                                 Estimate                    Std Err
             Intercept 5                         -2.499***                   0.202
             Intercept 4                         -0.893***                   0.182
             Intercept 3                         1.022***                    0.190
             Intercept 2                         2.669***                    0.280
             Male                                0.762***                    0.138
             College                             0.692***                    0.165
             Post-Graduate                       0.909***                    0.186
             Income                              0.005**                     0.002
             Pseudo R2                           0.115
             No. of observations                 744




                                                      32
                                                                           Table IV
                                                                       Trading Frequency

This table presents the distribution of trading frequency. Competence is estimated using investor characteristics that measure gender, education, and income.
Overconfidence is defined as the forecast of investor’s own portfolio return minus forecast of market return over the next 12 months. “Days between trading” is
calculated at the mid-point of each response category. We test the effect of investor characteristics by comparing average number of days between trading at the
lowest response value of a given variable with the average number of days between trading at higher response values. ***, **, * denote significance at 0.01, 0.05,
and 0.10, respectively. Data are from June 1999 and April 2000 surveys.

                                     At least once   At least once   At least once a   At least once a   At least once   Average days        No. of
                                     a day           a week          month             quarter           a year          between trading     obs.
          All investors                  3.1%           11.6%            34.0%              75.7%           93.7%              93.7             670
          Competence
            <= 4                         2.9%           10.8%            27.5%             69.6%            91.9%             109.3              418
            >4                           3.6%           13.1%            44.8%             85.7%            96.8%             67.9***            252
          Overconfidence
            <= 3.2%                      2.8%           9.5%             32.5%             72.8%            93.1%             100.4              422
            > 3.2%                       3.6%           15.3%            36.7%             80.7%            94.8%             82.3**             248
          Gender
            Male                         3.5%           13.4%            40.3%             82.0%            95.6%             77.6               434
            Female                       2.5%           8.5%             22.5%             64.0%            90.2%            123.4***            236
          Education
            Less than college            3.6%           11.8%            25.6%             68.2%            89.7%             115.2              195
            College                      2.4%           11.5%            35.3%             78.2%            96.4%             85.4***            252
            Post-Graduate                3.6%           11.7%            39.9%             79.4%            94.2%             84.5***            223
          Age
            <30                          3.0%           21.2%            47.0%             87.9%            97.0%               66              62.0
            30 – 40                      6.4%           12.3%            39.0%             84.5%            98.4%              70.3             187
            40 – 50                      2.5%           10.5%            28.5%             70.5%            92.5%            106.6***           200
            50 – 60                      1.6%           11.3%            35.5%             75.8%            93.6%             93.3**            124
            >= 60                        0.0%            6.4%            24.7%             60.2%            84.9%            136.4***            93
          Income
            Less than $50,000            1.2%            4.7%            18.8%             56.5%            84.7%             145.7               85
            $50,000 - $100,000           1.3%           9.0%             28.0%             71.7%            92.5%            105.1***            321
            More than $100,000           6.1%           17.0%            46.2%             86.7%            98.1%            63.2***             264




                                                                                 33
                                                 Table V
                                Investor Competence and Trading Frequency

We estimate the impact of investor competence and other investor attributes on trading frequency using
ordered logit regressions. The response variable is trading frequency. There are six categories, coded as
following: category = 1 if trading frequency is “less than once a year”; category = 2 if trading frequency is
“at least once a year, but not more than once a quarter”; category = 3 if trading frequency is “at least once a
quarter, but not more than once a month”; category = 4 if trading frequency is “at least once a month, but
not more than once a week”; category = 5 if trading frequency is “at least once a week, but not more than
once a day”; category = 6 if trading frequency is “at least once a day.” Competence is estimated using
investor characteristics that measure gender, education, and income (see Table III). College and Post-
Graduate are dummy variables that are set to 1 if an investor reports an education level of college and post-
graduate respectively, and 0 otherwise. Male is a dummy variable, equal to 1 if the investor is male; 0 if
the investor is female. Income is categorical. We take the mid-point of each category. The top category
for income is “more than $100,000 per year.” Income in this category is set to $100,000. MaleX is the
residual of the following logit regression: regress Male onto Competence. CollegeX, Post-GraduateX, and
IncomeX are calculated in the same manner. Intercepts are not reported. Standard errors are in parentheses.
*** ** *
   , , denote significance at 0.01, 0.05, and 0.10, respectively. Data are from June 1999 and April 2000
surveys.


                                                (1)               (2)              (3)
                   Competence                1.697***                           1.525***
                                             (0.244)                            (0.247)
                   Male                                        0.693***
                                                                (0.152)
                   College                                       0.119
                                                                (0.180)
                   Post-Graduate                                 0.156
                                                                (0.188)
                   Income                                       0.019***
                                                                (0.003)
                   Age                                         -0.026***       -0.026***
                                                                (0.006)         (0.006)
                   MaleX                                                         -0.185
                                                                                (0.609)
                   CollegeX                                                      -0.629
                                                                                (0.554)
                   Post-GraduateX                                                -0.861
                                                                                (0.712)
                   IncomeX                                                      0.013**
                                                                                (0.005)
                   Pseudo R2                  0.075              0.133           0.134
                   No. of obs                  670                670             670




                                                        34
                                             Table VI
                    Investor Competence, Overconfidence, and Trading Frequency

We investigate the impact of investor competence on trading frequency, controlling for overconfidence and
other investor attributes. Ordered logit regressions are estimated. The response variable is trading
frequency. There are six categories, coded as following: category = 1 if trading frequency is “less than
once a year”; category = 2 if trading frequency is “at least once a year, but not more than once a quarter”;
category = 3 if trading frequency is “at least once a quarter, but not more than once a month”; category = 4
if trading frequency is “at least once a month, but not more than once a week”; category = 5 if trading
frequency is “at least once a week, but not more than once a day”; category = 6 if trading frequency is “at
least once a day.” Competence is estimated using investor characteristics that measure gender, education,
and income (see Table III). Overconfidence is measured as (forecast of own portfolio return over the next
twelve months – forecast of stock market return over the next twelve months). ForecastError is calculated
in two steps. First, the absolute value of (forecast of overall return of the stock market over the next twelve
months minus the realized return of the stock market over the next twelve months) is obtained. Then, the
mean absolute forecast error of all respondents for the particular survey, i.e., June 1999 survey or April
2000 survey, is subtracted from the individual absolute forecast errors to arrive at ForecastError. College
and Post-Graduate are dummy variables that are set to 1 if an investor reports an education level of college
and post-graduate respectively, and 0 otherwise. Male is a dummy variable, equal to 1 if the investor is
male; 0 if the investor is female. Income is categorical. We take the mid-point of each category. The top
category for income is “more than $100,000 per year.” Income in this category is set to $100,000. MaleX
is the residual of the following logit regression: regress Male onto Competence. CollegeX, Post-GraduateX,
and IncomeX are calculated in the same manner. Intercepts are not reported. Standard errors are in
parentheses. Overconfidence and ForecastError are both winsorized at 0.01 and 0.99. ***, **, * denote
significance at 0.01, 0.05, and 0.10, respectively. Data are from June 1999 and April 2000 surveys.


                             (1)                (2)               (3)               (4)             (5)
Competence                1.671***                             1.508***          1.770***        1.581***
                          (0.244)                              (0.247)           (0.249)         (0.252)
Overconfidence            1.517**              1.261            1.260
                          (0.767)             (0.773)          (0.772)
ForecastError                                                                     0.011            0.008
                                                                                 (0.008)          (0.008)
Male                                          0.673***
                                              (0.153)
College                                        0.124
                                              (0.180)
Post-Graduate                                  0.160
                                              (0.188)
Income                                        0.019***
                                              (0.003)
Age                                          -0.025***         -0.026***                         -0.026***
                                              (0.006)           (0.006)                           (0.006)
MaleX                                                            -0.201                            -0.151
                                                                (0.609)                           (0.609)
CollegeX                                                         -0.622                            -0.607
                                                                (0.554)                           (0.554)
Post-GraduateX                                                   -0.853                            -0.826
                                                                (0.712)                           (0.713)
IncomeX                                                         0.013**                           0.014**
                                                                (0.005)                           (0.005)
Pseudo R2                  0.080               0.137              0.129           0.078             0.135
No. of obs                  670                 670                670             670               670




                                                       35
                                                 Table VII
                                                 Home Bias

Percentage of investors who own foreign investments. Competence is estimated using investor
characteristics that measure gender, education, and income. OptimismUS is estimated using investor
characteristics that measure gender, education, age, and income. We test the effect of investor
characteristics by comparing the decision to invest in foreign assets at the lowest response value of a given
variable with the decision to invest in foreign assets at higher response values. ***, **, * denote significance
at 0.01, 0.05, and 0.10, respectively. Data are from March 2002, June 2002 and September 2002 surveys.
The total number of observations is 2,483.

                                                         Own foreign        No. of
                                                         investment         obs.
                        All investors                        36.3%             901
                        Competence
                          <= 4                                31.9%             560
                          >4                                 47.0%***           341
                        OptimismUS
                          <= 0.72                             38.4%             437
                          > 0.72                             34.5%**            464
                        Gender
                          Male                                39.1%             578
                          Female                             32.2%***           323
                        Education
                          Less than college                   27.4%             272
                          College                            37.9%***           328
                          Post-Graduate                      48.1%***           301
                        Age
                          <30                                 33.9%             64
                          30 – 40                            43.0%**            233
                          40 – 50                             38.8%             273
                          50 – 60                             35.2%             194
                          >= 60                               27.5%             137
                        Income
                          Less than $50,000                   24.8%             135
                          $50,000 - $100,000                 36.4%***           435
                          More than $100,000                 44.6%***           331




                                                      36
                                              Table VIII
                                  Investor Competence and Home Bias

We study the impact of investor competence and other investor attributes on home bias using logit
regressions. The dependent variable is participation in foreign assets, equal to 1 if investor holds foreign
assets, and 0 otherwise. Competence is estimated using investor characteristics that measure gender,
education, and income. OptimismUS is estimated using investor characteristics that measure gender,
education, age, and income. College and Post-Graduate are dummy variables that are set to 1 if an investor
reports an education level of college and post-graduate respectively, and 0 otherwise. Male is a dummy
variable, equal to 1 if the investor is male; 0 if the investor is female. Income is categorical. We take the
mid-point of each category. The top category for income is “more than $100,000 per year.” Income in this
category is set to $100,000. MaleX is the residual of the following logit regression: regress Male onto
Competence and OptimismUS. CollegeX, Post-GraduateX, ageX, and IncomeX are calculated the same
way. Data are from March 2002, June 2002, and September 2002. Intercepts are not reported. Standard
errors are in parentheses. ***, **, * denote significance at 0.01, 0.05, and 0.10, respectively.



                                (1)                    (2)                   (3)                 (4)
 Competence                  1.359***               1.233***                                  1.387***
                             (0.145)                (0.138)                                    (0.148)
 OptimismUS                 -2.581***                                                         -2.713***
                             (0.813)                                                           (0.829)
 Male                                                                      0.190**
                                                                           (0.089)
 College                                                                   0.308***
                                                                           (0.104)
 Post-Graduate                                                             0.708***
                                                                           (0.112)
 Income                                                                    0.009***
                                                                           (0.002)
 Age                                                                      -0.009***
                                                                           (0.003)
 MaleX                                                                                          -0.321
                                                                                               (0.339)
 CollegeX                                                                                       -0.056
                                                                                               (0.205)
 Post-GraduateX                                                                                  0.423
                                                                                               (0.347)
 IncomeX                                                                                         0.004
                                                                                               (0.005)
 AgeX                                                                                           -0.020
                                                                                               (0.017)
 Pseudo R2                    0.050                   0.045                 0.064                0.064
 No. of obs                   2483                    2483                  2483                 2483




                                                    37
                                               Table IX
                                Investor Competence and Realized Returns

The association between investor competence and realized returns is studied using OLS regressions. The
dependent variable is an investor’s self-reported return of the previous twelve months, measured in
percentage. Competence is estimated using investor characteristics that measure gender, education, and
income. OptimismUS is estimated using investor characteristics that measure gender, education, age, and
income. Mar02 is a dummy variable, set to 1 if the data are from March 2002 survey, zero otherwise.
June02 is defined similarly. Self-reported return of the previous twelve months is winsorized at 0.01 and
0.99. Data are from March 2002, June 2002, and September 2002. White (1980) standard errors are in
parentheses. ***, **, * denote significance at 0.01, 0.05, and 0.10, respectively.



                                                  (1)                   (2)
                    Intercept                 32.932***              25.716***
                                               (7.945)                (5.924)
                    Mar02                      7.051***              7.081***
                                               (1.164)                (1.164)
                    June02                     7.120***              7.126***
                                               (1.181)                (1.181)
                    Competence                -7.732***              -8.265***
                                               (1.373)                (1.555)
                    OptimismUS                 -12.671
                                               (9.744)
                    Adjusted R2                 0.042                  0.041
                    No. of obs                  1723                   1723




                                                   38
                                             Figure I
   Percentage of Participants that Choose Their Own Judgments over Matched Chance Lotteries

The horizontal axis is the self-rated probability of a participant’s judgment being correct. The vertical axis
is the percentage of participants that choose their own judgments over matched chance lotteries. This
figure is adapted from Heath and Tversky (1991), Figure 4.



                                                   100

                                                    90                   High Knowledge

                                                    80
                         Choosing Own Judgements


                                                    70
                              % of Participants




                                                    60
                                                                                               Low Knowledge
                                                    50

                                                    40

                                                    30

                                                    20

                                                    10

                                                     0
                                                         40     50       60        70     80       90       100
                                                              Se lf Rate d Probability of Be ing Corre ct




                                                                              39
                                                                       Figure II
                                         Market Risk Exposure of Low Competence and High Competence Investors

The horizontal axis is the previous twelve months return of S&P500 index. The vertical axis is the mean
portfolio returns for low and high competence investors for the same twelve months. Low competence is
defined as competence less than or equal to 4.0; high competence is defined as competence greater than 4.0.
▲represents low competence investors, ♦ represents high competence investors. Data are from March 2002,
June 2002, and September 2002.



                                         6

                                         4
       Mean Investor Portfolio Return




                                         2

                                         0          Low Competence

                                         -2

                                         -4                                          High Competence

                                         -6

                                         -8

                                        -10
                                              -25           -20           -15              -10         -5       0
                                                                  Previous Year S&P500 Index Return




                                                                                40
