                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     ETHNIC IDENTIFICATION, INTERMARRIAGE,
                AND UNMEASURED PROGRESS BY MEXICAN AMERICANS

                                              Brian Duncan
                                             Stephen J. Trejo

                                          Working Paper 11423
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w11423


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       June 2005




The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by Brian Duncan and Stephen J. Trejo. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Ethnic Identification, Intermarriage, and Unmeasured Progress by Mexican Americans
Brian Duncan and Stephen J. Trejo
NBER Working Paper No. 11423
June 2005
JEL No. J12, J15, J62

                                          ABSTRACT

Using Census and CPS data, we show that U.S.-born Mexican Americans who marry non-Mexicans
are substantially more educated and English proficient, on average, than are Mexican Americans who
marry co-ethnics (whether they be Mexican Americans or Mexican immigrants). In addition, the
non-Mexican spouses of intermarried Mexican Americans possess relatively high levels of schooling
and English proficiency, compared to the spouses of endogamously married Mexican Americans.
The human capital selectivity of Mexican intermarriage generates corresponding differences in the
employment and earnings of Mexican Americans and their spouses. Moreover, the children of
intermarried Mexican Americans are much less likely to be identified as Mexican than are the
children of endogamous Mexican marriages. These forces combine to produce strong negative
correlations between the education, English proficiency, employment, and earnings of
Mexican-American parents and the chances that their children retain a Mexican ethnicity. Such
findings raise the possibility that selective ethnic “attrition” might bias observed measures of
intergenerational progress for Mexican Americans.
Brian Duncan
Department of Economics
University of Colorado at Denver
Campus Box 181
Denver, CO 80217-3364
bduncan@carbon.cudenver.edu

Stephen J. Trejo
Department of Economics
University of Texas at Austin
1 University Station C3100
Austin, TX 78712-0301
trejo@eco.utexas.edu
I. Introduction1

         One of the most important and controversial questions in U.S. immigration research is

whether the latest wave of foreign-born newcomers (or their U.S.-born descendants) will

ultimately assimilate into the mainstream of American society, and whether the pace and extent

of such assimilation will vary across immigrant groups. In terms of key economic outcomes such

as educational attainment, occupation, and earnings, the sizeable differences by national origin

that initially persisted among earlier European immigrants have largely disappeared among the

modern-day descendants of these immigrants (Neidert and Farley 1985; Lieberson and Waters

1988; Farley 1990). There is considerable skepticism, however, that the processes of

assimilation and adaptation will operate similarly for the predominantly non-white immigrants

who have entered the United States in increasing numbers over the past thirty years (Gans 1992;

Portes and Zhou 1993; Rumbaut 1994). In a controversial new book, Huntington (2004) voices a

particularly strong version of such skepticism with regard to Hispanic immigration.

         Mexicans assume a central role in current discussions of immigrant intergenerational

progress and the outlook for the so-called “new second generation,” not just because Mexicans

make up a large share of the immigrant population, but also because most indications of relative

socioeconomic disadvantage among the children of U.S. immigrants vanish when Mexicans are

excluded from the sample (Perlmann and Waldinger 1996, 1997). Therefore, to a great extent,

concern about the long-term economic trajectory of immigrant families in the United States is

concern about Mexican-American families.

         Several recent studies compare education and earnings across generations of Mexican


         1
          For helpful comments and advice, we are grateful to Jorge Chapa, Alberto Davila, Dan Hamermesh, Harry Holzer,
Bob Hummer, Marie Mora, Gerald Oettinger, Art Sakamoto, Adela de la Torre, and participants in the NBER conference on
Mexican immigration. We thank the Russell Sage Foundation for initial support of this research.
                                                              2

Americans (Trejo 1997, 2003; Fry and Lowell 2002; Farley and Alba 2002; Grogger and Trejo

2002; Livingston and Kahn 2002; Blau and Kahn 2005; Duncan, Hotz, and Trejo 2005). Table 1

illustrates the basic patterns that emerge for men.2 Between the first and second generations,

average schooling rises by almost three and one-half years and average hourly earnings grow by

about 30 percent for Mexicans. The third generation, by contrast, shows little or no additional

gains, leaving Mexican-American men with an educational deficit of 1.3 years and a wage

disadvantage of about 25 percent, relative to whites. Similar patterns emerge for women, and

also when regressions are used to control for other factors such as age and geographic location

(Grogger and Trejo 2002; Blau and Kahn 2005; Duncan, Hotz, and Trejo 2005).

         The apparent lack of socioeconomic progress between second and later generations of

Mexican Americans is surprising. Previous studies have consistently found parental education to

be one of the most important determinants of an individual’s educational attainment and ultimate

labor market success (Haveman and Wolfe 1994; Mulligan 1997). Through this mechanism, the

huge educational gain between first- and second-generation Mexican Americans should produce

a sizable jump in schooling between the second and third generations, because on average the

third generation has parents who are much better educated than those of the second generation.

Yet the improvement in schooling we expect to find between the second and third generations is

largely absent.

         The research summarized in Table 1 suggests that intergenerational progress stalls for

Mexican Americans after the second generation. As noted by Borjas (1993) and Smith (2003),


         2
            These averages are calculated from March 1998-2002 Current Population Survey data, with standard errors shown in
parentheses. The samples for the earnings data are limited to individuals who worked during the calendar year preceding the
survey. The “white” ethnic group is defined to exclude Hispanics, as well as blacks, Asians, and Native Americans. The first
generation consists of immigrants: foreign-born individuals whose parents were also born outside the United States. The second
generation denotes U.S.-born individuals who have at least one foreign-born parent. The so-called “third generation,” which
really represents the third and all higher generations, identifies U.S. natives whose parents are also natives.
                                                               3

however, generational comparisons in a single cross-section of data do a poor job of matching

immigrant parents and grandparents in the first generation with their actual descendants in later

generations. Indeed, Smith (2003) finds evidence of more substantial gains between second- and

third-generation Mexicans when he combines cross-sectional data sets from successive time

periods in order to compare second-generation Mexicans in some initial period with their third-

generation descendants twenty-five years later. Yet even Smith’s analysis shows signs of

intergenerational stagnation for Mexican Americans. In his Table 4, for example, five of the six

most recent cohorts of Mexicans experience no wage gains between the second and third

generations. Moreover, all studies conclude that large education and earnings deficits (relative to

whites) remain for third- and higher-generation Mexicans.3

         These findings—that the economic disadvantage of Mexican Americans persists even

among those whose families have lived in the United States for more than two generations, and

that the substantial progress observed between the first and second generations seems to stall

thereafter—raise doubts whether the descendants of Mexican immigrants are enjoying the same

kind of intergenerational advancement that allowed previous groups of unskilled immigrants,

such as the Italians and Irish, to eventually enter the economic mainstream of American society.

Such conclusions could have far-reaching implications, but the validity of the intergenerational

comparisons that underlie these conclusions rests on assumptions about ethnic identification that

have received relatively little scrutiny for Mexican Americans. In particular, analyses of

intergenerational change typically assume, either explicitly or implicitly, that the ethnic choices

made by the descendants of Mexican immigrants do not distort outcome comparisons across


           3
             Borjas (1994) and Card, DiNardo, and Estes (2000) investigate patterns of intergenerational progress for many
different national origin groups, including Mexicans.
                                                                 4

generations.

          Ethnic identification is to some extent endogenous, especially among people at least one

or two generations removed from immigration to the United States (Alba 1990; Waters 1990).

Consequently, the descendants of Mexican immigrants who continue to identify themselves as

Mexican in the third and higher generations may be a select group. For example, if the most

successful Mexicans are more likely to intermarry or for other reasons cease to identify

themselves or their children as Mexican, then available data may understate human capital and

earnings gains between the second and third generations. In other words, research on

intergenerational assimilation among Mexican Americans may suffer from the potentially serious

problem that the most assimilated members of the group under study eventually fade from

empirical observation as they more closely identify with the group they are assimilating toward.4

          For other groups, selective ethnic identification has been shown to distort observed

socioeconomic characteristics. American Indians are a particularly apt example, because they

exhibit very high rates of intermarriage, and fewer than half of the children of such

intermarriages are identified as American Indian by the Census race question (Eschbach 1995).

For these and other reasons, racial identification is relatively fluid for American Indians, and

changes in self-identification account for much of the surprisingly large increase in educational

attainment observed for American Indians between the 1970 and 1980 U.S. Censuses (Eschbach,

Supple, and Snipp 1998). In addition, Snipp (1989) shows that those who report American

Indian as their race have considerably lower schooling and earnings, on average, than the much

larger group of Americans who report a non-Indian race but claim to have some Indian ancestry.


         4
           Bean, Swicegood, and Berg (2000) raise this possibility in their study of generational patterns of fertility for Mexican-
origin women in the United States.
                                                  5

       To cite another example, Waters (1994) observes selective ethnic identification among

the U.S.-born children of New York City immigrants from the West Indies and Haiti. The

teenagers doing well in school tend to come from relatively advantaged, middle-class families,

and these kids identify most closely with the ethnic origins of their parents. In contrast, the

teenagers doing poorly in school are more likely to identify with African Americans. This

pattern suggests that self-identified samples of second-generation Caribbean blacks might

overstate the socioeconomic achievement of this population, a finding that potentially calls into

question the practice of comparing outcomes for African Americans and Caribbean blacks as a

means of distinguishing racial discrimination from other explanations for the disadvantaged

status of African Americans (Sowell 1978).

       Using microdata from the U.S. Census and from recent years of the Current Population

Survey (CPS), we begin to explore these issues for Mexican Americans. In particular, we

investigate what factors influence whether individuals choose to identify themselves (or their

children) as Mexican-origin, and how these ethnic choices may affect inferences about the

intergenerational progress of Mexican Americans. To date, analyses of ethnic responses and

ethnic identification employing large national surveys have focused primarily on whites of

European descent (Alba and Chamlin 1983; Lieberson and Waters 1988, 1993; Farley 1991), and

therefore much could be learned from a similar analysis that highlights ethnic choices among the

Mexican-origin population.

       Existing studies (Stephan and Stephan 1989; Eschbach and Gomez 1998; Ono 2002)

demonstrate that the process of ethnic identification by Mexican Americans is fluid, situational,

and at least partly voluntary, just as has been observed for non-Hispanic whites and other groups.

These studies, however, do not directly address the issue that we will focus on: the selective
                                                 6

nature of Mexican identification and how it affects our inferences about intergenerational

progress for this population. Though previous research has noted the selective nature of

intermarriage for Hispanics overall (Qian 1997, 1999) and for Mexican Americans in particular

(Fu 2001; Rosenfeld 2001), this research has not examined explicitly the links between

intermarriage and ethnic identification, nor has previous research considered the biases that these

processes might produce in standard intergenerational comparisons of economic status for

Mexican Americans.

       Ideally, if we knew the family tree of each individual, we could identify which individuals

are descended from Mexican immigrants and how many generations have elapsed since that

immigration took place. It would then be a simple matter to compare outcomes for this “true”

population of Mexican descendants with the corresponding outcomes for a relevant reference

group (e.g., non-Hispanic whites) and also with those for the subset of Mexican descendants who

continue to self-identify as Mexican-origin. Such an analysis would provide an unbiased

assessment of the relative standing of the descendants of Mexican immigrants in the United

States, and it would show the extent to which selective ethnic identification distorts estimated

outcomes for this population when researchers are forced to rely on standard, self-reported

measures of Mexican identity.

       Following the 1970 Census, unusually detailed information of this sort was collected for a

small sample of individuals with ancestors from a Spanish-speaking country. After each

decennial U.S. Census, selected respondents to the Census long form are reinterviewed in order

to check the accuracy and reliability of the Census data. The 1970 Census was the first U.S.

Census to ask directly about Hispanic origin or descent, and therefore a primary objective of the

1970 Census Content Reinterview Study (U.S. Bureau of the Census 1974) was to evaluate the
                                                              7

quality of the responses to this new question. For this purpose, individuals in the reinterview

survey were asked a series of questions regarding any ancestors they might have who were born

in a Spanish-speaking country. Among those identified by the reinterview survey as having

Hispanic ancestors, Table 2 shows the percent who had previously responded on the 1970 Census

long form that they were of Hispanic “origin or descent.”5

       Overall, 76 percent of reinterview respondents with ancestors from a Spanish-speaking

country had self-identified as Hispanic in the 1970 Census, but the correspondence between

Hispanic ancestry in the reinterview and Hispanic identification in the Census fades with the

number of generations since the respondent’s Hispanic ancestors arrived in the United States.

Virtually all (99 percent) first-generation immigrants born in a Spanish-speaking country

identified as Hispanic in the Census, but the rate of Hispanic identification dropped to 83 percent

for the second generation, 73 percent for the third generation, 44 percent for the fourth

generation, and all the way down to 6 percent for higher generations of Hispanics. Interestingly,

intermarriage seems to play a central role in the loss of Hispanic identification. Almost everyone

(97 percent) with Hispanic ancestors on both sides of their family identified as Hispanic in the

Census, whereas the corresponding rate was only 21 percent for those with Hispanic ancestors on

just one side of their family. Given the small number of Hispanics in the reinterview sample

(369 individuals reported having at least one ancestor from a Spanish-speaking country), the

percentages in Table 2 should be regarded with caution, especially those for the very small

samples of Hispanics who are fourth generation or higher. Nonetheless, these data do suggest

that self-identified samples of U.S. Hispanics might omit a large proportion of later-generation

individuals with Hispanic ancestors, and that intermarriage could be a fundamental source of


       5
           The information in Table 2 is reproduced from Table C of U.S. Bureau of the Census (1974, p. 8).
                                                                8

such intergenerational ethnic “attrition.”

         Unfortunately, the microdata underlying Table 2 no longer exist, so we cannot use these

data to examine in a straightforward manner how selective ethnic attrition affects observed

measures of intergenerational progress for Mexican Americans.6 Out of necessity, we instead

adopt much less direct strategies for trying to shed light on this issue. First, we use the presence

of a Spanish surname as on objective, though imperfect, indicator of Mexican ancestry. Second,

we analyze the extent and selectivity of intermarriage by Mexican Americans. Third, we study

the links between Mexican intermarriage and ethnic identification, focusing on the children

produced by these intermarriages. Finally, we explore how intermarriage and ethnic

identification vary across generations of U.S.-born Mexicans. Throughout, we analyze the same

four outcome variables. The first two—educational attainment and English proficiency—are

important measures of human capital. The other two—employment and average hourly

earnings—are key indicators of labor market performance.



II. Spanish Surname

         Our first set of analyses exploits the information about Spanish surnames that was made

available most recently in the 1980 Census. The microdata file indicates whether an individual’s

surname appears on a list of almost 12,500 Hispanic surnames constructed by the Census Bureau.

This information, however, is provided only for those individuals who reside in the following


         6
            Starting in 1980, the Census has included an open-ended question asking for each person’s “ancestry” or “ethnicity,”
with the first two responses coded in the order that they are reported (Farley 1991). For the purposes of identifying individuals
with Mexican or Hispanic ancestors, however, the Census ancestry question is not a good substitute for the detailed battery of
questions included in the 1970 Census Content Reinterview Study. Indeed, many 1980-2000 Census respondents who identified
as Hispanic in response to the Hispanic origin question failed to list an Hispanic ancestry in response to the ancestry item that
comes later on the Census long form questionnaire, perhaps because they thought it redundant and unnecessary to indicate their
Hispanic ethnicity a second time. Comparatively few respondents listed an Hispanic ancestry after identifying as non-Hispanic
                                                               9

five southwestern states: California, Texas, Arizona, Colorado, and New Mexico.

         Though the surname list constructed for the 1980 Census is more extensive and accurate

than those used with previous Censuses, as a tool for identifying Hispanics the list suffers from

sins of both omission and commission. Both types of errors are introduced by the common

practice of married women taking the surname of their husbands, as Hispanic women can lose

and non-Hispanic women can gain a Spanish surname through intermarriage. The surname list

also errs by labeling as Hispanic some individuals of Italian, Filipino, or Native Hawaiian

descent who have names that appear on the list (Bean and Tienda 1987; Perkins 1993).

         For our purposes, another weakness of the surname list is that it cannot distinguish

Mexicans from other Hispanic national origin groups. This weakness is minimized, however, by

limiting the sample to the aforementioned five southwestern states. In 1980, the Puerto Rican

and Cuban populations in these states were still quite small, and large-scale immigration from

Central and South America had not yet begun. As a result, the overwhelming majority of

Hispanics in these southwestern states are Mexican-origin. Indeed, in the samples of U.S.-born

individuals analyzed below, 88 percent of those who self-report as being of Hispanic origin

indicate Mexican as their national origin, and almost all remaining self-reported Hispanics fall

into the “Other Hispanic” category. Individuals in this “Other Hispanic” category are especially

prevalent in the states of New Mexico and Colorado, where some Hispanics whose families have

lived in these regions for many generations prefer to call themselves “Hispanos,” emphasizing

their roots to the Spaniards who settled the new world over their Mexican and Indian ancestry

(Bean and Tienda 1987).



when answering the Hispanic origin question, so the ancestry question actually produces a lower overall count of Hispanics than
does the Hispanic origin question (Lieberson and Waters 1988; del Pinal 2004).
                                                10

       The Spanish surname information provided in the 1980 Census is in addition to the race

and Hispanic origin questions typically employed to identify racial/ethnic groups. Our hope is

that, particularly for men, the presence of a Spanish surname in the five southwestern states

provides an objective, albeit imperfect, indicator of Mexican ancestry that allows us to identify

some individuals of Mexican descent who fail to self-report as Hispanic and who are therefore

missed by subjective indicators such as the Hispanic origin question in the Census. If so, then

perhaps differences in human capital and labor market outcomes between Spanish-surnamed

individuals who do and do not self-identify as Hispanic can reveal something about the selective

nature of ethnic identification for Mexican Americans.

       To pursue this idea, we extracted from the 1980 Census five-percent microdata sample all

individuals between the ages of 25-59 who reside in the states of California, Texas, Arizona,

Colorado, and New Mexico. We focus on individuals in this age range because they are old

enough that virtually all of them will have completed their schooling, yet they are young enough

that observed labor market outcomes reflect their prime working years. Given our interest in

ethnic identification, we exclude from our sample anyone whose information about race,

Hispanic origin, or country of birth was allocated by the Census Bureau. To increase the

accuracy of the Spanish surname indicator, individuals whose race is American Indian or Asian

are also excluded, as is anyone else with a race other than white or black who neither has a

Spanish surname nor self-reports as being of Hispanic origin.

       In our data, there are two different ways for individuals to be identified as Hispanic.

They can self-report being Hispanic in response to the Hispanic origin question, and they can

possess a Spanish surname. Based on these two Hispanic indicators, we define three mutually

exclusive types of Hispanic identification: those identified as Hispanic both by self-report and by
                                                11

surname, those identified as Hispanic by self-report only (and not by surname), and those

identified as Hispanic by surname only (and not by self-report). Remaining individuals in our

sample are non-Hispanic whites and blacks (i.e., persons of white or black race who do not self-

report as being of Hispanic origin and also do not possess a Spanish surname). We conduct all

analyses separately for men and women.

       Table 3 shows the ethnic distribution of our sample separately for U.S. natives and three

different groups of foreign-born individuals: those born in Mexico, those born in another

Hispanic country, and those born in a non-Hispanic foreign country. For now, let us focus on the

data for men in the top panel of the table. As might be expected, almost everyone born in

Mexico is identified as Hispanic and very few men born in non-Hispanic foreign countries are

identified as Hispanic. Just over 85 percent of men born in Hispanic countries other than Mexico

are identified as Hispanic. The Spanish surname indicator does not capture all Hispanics, as

substantial numbers of men born in Mexico and other Hispanic countries are identified as

Hispanic by self-report only. But note that few men born in Mexico and other Hispanic countries

are identified as Hispanic by surname only. Of men identified as Hispanic, only 0.5 percent of

those born in Mexico and 1.2 percent of those born in other Hispanic countries are identified by

surname only. Among U.S.-born men identified as Hispanic, however, the corresponding rate is

about 4 percent; still low, but noticeably higher. The higher-rate of surname-only identification

for U.S.-born Hispanics compared to foreign-born Hispanics is what we might expect if this

group in part captures men of Hispanic descent who are choosing not to self-identify as Hispanic,

because ethnicity is likely to be more fluid and malleable for U.S.-born Hispanics than for

Hispanic immigrants. The patterns are similar for women in the bottom panel of the table, except

that for all countries of birth women show more inconsistency between self-reported and
                                                               12

surname-based indicators of Hispanicity than men do, presumably because of errors sometimes

introduced when married women take their husband’s surname.

          Henceforth we limit the analysis to U.S.-born individuals, because issues of ethnic

identification are most relevant for this group. Table 3 indicates that, even among the U.S.-born,

men with a Spanish surname usually also self-report being of Hispanic origin. As noted above,

just 4 percent of the U.S.-born men that we label as Hispanic are so identified only by their

Spanish surname. A larger share of Hispanic men, 13 percent, self-identify as Hispanic but do

not possess a surname on the Census list of Spanish surnames. The vast majority, 83 percent,

identifies as Hispanic through both self-report and surname. For U.S.-born Hispanic women, the

corresponding proportions are 13 percent identify as Hispanic by surname only, 21 percent by

self-report only, and 66 percent through both indicators.

          For each type of Hispanic identification, as well as for non-Hispanic whites and blacks,

Table 4 displays averages for the following measures of human capital and labor market

performance: completed years of schooling, percent deficient in English, percent employed, and

the natural logarithm of average hourly earnings. Here, we define someone to be “deficient” in

English if they speak a language other than English at home and they report speaking English

worse than “very well.”7 The employment and earnings measures pertain to the calendar year

preceding the Census. We compute average hourly earnings as the ratio of annual earnings to

annual hours of work, where annual earnings are the sum of wage and salary income and self-

employment income, and annual hours of work are the product of weeks worked and usual

weekly hours of work. The samples for the earnings data are limited to those who were


          7
            The Census asks individuals whether they “speak a language other than English at home,” and those who answer
affirmatively then are asked how well they speak English, with possible responses of “very well,” “well,” “not well,” or “not at
all.”
                                                              13

employed.8 Standard errors are shown in parentheses.

         In general, the top panel of Table 4 shows that men identified as Hispanic by self-report

only or by surname only have more human capital and better labor market outcomes than men

identified as Hispanic by both indicators. Men with inconsistent responses to the Hispanic

indicators have at least a year and a half more schooling and over 10 percent higher wages than

Hispanic men with consistent responses,9 and rates of English deficiency are lower for men with

inconsistent responses. The bottom panel of Table 4 shows patterns for women that are

qualitatively similar but even stronger, with a substantial advantage in the employment rate now

evident for women with inconsistent Hispanic indicators.

         The least squares regression coefficients reported in Table 5 illustrate more clearly these

comparisons and also show how the comparisons change after conditioning on the influence of

various controls. The dependent variables are the four outcomes introduced in Table 4. The key

independent variables are dummies indicating the type of Hispanic identification and a dummy

identifying non-Hispanic blacks, so that the reference group consists of non-Hispanic whites.

The first regression specification—the columns labeled (1) in Table 5—includes only the ethnic

dummy variables, and therefore these coefficients reproduce the mean comparisons from Table 4.

The second specification—the columns labeled (2)—adds controls for geographic location and

age. The controls for geographic location are dummy variables identifying the five states

included in the sample and whether the individual resides in a metropolitan area. The controls

for age are dummy variables identifying five-year age intervals. Finally, for the employment and


         8
           In addition, observations in the 1980 Census data with computed hourly earnings below $1 or above $200 are
considered outliers and excluded.
         9
           For expositional convenience, throughout the paper we will treat log wage differences as representing percentage
wage differentials, although we recognize that this approximation becomes increasingly inaccurate for log differences on the
                                                                14

earnings outcomes, there is a third specification—the columns labeled (3)—that also conditions

on the human capital variables that measure educational attainment and English proficiency.

          Table 5 indicates that, for both men and women, and for all outcomes, controlling for

geographic location and age has little effect on the patterns just described. The coefficients

change only slightly as we move from specification (1) to specification (2). For the labor market

outcomes, however, controlling for human capital has a large effect. Moving from specification

(2) to specification (3) dramatically shrinks the employment and earnings differences associated

with the type of Hispanic identification, and it also reduces the labor market disadvantage of

Hispanics relative to non-Hispanic whites.10 These findings reveal that differences in labor

market outcomes across Hispanic groups and between Hispanics and whites are largely driven by

the corresponding differences in schooling and English proficiency.

          How should we interpret these patterns? If the group of Hispanic men identified by

surname only captures some Hispanics who are choosing to loosen their ethnic attachment, then

we have found evidence that such individuals are positively selected in terms of human capital

and labor market outcomes. The small size of this group, however, argues against regarding

these results as anything more than suggestive. Note that we also found evidence of positive

selection for Hispanic men identified by self-report only. These men may be Hispanics who lost

their Spanish surname through intermarriage, as could occur if they have an Hispanic mother or



order of .25 or more in absolute value. In such instances, one can calculate the implied percentage wage differential as ex -1,
where x represents the estimated log wage difference.
          10
             One surprise in Table 5 is that the specification (3) earnings regression for women yields a positive and statistically
significant coefficient for the dummy variable indicating deficient English. This counterintuitive result arises from the strong
correlation, for Hispanics, between education and English proficiency, and from the fact that the regression restricts the returns to
education to be the same for Hispanics and non-Hispanics. Either dropping education from this regression or allowing its effect
to vary by ethnicity produces the expected negative coefficient for deficient English. Allowing the impact of education to differ
for Hispanics and non-Hispanics does not, however, alter the pattern of earnings differences by type of Hispanic identification or
the conclusion that most of these earnings differences derive from human capital differences.
                                                 15

grandmother who married a non-Hispanic man and took his surname. Therefore, the results for

the “Hispanic by self-report only” group are consistent with the results on the selectivity of

Mexican intermarriage that we present in the next section. Finally, the patterns for women are

similar to those for men but cannot necessarily be interpreted in the same way, because the

“Hispanic by surname only” group includes some non-Hispanic women who acquired a Spanish

surname through marriage.



III. Mexican Intermarriage

       Intermarriage has always been a fundamental source of ethnic flux and leakage in

American society (Lieberson and Waters 1988). For Mexican Americans, Rosenfeld (2002,

Table 1) shows that intermarriage increased substantially between 1970 and 1980 and even more

sharply between 1980 and 1990. Indeed, Perlmann (2003) argues that the proclivity for

intermarriage by second-generation Mexicans today is similar to what was observed for second-

generation Italians in the early 1900s. This argument has potentially provocative implications for

intermarriage by future generations of Mexican Americans, because intermarriage became so

commonplace for subsequent generations of Italian Americans that Alba (1986) characterized

this group as entering the “twilight of ethnicity.” Accordingly, our second set of analyses

examines the extent and selectivity of Mexican-American intermarriage.

       Because intermarriage is probably the predominant source of leakage from the population

of self-identified Mexican Americans (through the ethnic choices made by the children and

grandchildren of these intermarriages), knowing the magnitude of Mexican-American

intermarriage is important for evaluating the potential bias that such leakage could produce in

intergenerational comparisons. One important limitation, however, of Census (and CPS) data for
                                                 16

investigating the frequency of intermarriage is that these data measure prevalence rather than

incidence. In other words, these data show the marriages that exist at a given point in time,

rather than all marriages that took place over a given span of time. Prevalence measures of

intermarriage may differ from incidence measures if, for example, intermarriages are at a higher

risk of divorce than are endogamous marriages. For our purposes, prevalence measures of

intermarriage that capture both marital incidence and duration may actually be preferable, since

longer-lasting marriages are more likely to produce children and have the influence on ethnic

identification in succeeding generations that is the focus of our interest.

       For these analyses, we employ microdata from the 2000 Census. The sample includes

marriages that meet the following conditions: both spouses are between the ages of 25-59, the

couple currently lives together, and at least one spouse is a U.S.-born individual identified as

Mexican by the Census question regarding Hispanic origin. Furthermore, we exclude marriages

in which either spouse has allocated information about Hispanic origin. These restrictions yield a

sample of 62,734 marriages.

       For the U.S.-born Mexican husbands and wives involved in these marriages, Table 6

shows the nativity/ethnicity distributions of their spouses. Intermarriage is widespread in our

samples of Mexican-American husbands and wives. The first column indicates that just over

half (51 percent) of U.S.-born husbands of Mexican descent have wives of the same nativity and

ethnicity, and another 14 percent are married to Mexican immigrants. Therefore, the remaining

35 percent of Mexican-American husbands have wives that are neither Mexican nor Mexican

American, with the bulk of these wives (27 percent) being U.S.-born non-Hispanic whites. The

nativity/ethnicity distribution of Mexican-American wives is quite similar, except for a

somewhat higher rate of marriage to Mexican immigrants and a correspondingly lower rate of
                                                             17

marriage to U.S.-born Mexicans.

         Table 6 suggests that, in terms of nativity and ethnicity, the marital choices of U.S.-born

Mexicans can be classified into three main categories of spouses: U.S.-born Mexicans, foreign-

born Mexicans, and non-Mexicans. Based on this simplification, Table 7 proposes a typology of

marriages involving U.S.-born Mexicans that also indicates, for marriages in which only one

spouse is a U.S.-born Mexican, whether the other spouse is the husband or the wife. Note that

the unit of analysis in Table 7 is the marriage, rather than the U.S.-born Mexican husband or wife

as in Table 6. This shift in focus is consistent with our interest in how Mexican intermarriage

may impact the ethnic identification and observed socioeconomic characteristics of subsequent

generations, because children are a product of the marriage. Table 7 demonstrates the potential

for ethnic leakage among the children of Mexican Americans, as almost half (48 percent) of

Mexican-American marriages involve a non-Mexican spouse.

         Using this same typology of Mexican-American marriages, Table 8 presents averages of

the human capital and labor market variables for the husbands and wives in each type of

marriage.11 These calculations include all husbands or wives in the relevant marriages, not just

the Mexican-American husbands or wives. Therefore, we can observe not only the selectivity of

U.S.-born Mexicans who intermarry, but also the characteristics of their spouses. For example,

wife outcomes for the marriage type “Husband non-Mexican” provide information about

Mexican-American women who marry non-Mexicans, whereas husband outcomes for this same

marriage type provide information about the spouses of these women. For both husbands and


         11
             As before, the samples for the earnings data are limited to employed individuals. In addition, observations in the
2000 Census data with computed hourly earnings below $2.50 or above $500 are considered outliers and excluded. Beginning in
1990, the Census questions about educational attainment were changed to ask specifically about postsecondary degrees obtained
rather than years of schooling. We follow Jaeger’s (1997) recommendations for how to construct a completed years of schooling
variable from the revised education questions.
                                                              18

wives, outcomes for the marriage type “Both spouses U.S.-born Mexican” provide information

about Mexican Americans involved in endogamous marriages.

         Table 8 reveals striking differences in human capital and labor market outcomes between

Mexican Americans married to Mexicans and those married to non-Mexicans. U.S.-born

Mexicans married to non-Mexicans have much higher education, English proficiency,

employment, and earnings than those with spouses that are also U.S.-born Mexicans, 12 whereas

U.S.-born Mexicans married to Mexican immigrants have lower outcomes than any other group

of Mexican Americans. Table 8 also shows that non-Mexican spouses of Mexican Americans

have the best outcomes of any group considered, and that Mexican immigrant spouses of

Mexican Americans have the worst outcomes.

         The magnitudes of these differences are easier to see in Table 9, which displays

regression-adjusted outcome differences constructed in a similar fashion as those shown

previously in Table 5. Here, the key independent variables are dummies indicating the type of

marriage, with the reference group consisting of endogamous marriages in which both spouses

are U.S.-born Mexicans. In addition, the controls for geographic locations are now dummy

variables identifying the nine Census divisions, the individual states of California and Texas, and

whether the respondent resides in a metropolitan area.

         Among Mexican-American husbands, for example, those with non-Mexican wives

average a year more schooling than those with U.S.-born Mexican wives. Compared to their

counterparts in endogamous marriages, intermarried Mexican-American men also have a 9

percentage point lower rate of English deficiency, a 3 percentage point higher rate of


           12
              Consistent with our results, White and Sassler (2000) find that Mexican Americans married to non-Hispanic whites
tend to live in neighborhoods with higher socioeconomic status than do endogamously married Mexican Americans.
                                                19

employment, and a 15 percent wage advantage. These unadjusted differences, from regression

specification (1), narrow only slightly after controlling for geographic location and the husband’s

age in specification (2). The non-Mexican husbands of intermarried Mexican-American women

have even better outcomes than intermarried Mexican-American men, particularly in terms of

education and hourly earnings, but these differences are not nearly as great as the corresponding

differences just described between Mexican-American men in endogamous versus exogamous

marriages. Similar patterns are evident for women, except that employment differences

associated with intermarriage are larger than they are for men, and outcome differences between

Mexican-Americans with non-Mexican spouses and non-Mexicans with Mexican-American

spouses tend to be smaller for women than for men.

       For both husbands and wives, a comparison of specifications (2) and (3) shows that

controlling for education and English proficiency dramatically shrinks employment and earnings

differences across marriage types. Evidently, the human capital selectivity associated with

intermarriage generates most of the labor market differences observed along this same

dimension.

       Our finding of positive educational and economic selectivity for intermarried Mexican

Americans is not unexpected (Qian 1999). First of all, opportunities for meeting and interacting

with people from other racial/ethnic groups are better for more educated Mexican Americans,

because highly-educated Mexican Americans tend to live, study, and work in less segregated

environments. Second, given the sizeable educational deficit of the average Mexican American,

better-educated Mexican Americans are likely to be closer in social class to the typical non-

Mexican. Third, attending college is an eye-opening experience for many students that may work

to diminish preferences for marrying within one’s own racial/ethnic group. Finally, the theory of
                                                                20

“status exchange” in marriage formulated by Davis (1941) and Merton (1941) predicts that

members of lower-status minority groups (such as Mexican Americans) would tend to need

higher levels of socioeconomic attainment to attract spouses who are members of higher-status

majority groups.



IV. Mexican Identification of Children

          We next investigate the link between intermarriage and ethnic identification by

examining what determines whether the children of Mexican Americans are identified as

Mexican.13 We start with the same sample of Mexican-American marriages from the 2000

Census used in the intermarriage analyses of the preceding section, but henceforth we further

restrict the sample to those marriages that have produced at least one child under age 19 currently

residing in the household. We continue to exclude marriages in which either spouse has

allocated information about Hispanic origin, and we now impose this condition for the relevant

children as well. Finally, to the extent possible with the information available in the Census, we

exclude families in which any of the children are suspected of being stepchildren. These

restrictions produce a sample of 37,921 families.

          Using the same typology of Mexican-American marriages introduced earlier, Table 10

reports for each type of marriage the percent in which the youngest child is identified as Mexican

by the Hispanic origin question in the Census.14 Of primary interest for our purposes is how this


          13
           Along the same lines, Xie and Goyette (1997) use 1990 Census data to study the determinants of Asian identification
among children produced by intermarriages between an Asian and a non-Asian.
          14
              Because Mexican identification varies little across children within a given family, we report results using only
information for the youngest child. Instead using information for the oldest child produces similar results, as would using
indicators for whether any or all of the children in the family are identified as Mexican. In Census data, note that parents are
likely to be responding for their children. An important question is how these children will respond to survey questions about
ethnic identification when they become adults and answer from themselves. See Portes and Rumbaut (2001, Chapter 7) for a
discussion of parental and other influences on the evolving ethnic identities of second-generation adolescents.
                                                               21

percentage varies with the nativity and ethnicity of the parents. Overall, the youngest child is

identified as Mexican in 84 percent of these families, which raises the possibility of substantial

ethnic attrition among the children of Mexican Americans. The crucial determinant of a child’s

Mexican identification is whether both parents are Mexican-origin. In marriages between two

U.S.-born Mexicans or between a U.S.-born Mexican and a Mexican immigrant, Mexican

identification of the child is virtually assured (i.e., the relevant rates are 98 percent). In marriages

between a U.S.-born Mexican and a non-Mexican, however, the likelihood that the child is

identified as Mexican drops to 64-71 percent, with the precise figure depending on which parent

is non-Mexican, the father or the mother.15

          Tables 11 and 12 show how measures of the human capital and labor market performance

of parents correlate with whether their youngest child is identified as Mexican. Table 11 presents

mean outcomes, by the Mexican identification of the child, and Table 12 reports regression-

adjusted differences relative to the reference group consisting of parents whose youngest child is

not identified as Mexican. In these marriages involving at least one Mexican-American spouse,

parents with children not identified as Mexican average about a year more schooling and have

approximately a 10 percentage point lower rate of English deficiency than do their counterparts

with children designated as Mexican. Parents with children not identified as Mexican also

exhibit advantages in employment (2 percentage points for men and 3 percentage points for

women) and earnings (16 percent for men and 8 percent for women). Conditioning on

geographic location and the parent’s age reduces these outcome differences, but modestly

(compare the estimates in specifications (1) and (2) of Table 12).


          15
            In regressions not reported here, we find that the impact of intermarriage on the Mexican identification of children
does not change when controls are included for the age and gender of the child, the number of additional children in the family,
geographic location, and various characteristics of the parents (age, education, and English proficiency).
                                                            22

       Specification (3) of Table 12 adds as regressors the dummy variables indicating the type

of marriage, and this change has a dramatic impact on the results, eliminating the outcome

disadvantages previously associated with the youngest child’s Mexican identification. To

understand what this means, recall from Table 10 that virtually all families with two Mexican-

origin parents identify their children as Mexican. Therefore, in specification (3), the dummy

variable for the youngest child’s Mexican identification essentially becomes an interaction term

between the child’s Mexican identification and a dummy variable identifying marriages

involving a non-Mexican spouse. Because the type of marriage dummies capture the main effect

of intermarriage (i.e., marriages involving a non-Mexican spouse), the estimated effect of the

child’s Mexican identification now represents outcome differences between intermarried parents

whose youngest child is identified as Mexican and intermarried parents whose youngest child is

not identified as Mexican. The generally small and statistically insignificant coefficients

estimated on the child’s Mexican identification dummy in specification (3) reveal that, within the

group of marriages involving a non-Mexican spouse, parents’ outcomes do not vary with the

Mexican identification of their children.16 In other words, intermarriage is the crucial link

between the ethnic identification of Mexican-American children and the human capital and labor

market performance of their parents. The strong correlation observed between parental skills and

whether the child is identified as Mexican arises because of the intense selectivity of Mexican-

American intermarriage, especially in terms of human capital, and the powerful influence of

intermarriage on the ethnic identification of children.

       Despite the apparent strength of intermarriage selectivity and its close link to the Mexican

identification of children, one could use our data to argue that these factors ultimately produce


       16
            Not surprisingly, this same conclusion emerges from comparing mean outcomes for the relevant groups.
                                                 23

little bias in observed outcomes for Mexican Americans. For example, Table 11 shows that, in

families with at least one Mexican-American parent, fathers average 1.1 years more schooling

(and mothers average 0.8 years more schooling) if their youngest child is not identified as

Mexican. This pattern reflects the educational selectivity of Mexican intermarriage, but the

impact of such selectivity is attenuated by the small overall incidence of non-Mexican affiliation

among children with at least one Mexican-American parent (i.e., from the bottom row of Table

10, just 16 percent of these children fail to identify as Mexican). As a result, in Table 11,

restoring to our samples the potentially “missing” families with children not identified as

Mexican only raises the average schooling of fathers from 12.1 to 12.3 years (and of mothers

from 12.3 to 12.4 years). Moreover, estimates of intergenerational correlations suggest that less

than half of any educational gains for parents get transmitted to their children (Couch and Dunn

1997; Mulligan 1997; Card, DiNardo, and Estes 2000). Therefore, our Census analyses can

directly substantiate only a tiny amount of “hidden” progress for these children of Mexican

Americans: less than 0.1 years of education, and similarly small amounts for the other outcomes.

       We think it premature, however, to conclude that the measurement issues and potential

biases which motivated this paper can be safely ignored. In our Census samples, for us to know

that a child is of Mexican descent, at least one of his U.S.-born parents must continue to self-

identify as Mexican. We therefore miss completely any Mexican-origin families in which the

relevant Mexican descendants no longer identify as Mexican. Data from the 1970 Census

Content Reinterview Study, presented earlier in Table 2, indicate that we could be missing a

large share of later-generation Mexican-orign families (e.g., well over half of Mexican

descendants beyond the third generation). For this reason, we believe that our results show the

direction, but not the magnitude, of measurement biases arising from selective intermarriage and
                                                                24

ethnic identification by Mexican Americans. Estimating the magnitude of such biases would

require either microdata with more detailed information about ancestors’ national origins (such

as that collected in the now-extinct 1970 Census Content Reinterview Study), or a complicated

simulation model that starts with a cohort of Mexican immigrants and analyzes how selective

intermarriage interacts with the parent-child transmission of skills and ethnic identification to

produce the joint distributions of outcomes and Mexican identity across generations.17 The

Census and CPS results reported here could provide some of the inputs for a simulation model of

this type.



V. Generational Patterns

        Our final set of analyses use recent CPS data to explore how patterns of intermarriage and

ethnic identification vary by generation for U.S.-born Mexicans. To the extent that Mexican

intermarriage and/or the selectivity of such intermarriage increases with generation, or that ethnic

attachment declines with generation, the potential becomes greater for existing data to give an

inaccurate representation of the intergenerational progress of Mexican Americans.

        Beginning in 1980, the decennial Census stopped asking respondents where their parents

were born. Starting in 1994, the CPS began collecting this information on a regular basis from

all respondents. As a result, the CPS is currently the best large-scale U.S. data set for

investigating how outcomes vary by immigrant generation. Using the CPS information on the

nativity of each individual and his parents, we define three broad categories of immigrant

generation for Mexicans. The first generation consists of immigrants: foreign-born individuals

whose parents were also born outside of the United States. The second generation includes U.S.-


        17
             Brito (2004) provides an initial attempt at using simulation techniques to analyze this problem.
                                                             25

born individuals who have at least one foreign-born parent. The designation “third and higher

generation” applies to U.S. natives whose parents are also natives. For ease of exposition, we

will often refer to this last group as the “3rd+ generation” or simply the third generation.

Compared to the Census data analyzed earlier, the main advantage of the CPS is this ability to

distinguish between the second and higher generations of U.S.-born Mexicans. For our purposes,

important drawbacks of the CPS data are the smaller sample sizes and the absence of information

about English proficiency.

         We analyze microdata from the March CPS files for the years 1996, 1998, 2000, and

2002.18 Our CPS samples and variables are created using the same procedures that we employed

with the 2000 Census data. In the CPS data, these procedures yield a sample of 4,407 marriages

for our intermarriage analyses.

         Table 13 shows the nativity/ethnicity distributions of the spouses of the U.S.-born

Mexican husbands and wives in our CPS sample of marriages. This table is comparable to Table

6 presented earlier for the 2000 Census data, except that the current table distinguishes between

second- and third-generation Mexicans. Intermarriage by Mexican Americans rises between the

second and third generations, driven by increased marriage to U.S.-born, non-Hispanic whites.

Among Mexican-American husbands, the proportion married to non-Mexicans grows from 31

percent for the second generation to 34 percent for the third generation. Among Mexican-

American wives, the corresponding increase is from 28 percent to 34 percent. The biggest

difference between generations, however, is in the composition of endogamous Mexican

marriages. For both husband and wives, the rate of marriage to third generation Mexicans


          18
             The CPS sample rotation scheme implies that about half of the households will be the same in any two March
surveys from adjacent years, so to obtain independent samples we skip odd-numbered years.
                                                 26

doubles between the second and the third generation, and simultaneously the rate of marriage to

Mexican immigrants is cut to a third of its initial level. All told, around half of second-

generation Mexican husbands and wives have spouses who are first- or second-generation

Mexicans, whereas the same is true for only about a fifth of third-generation Mexicans. In this

sense, intergenerational assimilation in marriage occurs for Mexican Americans not just through

increased intermarriage with non-Mexicans, but also through sharply higher rates of marriage to

later-generation Mexicans.

       For our CPS sample of marriages, Table 14 applies the typology introduced previously in

Table 7. In Table 14, the column labeled “2nd Generation” shows the distribution by type for all

sample marriages that involve a second-generation Mexican, and the “3rd+ Generation” column

reports the same distribution for all marriages that involve a third-generation Mexican.

Consequently, there exists some overlap between the two columns, because marriages between a

second-generation Mexican and a third-generation Mexican will be counted in the first row of

both columns. Between the second and third generations, Table 14 shows that Mexican-

American marriages undergo a marked increase in the involvement of non-Mexicans and a large

decline in the involvement of Mexican immigrants. Given our earlier finding that marriages to

non-Mexicans are particularly susceptible to ethnic leakage (see Table 10), the increased

prevalence of intermarriage across generations raises the potential for intergenerational attrition

of Mexicans in standard data sources.

       For the CPS data, Table 15 replicates the Census analysis presented earlier in Table 8. In

terms of the outcome variables available in the CPS—education, employment, and hourly

earnings—the patterns of intermarriage selectivity are similar to those found in the Census data.

Moreover, the CPS data show these patterns to be similar for second- and third-generation
                                                 27

Mexicans. Although the extent of intermarriage selectivity for Mexicans does not appear to

increase between the second and later generations, neither does it appear to diminish. Given this

stability in intermarriage selectivity, the rising rate of Mexican intermarriage across generations

could by itself produce biased intergenerational comparisons for this population.

       Finally, Table 16 reproduces with CPS data the analysis from Table 10 of how the

youngest child’s Mexican identification varies with intermarriage. Once again, we find that a

child is almost certain to be identified as Mexican when both his parents are Mexican-origin.

Moreover, this pattern does not weaken across generations. Overall, the rate at which the

youngest child is identified as Mexican in the CPS data falls from 82 percent for marriages

involving a second-generation Mexican to 73 percent for marriages involving a higher-generation

Mexican. This decline arises primarily from the changing composition of marriage types across

generations; in particular, the increased prevalence in later generations of intermarriage between

Mexican-Americans and non-Mexicans.



VI. Conclusion

       In this paper, we look for evidence on whether selective intermarriage and selective

ethnic identification might bias observed measures of socioeconomic progress for later

generations of Mexican Americans. Ideal data for this purpose would allow us to identify which

individuals are descended from Mexican immigrants and how many generations have elapsed

since that immigration took place. We could then simply compare outcomes for this “true”

population of Mexican descendants with the corresponding outcomes for the subset of Mexican

descendants who continue to self-identify as Mexican-origin. Unfortunately, we do not have

access to microdata of this sort, so we instead adopt much less direct strategies for tyring to shed
                                                28

light on this issue.

        We begin by examining 1980 Census data that provide an indicator for Spanish surnames

in addition to the information about Hispanic origin typically used to identify Mexican ethnics.

Our hope is that, particularly for men, the presence of a Spanish surname in the five southwestern

states provides an objective, albeit imperfect, indicator of Mexican ancestry that allows us to

identify some individuals of Mexican descent who fail to self-report as Hispanic and who are

therefore missed by subjective indicators such as the Hispanic origin question in the Census. If

so, then differences in human capital and labor market outcomes between Spanish-surnamed

individuals who do and do not self-identify as Hispanic might reveal something about the

selective nature of ethnic identification for Mexican Americans. We find that U.S.-born men

identified as Hispanic by surname only have more human capital and better labor market

outcomes than U.S.-born men identified as Hispanic by both self-report and surname. The same

pattern holds for women, though in this case interpretation is clouded by the common practice of

married women taking the surname of their husbands. Overall, the results are consistent with the

notion that individuals of Mexican descent who no longer self-identify as Hispanic are positively

selected in terms of socioeconomic status. Relatively few individuals with Spanish surnames fail

to self-identify as Hispanic, however, so it would be unwise to regard these results as anything

more than suggestive.

        Using data from the 2000 Census and recent March Current Population Surveys, we then

investigate the extent and selectivity of Mexican intermarriage and how such intermarriage

influences the Mexican identification of children. We show that U.S.-born Mexican Americans

who marry non-Mexicans are substantially more educated and English proficient, on average,

than are Mexican Americans who marry co-ethnics (whether they be Mexican Americans or
                                                  29

Mexican immigrants). In addition, the non-Mexican spouses of intermarried Mexican Americans

possess relatively high levels of schooling and English proficiency, compared to the spouses of

endogamously married Mexican Americans. The human capital selectivity of Mexican

intermarriage generates corresponding differences in the employment and earnings of Mexican

Americans and their spouses. Moreover, the children of intermarried Mexican Americans are

much less likely to be identified as Mexican than are the children of endogamous Mexican

marriages. These forces combine to produce strong negative correlations between the education,

English proficiency, employment, and earnings of Mexican-American parents and the chances

that their children retain a Mexican ethnicity.

       Despite the apparent strength of intermarriage selectivity and its close link to the Mexican

identification of children, our analyses cannot directly substantiate significant biases in

measuring the intergenerational progress of Mexican Americans. The data used here are

inadequate, however, because they overlook families descended from Mexican immigrants in

which neither parent self-identifies as Mexican. Indeed, data from the 1970 Census Content

Reinterview Study indicate that we could be missing a large share of later-generation Mexican-

orign families (e.g., well over half of Mexican descendants beyond the third generation). For this

reason, we believe that our results show the direction, but not the magnitude, of measurement

biases arising from selective intermarriage and ethnic identification by Mexican Americans.

Estimating the magnitude of such biases would require either microdata with more detailed

information about ancestors’ national origins (such as that collected in the now-extinct 1970

Census Content Reinterview Study), or a complicated simulation model that starts with a cohort

of Mexican immigrants and analyzes how selective intermarriage interacts with the parent-child

transmission of skills and ethnic identification to produce the joint distributions of outcomes and
                                                  30

Mexican identity across generations. The empirical results reported here could provide some of

the inputs for a simulation model of this type.
                                              31

References


Alba, Richard D. Italian Americans: Into the Twilight of Ethnicity. Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
       Prentice-Hall, 1986.

______. Ethnic Identity: The Transformation of White America. New Haven, CT: Yale
      University Press, 1990.

Alba, Richard D., and Chamlin, Mitchell B. “A Preliminary Examination of Ethnic
       Identification Among Whites.” American Sociological Review, April 1983, 48(2), pp.
       240-47.

Bean, Frank D.; Swicegood, C. Gray; and Berg, Ruth. “Mexican-Origin Fertility: New Patterns
       and Interpretations.” Social Science Quarterly, March 2000, 81(1), pp. 404-20.

Bean, Frank D., and Tienda, Marta. The Hispanic Population of the United States. New York:
       Russell Sage Foundation, 1987.

Blau, Francine D., and Kahn, Lawrence M. “Gender and Assimilation among Mexican
       Americans.” Manuscript. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University, 2005.

Borjas, George J. “The Intergenerational Mobility of Immigrants.” Journal of Labor Economics,
        January 1993, Part 1, 11(1), pp. 113-35.

______. “Long-Run Convergence of Ethnic Skill Differentials: The Children and Grandchildren
      of the Great Migration.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, July 1994, 47(4), pp.
      553-73.


Brito, Dagobert L. “Education and Asymmetric Hispanic Assimilation: A Preliminary
        Exploration.” Manuscript. Houston, TX: Rice University, 2004.

Card, David; DiNardo, John; and Estes, Eugena. “The More Things Change: Immigrants and the
       Children of Immigrants in the 1940s, the 1970s, and the 1990s,” in George J. Borjas, ed.,
       Issues in the Economics of Immigration. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2000, pp.
       227-69.

Couch, Kenneth A., and Dunn, Thomas A. “Intergenerational Correlations in Labor Market
       Status: A Comparison of the United States and Germany.” Journal of Human Resources,
       Winter 1997, 32(1), pp. 210-32.

Davis, Kingsley. “Intermarriage in Caste Societies.” American Anthropologist, July-September
       1941, 43(3, part 1), pp. 376-95.
                                              32

del Pinal, Jorge H. Race and Ethnicity in Census 2000. Census 2000 Testing, Experimentation,
       and Evaluation Program: Topic Report No. 9, U.S. Census Bureau. Washington, DC:
       U.S. Government Printing Office, 2004.

Duncan, Brian; Hotz, V. Joseph; and Trejo, Stephen J. “Hispanics in the U.S. Labor Market.”
      Manuscript. Austin, TX: University of Texas, 2005.

Eschbach, Karl. “The Enduring and Vanishing American Indian: American Indian Population
      Growth and Intermarriage in 1990.” Ethnic and Racial Studies, January 1995, 18(1), pp.
      89-108.

Eschbach, Karl, and Gomez, Christina. “Choosing Hispanic Identity: Ethnic Identity Switching
      among Respondents to High School and Beyond.” Social Science Quarterly, March
      1998, 79(1), pp. 74-90.

Eschbach, Karl; Supple, Khalil; and Snipp, C. Matthew. “Changes in Racial Identification and
      the Educational Attainment of American Indians, 1970-1990.” Demography, February
      1998, 35(1), pp. 35-43.

Farley, Reynolds. “Blacks, Hispanics, and White Ethnic Groups: Are Blacks Uniquely
        Disadvantaged?” American Economic Review, May 1990, 80(2), pp. 237-41.

______. “The New Census Question about Ancestry: What Did It Tell Us?” Demography,
      August 1991, 28(3), pp. 411-29.

Farley, Reynolds, and Alba, Richard. “The New Second Generation in the United States.”
        International Migration Review, Fall 2002, 36(3), pp. 669-701.

Fry, Richard, and Lowell, B. Lindsay. “Work or Study: Different Fortunes of U.S. Latino
       Generations.” Report. Washington, DC: Pew Hispanic Center, 2002.

Fu, Vincent Kang. “Racial Intermarriage Pairings.” Demography, May 2001, 38(2), pp. 147-59.

Gans, Herbert J. “Second-Generation Decline: Scenarios for the Economic and Ethnic Futures of
       the Post-1965 American Immigrants.” Ethnic and Racial Studies, April 1992, 15(2), pp.
       173-92.

Grogger, Jeffrey, and Trejo, Stephen J. Falling Behind or Moving Up? The Intergenerational
      Progress of Mexican Americans. San Francisco: Public Policy Institute of California,
      2002.

Haveman, Robert, and Barbara Wolfe. Succeeding Generations: On the Effects of Investments in
     Children. New York: Russell Sage Foundation, 1994.

Huntington, Samuel P. Who Are We?: The Challenges to America's Identity. New York: Simon
                                               33

       and Schuster, 2004.

Jaeger, David A. “Reconciling the Old and New Census Bureau Education Questions:
        Recommendations for Researchers.” Journal of Business and Economics Statistics, July
        1997, 15(3), pp. 300-09.

Lieberson, Stanley, and Waters, Mary C. From Many Strands: Ethnic and Racial Groups in
       Contemporary America. New York: Russell Sage Foundation, 1988.

______. “The Ethnic Responses of Whites: What Causes Their Instability, Simplification, and
      Inconsistency?” Social Forces, December 1993, 72(2), pp. 421-50.

Livingston, Gretchen, and Kahn, Joan R. “An American Dream Unfulfilled: The Limited
       Mobility of Mexican Americans.” Social Science Quarterly, December 2002, 83(4), pp.
       1003-12.

Merton, Robert K. “Intermarriage and the Social Structure: Fact and Theory.” Psychiatry, 1941,
      4, pp. 361-74.

Mulligan, Casey B. Parental Priorities and Economic Inequality. Chicago: University of
       Chicago Press, 1997.

Neidert, Lisa J., and Farley, Reynolds. “Assimilation in the United States: An Analysis of Ethnic
       and Generation Differences in Status and Achievement.” American Sociological Review,
       December 1985, 50(6), pp. 840-50.

Ono, Hiromi. “Assimilation, Ethnic Competition, and Ethnic Identities of U.S.-Born Persons of
      Mexican Origin.” International Migration Review, Fall 2002, 36(3), pp. 726-45.

Perkins, R. Colby. “Evaluating the Passel-Word Spanish Surname List: 1990 Decennial Census
       Post Enumeration Survey Results.” Working Paper no. 4. Washington, DC: U.S. Bureau
       of the Census, Population Division, August 1993.

Perlmann, Joel. “Mexicans Now, Italians Then: Intermarriage Patterns.” Working Paper no.
      376. Annandale-on-Hudson, NY: Jerome Levy Economics Institute, April 2003.

Perlmann, Joel, and Waldinger, Roger. “The Second Generation and the Children of the Native
      Born: Comparisons and Refinements.” Working Paper no. 174. Annandale-on-Hudson,
      NY: Jerome Levy Economics Institute, November 1996.

______. “Second Generation Decline? Children of Immigrants, Past and Present—A
      Reconsideration.” International Migration Review, Winter 1997, 31(4), pp. 893-922.

Portes, Alejandro, and Rumbaut, Ruben G. Legacies: The Story of the Immigrant Second
        Generation. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 2001.
                                              34



Portes, Alejandro, and Zhou, Min. “The New Second Generation: Segmented Assimilation and
        Its Variants Among Post-1965 Immigrant Youth.” Annals of the American Academy of
        Political and Social Science, November 1993, 530, pp. 74-96.

Qian, Zhenchao. “Breaking the Racial Barriers: Variations in Interracial Marriage Between 1980
       and 1990.” Demography, May 1997, 34(2), pp. 263-76.

______. “Who Intermarries? Education, Nativity, Region, and Interracial Marriage, 1980 and
      1990.” Journal of Comparative Family Studies, Autumn 1999, 30(4), pp. 579-97.

Rosenfeld, Michael J. “The Salience of Pan-National Hispanic and Asian Identities in U.S.
      Marriage Markets.” Demography, May 2001, 38(2), pp. 161-75.

______. “Measures of Assimilation in the Marriage Market: Mexican Americans 1970-1990.”
      Journal of Marriage and Family, February 2002, 64(1), pp. 152-62.

Rumbaut, Ruben G. “The Crucible Within: Ethnic Identity, Self-Esteem, and Segmented
     Assimilation Among Children of Immigrants.” International Migration Review, Winter
     1994, 28(4), pp. 748-94.

Smith, James P. “Assimilation across the Latino Generations.” American Economic Review,
       May 2003, 93(2), pp. 315-319.

Snipp, C. Matthew. American Indians: The First of this Land. New York: Russell Sage
       Foundation, 1989.

Sowell, Thomas. “Three Black Histories,” in Thomas Sowell, ed., Essays and Data on American
       Ethnic Groups. Washington, DC: Urban Institute, 1978, pp. 7-64.

Stephan, Cookie White, and Stephan, Walter G. “After Intermarriage: Ethnic Identity among
       Mixed-Heritage Japanese-Americans and Hispanics.” Journal of Marriage and the
       Family, May 1989, 51(2), pp. 507-19.

Trejo, Stephen J. “Why Do Mexican Americans Earn Low Wages?” Journal of Political
        Economy, December 1997, 105(6), pp. 1235-68.

______. “Intergenerational Progress of Mexican-Origin Workers in the U.S. Labor Market.”
      Journal of Human Resources, Summer 2003, 38(3), pp. 467-89.

U.S. Bureau of the Census. 1970 Census of Population and Housing, Evaluation and Research
       Program: Accuracy of Data for Selected Population Characteristics as Measured by
       Reinterviews. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1974.

Waters, Mary C. Ethnic Options: Choosing Identities in America. Berkeley, CA: University of
                                             35

       California Press, 1990.

______. “Ethnic and Racial Identities of Second-Generation Black Immigrants in New York
      City.” International Migration Review, Winter 1994, 28(4), pp. 795-820.

White, Michael J., and Sassler, Sharon. “Judging Not Only by Color: Ethnicity, Nativity, and
       Neighborhood Attainment.” Social Science Quarterly, December 2000, 81(4), pp. 997-
       1013.

Xie, Yu, and Goyette, Kimberly. “The Racial Identification of Biracial Children with One Asian
       Parent: Evidence from the 1990 Census.” Social Forces, December 1997, 76(2), pp. 547-
       70.
      Table 1: Average Years of Education and Log Hourly Earnings, Men Ages 25-59,
                                     1998-2002 CPS

                                                          Mexicans                              3rd+
                                           1st               2nd              3rd+            Generation
                                        Generation        Generation        Generation         Whites

        Years of education                 8.8              12.2             12.3              13.6
                                           (.04)             (.06)            (.04)             (.007)

        Log hourly earnings                2.244             2.560             2.584             2.837
                                           (.006)            (.015)            (.010)            (.002)

Source: March 1998-2002 Current Population Survey data.
Note: Standard errors are shown in parentheses. Sampling weights were employed in these calculations. The
samples include men ages 25-59. The samples for the hourly earnings data are further limited to individuals who
worked during the calendar year preceding the survey. The “white” ethnic group is defined to exclude Hispanics, as
well as blacks, Asians, and Native Americans. The first generation consists of immigrants: foreign-born individuals
whose parents were also born outside the United States. The second generation denotes U.S.-born individuals who
have at least one foreign-born parent. The third generation identifies U.S. natives whose parents are also natives.
Excluded from the samples are foreign-born individuals who have at least one U.S.-born parent, as well as
individuals for whom generation cannot be determined because birthplace data are missing for themselves or either
parent.
 Table 2: Hispanic Identification of Individuals with Ancestors from a Spanish-Speaking
          Country, as Reported in the 1970 Census Content Reinterview Study

                                                                           Percent Who
                                                                           Identified as
                                                                            Hispanic in
Hispanic Ancestry Classification in Reinterview                             the Census             Sample Size

Most recent ancestor from a Spanish-speaking country:
 Respondent (i.e., 1st generation)                                              98.7                     77
 Parent(s) (i.e., 2nd generation)                                               83.3                     90
 Grandparent(s) (i.e., 3rd generation)                                          73.0                     89
 Great grandparent(s) (i.e., 4th generation)                                    44.4                     27
 Further back (i.e., 5th+ generations)                                           5.6                     18

Hispanic ancestry on both sides of family                                       97.0                    266

Hispanic ancestry on one side of family only                                    21.4                    103
 Father’s side                                                                  20.5                     44
 Moether’s side                                                                 22.0                     59

All individuals with Hispanic ancestry                                          75.9                    369

Source: Table C of U.S. Bureau of the Census (1974, p. 8).
Note: Information regarding the generation of the most recent ancestor from a Spanish-speaking country was
missing for 68 respondents who nonetheless indicated that they had Hispanic ancestry on one or both sides of their
family.
          Table 3: Ethnic Distributions (Percentages), by Country of Birth, 1980

                                                                Country of Birth
                                                                                                   Non-
                                                                               Other              Hispanic
                                        United                                Hispanic            Foreign
                                        States             Mexico             Country             Country
Men
Identified as Hispanic by:
   Self-report and surname              10.3               91.9                64.4                  .7
   Self-report only                      1.6                7.0                20.4                 1.0
   Surname only                           .5                 .5                 1.0                 1.1
Non-Hispanic:
   White                               79.9                  .5                 9.0               95.0
   Black                                7.7                  .02                5.1                2.2
                                      100.0%              100.0%              100.0%             100.0%

Sample size                            373,700              23,719              6,124              15,675

Women
Identified as Hispanic by:
   Self-report and surname                9.4               87.0               54.0                   .6
   Self-report only                       3.0               11.6               31.5                  1.0
   Surname only                           1.8                 .6                1.2                  2.9
Non-Hispanic:
   White                                77.3                 .7                 8.7                94.7
   Black                                 8.5                 .1                 4.7                  .8
                                       100.0%             100.0%              100.0%              100.0%

Sample size                            378,873              22,163              7,045              18,560

Source: 1980 Census data.
Note: The samples include individuals ages 25-59 who reside in the states of California, Texas, Arizona,
Colorado, and New Mexico. Individuals whose race is American Indian or Asian are excluded, as is anyone
else with a race other than white or black who neither has a Spanish surname nor self-reports as being of
Hispanic origin. The category “Other Hispanic Country” refers to individuals born in a Hispanic country other
than Mexico. The following countries are included in this category: Puerto Rico, Cuba, Dominican Republic,
El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua, Costa Rica, Panama, Colombia, Peru, Ecuador, Argentina,
Chile, Venezuela, Bolivia, Uruguay, Paraguay, and Spain.
             Table 4: Average Outcomes by Type of Hispanic Identification, 1980,
                                U.S.-Born Individuals Only

                                              Years of         Deficient          Percent         Log Hourly
                                             Education         English           Employed          Earnings
     Men
     Identified as Hispanic by:
       Self-report and surname                10.6               28.8              90.7              1.900
                                               (.02)              (.23)             (.15)            (.003)
       Self-report only                       12.1               14.4              90.8              2.008
                                               (.05)              (.46)             (.38)            (.009)
       Surname only                           12.2                7.0              91.8              2.083
                                               (.08)              (.61)             (.66)            (.017)
     All types of Hispanics                   10.8               26.1              90.8              1.921
                                               (.02)              (.20)             (.13)            (.003)
     Non-Hispanic:
      White                                   13.6                  .6             94.1              2.163
                                               (.005)              (.01)            (.04)            (.001)
       Black                                  12.0                  .8             84.1              1.926
                                               (.02)               (.05)            (.22)            (.004)
     Women
     Identified as Hispanic by:
       Self-report and surname                 9.7               33.3              59.6              1.476
                                               (.02)              (.26)             (.26)            (.004)
       Self-report only                       11.7               13.0              67.9              1.624
                                               (.03)              (.32)             (.44)            (.007)
       Surname only                           12.3                3.2              67.7              1.626
                                               (.03)              (.21)             (.56)            (.009)
     All types of Hispanics                   10.5               25.1              62.4              1.531
                                               (.02)              (.19)             (.21)            (.003)
     Non-Hispanic:
      White                                   13.0                  .5             68.7              1.679
                                               (.005)              (.01)            (.09)            (.001)
       Black                                  12.1                  .6             70.8              1.649
                                               (.02)               (.04)            (.25)            (.004)

Source: 1980 Census data.
Note: Standard errors are shown in parentheses. The samples include U.S.-born individuals ages 25-59 who reside
in the states of California, Texas, Arizona, Colorado, and New Mexico. Individuals whose race is American Indian
or Asian are excluded, as is anyone else with a race other than white or black who neither has a Spanish surname nor
self-reports as being of Hispanic origin. The samples for the hourly earnings data are further limited to individuals
who were employed at some time during the calendar year preceding the Census. The sample sizes for men are
373,700 for the full sample and 339,272 for the employed sample, and the sample sizes for women are 378,873 for
the full sample and 247,111 for the employed sample.
            Table 5: Regression-Adjusted Outcome Differences by Type of Hispanic Identification, 1980,
                                          U.S.-Born Individuals Only

                                                                    Dependent Variable
                                Education       Deficient English          Employment                  Log Hourly Earnings
Regressor                     (1)       (2)      (1)        (2)        (1)      (2)       (3)        (1)      (2)        (3)

Men
Identified as Hispanic by:
  Self-report and surname    -3.02     -3.03     .282      .280     -.034    -.040        .003     -.263     -.227     -.075
                              (.02)     (.02)   (.001)    (.001)    (.001)   (.001)      (.002)    (.004)    (.004)    (.004)
 Self-report only            -1.49     -1.67     .138      .141     -.033    -.039       -.015     -.154     -.129     -.048
                              (.04)     (.04)   (.002)    (.002)    (.003)   (.003)      (.003)    (.009)    (.008)    (.008)
 Surname only                -1.34     -1.39     .064      .065     -.024    -.022       -.003      -.080    -.077     -.010
                              (.08)     (.07)   (.004)    (.004)    (.006)   (.006)      (.006)     (.016)   (.015)    (.015)
Non-Hispanic black           -1.58     -1.60     .002     -.0004    -.101    -.106       -.087      -.237    -.231     -.167
                              (.02)     (.02)   (.001)    (.001)    (.002)   (.002)      (.002)     (.004)   (.004)    (.004)
Years of education                                                                        .012                          .046
                                                                                         (.0001)                       (.0004)
Deficient English                                                                        -.021                         -.074
                                                                                         (.002)                        (.006)
Women
Identified as Mexican by:
  Self-report and surname    -3.30     -3.30     .328      .326     -.091    -.097        .014     -.203     -.176     -.013
                              (.02)     (.02)   (.001)    (.001)    (.003)   (.003)      (.003)    (.004)    (.004)    (.005)
 Self-report only            -1.27     -1.48     .125      .130     -.007    -.026        .024     -.055     -.061      .014
                              (.03)     (.03)   (.002)    (.002)    (.004)   (.004)      (.004)    (.007)    (.007)    (.007)
 Surname only                 -.66      -.96     .026      .033     -.009    -.035       -.005     -.053     -.069     -.016
                              (.03)     (.03)   (.002)    (.002)    (.006)   (.006)      (.005)    (.009)    (.009)    (.009)
Non-Hispanic black            -.91      -.94     .0008    -.001      .022     .009        .037     -.030     -.028      .018
                              (.02)     (.02)   (.001)    (.001)    (.003)   (.003)      (.003)    (.004)    (.004)    (.004)
Years of education                                                                        .029                          .064
                                                                                         (.0003)                       (.0005)
Deficient English                                                                        -.042                          .035
                                                                                         (.004)                        (.008)
Controls for:
 Geographic location          No       Yes       No        Yes        No       Yes        Yes        No       Yes       Yes
 Age                          No       Yes       No        Yes        No       Yes        Yes        No       Yes       Yes
Source: 1980 Census data.
Note: The reported figures are estimated coefficients from ordinary least squares regressions run separately for men and women. Standard errors are shown in
parentheses. The samples include U.S.-born individuals ages 25-59 who reside in the states of California, Texas, Arizona, Colorado, and New Mexico.
Individuals whose race is American Indian or Asian are excluded, as is anyone else with a race other than white or black who neither has a Spanish surname nor
self-reports as being of Hispanic origin. The samples for the hourly earnings regressions are further limited to individuals who were employed at some time
during the calendar year preceding the Census. The sample sizes for men are 373,700 for the full sample and 339,272 for the employed sample, and the sample
sizes for women are 378,873 for the full sample and 247,111 for the employed sample. For the dummy variables indicating ethnicity, the reference group consists
of non-Hispanic whites. The controls for geographic location are dummy variables identifying the five states included in the sample and whether the individual
resides in a metropolitan area. The controls for age are dummy variables identifying five-year age intervals.
    Table 6: Nativity/Ethnicity Distributions of the Spouses of U.S.-Born Mexicans, 2000

                                                                  U.S.-Born Mexican:
                      Nativity/Ethnicity of Spouse               Husbands      Wives

                      U.S.-born
                       Mexican                                     50.6               45.3
                       Other Hispanic                               2.7                2.3
                       Non-Hispanic:
                         White                                     26.7               28.1
                         Black                                       .6                1.5
                         Asian                                       .4                 .3
                         Other race                                  .8                 .6
                         Multiple race                              1.0                1.0

                      Foreign-born
                       Mexican                                     13.6               17.4
                       Other Hispanic                               1.5                1.8
                       Non-Hispanic:
                         White                                      1.1               1.2
                         Black                                       .04               .06
                         Asian                                       .7                .3
                         Other race                                  .06               .03
                         Multiple race                               .2                .2
                                                                  100.0%            100.0%

Source: 2000 Census data.
Note: The sample includes marriages that meet the following conditions: both spouses are between the ages of 25-
59, the couple currently lives together, and at least one spouse is a U.S.-born individual identified as Mexican by the
Census question regarding Hispanic origin. For the U.S.-born Mexican husbands and wives involved in these
marriages, the table shows the nativity/ethnicity distributions of their spouses. There are 62,734 such marriages, and
these marriages involve 38,911 U.S.-born Mexican husbands and 43,527 U.S.-born Mexican wives.
                Table 7: Types of Marriages Involving U.S.-Born Mexicans, 2000

                        Type of Marriage                                Percent of Sample

                        Both spouses U.S.-born Mexican                          31.4

                        Husband foreign-born Mexican                            12.0
                         (Wife U.S.-born Mexican)

                        Wife foreign-born Mexican                                8.4
                         (Husband U.S.-born Mexican)

                        Husband non-Mexican                                     25.9
                         (Wife U.S.-born Mexican)

                        Wife non-Mexican                                        22.2
                         (Husband U.S.-born Mexican)
                                                                              100.0%

Source: 2000 Census data.
Note: The sample includes marriages that meet the following conditions: both spouses are between the ages of 25-
59, the couple currently lives together, and at least one spouse is a U.S.-born individual identified as Mexican by the
Census question regarding Hispanic origin. There are 62,734 such marriages.
                      Table 8: Average Outcomes by Type of Marriage, 2000

                                                Years of         Deficient         Percent         Log Hourly
                                               Education         English          Employed          Earnings
 Husbands
 Type of marriage:
  Both spouses U.S.-born Mexican                 12.0              14.1             91.9              2.692
                                                  (.02)             (.25)            (.19)            (.005)
   Husband foreign-born Mexican                   9.6              53.3             92.8              2.544
                                                  (.05)             (.57)            (.30)            (.007)
   Wife foreign-born Mexican                     11.5              24.4             91.8              2.621
                                                  (.04)             (.59)            (.38)            (.009)
   Husband non-Mexican                           13.5               4.0             95.1              2.919
                                                  (.02)             (.15)            (.17)            (.005)
   Wife non-Mexican                              13.1               5.1             94.9              2.845
                                                  (.02)             (.19)            (.19)            (.005)
 All husbands                                    12.3              15.0             93.5              2.763
                                                  (.01)             (.14)            (.10)            (.003)
 Wives
 Type of marriage:
  Both spouses U.S.-born Mexican                 12.1              14.2             73.3              2.415
                                                  (.02)             (.25)            (.32)            (.005)
   Husband foreign-born Mexican                  11.4              18.8             69.8              2.355
                                                  (.03)             (.45)            (.53)            (.009)
   Wife foreign-born Mexican                     10.3              53.5             60.0              2.289
                                                  (.05)             (.69)            (.67)            (.012)
   Husband non-Mexican                           13.1               6.0             79.2              2.565
                                                  (.02)             (.19)            (.32)            (.006)
   Wife non-Mexican                              13.3               4.4             79.6              2.579
                                                  (.02)             (.17)            (.34)            (.006)
 All wives                                       12.4              13.7             74.7              2.480
                                                  (.01)             (.14)            (.17)            (.003)

Source: 2000 Census data.
Note: Standard errors are shown in parentheses. The samples include husbands and wives in marriages that meet the
following conditions: both spouses are between the ages of 25-59, the couple currently lives together, and at least
one spouse is a U.S.-born individual identified as Mexican by the Census question regarding Hispanic origin. The
samples for the hourly earnings data are further limited to individuals who were employed at some time during the
calendar year preceding the Census. The sample sizes are 62,734 husbands and 62,734 wives for the full samples,
and 58,003 husbands and 45,857 wives for the employed samples.
                             Table 9: Regression-Adjusted Outcome Differences by Type of Marriage, 2000

                                                                               Dependent Variable
                                            Education      Deficient English          Employment                  Log Hourly Earnings
      Regressor                           (1)       (2)     (1)        (2)        (1)      (2)       (3)        (1)      (2)        (3)

      Husbands
      Type of marriage:
       Husband foreign-born Mexican      -2.46    -2.53     .392      .401      .009     .0001       .030     -.148     -.147      .027
                                          (.04)    (.04)   (.004)    (.004)    (.003)   (.003)      (.004)    (.009)    (.009)    (.009)
       Wife foreign-born Mexican          -.53     -.57     .104      .108     -.001    -.006        .001     -.071     -.065     -.028
                                          (.04)    (.04)   (.005)    (.005)    (.004)   (.004)      (.004)    (.010)    (.010)    (.010)
       Husband non-Mexican                1.42     1.35    -.101     -.089      .032     .028        .013      .227      .199      .115
                                          (.03)    (.03)   (.003)    (.004)    (.003)   (.003)      (.003)    (.007)    (.007)    (.007)
       Wife non-Mexican                   1.05      .98    -.090     -.077      .031     .026        .015      .153      .125      .064
                                          (.03)    (.03)   (.004)    (.004)    (.003)   (.003)      (.003)    (.007)    (.007)    (.007)
      Years of education                                                                             .010                          .060
                                                                                                    (.0003)                       (.001)
      Deficient English                                                                             -.010                         -.056
                                                                                                    (.003)                        (.008)
      Wives
      Type of marriage:
       Husband foreign-born Mexican       -.70     -.81     .046      .057     -.035    -.042       -.011     -.061     -.075     -.015
                                          (.04)    (.04)   (.004)    (.004)    (.006)   (.006)      (.006)    (.010)    (.010)    (.010)
       Wife foreign-born Mexican         -1.76    -1.86     .393      .400     -.134    -.139       -.043     -.126     -.138      .003
                                          (.04)    (.04)   (.005)    (.005)    (.007)   (.007)      (.007)    (.012)    (.012)    (.012)
       Husband non-Mexican                1.08      .95    -.082     -.064      .059     .046        .010      .150      .130      .061
                                          (.03)    (.03)   (.003)    (.003)    (.005)   (.005)      (.005)    (.008)    (.008)    (.007)
       Wife non-Mexican                   1.21     1.08    -.098     -.079      .063     .049        .007      .164      .144      .062
                                          (.03)    (.03)   (.004)    (.004)    (.005)   (.005)      (.005)    (.008)    (.008)    (.008)
      Years of education                                                                             .032                          .081
                                                                                                    (.0006)                       (.001)
      Deficient English                                                                             -.091                         -.038
                                                                                                    (.005)                        (.009)
      Controls for:
       Geographic location                No       Yes      No        Yes        No       Yes        Yes       No        Yes       Yes
       Age                                No       Yes      No        Yes        No       Yes        Yes       No        Yes       Yes

Source: 2000 Census data.
Note: The reported figures are estimated coefficients from ordinary least squares regressions run separately for husbands and wives. Standard errors are shown
in parentheses. The samples include husbands and wives in marriages that meet the following conditions: both spouses are between the ages of 25-59, the couple
currently lives together, and at least one spouse is a U.S.-born individual identified as Mexican by the Census question regarding Hispanic origin. The samples
for the hourly earnings regressions are further limited to individuals who were employed at some time during the calendar year preceding the Census. The sample
sizes are 62,734 husbands and 62,734 wives for the full samples, and 58,003 husbands and 45,857 wives for the employed samples. For the dummy variables
indicating the type of marriage, the reference group consists of endogamous marriages in which both spouses are U.S.-born Mexicans. The controls for
geographic location are dummy variables identifying the nine Census divisions, the individual states of California and Texas, and whether the individual resides in
a metropolitan area. The controls for age are dummy variables identifying five-year age intervals.
       Table 10: Mexican Identification of Youngest Child by Type of Marriage, 2000

                                                                 Percent with Youngest Child
                                                                    Identified as Mexican
               Type of marriage:
                Both spouses U.S.-born Mexican                                 98.2
                                                                                (.12)

                 Husband foreign-born Mexican                                  97.9
                                                                                (.20)

                 Wife foreign-born Mexican                                     97.8
                                                                                (.24)

                 Husband non-Mexican                                           63.5
                                                                                (.51)

                 Wife non-Mexican                                              71.1
                                                                                (.51)

               All types of marriages                                          84.4
                                                                                (.19)

Source: 2000 Census data.
Note: Standard errors are shown in parentheses. The sample includes marriages that meet the following conditions:
both spouses are between the ages of 25-59, the couple currently lives together, at least one spouse is a U.S.-born
individual identified as Mexican by the Census question regarding Hispanic origin, and the marriage has produced at
least one child under age 19 that resides in the household. There are 37,921 such marriages.
 Table 11: Average Parental Outcomes by Mexican Identification of Youngest Child, 2000

                                                                  Parental Outcomes
                                              Years of          Deficient      Percent            Log Hourly
                                             Education          English       Employed             Earnings
   Fathers
   Youngest child identified as:
    Mexican                                    12.1              18.0              94.3              2.733
                                                (.02)             (.21)             (.13)            (.004)

     Not Mexican                               13.2                6.2             96.2              2.888
                                                (.03)              (.31)            (.25)            (.009)

   All fathers                                 12.3              16.1              94.6              2.757
                                                (.02)             (.19)             (.12)            (.003)
   Mothers
   Youngest child identified as:
    Mexican                                    12.3              15.8              73.0              2.454
                                                (.02)             (.20)             (.25)            (.004)

     Not Mexican                               13.1                6.5             75.9              2.535
                                                (.03)              (.32)            (.56)            (.010)

   All mothers                                 12.4              14.4              73.4              2.467
                                                (.01)             (.18)             (.23)            (.004)

Source: 2000 Census data.
Note: Standard errors are shown in parentheses. The samples include fathers and mothers in marriages that meet the
following conditions: both spouses are between the ages of 25-59, the couple currently lives together, at least one
spouse is a U.S.-born individual identified as Mexican by the Census question regarding Hispanic origin, and the
marriage has produced at least one child under age 19 that resides in the household. The samples for the hourly
earnings data are further limited to individuals who were employed at some time during the calendar year preceding
the Census. The sample sizes are 37,921 fathers and 37,921 mothers for the full samples, and 35,496 fathers and
27,227 mothers for the employed samples.
            Table 12: Regression-Adjusted Parental Outcome Differences by Mexican Identification of Youngest Child, 2000

                                                                     Dependent Variable (Parental Outcomes)
                                           Education               Deficient English            Employment             Log Hourly Earnings
Regressor                           (1)       (2)       (3)      (1)      (2)      (3)     (1)       (2)    (3)        (1)    (2)       (3)

Fathers
Youngest child Mexican            -1.11      -1.01      -.005    .118     .107     .002    -.019    -.018    -.002    -.155    -.126    -.004
                                   (.04)      (.04)     (.04)   (.005)   (.005)   (.005)   (.003)   (.003)   (.004)   (.009)   (.009)   (.010)
Type of marriage:
 Husband foreign-born Mexican                          -2.35                       .400                       .004                      -.135
                                                        (.05)                     (.005)                     (.004)                     (.010)
 Wife foreign-born Mexican                              -.57                       .120                      -.005                      -.049
                                                        (.05)                     (.006)                     (.004)                     (.012)
 Husband non-Mexican                                    1.30                      -.079                       .030                       .211
                                                        (.04)                     (.005)                     (.003)                     (.010)
 Wife non-Mexican                                       1.02                      -.075                       .030                       .147
                                                        (.04)                     (.005)                     (.003)                     (.010)
Mothers
Youngest child Mexican             -.86       -.74       .04     .093     .080    -.001    -.030    -.022     .013    -.081    -.066     .026
                                   (.04)      (.04)     (.04)   (.005)   (.005)   (.005)   (.006)   (.006)   (.007)   (.011)   (.010)   (.011)
Type of marriage:
 Husband foreign-born Mexican                           -.72                       .063                      -.034                      -.057
                                                        (.04)                     (.005)                     (.007)                     (.012)
 Wife foreign-born Mexican                             -1.77                       .405                      -.146                      -.126
                                                        (.05)                     (.006)                     (.008)                     (.015)
 Husband non-Mexican                                     .96                      -.065                       .028                       .140
                                                        (.04)                     (.005)                     (.007)                     (.011)
 Wife non-Mexican                                       1.09                      -.077                       .041                       .167
                                                        (.04)                     (.005)                     (.007)                     (.011)
Controls for:
 Geographic location                No       Yes       Yes       No      Yes      Yes        No      Yes     Yes       No      Yes       Yes
 Age of parent                      No       Yes       Yes       No      Yes      Yes        No      Yes     Yes       No      Yes       Yes

  Source: 2000Census data.
Note: The reported figures are estimated coefficients from ordinary least squares regressions run separately for fathers and mothers. Standard errors are shown in
parentheses. The samples include fathers and mothers in marriages that meet the following conditions: both spouses are between the ages of 25-59, the couple
currently lives together, at least one spouse is a U.S.-born individual identified as Mexican by the Census question regarding Hispanic origin, and the marriage
has produced at least one child under age 19 that resides in the household. The samples for the hourly earnings data are further limited to individuals who were
employed at some time during the calendar year preceding the Census. The sample sizes are 37,921 fathers and 37,921 mothers for the full samples, and 35,496
fathers and 27,227 mothers for the employed samples. The dummy variable “youngest child Mexican” indicates parents whose youngest child is identified as
Mexican by the Census question regarding Hispanic origin; the reference group consists of parents whose youngest child is not identified as Mexican. The
controls for geographic location are dummy variables identifying the nine Census divisions, the individual states of California and Texas, and whether the family
resides in a metropolitan area. The controls for age of the parent are dummy variables identifying five-year age intervals.
      Table 13: Nativity/Ethnicity Distributions of the Spouses of U.S.-Born Mexicans,
                              by Generation, 1996-2002 CPS

                                                             U.S.-Born Mexican:
                                                        nd
                                                    2 Generation            3rd+ Generation
     Nativity/Ethnicity of Spouse                Husbands    Wives       Husbands     Wives

     U.S.-born
      2nd Generation Mexican                        21.9            19.4                 9.7            10.3
      3rd+ Generation Mexican                       24.9            18.9                49.2            44.4
      Other Hispanic                                 2.0             1.9                 1.6             1.3
      Non-Hispanic:
        White                                       23.4            19.3                28.8            28.3
        Black                                         .5             1.6                  .3             1.2
        Asian                                         .6              .5                  .5              .6
        Other race                                    .9              .5                  .6              .8

     Foreign-born
      Mexican                                       22.5            34.1                 6.8            11.1
      Other Hispanic                                 1.5             1.8                  .8              .7
      Non-Hispanic:
        White                                       1.1             1.5                 1.5             1.1
        Black                                       0.0             0.0                 0.0              .1
        Asian                                        .8              .5                  .4              .1
        Other race                                  0.0             0.0                 0.0              .1
                                                 100.0%           100.0%              100.0%          100.0%

Source: March 1996-2002 CPS data.
Note: The sample includes marriages that meet the following conditions: both spouses are between the ages of 25-
59, the couple currently lives together, and at least one spouse is a U.S.-born individual identified as Mexican by the
CPS question regarding Hispanic origin. For the U.S.-born Mexican husbands and wives involved in these
marriages, the table shows the nativity/ethnicity distributions of their spouses. There are 4,407 such marriages.
These marriages involve 2,819 U.S.-born Mexican husbands (882 from the 2nd generation and 1,937 from the 3rd+
generation) and 3,141 U.S.-born Mexican wives (996 from the 2nd generation and 2,145 from the 3rd+ generation).
         Table 14: Types of Marriages Involving U.S.-Born Mexicans, by Generation,
                                      1996-2002 CPS

                                                                   Percent of Sample
                                                              nd
         Type of Marriage                                   2 Generation       3rd+ Generation

         Both spouses U.S.-born Mexican                            35.7                      43.5

         Husband foreign-born Mexican                              20.2                        7.6
          (Wife U.S.-born Mexican)

         Wife foreign-born Mexican                                 11.8                        4.2
          (Husband U.S.-born Mexican)

         Husband non-Mexican                                       16.3                      23.5
          (Wife U.S.-born Mexican)

         Wife non-Mexican                                          16.1                      21.2
          (Husband U.S.-born Mexican)
                                                                100.0%                      100.0%

Source: March 1996-2002 CPS data.
Note: The sample includes marriages that meet the following conditions: both spouses are between the ages of 25-
59, the couple currently lives together, and at least one spouse is a U.S.-born individual identified as Mexican by the
CPS question regarding Hispanic origin. There are 4,407 such marriages, with 1,685 of these marriages involving at
least one 2nd generation Mexican and 3,130 involving at least one 3rd+ generation Mexican (408 marriages are
between a 2nd generation Mexican and a 3rd+ generation Mexican).
       Table 15: Average Outcomes by Type of Marriage and Generation, 1996-2002 CPS

                                                  Years of                   Percent                 Log Hourly
                                                 Education                 Employed                     Earnings
                                               2nd       3rd+            2nd        3rd+            2 nd
                                                                                                               3rd+
Husbands
Type of marriage:
 Both spouses U.S.-born Mexican              12.1        12.0          94.8        93.1           2.642       2.612
                                              (.11)       (.07)         (.90)       (.69)         (.024)      (.017)
 Husband foreign-born Mexican                10.0         9.6          95.3        92.8           2.484       2.454
                                              (.22)       (.27)        (1.15)      (1.68)         (.031)      (.045)
 Wife foreign-born Mexican                   11.3        12.1          98.0        90.2           2.499       2.542
                                              (.22)       (.24)        (1.00)      (2.60)         (.041)      (.054)
 Husband non-Mexican                         13.6        13.7          94.5        96.5           2.901       2.859
                                              (.13)       (.09)        (1.37)       (.68)         (.039)      (.024)
 Wife non-Mexican                            13.2        13.1          95.9        95.2           2.810       2.808
                                              (.13)       (.09)        (1.20)       (.83)         (.036)      (.022)
All husbands                                 12.0        12.4          95.4        94.2           2.662       2.699
                                              (.08)       (.05)         (.51)       (.42)         (.015)      (.011)
Wives
Type of marriage:
 Both spouses U.S.-born Mexican              12.2        12.0          76.5        74.3           2.348       2.282
                                              (.10)       (.07)        (1.73)      (1.18)         (.026)      (.018)
 Husband foreign-born Mexican                11.7        11.5          72.1        69.2           2.288       2.234
                                              (.15)       (.16)        (2.44)      (3.01)         (.037)      (.052)
 Wife foreign-born Mexican                   10.5        10.9          58.6        56.8           2.180       2.187
                                              (.25)       (.30)        (3.51)      (4.33)         (.050)      (.062)
 Husband non-Mexican                         13.4        13.2          80.4        77.6           2.512       2.460
                                              (.12)       (.07)        (2.40)      (1.54)         (.043)      (.025)
 Wife non-Mexican                            13.2        13.4          79.0        77.9           2.534       2.511
                                              (.13)       (.08)        (2.48)      (1.61)         (.041)      (.029)
All wives                                    12.2        12.5          74.5        74.7           2.381       2.370
                                              (.07)       (.04)        (1.06)       (.78)         (.017)      (.013)

  Source: March 1996-2002 CPS data.
  Note: Standard errors are shown in parentheses. The samples include husbands and wives in marriages that meet the
  following conditions: both spouses are between the ages of 25-59, the couple currently lives together, and at least
  one spouse is a U.S.-born individual identified as Mexican by the Census question regarding Hispanic origin. The
  samples for the hourly earnings data are further limited to individuals who were employed at some time during the
  calendar year preceding the CPS. For the marriages involving a 2nd generation Mexican, the sample sizes are 1,685
  husbands and 1,685 wives for the full samples, and 1,581 husbands and 1,220 wives for the employed samples. For
  the marriages involving a 3rd+ generation Mexican, the sample sizes are 3,130 husbands and 3,130 wives for the full
  samples, and 2,899 husbands and 2,262 wives for the employed samples.
Table 16: Mexican Identification of Youngest Child by Type of Marriage and Generation,
                                     1996-2002 CPS

                                                                 Percent with Youngest Child
                                                                    Identified as Mexican
                                                              nd
                                                             2 Generation         3rd+ Generation
           Type of marriage:
            Both spouses U.S.-born Mexican                        99.3                    98.9
                                                                   (.41)                   (.33)

              Husband foreign-born Mexican                        98.2                    97.7
                                                                   (.79)                  (1.12)

              Wife foreign-born Mexican                           99.4                    98.0
                                                                   (.62)                  (1.41)

              Husband non-Mexican                                 48.2                    47.4
                                                                  (3.59)                  (2.23)

              Wife non-Mexican                                    40.1                    34.3
                                                                  (3.46)                  (2.20)

           All types of marriages                                 81.7                    73.3
                                                                  (1.09)                   (.95)

Source: March 1996-2002 CPS data.
Note: Standard errors are shown in parentheses. The sample includes marriages that meet the following conditions:
both spouses are between the ages of 25-59, the couple currently lives together, at least one spouse is a U.S.-born
individual identified as Mexican by the CPS question regarding Hispanic origin, and the marriage has produced at
least one child under age 19 that resides in the household. There are 3,174 such marriages, with 1,261 of these
marriages involving at least one 2nd generation Mexican and 2,193 involving at least one 3rd+ generation Mexican
(280 marriages are between a 2nd generation Mexican and a 3rd+ generation Mexican).
