NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

IMPACTS OF POLICY REFORMS ON LABOR MIGRATION
FROM RURAL MEXICO TO THE UNITED STATES
Susan M. Richter
J. Edward Taylor
Antonio Yúnez-Naude
Working Paper 11428
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11428
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2005

Paper is forthcoming in a National Bureau of Economic Research Book, to be published by University of
Chicago Press, and was presented at the NBER Mexican Immigration Conference, February 2005. Richter
and Taylor are Ph.D Candidate and Professor, respectively, in the Department of Agricultural and Resource
Economics at the University of California, Davis, and Yúnez is Professor at the Center for Economic Studies
at El Colegio de México. We gratefully acknowledge support from the William and Flora Hewlett
Foundation, the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA/NRI), Mexico’s Consejo Nacional de Ciencia y
Tecnología (CONACYT), and the University of California Institute for Mexico (UCMEXUS), without which
this research would not have been possible. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by Susan M. Richter, J. Edward Taylor, and Antonio Yúnez-Naude. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Impacts of Policy Reforms on Labor Migration From Rural Mexico to the United States
Susan M. Richter, J. Edward Taylor, and Antonio Yúnez-Naude
NBER Working Paper No. 11428
June 2005
JEL No. F1, J6, J4, O1
ABSTRACT
Using new survey data from Mexico, a dynamic econometric model is estimated to test the effect
of policy changes on the flow of migrant labor from rural Mexico to the United States and test for
differential effects of policy changes on male and female migration. We find that both IRCA and
NAFTA reduced the share of rural Mexicans working in the United States. Increased U.S. border
enforcement had the opposite effect. The impacts of these policy variables are small compared with
those of macroeconomic variables. The influence of policy and macroeconomic variables is small
compared with that of migration networks, as reflected in past migration by villagers to the United
States. The effects of all of these variables on migration propensities differ, quantitatively and in
some cases qualitatively, by gender.
Susan M. Richter
University of California, Davis
srichter@primal.ucdavis.edu
J. Edward Taylor
University of California, Davis
Antonio Yúnez-Naude
El Colegio de Mexico

IMPACTS OF POLICY REFORMS ON LABOR MIGRATION
FROM RURAL MEXICO TO THE UNITED STATES
Immigrant workers from Mexico are a critical component of the supply of labor to
agriculture and many non-agricultural sectors in the United States. They constitute 3.5
percent of U.S. labor force but are heavily concentrated into two types of sectors.
Twenty-five percent are in services, and twenty-nine percent are involved in production
and transportation occupations (Grieco and Ray, 2004). However, the majority of
farmworkers are Mexico-born. According to the National Agricultural Worker Survey
(NAWS), Mexico-born persons represented an estimated 77 percent of the U.S. farm
workforce in 1997-98 (up from 57 percent in 1990; U.S. Department of Labor, 2000 and
1991). The majority of these workers (52 percent) were unauthorized. An overwhelming
majority originate from households in rural Mexico (U.S. Commission on Immigration
Reform, 1997).
Two major policy changes, The North American Free Trade Agreement
(NAFTA) and the 1986 Immigration Reform and Control Act (IRCA), together with
intensified enforcement along the southern U.S. border, were aimed wholly or partially at
curtailing the flow of unauthorized Mexico-to-U.S. migration. The curtailment of
unauthorized migration had the potential to reduce the supply of labor to these U.S.
economic sectors. But these policies had potentially counteracting effects. The overall
impact of NAFTA, IRCA and increased border enforcement on migration is theoretically
ambiguous and therefore must be estimated econometrically.
In this paper, we estimate a dynamic econometric model to test the effect of these
policy changes on the flow of migrant labor from rural Mexico to the United States.
Recognizing that policy changes may have differential effects on male and female labor
migration, we estimate the effects of policy changes by the gender of migrant flows, as
well. The models are estimated using retrospective data from the 2003 National Mexico
Rural Household Survey.
Conceptual Framework
Given individual, household and community characteristics, policy changes may alter the
larger milieu within which migration decisions take place. In this paper we isolate the
impact of three policies, IRCA, NAFTA and increased expenditure on enforcement along
the U.S.-Mexican border. Each of these policies has counteracting effects on migration,
making the overall impact on migration ambiguous.
IRCA had two main components. First, it made employers who hired illegal
aliens subject to fines and/or imprisonment. These penalties were meant to discourage
the hiring of unauthorized immigrants and reduce migration by dampening the
employment expectations of migrants. Second, IRCA provided amnesty to illegal aliens
who have lived in the U.S. continually since 1982, if they applied before 1988. This
policy legalized U.S. migration contacts for households throughout rural Mexico. In so
doing, it may have encouraged migration by family members of newly legalized
migrants, while also sending a signal to rural Mexicans that future amnesty deals might
be forthcoming. Therefore, these two components of IRCA potentially have
counteracting effects on immigration.
2

NAFTA was only partially motivated by migration concerns but was expected to
have far-reaching impacts on migration flows. In the long run, trade liberalization
policies open North American markets to Mexico, encouraging export of goods and
decreasing migration pressures.1 That is, in the long run, trade and migration may be
substitutes. After Mexico joined NAFTA, Mexican agricultural exports to the United
States did, indeed, increase. However, in the short run, NAFTA could displace rural
workers as production shifts from importables to exportables and labor markets adjust to
new market realities. Computable general equilibrium models predicted that the increase in
labor demand generated by exports to the United States would be insufficient to absorb
workers displaced from agricultural activities that had been protected by government
policies prior to NAFTA. This, in turn, would stimulate out-migration from rural Mexico
(Levy and and van Wijnberger: 1992, and Robinson et.al.: 1991).
The process of dismantling protectionist agrarian policies, which began just prior to
NAFTA, was also expected to displace agricultural workers throughout Mexico. Mexico
phased out price supports for eleven agricultural field crops and the processing, storing, and
marketing activities of the state-run National Company of Popular Subsistence
(CONASUPO, Yunez-Naude: 2003). Agricultural credit subsidies were also reduced
sharply (Yunez and Barceinas: 2004). For rural workers displaced by policies related to
NAFTA, migration may have been a vehicle to overcome short term financial shocks.
The third policy that we evaluate is the increase in enforcement along the U.S. Mexico border. Increases in border enforcement were meant to curtail unauthorized
immigration. However, they could have the opposite effect, by discouraging
unauthorized immigrants from returning to their home countries and thus extending their
stays in the United States. Increased border enforcement raises smuggler fees, but
family members may be willing to pay the increased cost in order to reunite with relatives
who have extended stays in the United States.
The possible impacts of these three policies on migration are complex and
theoretically ambiguous. The net effects of these policy shocks on the migration of labor
from rural Mexico to the United States can only be determined empirically. However, in
order to isolate the effects of policy changes on migration we also need to control for the
plethora of individual, household and community variables influencing migration
decisions over time, as well as macroeconomic shocks that affect the migration decision.
Individual, household and community variables affect the costs and benefits of
migrating relative to staying at home and thus the propensity to migrate. The propensity
to migrate and obtain employment in the United States is partly a function of migration
networks and sending-area characteristics. Sending-area characteristics and community
level heterogeneity are controlled for econometrically via fixed effects, while migration
networks or contacts with employed migrants in the United States are represented by
lagged stocks of employed villagers in the United States. Networks may be genderspecific. For example, females may base their migration decision on the knowledge that
other females in the village have succeeded in crossing the border and obtaining
employment in the United States. In order to evaluate gender-specific network effects we
include separately the lagged stocks of male and female villagers employed in the United
States.
1

Presidents Salinas and Bush (Senior) argued this point to gain support for NAFTA.

3

Several macroeconomic variables also may influence the benefits and costs of
international migration. These variables include changes in the peso-dollar exchange rate
and in per-capita GDPs of both countries. Mexican currency devaluations increase the
purchasing power of dollars remitted in Mexico. Changes in U.S. GDP are included as a
proxy for the availability of jobs in the United States. They are expected to be positively
related to migration. The impact of an increase in Mexico’s GDP is ambiguous. On one
hand, it could reflect employment growth that discourages migration. On the other hand,
higher income in Mexico could provide households with the liquidity to finance
investments, including investments in international migration, i.e., the costs associated
with crossing the U.S.-Mexican border and establishing oneself in a foreign labor market.
Our econometric analysis controls explicitly for these variables in order to isolate the
impact of our three policy variables.
Theoretical Model
At the micro level, international migration is only observed for households and family
members that choose to participate in migration, which is a discrete decision. Migrants
are individuals for whom the expected benefits of migration, R, exceed the (unobserved)
migration “reservation wage,” ω. The migration reservation wage depends on local
opportunities on and off the farm. Following Mincer, the local wage is a function of
human capital that affects the marginal productivity of labor. Let XW denote a vector of
human capital characteristics influencing wage income in the local labor market. The
productivity of family members’ on local farm and off-farm activities is shaped both by
these human capital variables and by family assets K . Remittances are a function of
migrants’ human capital, which affects earnings, as well as migrants’ motivations to
remit, which may be influenced by both human capital and family assets (Lucas and
Stark, Taylor, 1985). Contacts at migrant destinations, MK , are a form of migration
capital that can enhance the labor-market prospects of migrants (Munshi, 2003).
Migrant remittances and reservation wages have both deterministic and stochastic
components; thus, R = R( X R ) + u and ϖ = ϖ ( X ϖ ) + v , where X ϖ = [ X W , K ] ,
X R = [ X W , K , MK ] , and u and v are stochastic errors. Letting δ i = 1 if household
member i migrates and 0 otherwise, the migration participation decision becomes:

δi =

(1)

1
0

if η i < R ( X R ) − ϖ ( X ϖ )
otherwise

where η i = vi − u i . Total migration is simply the sum of individuals who migrate; that is,

M =
i

δ i . Let θ t represent the joint distribution of variables X R and X ϖ in

community j at time t. Then
(2)

M jt = M (θ jt , Z jt )

where Z jt is a vector of community variables influencing the productivity of labor in
local activities and remittances. In the econometric model, we control for the influences
of θ jt and Z jt by including lagged migration ( M j ,t −1 ), fixed effects for communities, and
a time trend.
4

Data

The data used to estimate the model are from a nationwide rural household survey carried
out jointly by El Colegio de Mexico and the University of California, Davis. The Mexico
National Rural Household Survey (Encuesta Nacional a Hogares Rurales de Mexico, or
ENHRUM) provides retrospective data on migration by individuals from a sample of
rural households that is both nationally and regionally representative (see
http://precesam.colmex.mx). Past studies of Mexican labor supply to the U.S.
employment sectors used proxies including border apprehensions (e.g., Torok and
Huffman: 1986) or data from surveys of small numbers of villages. Usually surveys
have not collected migration flows over extended periods of times and thus are unable to
evaluate policies’ long-term impact on the dynamics and trends of migration. We hope
that our dataset will fill this lacuna in the literature.
The ENHRUM was carried out in January and February 2003 in all of Mexico’s
five census regions (See Figure 1). INEGI (Instituto Nacional de Estadística, Geografía
e Informática), Mexico’s national census office, designed the sampling frame to provide
a statistically reliable characterization of Mexico’s population living in rural areas,
defined by INEGI as communities with fewer than 2,500 inhabitants. The survey was
designed to be representative both nationally and regionally. Rural households were
selected via a three-tiered stratified random sampling method involving states,
communities, and households randomly drawn within each community. This method
generated a sample of 1,782 households in 80 villages and 14 Mexican states. For
reasons of cost and tractability, individuals in hamlets or disperse populations with fewer
than 500 inhabitants were not included in the survey. The sample is representative of
more than 80 percent of the population that the Mexican census office considers to be
rural.
The ENHRUM survey assembled complete migration histories from 1980 through
2002 for (a) the household head, (b) the spouse of the head, (c) all individuals who lived
in the household 3 months or more in 2002, and (d) a random sample of sons and
daughters of either the head or his/her spouse who lived outside the household longer
than 3 months in 2002. In theory, the ENHRUM survey collected retrospective
information only about labor migrants.2 However, data on place of residence of all
family members were gathered for 2002, regardless of employment status. For 2002,
virtually all migrants were considered by family members in the village to be labor
migrants. If the same is true for earlier years, our counts of labor migrants will also
reflect total migration. For each year, the survey provides information on the migrant’s
sector of employment, agricultural or non-agricultural, and the state in which he/she
worked. The survey provides the most reliable longitudinal data on migration from rural
Mexican communities to the United States.
The survey asked individuals to recall employment information for each migrant
from 1980-2002. Individuals may be unable to remember their (or their migrant sons’
and daughters’) employment histories for 22 years. However, when employment is
coupled with a life event such as international migration, there is a smaller likelihood that
2

The questions asked in the survey were: “¿Qué años trabajó ___ en los E.U. desde 1980? ¿En qué trabajó
y en qué estado? ¿Por un salario o por cuenta propia?” (“In what years did ___ work in the U.S. since
1980? In what job and which state? For a salary or self-employed?”).

5

data will be misreported. A study by Smith and Thomas (2003) showed that when
respondents are asked to recall information linked to salient events, such as marriage or
birth of a child, misreporting is insignificant. Also, individuals asked to recall labor or
migration histories reported more accurately moves that involved either a long distance or
extended stays.
To implement the survey, Mexico was divided into 5 regions, reflecting INEGI’s
standard regionalization of the country: Center, South-Southeast, Center-West,
Northwest, and Northeast.3 Table 1 summarizes migration from households in rural
Mexico. Sixteen percent of all households in the sample had a family member living in
the United States at the start of 2002, the year of the survey, and 26 percent had a family
member living in another part of Mexico. Many households had more than one migrant.
The number of U.S. migrants per household ranged from 0 to 9, while the number of
internal migrants ranged from 0 to 10. The average household in the sample had 0.35
U.S. migrants and 0.71 internal migrants in 2002—or 1.06 migrants in total.
As indicated in the Table, there are sharp differences in migration experience
among the five rural regions. West-Central Mexico traditionally has been the largest
sender of migrants to the United States, with far and away the highest current
participation in international migration and the most international migration experience.
In this region, nearly 28% of all households have at least one family member in the
United States, and the average household had .62 U.S. migrants. By contrast, 7.5% of
households in the south-southwest have U.S. migrants, with an average of .10 U.S.
migrants per household.
Econometric Model

We econometrically estimate the impact of policy reforms for three dependent variables:
1) the share of villagers employed in the U.S.; 2) the share of female villagers employed
in the U.S.; and 3) the share of male villagers employed in the U.S.
For the first dependent variable we estimate two fixed-effects panel data models
for all employed immigrants. The first model is intended to capture the basic dynamics
of rural Mexico-to-U.S. migration. The share of village population observed as labor
migrants in the Untied States at time t, Mt, is regressed on the same share lagged one year
( M jt −1 ) and a time trend (t), controlling for a vector of village fixed effects, αj:4
(3a)
M jt = α j + γt + δM jt −1 + u jt
Essentially, equation (3a) estimates the dynamic nature of employed migration over time
and allows us to evaluate the role of networks and the inertia of employed migration over
time. Village fixed effects, α j , control for community-specific migration dynamics that
3

The high-migration West-Central region was the focus of Mexico Migration Project (MMP) surveys
(Population Studies Center, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia (producer and distributor),
www.pop.upenn.edu/mexmig/welcome.html). The MMP surveyed a random sample of households within
communities, but the sample of MMP communities was not random.
4
We use the percentage rather than the sum of villagers who migrated because of our concern that the size
of village populations in the synthetic cohorts created using retrospective data is biased downward as one
goes back in time, as individuals are removed from the population due to death (and thus are not available
to be counted in 2003).

6

shape the migration trend; each village is permitted to have its own migration trajectory.
The village fixed-effects model makes it possible to isolate the underlying migration
trend (t) and influence of networks and inertia (the lagged-migration variable) from
policy and macroeconomic variables shaping migration.
Model two includes three policy variables: dummy variables for IRCA (1 for all
time periods beginning in 1986, the year of IRCA’s implementation) and NAFTA (1
beginning in 1994, 0 before), and a continuous variable measuring the percentage change
in border enforcement expenditures ( ∆BEt ) . We also include macroeconomic variables:
the percentage changes between time t and t-1 in the peso-dollar exchange rate ( ∆ERt )
and the US and Mexico GDPs ( ∆USGDPt , ∆MGDPt ) .
(3b)

M jt = α j + γ t + δ M jt −1 + β1 IRCAt + β 2 NAFTAt t + β 3 ∆BEt

+θ1∆ERt + θ 2 ∆USGDPt + θ3 ∆MGDPt + u " jt
Our use of dummy variables to evaluate the impact of NAFTA and IRCA
warrants some explanation. Other methods are possible, including controls for trade
flows or changes in real wages in Mexico and the U.S. But these variables may not be
exogenous to migration. For example, changes in real agricultural wages in the United
States clearly are related to the supply of migrant labor from rural Mexico. The inclusion
of policy dummy variables in the regressions makes it possible to evaluate the long run
impact of exogenous policy shocks on the rate and dynamic of labor migration. Inclusion
of the lagged-migration variable allows for the impacts of policy shocks to unfold
gradually over time. The vector of fixed effects, α j , δ , β k , k = 1,...,3 and θ l , l = 1,...,4 are
parameters to be estimated, and u jt , u 'jt , and u" jt are stochastic errors. The use of
migration shares ( M jt ) instead of differences in migration shares between periods
( M jt − M jt −1 ) as the dependent variable allows for the possibility that δ ≠ 1 . Under the
null hypothesis of no policy impacts on migration the coefficients β k = 0 ∀ k.
We estimate three types of dynamic fixed-effects models for labor migration by
gender (g = m, f). The first model is similar to equation (3a). We estimate the share of
males (females) in employed migration as a function of a time trend (t) and the lagged
share of male (female) migrants in village populations:
(4a)
M jgt = α j + γ t + δ1M jgt −1 + u " jt
We re-estimated each equation including the lagged stock of other-gender migrants to
evaluate the gender sensitivity of networks:
(4b)
M jsgt = α j + γ t + δ1M jmt −1 + δ 2 M jft −1 + u " jt
If both male and female networks shape female migration, then both δ 1 (lagged-female
migration) and δ 2 (lagged-male migration) will be significant, and conversely for the
male migration regression.
In the final estimation we include, in each gender-specific migration equation, all
our policy and macroeconomic variables. This model is similar to equation (3b) except
that it includes the lagged stock of other gender’s participation in employed migration:
M jsgt = α j + γ t + δ1M jmt −1 + δ 2 M jft −1 + θ1∆IRCAt + θ 2 ∆NAFTAt
(4c)
+θ3 ∆BEt + β1∆ERt + β 2 ∆USGDPt + β3 ∆MGDPt + u " jt

7

Estimation and Results

The series of models given by 3(a)-3(b) and 4(a)-4(c) was estimated using the standard
least square dummy variable (LSDV) method. This method results in a downward bias in
the estimate of δ ; however, this bias diminishes as the number of observations in the
time dimension (T) increases (Judson and Owen, 1999). Judson and Owen show that the
bias becomes negligible as T approaches 30. In our dataset, T=23 (1980-2002,
inclusive), which indicates that there will be some bias, but it will be small. Judson and
Owen also conclude that when T is greater than 20 the bias in the other parameter
estimates is negligible. The key hypotheses that we wish to test involve not δ , but rather,
the other parameters in the model (i.e., the effects of policy variables).
Figure 2 presents estimated shares of populations from the surveyed villages in
U.S. farm and nonfarm jobs from 1980 to 2002. It shows an upward trend in migration to
the United States for both males and females. However the trend is steeper for males
than females.5 Female migration is steady, lower than male migration, and has a steady
increase over the 23-year period. Table 2 presents variable definitions and means for
variables used in the econometrics.
The data set for this sample provides information on migration from 80 villages
over 23 years (from 1980 to 2002); however, one year (80 observations) was lost as a
result of lagged right-hand-side variables. Thus, the total sample size is 1,760 (22 years x
80 villages).
Table 3 reports the econometric results for the village share of labor migrants
using ordinary least squares, controlling for fixed effects. Column 1 of Table 3 shows
results from the model that only controls for the lagged stock of migration. The time
trend is significant and positive. The coefficient on lagged migration is also significant
and positive, indicating that networks created through past migration influence current
migration.
Macroeconomic variables and policies, such as NAFTA and IRCA, can change
the overall trend and influence of migration rates. Results from Model 2, which includes
these variables, are reported in column 2 of Table 36. The time trend and coefficient on
lagged migration remain positive, large and significant. The dummy variables for
NAFTA and IRCA have a significant and negative impact on migration. Therefore, the
supply of migrant labor from rural Mexico to the U.S. decreases after the implementation
of IRCA in 1982, and it decreases once again following NAFTA in 1994. These findings
support the hypothesis that NAFTA relieved migration pressures. IRCA also curtailed
migration, but to a smaller degree than NAFTA. In contrast to these policies, the increase
in border enforcement increased the share of villagers working in the United States. This
finding supports the hypothesis that migrants continue to enter the U.S. and/or that
increased border enforcement discourages return migration.
5

The surge in migration to the United States in the 1990s is mirrored in U.S. Census 2000 data. The U.S.
Census does not provide information on where migrants originate in Mexico (e.g., from rural or urban
areas). However, they show an unexpectedly large increase in Mexico-born persons living in the United
States.
6
Trends in migration may also be influenced by regional dynamics. When separate repressors are
estimated for Mexico’s five census regions, there were no differences in the signs of significant variables
among regions for all of the models presented in this paper.

8

The macroeconomic variables are all significant and larger in magnitude than the
policy variables. The devaluation of the peso increases the rate of migration. This is of
the expected sign, inasmuch as the devaluation raises the returns to migration
(remittances) in pesos. Changes in both country GDPs increase migration. Economic
expansion in the U.S. pulls rural Mexicans into the country. GDP growth in Mexico
encourages migration. This finding is consistent with the argument that income growth
enables rural households to finance the cost of crossing the border and establishing
migrants in U.S. labor markets.
Gender-specific regression results appear in Table 4, for female migrants, and
Table 5, for male migrants. The column labeled “Model I” in each table shows results for
the basic dynamic regression model. When we estimate the migration model by gender,
the trend remains significant and positive but flat. However, the lagged migration
participation rate is both statistically and quantitatively significant. When the lagged
migration rate of males is added to the estimate of female migration (Model II in Table
4), it has no significant impact. That is, there is no evidence of significant cross-gender
network effects on female migration. The effect of lagged female migration on male
migration (Table 5) is positive and significant at the 10% level, but it is quantitatively
small. A one-percentage-point increase of the share of village females working in the
United States, other things being equal, is associated with a .07-percent increase in male
participation in international migration. This finding suggests that labor migration
networks are gender specific. That is, estimates of a gender’s participation in labor
migration do not improve appreciably when the other gender’s migration network is
included in our regressions.
Macroeconomic and policy variables (Model II in Tables 4 and 5) significantly
increase the predicative power of the migration models for both genders.7 Qualitatively,
policy changes have similar effects on male and female migration, with the exception of
GDP growth. However, quantitatively the results differ according to gender. The
decrease in the male migrant share after NAFTA is three times greater than the drop in
the female share. This suggests that female migration was more resilient to NAFTArelated policy changes. The decrease in migration shares after implementation of IRCA
is twice as large for males as females. Other things being equal, a 1-percent increase in
U.S. border enforcement has a larger positive percentage effect on male migration than
on female migration (.022 and .010, respectively). This indicates either that border
enforcement increases male stays more than female stays, or perhaps more plausibly, that
border controls are more of a deterrent to border crossings by females than males.
The effects of changes in Mexico’s GDP are significant only for female migration.
By contrast, changes in US GDP are significant only for male migration. These findings
may suggest that female migration is more sensitive to liquidity constraints that can be
loosened by income growth in Mexico, while female migrant labor demand is robust to U.S.
GDP growth. Male migration, on the other hand, appears to be sensitive to U.S. economic
growth.

7

An F test of restricted versus unrestricted regressions, for both male and female migration shares rejected
the joint hypothesis that the macroeconomic and policy variables were jointly zero.

9

Limitations and Caveats

Reliance on policy dummy variables and retrospective data to test for effects of policy
changes on migration raises some questions and concerns that should be kept in mind
when interpreting the findings presented here.
It might be argued that policy changes were endogenous responses to increasing
migration in the period covered by our analysis. However, the build-up to IRCA was
gradual and commenced several years prior to the period covered by our analysis.
Sanctions were enacted by the U.S. House of Representatives twice in the early 1970s but
subsequently blocked in the Senate. President Carter proposed sanctions against
employment of unauthorized immigrants and legalization in 1977. Following several
years of debate and the establishment of the Select Commission on Immigration Reform,
IRCA was finally passed in 1986. It might also be argued that IRCA was a response to
economic recession, which in turn could be correlated with immigration. However, by
the time IRCA was passed, the early 1980s recession was largely over. There was more
unauthorized Mexico-to-U.S. migration after 1982-83 recession, and migration
accelerated in the 1990s (Martin, 2003, Chapter 7).
Our analysis uses fixed effects to control for unobserved village characteristics on
migration. It might be argued, however, that the effects of IRCA and NAFTA on migration
probabilities varied across regions. IRCA’s effects may have been different in rural areas in
which the prevalence of migration was high prior to the policy’s implementation. NAFTA’s
influence on migration may have been different in regions with high agricultural potential or
high levels of industrialization. How these regional characteristics might have influenced
migration is not clear a priori. For example, the influence of a large manufacturing sector on
NAFTA’s migration effects could be positive (in the case of internationally competitive
industries) or negative (in the case of industries that were protected by Mexican trade
policies prior to NAFTA). A high prevalence of migration prior to IRCA could reflect a
region’s vulnerability to immigration reforms or an enhanced ability to adapt to reforms, for
example, through amnesty programs. A rich agricultural base could reflect opportunities for
expanding agro-exports post-NAFTA; however, labor-saving technological change is
concentrated on high-potential lands. To explore the sensitivity of policy findings to
regional conditions, we re-estimated the model including, as explanatory variables,
interactions between:
• IRCA and the share of villagers who were international labor migrants in 1980
• NAFTA and the share of cultivated land that was irrigated in 1980
• NAFTA and the share of manufacturing in state GDPs in 1980
We chose 1980 values for these variables to minimize possible endogeneity bias. In
no case was an interaction term significant in explaining migration probabilities. Inclusion
of these interactions did not qualitatively alter the effects of the policy variables presented
earlier.
A number of other economic and policy changes were more or less coincident with
IRCA and NAFTA. Foremost among these were the peso devaluation of late 1994 and
1995 and enactment of a major welfare reform in the United States in 1996.

10

We attempt to disentangle the effects of currency devaluations from those of policy
shocks by including changes in the peso-dollar exchange rates in our regression. The 199495 period saw a sharp increase in this exchange rate. However, this was not the only period
of significant devaluation in our time series. We believe that there is sufficient variation in
our exchange-rate variable from 1980 to 2002 to control for currency effects.
Other policies that could have affected immigration were enacted within several
years of IRCA and NAFTA. Foremost among these was the Personal Responsibility and
Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act of 1996 (PL 104-193, PRWORA), which singled out
immigrants. Most legal immigrants arriving after August 22, 1996 are not eligible for
federal welfare assistance until they have been in the United States for at least five years,
and many legal immigrants receiving assistance when PRWORA was enacted lost their
eligibility for benefits. Enacted only two years after NAFTA, PRWORA’s effects could
conceivably contaminate our findings, if restricting immigrants’ access to benefits created a
deterrent to immigration. In a study of agricultural counties in California, Green, et al.
(2003) found that PRWORA reduced the number of adults receiving cash assistance;
however, controlling for employment and other variables, the estimated effect of the policy
change was not large. Borjas (2002) concluded that much of the potential impact of welfare
reform on immigrants outside of California was undone by the actions of state governments.
Many states — particularly those with large immigrant populations — chose to offer stateprovided benefits to otherwise ineligible immigrants. Empirical studies overwhelmingly
point to employment and wages as the primary drivers of immigration. These
considerations raise doubts about the extent to which welfare reform influenced
immigration.
Due to mortality, some (mostly older) individuals disappear from our synthetic
cohorts of migrants and villagers as we go back in time—that is, they are not alive to be
counted at the time of the survey. If old villagers are less likely to migrate, this will result in
an upward bias in the estimated share of villagers in the United States (and thus a downward
bias in the estimated migration trend), and this bias will be larger the farther back in time
one goes. The key question relevant to our analysis is whether this bias alters the estimated
effect of policy changes on migration. We explored this possibility by estimating the model
separately for younger age cohorts of villagers (i.e., those who were 16-35 years old in 1980
and thus less at risk of being affected by mortality over the study period). There were no
significant changes to our econometric findings. Our findings on the effects of policy
reforms on migration appear to be robust to the ways in which we construct our synthetic
cohorts.
Conclusions

The impacts of NAFTA, IRCA and increased U.S. border enforcement are ambiguous apriori. Each policy change potentially has both positive and negative influences on
migration. In the past, data limitations have made it difficult to test for impacts of policy
shocks on Mexico-to-U.S. migration dynamics. The Mexico National Rural Household
Survey provides retrospective migration histories from a nationally random sample of
rural Mexicans. This makes it possible to isolate migration trends and control for placeof-origin characteristics while measuring the impacts of policy shocks on the share of
rural Mexicans working in the United States.

11

Several general findings emerge from our analysis. First, international labor
migration from rural Mexico has followed an upward trend from 1980-2002 but is driven
overwhelmingly by past migration, reflecting the central role of migration networks.
Second, policy variables significantly influence migration, but not as much as
macroeconomic variables. NAFTA and IRCA had some impact on curtailing migration;
however, increased border enforcement appears to have the opposite effect. No policies
are able to counteract the effects of a changing macroeconomic environment. Third, the
influences of both policy and macroeconomic variables are small compared with network
effects embodied in past migration.
A unique contribution of this analysis is the insight it offers into the dynamics
underlying female and male migration. Policy shocks and macroeconomic variables have
differential effects on female and male migration, quantitatively (in the case of NAFTA
and IRCA) and in some cases qualitatively (in the case of Mexico and U.S. GDP growth).
The role of Mexico GDP growth in loosening liquidity constraints on migration appears
to be more important for females than males, while the impact of U.S. income growth is
greater for males.
Although own-gender migration networks are significant and large, cross-gender
network effects are small or nonexistent. Past research has suggested that female
migrants follow males, for example, for purposes of family reunification. However, we
find that past labor migration by male villagers has no significant effect on female labor
migration. That is, controlling for community effects and long run migration dynamics,
labor migration networks are gender specific. Future economic research is warranted on
gender asymmetries in networks and their influence on migration propensities.

12

Northeastern Region
Figure 1:
ENHRUM 2003 Regions
and Distribution of
Communities Surveyed

Southern Region

Northwestern
Region

West Central Region

Central Region

Figure 2: Average Share of Villagers Employed in United States: 1980-2002
0.125

0.10

0.075

Mean Share

0.05

0.025

0.00
1980 1981 1982 1983 1984 1985 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002

Año
Share of Villagers Employed in
US

Share of Female Villagers
Employed in US

Share of Male Villagers
Employed in US

Region
South-South East

Center

Center-West

Northwest

Northeast

Total

Source: ENHRUM, 2003

Table 1. Migration Summary Statistics for Rural Mexico, by Region
Variable
Percentages
Sample Mean

Standard Deviation

-

0.26

US Migrants per Household

0.10

0.42

Household Sample Size

372

Households with US migrants (%)

7.53%

-

0.35

US Migrants per Household

0.27

0.89

Household Sample Size

365

Households with US migrants (%)

14.52%

-

0.45

US Migrants per Household

0.62

1.29

Household Sample Size

346

Households with US migrants (%)

27.75%

-

0.33

US Migrants per Household

0.23

0.79

Household Sample Size

339

Households with US migrants (%)

12.09%

-

0.40

US Migrants per Household

0.54

1.43

Household Sample Size

360

Households with US migrants (%)

19.72%

-

0.37

US Migrants per Household

0.35

1.04

Household Sample Size

1782

Households with US migrants (%)

16.22%

Table 2. Variable Definitions and Means
Variable
Description
T
Time Trend
Share of Villagers
USMIG
Employed in U.S.
Share of Female Villagers
Female Migration
Employed in U.S.
Share of Male Villagers
Male Migration
Employed in U.S.
% change in Peso-Dollar
% Change ER
exchange rate from
previous year
% change in INS border
% Change Border Control
enforcement budget from
previous year
Dummy variable = 1
NAFTA
beginning in 1994
Dummy variable = 1
IRCA
beginning in 1986
% change Mexico per capita
% Change MGDP
GDP
% change US per capita
% Change US GDP
GDP

Mean
11

.0403
.0059
.0344
11.4
13.8
0.39
0.74
2.5
3.0

Table 3.
OLS Coefficients for three Dynamic Models—Participation in Migration (USMIGt)
(standard errors in Parenthesis)

Variables
Constant
T
USMIGt-1

Model I
-.006
(.003)**
.001
(.000)**
.846
(.015)**

All Regions

NAFTA
IRCA
% Change
Border
Control
% Change
ER
% Change
MGDP
% Change
US GDP
R2
.947
Dependent Variable: Weighted total of international workers in village
All models were estimated with village fixed effects.
N=1759. **Significance at .05 level * Significance at .1 level

Model II
-.013
(.004)**
.001
(.000)**
.845
(.015)**
-.008
(.002)**
-.003
(.001)**
.011
(.003)**
.015
(.004)**
.034
(.016)**
.051
(.022)**
.948

Table 4.
OLS Coefficients for three Dynamic Models—Female Participation in Migration (Female
USMIGt) (standard errors are in parentheses)
All Regions
Variables
Model I
Model II
-.001
-.003
Constant
(.001)
(.001)**
.000
.000
T
(.000)**
(.000)**
.881
.874
Female USMIGt-1
(.014)**
(.015)**
.007
Male USMIGt-1
(.008)
-.002
NAFTA
(.001)**
-.001
IRCA
(.000)*

% Change Border
Control

.002
(.001)**

.003
(.001)**
.011
% Change MGDP
(.005)**
.009
% Change US GDP
(.007)
R2
.882
.883
Dependent Variable: Weighted total of female international workers in village
All models were estimated with village fixed effects.
N=1759. **Significance at .05 level * Significance at .1 level
% Change ER

18

Table 5
OLS Coefficients for three Dynamic Models—Male Participation in Migration (Male
USMIGt)
(standard errors are in parentheses)

Variables
Constant
T
Male USMIGt-1

Model I
-.005
(.003)*
.000
(.000)**
.822
(.016)**

Female USMIGt-1
NAFTA
IRCA
% Change Border
Control

All Regions

Model II
-.010
(.003)**
.001
(.000)**
.815
(.017)**
.068
(.042)
-.006
(.002)**
-.002
(.001)*
.010
(.002)**

.012
(.004)**
.023
% Change MGDP
(.015)
.042
% Change US GDP
(.019)**
R2
.947
.948
Dependent Variable: Weighted total of male international workers in village
All models were estimated with village fixed effects.
N=1759. **Significance at .05 level * Significance at .1 level
% Change ER

19

References

Borjas, George. 2002. The Impact of Welfare Reform on Immigrant Welfare Use.
Center for Immigration Studies Report (http://www.cis.org/articles/2002/borjas.htm)
(March).
Grieco, Elizabeth and Brian Ray, “Mexican Immigrants in the US Labor Force,”
Migration Information Source, March 1, 2004.
Judson, R. A. and A. L. Owen “Estimating Dynamic Panel Data Models: A Guide for
Macroeconomists.” Econometric Letters, 65(1999):9-15.
Kossoudji, Sherrie A. “Playing Cat and Mouse at the U.S.–Mexican Border.”
Demography 29 (1992):159–80.
Levy, S. and S. van Wijnbergen. Mexican agriculture in the free trade agreement:
Transition Problems in Economic Reform, OECD Development Centre, Technical Papers
No. 63, 1992.
Lucas, R.E.B. and Stark, O. "Motivations to Remit: Evidence from Botswana," Journal of
Political Economy 93(1985):901-918.
Martin, P.L. Trade and Migration: NAFTA and Agriculture. Washington, D.C.: Institute
for International Economics, 1993.
Martin, Philip. 2003. Promise Unfulfilled: Unions, Immigration, and Farm Workers.
Ithaca. Cornell University Press. www.cornellpress.cornell.edu/, Chapter 7.
Martin, P.L., W. Huffman, R. Emerson, R.I. Rochin, and J.E. Taylor. Immigration Reform
and U.S. Agriculture. Oakland: Division of Agriculture and Natural Resources, 1985.
Mincer, Jacob. Schooling, Experience, and Earnings. New York: Columbia University
Press, 1974.
Munshi, Kaivan. “Networks in the Modern Economy: Mexican Migrants in the U.S.
Labor Market." Quarterly Journal of Economics 18(2003):549-599.
Public Policy Institute of California. “Has Increased Border Enforcement Reduced
Unauthorized Immigration?” Research Brief, Issue #61, July 2002.
Robinson, S., M.E. Burfisher, R. Hinojosa-Ojeda and K.E. Thierfelder. "Agricultural
Policies and Migration in a U.S.-Mexico Free Trade Area: A Computable General
Equilibrium Analysis." UC Berkeley, Department of Agricultural and Resource Economics
Working Paper No. 617, December, 1991.
Singer, Audrey, and Douglas S. Massey. “The Social Process of Undocumented Border
Crossing Among Mexican Migrants.” International Migration Review 32 (1998): 561–92.
Smith, James P. and Duncan Thomas, “Remembrances of things past: test-retest reliability
of retrospective migration histories.” Journal of Royal Statistics Soceit, 166(2003):23-49.
20

Taylor, J. Edward. “Undocumented Mexico-U.S. Migration and the Returns to Households
in Rural Mexico.” American Journal of Agricultural Economics, 69(1987):626-38.
Thilmany, Dawn. “FLC usage among California growers under IRCA: an empirical
analysis of farm labor market risk management.” American Journal of Agricultural
Economics 78(1996):946-60.
Torok, S. J. and Wallace Huffman. “U.S. - Mexican Trade in Winter Vegetables and
Illegal Immigration.” American Journal of Agricultural Economics , 68(1986):246-260.
United States Commission on Immigration Reform, Migration Between Mexico and the
United States: Binational Study, Editorial y Litografia Regina de los Angeles, S.A.,
Mexico City), 1997.
U.S. Commission for the Study of International Migration and Cooperative Economic
Development (USCSIMCED). 1990. Unauthorized Migration: An Economic
Development Response. Washington, D.C.
United States Department of Labor. Findings from the National Agricultural Workers
Survey (NAWS) 1997-1998: A Demographic and Employment Profile of United States
Farmworkers. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Labor, Office of the Assistant
Secretary for Policy, Office of Program Economics, Research Report No. 8, 2000.
__________________. Findings from the National Agricultural Workers Survey (NAWS)
1990: A Demographic and Employment Profile of Perishable Crop Farm Workers.
Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Labor, Office of the Assistant Secretary for Policy,
Office of Program Economics, Research Report No. 8, 1991.
Yunez-Naude, A, "The Dismantling of CONASUPO, a Mexican State Trader in
Agriculture", The World Economy, Vol. 26, No. 1, 2003, pp. 97-122.
Yunez Naude, A. and F. Barceinas Paredes, “Agricultural Trade and NAFTA: The
Case of Mexico”, in Kevin C. Kennedy (Ed.), The First Decade of NAFTA: The Future of
Free Trade in North America, Transnational Publishers, Inc., New York, Dec. 2004, ##
pp.

21

