                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      CONTINGENT CLAIMS VALUATION OF CORPORATE LIABILITIES:
                   THEORY AND EMPIRICAL TESTS


                        E. Philip Jones

                         Scott P. Mason

                         Eric Rosenfeld



                     Working Paper No. 11143




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Caithrldge MA 02138


                           June 1983



This paper was prepared as part of the National Bureau of Economic
Research program in Financial Markets and Monetary Economics and
project in the Changing Roles of Debt and Equity in Financing U.S.
Capital Forntion, which was financed by a grant from the Anrican
Council of Life Insurance. It was presented at the NBER Conference
on Corporate Capital Structures in the United States, Palm Beach,
Florida, January 6 and 7, 1983. Any opinions expressed are those
of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
                                          NBER Working Paper #1143
                                               June 1983




              Contingent Claims Valuation of Corporate
              Liabilities: Theory and Empirical Tests


                              ABSTRACT



        Although the Contingent Claims Analysis model has become the
premier theory of how value is allocated among claimants on firms,
its empirical validity remains an open question. In addition to being
of academic interest, a test of the model would have significant prac-
tical implications. If it can be established that the model predicts
actual market prices, then the model can be used to price new and un—
traded claims, to infer firm values from prices of traded claims like
equity and to price covenants separately. In this paper evidence is
presented on how well a model which makes the usual assumptions in
the literature does in predicting market prices for claims in standard
capital structures. The results suggest that the usual assumption list
requires modification before it can serve as a basis for valuing corpo-
rate claims.


                                 E. Philip Jones
                                 Scott P. Mason
                                 Eric Rosenfeld
                                 Graduate School of Business Administration
                                 Harvard University
                                 Boston, Massachusetts 02163
1. Introduction

        A fundamental issue in the study of capital structure is how securities

issued by firms are valued in the financial markets. Typical corporate capital

structures contain many individual securities, which in themselves are complicated

by numerous covenants and indenture provisions. In addition, the valuation

of any individual security must consider complex interactions among different

claims. The corporate liability pricing model derived in Black and Scholes

(1973) and Merton (1974) represents a theoretical breakthrough on this problem,

with potentially significant practical applications. The critical insight of

their model is that every security is a contingent claim on the value of the

underlying firm. Hence these securities can be priced via an arbitrage logic

which is independent of the equilibrium structure of risk and return. Every

security must obey a general equation which depends only on riskiess interest

rates, the market value of the entire firm, and its volatility. The model

distinguishes among securities via boundary conditions which correspond to

covenants and indenture provisions. Since all of these data are directly ob-

servable or can be readily estimated, the model can be used to predict actual

market prices.

        Although this model has been the premier theory of how value is

allocated among claimants on firms for almost a decade, its empirical validity

remains an open question. Ingersoll has tested the model's ability to predict

prices for dual purpose funds (1976) and to predict call policies for convertible

bonds (1977). But we know of no test of the model in its presumably most impor-

tant application, namely the valuation of debt and equity in typical corporate

capital structures. In addition to being of academic interest, such a test has

significant practical implications. If it can be established that the model

predicts actual market prices, then the model can be used to price new and
                                                                          2


untraded claims, to infer firm values from prices of traded claims like
                                                                          equity
and to price covenants separately.

        In this paper evidence is presented on how well a model which

makes the usual assumptions in the literature does in predicting market
                                                                        prices
for claims in standard capital
                               structures. The goal is to examine the
predictive power of this prototypical model. The
                                                   results suggest that the
usual assumption list requires modification before it can serve as a basis

for valuing corporate claims.

       The usual assumptions made in the contingent claims valuation

literature, e.g. Ingersoll (1976, 1977), are as follows:

        (A.l) Perfect markets: The capital markets are perfect with no
              transactions costs, no taxes, and equal access to information
               for all investors.

       (A.2) Continuous trading.

       (A.3) Ito dynamics: The value of the firm, V, satisfies the
              stochastic differential equation.

               dV = (cLV—C)dt + aVdz


               where total cash outflow per unit time C is locally certain
                 and ci2 are the instantaneous expected rate of return and
               variance of return on the underlying assets.

       (A.4) Constant 2

       (A.5)   Nonstochastjc term structure: The instantaneous interest
               rate r(t) is a known function of time.

       (A.6) Shareholder wealth maximization:   Management acts to maximize
              shareholder wealth.

       (A.7) Perfect bankruptcy protection: Firms cannot file for pro-
              tection from creditors except when they are unable to make
              required cash payments. In this case perfect priority rules
              govern the distribution of assets to claimants.

      (A.8) Perfect antjdjlutjon protection: No new securities (other
            than additional common equity shares) can be issued until
            all existing non—equity claims are extinguished. Deals
            between equity and subsets of other claimants are prohibited.

      (A.9) Perfect liquidity: Firms can sell assets as necessary to
            make cash payouts, with no loss in total value.
                                                                          3




        Translating this set of assumptions into an explicit model for

valuing claims in a typical capital structure is considerably more difficult

than suggested by previous examples in the literature. A common capital

structure consists of equity and multiple issues of callable nonconvertible

sinking fund coupon debt. This differs from the standard example of a

single issue of nonconvertible debt, due to Merton (1974). because of both

the sinking fund and multiple issue features. One effect of sinking funds

is to reduce the effective maturity of debt. Another effect, due to the

option to retire at market or par (with or without an option to double the

sinking fund payment), is to make debt more like equity. Multiple issues

of debt introduce interactions among issues of debt, so that maximizing

the value of equity need not be equivalent to minimizing the value of a

given issue of debt, as in the single debt issue case. One accomplishment

of this paper is to translate the usual assumption list into a model for

realistic capital structures.

        The plan of the paper is as follows. Section 2 presents a theoretical

analysis of the valuation problem for a firm with equity and multiple issues

of callable non—convertible sinking fund coupon debt, based on the usual

assumption list. Section 3 describes the empirical methodology, including

numerical analysis techniques, sample data, and testing procedure. Section 4

presents an analysis of the results, and Section 5 gives a conclusion.


2. Theory

        The theoretical basis of the corporate liability pricing model is

developed in Black and Scholes (1973) and Merton (1974). They use an arbitrage

argument to show that corporate liabilities which are functions of the value

of the firm and time obey a partial differential equation which depends on
                                                                           4



 the known schedule of interest rates rr(t) and the variance rate of firm

value a2, as well as on payouts and indentures on claims, but does not

 depend on expected returns on assets and liabilities of the firm. Nor does

 it depend on any equilibrium structure of risk and return. Readers are

referred to these papers for a derivation of the basic partial differential

equation.

        A starting point for the analysis of realistic capital structures

is the standard example of contingent claims valuation as applied to non—

convertible corporate bonds, namely the formulation in Merton (1974) of a

callable coupon bond with no sinking fund. Merton shows that the equity

E(V,t) in a firm with one issue of such debt obeys the following partial

differential equation and boundary conditions



(la)           0 =                 + (rV_cPd)E + Et — rE + d
                     l/2a2V2E
               E(0,t) =    0


                    *
               E(V,t ) = max(0,V—P)


               E(V,t) =    V —   k(t)P

               Ev(v,t) =   1




where PEP(t) is the outstanding bond principal at time t, c is the coupon

rate per unit principal, k(t) is the call price schedule per unit principal,
                                           *
dd(V,t) is the known dividend policy and t is the maturity date of the
bond. The upper free boundary, (t), corresponds to the optimal call barrier

at or above which the firm will call the bonds. Similarly Merton shows that
                                                                                  5




the valuation problem for the debt issue D(V,t) can be formulated as follows:



(ib)               0 =                  + (rV..cPd)D + Dt — rD + cP
                         l/2a2V2Dvv

                   D(0,t) =     0



                   D(V,t)   =   min(V,P)

                   D(V,t) =     k(t)P

                   Dv(v,t) =    0



          The plan for section 2 is as follows. Section 2a generalizes the
analysis of callable nonconvertible coupon bonds to allow for sinking funds,

with   and without (noncumulative) options         to double the sinking fund payment.

Sinking funds are important because they dramatically decrease the effective

maturity of bonds, and because the option to sink at market or par makes              bonds

more like equity than otherwise.            Section 2b then generalizes the analysis

to deal with multiple issues of         callable   nonconvertible sinking fund coupon

bonds. The ultimate contingent claims formulation of this valuation problem

will bear only a generic resemblance to (la)(lb).



           2a. Sinking Funds

           Most issues of corporate debt specify the mandatory retirement of

 bonds via   periodic    sinking fund payments. Typically the firm       is   required to

 retire a specified fraction of the initial bonds each period..             Generally the

 firm   has the option to redeem these bonds through either of two mechanisms:
 (1)    it can   purchase the necessary bonds in      the market and deliver them to
                                                                          6




the trustee, or (2) it can choose the necessary bonds by lot and retire

them by paying the standard principal amount to their owners. Often the finn

also has the option to double the number of bonds retired each period if

it wishes. Hence the firm faces the following choices each period:


               (.1)   Should the bonds be called?

               (.2) Assuming the bonds are not called, should the mandatory
                    number of bonds be sunk at market or par?

               (3) Assuming the bonds are not called, should the sinking
                    fund payment be doubled. (If this option exists.)

        First the contingent claims formulation of this problem is considered

where the firm has no option to double the sinking fund payment. Next the

option to double is introduced.


        2ai: Sinking funds with no option to double

        Suppose that the f inn decides not to call its debt and has no option

to double. Then it must decide whether to sink bonds at market or par. Since

the only difference is in the cash payout Involved, and since higher firm

value implies higher equity value, management will choose whichever costs

less. For any given r(t), if the firm value is relatively low, then debt

will trade below par and the firm will choose to sink at market. And, for

some r(t), if firm value is relatively high, then debt will trade above par

and the firm will choose to sink at par.

        Consider the stylized case of a continuous sinking fund. Let s be

the rate at which bonds are sunk, and let P(t) = P(O)—st be the remaining

principal assuming the bonds have not been called. Then y(t)s/P(t) is the

fractional rate at which bonds are sunk. If debt trades below par, then

total sinking fund payments are iD(V,t) where y1(t). If debt trades above

par, then total sinking fund payments are yPs.      Hence a general expression
                                                                             7


for total sinking fund payments is ymin(D,P). Thus the contingent claims

formulation of the valuation problem for equity in the presence of a single

issue of callable nonconvertible sinking fund coupon debt, with no option

to double, is as follows:



(2a)           0 =                     ÷ [rVymin(D,P)_cP_d]E + Et_ rE + d
                           l/2a2V2E

               E(O,t) =          0


                       *
               E(V,t       )   = max(0,V—P)


               E(V,t) =          V-kP

               E(V,t) =          1


        Similarly, from (lb), the contingent claims formulation of the

valuation problem for debt in this capital structure is



        0                                                  — rD + ymin(D,P) + cP
(2b)          l/2c2V2D + [rV_ymin(D,P)_cP_d]D +


               D(O,t) =          0

                       *
              D(V,t        )   = min(V,P)

               D(V,t) = kP

               Dv(V,t) =         0




        In summary, the valuation problem for a capital structure with equity

and a single issue of callable nonconvertible sinking fund coupon debt, with

no option to double, divides into three regions of firm value as a function

of time. One region is defined by the fact that debt trades below par.
                                                                            8



 This region corresponds at the maturity of the debt issue to firm values

where bankruptcy occurs. A "par barrier" separates this region from the

 one above. The region above lies between the par barrier and the call

barrier, so that debt trades between par and the call price. Since the

call barrier converges to par at the maturity of the debt issue, this region

converges to a point. The third region lies above the call barrier. It

corresponds at the maturity of the debt issue to firm values where bankrupt-

cy does not occur.


        2aii: Sinking funds with an option to double

        Most sinking funds give the firm an option to double the sinking

fund payments. This section deals with noncumulative options to double,

where the right to double is unaffected by past doubling decisions.

There also exist cumulative options to double, where the right to

double is affected by past decisions. Given the option to double the sinking

fund payment, the actual principal that will be outstanding at any future date

is unknown. Hence the values of equity and debt as can no longer be written

as functions of firm value and time alone. However the following theorem

says that these values can be written as functions of firm value, current

principal, and time:


Theorem I:

Assume that the optimal retirement rate, P(V,P,t), for bonds can be expressed
as a deterministic function of firm value, current principal, and time.
Then equity and debt and functions E(V,P,t) and D(V,P,t) that obey the
following partial differential equations:
                                                                          9


 (3a) 0 =
            1/22V2E+ trV_ymin(D,P)_cP_d]EV_y*pEp+    Et_ rE + d


 (3b) 0 =
            l/22V2D+   [rV_y*minO,p)_cp_d}DV_ yPD+ Dt_ rD + y*min(D,P) ÷ cP
            *
    where y (V,P,t)    —P/P.


Proof:

Apply Ito's lemma to E(V,P,t) and D(V,P,t), noting that P is locally certain.
Substitute this into the standard arbitrage proof given in Merton (1974) or
Merton (1977). Q.E.D.

         Theorem I provides a valuation logic once the optimal policy with

respect to doubling the sinking fund payment has been determined. Consider

the decision whether to double the current sinking fund payment, assuming

that management acts optimally thereafter. Suppose that the sinking fund

payment is not doubled, so that the fraction of bonds retired is ydt =   sdt/P.
Let V and P be firm value and current principal before the sinking fund pay-

ment. Hence the value of equity after the sinking fund payment is

E[V—min(D,P)ydt,(i—ydt)P,tl.. Suppose alternatively that the sinking fund

payment is doubled. By analogy the value of equity after the sinking fund

payment is E[V—2min(D,P)ydt,(1—2'ydt)P,t}. The difference between the two equity

values is thus [min(D,P)E+ PE]Ydt. If the bracketed expression is positive,

the firm should not double the sinking fund payment; otherwise it should.

         Since min(D,P) is less than the call price kP, doubling the sinking

fund payment is a cheap way of calling a fraction of the bonds. Hence there

will be a "doubling barrier" (P,t) which lies below the call barrier V(P,t).

The firm will double the sinking fund payment above the doubling barrier,

but not below it. The firm is indifferent between doubling and not doubling

right at the barrier; hence the expression we just derived vanishes at the

barrier. Using this logic in (3a), the contingent claims formulation of

the valuation problem for equity in the presence of a single issue of callable

nonconvertible sinking fund coupon debt, with a noncumulative option to double,
                                                                                10



is as follows:



(4a) 0 =                                               d, 0<V<(P,t)
            l/2ZV2E+[rV_ymin(P,P)_cP_d1E_ iPE+ E_ rE +

      0 =                                                                d, (P,t)<V<(p,t)
            l/2a2V2E.+   trV_2ymin(D,P)_cP_&1E— 2iPE+ Et_ rE +

                         E(O,P,t) =          0



                         E(V,0,t) =          V


                                *
                         E(V,P,t    )   = max(0,V—P)


            min[D(V,P,t),P]E(VP,t) ÷ PE(VPt) =               0



                         E(V,P,t)            V — kP


                         E(V,P,t) =          1


Silimarly, from (3b), the contingent claims formulation of the valuation

problem for debt in this capital structure is



(4b) 0 =                 [rV_ymin(D,P)_cP_d1D— yPD+ Dt_ rD + ymin(D,P) + cP
            1/2a2V2D+
                                        for 0<V<V(P,t)


                                                                            + cP
      0 =
            1/2a2V2D+    [rV_2ymin(D,P)_cP_d1D-. 2yPD+ Dt_ rD + 2yrnin(D,P)
                                        for V(P,t)< v</P,t


                         D(0,P,t)        =   0

                         D(V,0,t)        =   0

                         D(V,P,t) = min(V.P)


            min[D(V,P,t).P] [Dv(V,P,t) —         1] + PD (V,P,t) =   0
                                                                                    11


       D(V,P,t)              kP


       Dv(v,P,t) =           0


         Actual sinking fund indentures cause claims to be nonhomogeneous

functions of firm value and current principal. The reason is that the

fractional rate at which bonds are retired (y or 2y where y =               sIP)
grows as current principal declines. However, there is a reasonable

approximation to actual sinking fund indentures that simplifies the analysis

and leads to additional insights. Namely assume that the fractional rate

at which bonds must be sunk is y, a constant, or 2y if the sinking fund

payment is doubled. In effect this assumes that the current decision whether

to double the sinking fund payment does not affect permitted future fractional

rates at which bonds are sunk.

         This assumption plus the assumption that dividends are proportional

to firm value reduce the dimensionality of the equations in (4a) (4b).

Consider standardized values for firm value (xV/P), equity (fEE/P), and

debt (gD/P); and define the proportional dividend rate as ad/V. Substitut-

ing these into (4a) and using the new assumptions, the following standardized

formulation



       0 =   l/2a2x2f        + [(r+y—5)x—ymln(g,l)—c]f +      (r+'y)f   + 6x, O<x<(t)
(5a)

       0 =   l/2c2x2f +           [(r+2y—cS)x—2y—c]f +   (r+2y)f + cSx, (t)<<x(t)


       f(O,t) =          0

               *
       f(x,t       ) =   max(O,x—l)


       (l—)f(,t) + f(x,t) =                 0
                                                                                     12



       f(x,t) =       x—k
                  =   1



           Note that this implies a doubling barrier which lies between the

par barrier and the call barrier, so that the firm is always sinking at par

if it doubles the sinking fund payment. To see that this is so, reconsider

the expression derived before, namely min(D,P)E ÷ PEE.          Suppose that the

debt is trading below par, so that this expression is DEv + PE =
                                                                                (VE)E.q+   PEE.
Under the new assumptions, equity is a homogeneous function of firm value

and current principal. Hence by Euler's condition E =                +           Substi—
                                                               VEv       PEE.
tuting this into the expression gives E(l_Ev) 0, which says that the sinking

fund payment should not be doubled.

           Similarly, using (4b), debt is proportional to a standardized solution,

g(x,t), where



(5b) 0 = 1/2a2x2g         + [(r+y—ó)x—ymin(g,l)—cjg
                                                 +         (r+y)g +      ymin(g,1)    + c,


                                                    0<x< (t)


   0   =    1/2i2x2g+     [(r+2y—,5)x—2y—c]g+
                                                —   (r+2y)g + 2y ÷ c,

   g(0,t) =       0

   g(x,t*) =      min(x,1)

    (l—)g(,t) + g(,t) —        1   =   0

   g(x,t) =       k

              =   0
                                                                          13



         In summary, the valuation problem for a capital structure with equity

and a single issue of callable nonconvertible sinking fund coupon debt, with

a noncumulative option to double, divides into four regions of firm value as

a function of time. One region is defined by the fact that debt trades

below par. In this region bonds are sunk at market and sinking fund payments

are not doubled. This region corresponds at the maturity of the debt issue

to firm values where bankruptcy occurs. A second region lies between the

par barrier and the doubling barrier. In this region bonds are sunk at par

and sinking fund payments are not doubled. A third region lies between the

doubling barrier and the call barrier. In this region bonds are sunk at

par and sinking fund payments are doubed. Since the call barrier converges

to par at the maturity of the debt issue, both the second and third regions

converge to a point. The fourth region lies above the call barrier. It

corresponds at the maturity of the debt Issue to firm values where bankruptcy

does not occur. For some given r(t), k(t) and c, it is possible that debt

will always trade below par. Thus bonds are always sunk at market and the

sinking fund payment is never doubled. In these cases there is only one

region, since the par barrier, doubling barrier and the call barrier do not

exist.

         Unfortunately, incorporating the option to double the sinking fund

payment in a capital structure with numerous debt issues dramatically increases

the dimensionality of the valuation problem. Therefore the option to double

is ignored in the numerical approximations. The results in this section

Imply that this leads to underpricing of equity and the overpricing of debt.


2b. Multiple debt issues

         This section generalizes the analysis to allow for multiple debt issues.

This feature of debt is important because it introduces interactions among
                                                                                 14


bonds that are not present in the standard example of one debt issue.

For expositional simplicity, this section considers the case of two issues

of callable nonconvertible sinking fund coupon debt (with no options to

double).

                The value of any remaining claims in a capital structure initially

composed of equity and two issues of callable nonconvertible sinking fund

coupon debt, with no options to double, will depend on whether either

debt issue has been redeemed via a call decision, as well as on firm value

and time. In effect the capital structure of the firm can be in any one of

four states, which is indexeed by the variable e. If there are n debt issues

then there are 2' such states. 0 = 0 is the state where both issues of debt

have been previously called. The valuation problem in this state is trivial;

equity value equal firm value. 0 = 1 is the state where bond 1 is alive but

bond 2 has been called. 8 = 2 is the state where bond 2 is alive but bond 1

has been called. Finally 8 = 3 is the state where neither bond has been called.

                With this notation the values of claims can be written as functions

of the current capital structure state as well as firm value and time. Letting

E(V,e,t), D(Y)0,t), and D'(V,0,t) be the values of equity and the two debt

issues, they obey the following system of partial differential equations in

any relevant capital structure state:



(6a)            0 =
                      l/2a2V2E+ (rV_r__d)E+ E_ rE + d         ; 0 =   1,2,3

(6b)            0 =
                      1/2a2V2D+   (rV_7r_1r_d)D+ Dt_ rD +     ; 0 =   1,3

(6c)            0 =
                      1/2c2V2D+   (rV—rr—Ad)D+ D— rD+ ir      ; 0 =   2,3


7T   and   ir    are   simply total cash payouts to the two debt issues. Taking account

of whether bonds have been called and whether it makes sense to sink at market
                                                                                          15



or par,



           ir(V,1,t) =          7r(V,3,t)        ymin(D,P) + cP


           ir(V,2,t)            0

           rr(V,2,t) =              r(V,3,t)       ymin(D,P) + cP

           ir(V,l,t) = 0



Note how current values of debt issues enter into valuation equations for

other claims. Hence equations (6a)(6b)(6c) must generally be solved simul-

taneously. It is always possible to eliminate one relevant equation, since

the claims sum to firm                  value.
           Boundary conditions are needed to relate the solutions to (6a)(6b)

(6c) for different capital structure states to each other and to complete

the contingent claims formulation of the general valuation problem. For

each relevant security in each state a lower boundary condition, a terminal

boundary condition, and an upper (free) boundary condition must be specified.

The lower boundary condition in every case is trivial; limited liability

translates zero firm value into zero value for every claim: E(0,e,t) =

D(o,e,t)    =   D(0,O,t)            =   0.

           Each state has a unique terminal boundary. Let t be the maturity of

debt Issue D and let t                       be the maturity of debt issue D. Without loss of
                  *        *_
generality t <         t        .    First     suppose that the firm is in capital structure

state 0 =       1, where the second debt issue has been called. Then the terminal
boundary coincides with the maturity of the first debt issue. The terminal

boundary condition in this case is standard for a capital strucutre with a

single issue of callable nonconvertible coupon debt:
                                                                            16


                    *                              *
          E(V,l,t )         = max [O,V—P(t )1

                 *                             *
          D(V,l,t )         = mm        [V,P(t )}


Next suppose that the firm is in capital structure state 0 = 2, where the

first debt issue has been called. Then the terminal boundary coincides with

the maturity of the second debt issue. Again the terminal boundary condition

is standard:

                    *                                  *
          E(V,2,t       )   = max (O,V-.P (t               )]
          D_(V,2,t*)        =   mm       [V,P_(t*)]

          Finally suppose that the firm is in capital structure state 0 =   3,
where neither debt issue has been called. Then t1e terminal boundary coincides

with the earlier maturity date, since the firm must transit to a new capital

structure state on this date. In the example the first debt issue matures
    *
at t .  Since the debt is callable, the only relevant region has to do with
firm   values which are insufficient to cover the remaining principal on the

first debt issue, so that the firm is bankrupt. Since firm value is insuffi-

cient to meet principal payments on the first debt issue alone, equity is

worthless in this region:


                                *
                E(V,3,t             )   =0

The value of the two debt issues in this region depends on seniority. If

the first issue is senior, then

                                *
                D(V,3,t             )   =V

                D(V,3,t) =                 0
                                                                                                     17


If the second issue is senior, then


                 D(V,3,t) = max[O,V_P_(t*)]
                               *
                                        = min[V,P'(t
                                                          *
                 D(V,3,t           )                          )]



Finally,    if neither issue is senior, then both get pro rata shares:


                           *
                                       = VP(t
                                                *         *             *
                 D(V,3,t       )                    )/[P(t )       + P(t )]


                 D(V,3,t)               =   VP_(t*)/[P(t*)          + p(t*)]



           It remains to specify upper free boundary conditions corresponding

to optimal call decisions in each of the capital structure states. First

suppose that the firm is in capital structure state 0 =                          1,   where the second

debt issue has been called. The upper free boundary conditions in this

case are standard for a capital structure with a single issue of callable

nonconvertible coupon debt:



                 E[V(1,t),l,t] =               (1,t)      —    k(t)P(t)

                 E[V(l,t),l,t] = 1



Next suppose that the firm is in capital structure state 0 =                            2,   where both

debt issues are alive. The upper free boundary in this state corresponds

to the barrier where the firm calls one of the bond issues and thus transit

to another state. Since management chooses the bond to call so as to maximize

shareholder wealth,


    E[V(3,t),3,t] =   max{E[(3,t)—k(t)P(t),2,t],                          E[V(3,t)—k(t)P(t),l.tJ}
                                                                         18


 Similarly the "high contact" optimization condition is


    Ev[v(3,t),3,t] =   max E[V(3,t)—k(t)P(t),2,t], E[(3,t)—k(t)p'(t),1,tJ /3V


Suppose that it is optimal to call the first debt issue at V(3,t), then the

values of the debt issues on this barrier are



        D[V(3,t),3,t] =     k(t)P(t)

        D'[V(3,t).3,t] =    D[V(3,t)—k(t)P(t),2,t]

Conversely suppose that it is optimal to call the second debt issue, then



        D[V(3,t),3,t] =     D[V(3,t)k(t)P(t),l,t]
        D[V(3,t),3,t] =     k(t)P(t)

        In summary, the valuation problem for capital structures containing

equity and two issues of callable nonconvertible sinking fund coupon debt

corresponds to the simultaneous solution of a system of partial differential

equations. Appropriate combinatorial application of these principles leads

directly to a formulation of the valuation problem for capital structures

containing equity and n issues of callable nonconvertible sinking fund coupon

debt. This approach is necessitated by the fundamental problem of determining

the optimal call policy governing the n callable bonds. This formulation

identifies that policy which maximizes the value of the equity.

        It is important to understand the dimensionality of the n issue case.

First note that there are     possible capital structure states, including

the trivial state of an all—equity firm. Furthermore there are a number of
                                                                             19


securities to be valued in each state. One way to calculate the number of

different solutions to partial differential equations required in the n issue

case is as follows. There are ()      =1   capital structure states corresponding

to 0 bonds having been called. In this one state there are n+l securities

outstanding for a total of n+l solutions. There are (—-j-) = n capital

structure states corresponding to 1 bond having been called. In each of

these n states there are n securities outstanding. Continuing in this way,
                        n-l
we find that there are   E  (—.---) (n+l—j) solutions in all. Hence one high
                        j=O
priority line of research in terms of applying contingent claims valuation

to realistic capital structures is the derivation of rational theorems which

rule out various capital structure states —    e.g.,   which show that certain

kinds of bonds are always called first.



3. Data and methodology

        Data were collected for 15 firms on a monthly basis from January 1975

to January 1982. The firms were chosen based on a number of criteria at the

beginning of 1975:


        1. Simple Capital Structures (i.e. one class of stock, no convertible
            bonds, small number of debt issues, no preferred stock).

        2. Small proportion of private debt to total capital.

        3. Small proportion of short term notes payable or capitalized
            leases to total capital.

        4. All   publicly   traded debt is rated.


Based on this criteria the following firms were selected:


           1.    Allied Chemical
           2.    Anheuser Busch
           3.    Brown Group
           4.    Bucyrus Erie
                                                                              20



                5.   Champior Spark   Plug
                6.  Cities Service
                7. CPC
                8. MGM
                9.   Procter and Gamble
             10. Pullman
             11. Raytheon
             12. Republic Steel
             13. Segrarn
             14. Sunbeam
             15. Upjohn


            contingent claims valuation model requires three kinds of data
          The

in order to solve for prices of individual claims as functions of total firm
value:    (1) indenture data, (2)      variance rate data, and (3) interest rate
data.    The bond indentures define the boundary conditions which constitute

the economic description of various claims. For example, the following data

were collected for each bond for each firm: principal, coupon rate, call

price schedule, call protection period, sinking fund payments, and options

to   sink at market or par. The bond covenant data were collected from Moody's
Bond Guide, except that sinking fund payments were collected from the monthly
S&P Bond Guide. For purposes of testing the model, actual bond prices were

also collected from the latter sources.

          The following procedure was used to estimate a variance rate for each

firm in the sample, as of each January from 1977 through 1982. First a

variance rate for all publicly traded claims was estimated. Namely, for each

of   the trailing 24 months, the logarithmIc total return was calculated on the
total    of all publicly traded claims, including any cash payouts, that were

outstanding at the beginning of the month. The sample variance of this return

gave an estimate of the variance rate nf all traded claims. An estimate of

 the variance and value of nontraded debt was also needed.        It was assumed that

 the variance rate of nontraded debt is equal to the variance rate of all traded
                                                                           21



debt, which was estimated in the same way as the variance rate of all traded

claims. It was also assumed that market value for nontraded debt is equal

to book value. Lastly, assuming that the returns to the nontraded debt were

uncorrelated with the returns to the traded claims, the variance rate for the

whole firm was estimated as a "market value" weighted sum of the variance

rate of the traded claims and the variance rate of the nontraded debt. To

the extent that the returns of the nontraded debt are positively correlated

with the returns to the traded claims, this estimation procedure will

systematically underestimate the variance rate of the firm. Table 1 summarizes

the estimates.

        The standard assumption in contingent claims analysis is that the

future course of interest rates, r(t), is known. Specifically, it is often

assumed that the instantaneous rate of interest is constant through time,

I.e. a flat term structure. The assumption of a flat term structure results

in a fundamental problem for the empirical test of the contingent claims

model. If a flat term structure is assumed then the model will misprice

riskiess bonds. Therefore the test of whether contingent claims analysis

can price risky bonds is systematically flawed. This problem is handled by

by the assumption that the future course of the one year rate of interest

will be consistent with the one year forward interest rates implied by the

current term structure. This procedure will result in the correct pricing

of riskiess bonds. The following procedure was used to estimate implied

one year forward interest rates for 25 years, as of each January from 1977

through 1982. First identify all par government bonds as of that date.

These data were gathered from the Wall Street Journal. There are usually

much less than 25 such bonds. Therefore linear interpolation was used to

complete a 25—year yield curve for par government bonds.   Then this yield
                                              Table 1

                            Estimates of Standard Deviation of Returns
                                   January 1977 — January 1982


                              1977      1978            1979     1980      1981     1982     Mean
  1.   Allied Chemical       0.203     0.192        0.194       0.220     0.226    0.232    0.211
  2.   Anheuser Busch        0.210     0.206        0.209       0.228     0.299    0.292    0.241
  3.   Brown Group           0.209     0.129        0.158       0.168     0,206    0.217    0.181
  4.   Bucyrus Erie         0.347      0.269        0.208      0.223     0.261    0.276    0.264
 5.    Champion Spark Plu   0.267      0.172        0.216      0.240     0.232    0.238    0.227
 6.    Cities Service       0.148      0.178        0.162      0.193     0.381    0.417    0.247
 7.    CPC                  0.202      0.166        0.143      0.120     0.175    0.213    0.170
 8.    MGM                  0.284      0.181        0.267      0.308     0.426    0.421    0.314
 9.    Procter and Gamble   0.146      0.151        0.162      0.147     0.164    0.173    0.157
10.    Pullman              0.343      0.230        0.314      0,354                       0.310
11.    Raytheon             0.282      0.174        0.224      0.271     0.364    0.403    0.286
12.    Republic Steel       0.210     0.162        0.195       0.212     0.182    0.185    0.191
13.    Seagram              0.282     0.235        0.205       0.238     0.375    0.377    0.285
14.    Sunbeam              0.263     0.193        0.249       0.321     0.316    0.370    0.286
15.    Upjohn               0.285     0.200        0.207       0.236     0.169    0.171    0.216
                                                                          22



curve was solved for implied one year forward rates. Hence the implied forward

rates pertain to a par term structure.

        The method of Markov chains is used to approximate solutions to the

problems posed in the previous section. Parkinson (1977), Mason (1979) and

Cox, Ross and Rubinstein (1979) use Markov chains to approximate solutions

to valuation problems similar to the ones considered in this paper. The

method of finite differences has been used by Brennan and Schwartz (1976a,

l976b) to treat similar contingent claims equations. The methods of Markov

chains and finite differences are very similar, as demonstrated in Brennan

and Schwartz (1978) and Mason (1978). Readers are referred to these papers

for background on numerical analysis techniques.

        If all claims are publicly traded, then the value of the firm can be

observed and prices for all claims, relative to the observed firm value, can

be predicted. However, since all claims on the test firms are not publicly

traded, an alternative approach had to be taken. Namely, the equity pricing

function was used to estimate firm value. In other words, what firm value

is consistent with the actual equity value? Then this estimated firm value

was used to predict debt prices. Note that this procedure amplifies systematic

errors in pricing the debt. For example, suppose that the model systematically

underprices equity and overprices debt, as functions of firm value. Then

this procedure will make two, compounding errors. First, it will overestimate

the value of the firm. Then it will overestimate debt as a function of firm

value. Hence it will overestimate debt for both reasons. Counting each year

from 1977 through 1982, and counting each bond existing in each year for each

of the 15 firms, we solved numerically for prices of 177 bonds, as well as

for equity values. The next section describes our results.
                                                                               23

4. Pinpirical Results

       Table 2 summarizes the empirical results for the 177 bonds in the

sample. It reveals that the average percentage pricing error —       defined   as

predicted price minus actual price, divided by actual price —   is    less than

1%. The standard deviation of the percentage pricing error is less than 8%.

The average absolute value of the percentage pricing error is about 6%. The

accompanying histogram in Figure 1 gives additional information on these errors.


                                 Table 2

              Total Number of Bonds                   177
              Fraction of Sample                   100.00%
              Percentage Error
              Mean                                 0.0064
              Std Dev                              0.0787
              Absolute Percentage Error
              Mean                                 0.0605
              Std Dev                              0.0506




                                 Figure 1




 i
 C




                                 Para.ng rnw
                                                                                  24


                                    Table 3


High Rated                                   Low Rated

Total Number of Bonds        151             Total Number of Bonds           26
Fraction of Sample         85.31%            Fraction of Sample           14.69%

Percentage Error                             Percentage Error

Mean                     —0.0006             Mean                        0.0468
Std Dev                   0.0774             Std Dev                     0.0733

Absolute Percentage Error                    Absolute Percentage Error

Mean                       0.0580            Mean                        0.0752
Std Dev                    0.0513            Std Dev                     0.0436


Difference of Means Test             —2.89


          Although there is almost no systematic bias in pricing errors for

the sample as a whole, there might be systematic bias among subsets of bonds

that simply cancel out in the entire sample. This was tested for by dividing

the sample according to conventional classifications. For example, Table 3

indicates that the model underprices bonds with high ratings (>A rating) and

overprices bonds with low ratings (<A rating) and that this difference is

statistically significant.

          Statistical significance is measured by a difference of means test.

This test assumes that the two underlying populations are normally distributed

with the same variance. In addition it is assumed that the samples are made

up of independent draws. To the extent that the samples are not made up of

independent draws, the test is biased in favor of rejecting the null hypothesis.

It is likely that the samples studied in this section are not perfectly inde-

pendent thus the reports of statistical significance are biased upward.

          Table 4 shows that the model underprices bonds on firms

with low variance rates (ci<.2) and overprices bonds on firms with high

variance rates (a>.2).
                                                                                 25


                                      Table 4


Low Variance                                    High Variance

Total Number of Bonds           95              Total Number of Bonds           82
Fraction of Sample           53.67%             Fraction of Sample           46.33%

Percentage Error                                Percentage Error

Mean                        —0.0067             Mean                        0.0215
Std Dev                      0.0802             Std Dev                     0.0740

Absolute Percentage Error                       Absolute Percentage Error

Mean                         0.0589             Mean                        0.0624
Std Dev                      0.0548             Std Dev                     0.0452

Difference of Means Test              —2.40



Table 5 indicates that the model underprices bonds with stated maturities

less than 15 years and overprices bonds with stated maturities greater than

15 years. Of course, total variance equals the variance rate multiplied by

time. Hence overpricing high variance and long maturity bonds may be two

sides of the same coin.



                                      Table 5


Long Term                                       Short Term

Total Number of Bonds          84             Total Number of Bonds             93
Fraction of Sample          47.46%            Fraction of Sample             52.54%

Percentage Error                              Percentage Error

Mean                        0.0243            Mean                          —0.0098
Std Dev                     0.0657            Std Dev                        0.0855

Absolute Percentage Error                     Absolute Percentage Error

Mean                        0.0576            Mean                          0.0632
Std Dev                     0.0399            Std Dev                       0.0585

Difference of Means Test              2.94
                                                                                26


                                     Table 6


Senior Bonds                                   Junior Bonds

Total Number f Bonds           163             Total Number of Bonds           14
Fraction of Sample           92.09%            Fraction of Sample            7.91%

Percentage Error                               Percentage Error

Mean                        0.0020             Mean                        0.0578
Std Dev                     0.0020             Std Dev                     0.0435

Absolute Percentage Error                      Absolute Percentage Error

Mean                        0.0608             Mean                        0.0578
Std Dev                     0.0512             Std Dev                     0.0435

Difference of Means Test             —2.58



Table 6 shows that the model prices senior bonds correctly on average, but

overprices junior bonds.



                                     Table 7


Low Coupon                                     High Coupon

Total Number of Bonds           73             Total Number of Bonds           104
Fraction of Sample           41.24%            Fraction of Sample            58.76%

Percentage Error                               Percentage Error

Mean                       —0.0354             Mean                         0.0358
Std Dev                     0.0855             Std Dev                      0.0575

Absolute Percentage Error                      Absolute Percentage Error

Mean                        0.0693             Mean                         0.0544
Std Dev                     0.0613             Std Dev                      0.0404


Difference of Means Test             —6.59



Finally, Table 7 shows that the model underprices low coupon bonds (coupon

rate < 7%) and overprices high coupon bonds (coupon rate > 7%).
                                                                          27

         In   summary, the model tends to underprice safe bonds and overprice

 risky bonds in a systematic way. This leads us to conclude that the usual

assumptions in the contingent claims valuation literature are violated in

some systematic way. Three assumptions are questioned in particular:

 (1) the assumption of zero personal taxes, (2) the assumption of a constant

variance rate, and (3) the assumption of perfect antidilution protection.

The plan is as follows. First there is a discussion of what kinds of pricing

errors would ensue from violation of each of these three assumptions. Then

empirical evidence is presented from the sample that is designed to discrimi-

nate among pricing errors induced by violation of each of these assumptions.


        4a. Personal tax assumption

        According to Assumption (A.l), which is standard in the contingent

claims valuation literature, there are no personal taxes. This implies that

investors capitalize ordinary income and capital gains in the same way.

However, conventional wisdom says that investors prefer capital gains to

ordinary income for tax reasons. Furthermore, Ingersoll (1976) finds that

inclusion of differential taxes on ordinary income and capital gains improves

the ability of the contingent claims valuation model to predict prices for

the income and capital shares of dual funds.

        If differential taxes cause investors to capitalize ordinary income

differently from capital gains, then failure to include this in the model could

lead to overpricing bonds with higher current yields relative to bonds with

lower current yields. (See Ingersoll (1976, p. 110) for a careful discussion

of this issue.) First consider highly rated bonds. Recall that the interest

rates in the model are derived from a term structure for par government bonds.
                                                                           28



Given the tax treatment of bonds trading in the secondary market, high

quality discount bonds should be underpriced relative to high quality premium

bonds. This is due to the fact that the IRS allows investors to amortize

secondary market premiums against interest income while also allowing

realized gains due to secondary market discounts to be taxed at capital

gains rates.

        Another dimension of any tax effect has to do with risk. Consider

low quality par bonds versus high quality par bonds —   e.g.,   new issue bonds

on high variance versus low variance firms. The expected capital loss on

the low quality bonds is larger in absolute terms than the expected capital

loss on the high quality bonds. Hence the low quality bonds will have a

higher coupon rate than the high quality bonds. Since the higher taxes on

the low quality bond are ignored, any tax effect will cause low quality to

be overpriced relative to high quality bonds. In particular, since government

par bonds are perfectly safe, any tax effect will cause corporate par bonds

to be overpriced in general. Similar considerations say that any tax effect

will cause junior par bonds to be overpriced relative to senior par bonds.

And similar considerations also suggest that any tax effect will cause longer

maturity par bonds to be overpriced relative to shorter maturity par bonds.


        4b. Variance rate assumption

        According to Assumption (A.4), which is standard in the contingent

claims valuation literature, the variance rate of firm value 02 is a constant.

Empirical evidence for cotmnon equity suggest that its variance rate goes up

as its level goes down. Of course this s consistent with a constant variance

rate for firm value — because of the possibility of leverage effects. However,

it is also consistent with a nonconstant firm value variance rate.
                                                                          29



        Suppose that the variance rate of firm value is not a constant, but

rather increases as firm value decreases. For example, the stochastic pro-

cess for firm value might belong to the constant elasticity of variance class.

And suppose that a constant variance rate is falsely assumed in estimating c2.

What kinds of pricing errors would this include? These errors would be simi-

lar in type to those induced by an underestimate of a variance rate that is

in fact constant. In other words, in either case the probability of financial

distress is significantly underestimated.

        Underestimating the variance will not matter much for high quality

bonds. But it will cause low quality bonds to be overpriced by a significant

amount. Hence underestimating the variance will cause corporate bonds to be

overpriced in general and will cause low quality bonds to be overpriced

relative to high quality bonds. Similar considerations suggest that the

underestimating the variance will cause junior bonds to be overpriced relative

to senior bonds, and longer maturity bonds to be overpriced relative to shorter

maturity bonds.


        4c. Dilution assumption

        According to the perfect antidilution assumption in (A.8), which is

standard in the contingent claims valuation literature, no new bonds can be

issued until all old bonds have been extinguished. Furthermore, according

to the perfect liquidity assumption in (A.9), firms can simply sell assets

In order to make cash payouts. Hence in the model equity maximizes its value

by funding all cash payouts through asset sales.

       However, firms which call bonds normally have the option to fund the

call by issuing new bonds with the same priority. Holding firm value constant,

this allows management to dilute any remaining bonds, as compared to the model
                                                                              30


which allows for no dilution. On the other hand, the model causes firm

value to go down when bonds are called, as compared to refunding with new

bonds that keeps firm value constant. Now suppose equity can choose between

refunding and asset liquidation to finance a call decision. The option to

refund can have value to equity. Failure to include the option to refund

in our model will cause equity to be underpriced and debt to be overpriced

in general. Since the option to refund has value because of the possibility

of diluting existing debt, junior debt will be overpriced relative to senior

debt and longer maturity debt will overpriced relative to shorter maturity

debt. In other words, debt can be economically junior either because it is

explicitly junior or because it has a relatively longer maturity than other

debt.


          4d. Empirical evidence on violation of these assumptions

          The empirical evidence tends to confirm the existence of a tax effect,

a variance effect, and a dilution effect. Table 8 gives evidence of a tax

effect. It shows that the model underprices discount bonds relative to

premium bonds. These results continue to obtain when examirig only high

quality bonds, where variance rate effects and dilution effects are minimal.

                                     Table 8

Premium Bonds                                  Discount Bonds

Total Number of Bonds           21             Total Number of Bonds          156
Fraction of Sample           11.86%            Fraction of Sample           88.14%

Percentage Error                               Percentage Error

Mean                        0.0487             Mean                        0.0007
Std Dev                     0.0579             Std Dev                     0.0516

Absolute Percentage Error                      Absolute Percentage Error

Mean                        0.0627             Mean                        0.0602
Std Dev                     0.0424             Std Dev                     0.0516


Difference of Means Test             2.67
                                                                              31


 Table 9 gives further evidence of a tax effect. It shows that the model

 overprices bonds with above—average coupon yields relative to bonds with

below—average coupon yields.     (The median coupon yield in the sample is

approximately 9%). Again, the results continue to obtain when examining only

high quality bonds. Hence there is unambiguous evidence for the existence

of a tax effect.




                                     Table 9


High Coupon/Pric Ratio (> .09)                 Low Coupon/Price Ratio (<=.09)
Total Number of Bonds                          Total Number of Bonds            90
Fraction of Sample          49.15%             Fraction of Sample           50.85%

Percentage Error                               Percentage Error
Mean                        0.0298             Mean                        —0.0162
Std Dev                     0.0658             Std Dev                      0.0833

Absolute Percentage Error                      Absolute Percentage Error

Mean                        0.0586             Mean                         0.0624
Std Dev                     0.0423             Std Dev                      0.0574

Difference of Means Test             4.05



          There is also empirical evidence for a variance effect. A naive test

for the existence of a variance effect is whether bonds of firms with high

estimated variance rates are overpriced relative to bonds of firms with low

estimated variance rat, since rIsky bond are more sensitive to underestimating

variance than safe bonds. Table 4 showed that this is the case. However,

this is a naive test, because a tax effect alone would cause risky bonds to

be overpriced relative to safe bonds. This is because, everything else equal,

risky bonds have higher expected capital losses than safe bonds, which is

compensated for by higher current yield. To test for a variance effect
                                                                                   32


independent of any tax effect, the sample is first split according to high

versus low current yield. This is done to control for the tax effect. Then

pricing errors are compared for bonds of high versus low variance firms with-

in each subsample. Table 10 reports these results. It shows that bonds of

high variance firms continue to be overpriced relative to low variance firms

within each subsample, although the effect is more pronounced for high

current yield bonds. Furthermore, almost identical results hold when junior

bonds are excluded from the sample, to check against the possibility that

variance only proxies for a dilution effect. These results are interpreted

as evidence for a variance effect in addition to a tax effect.



                                       Table 10


High Coupon/Price High Variance                   High Coupon/Price Low Variance

Total Number of Bonds            45               Total Number of Bonds             42
Fraction of Sample           25.42%               Fraction of Sample           23. 73%

Percentage Error                                  Percentage Error

Mean                         0.0490               Mean                         0.0093
Std Dev                      0.0640               Std Dev                      0.0614

Absolute Percentage Error                         Absolute Percentage Error

Mean                         0.0671           Mean                             0.0494
Std Dev                      0.0446               Std Dev                      0.0377


Low Coupon/Price High Variance                Low Coupon/Price Low Variance

Total Number of Bonds            37           Total Number of Bonds               53
Fraction of Sample           20. 90%          Fraction of Sample               29.94%

Percentage Error                                  Percentage Error

Mean                        —0.0119           Mean                            —0.0193
Std Dev                      0. 0715              Std Dev                      0.0905

Absolute Percentage Error                     Absolute Percentage Error

Mean                         0. 0566          Mean                            0.0665
Std Dev                      0. 0453          Std Dev                         0.0 643
                                                                           .33


        Lastly, the question remains as to evidence for a dilution effect,

in addition to a tax effect and a variance effect. A naive test for the

existence of a dilution effect is whether economically junior bonds are

overpriced —   that   is, either bonds which are explicitly junior or bonds that

are effectively junior because of their longer maturity —    relative   to econo-

mically senior bonds. Tables 5 and 6 showed that this is the case; junior

bonds are overpriced relative to senior bonds and longer maturity bonds are

overpriced relative to shorter maturity bonds. (The median maturity in the

sample is around 15 years).

        As before, this is a naive test, because either a tax effect or a

variance effect alone would cause junior bonds to be overpriced relative to

senior bonds and longer maturity relative to shorter maturity bonds. To

get a more sophisticated test, the sample is first restricted to bonds with

high current coupon yield issued by corporations with high variance rates,

which tends to control for tax and variance effects. Table 11 and 12 show

the results. Although economically junior bonds continue to be overpriced

relative to economically senior bonds, the effect is not strong. Hence there

appears to be a dilution effect, but it is not as strong as the tax and

variance effects.
                                                                                 34




                                      Table 11


Junior/High Yield, Variance                      Senior/High Yield, Variance

Total Number of Bonds            6               Total Number of Bonds           39
Fraction of Sample            3.39%              Fraction of Sample           22.03%

Percentage Error                                 Percentage Error

Me an                       0.0916           Me an                           0.0425
Std Dev                     0.0459               Std Dev                     0.0638

Absolute Percentage Error                        Absolute Percentage Error

Me an                       0.0916           Mean                            0.0634
Std Dev                     0.0459               Std Dev                     0.0431




                                      Table 12


Long Bonds/High Yield, Variance                  Short Bonds/High Yield, Variance

Total Number of Bonds            28          Total Number of Bonds               17
Fraction of Sample            15. 82%        Fraction of Sample                9.60%

Percentage Error                             Percentage Error

Mean                          0.0540         Mean                            0.0407
Std Dev                       0.0604         Std Dev                         0.0686

Absolute Percentage Error                    Absolute Percentage Error

Mean                          0.0681         Mean                            0.0656
Std Dev                       0.0440         Std Dev                         0.0455
                                                                        35
 5. Conclusion

         In this paper a theoretical model is derived for valuing claims in

 realistic capital structures containing equity and multiple issues of callable

nonconvertible sinking fund coupon debt, based on the usual assumptions in

the contingent claims valuation literature. This model is tested on a number

of bonds for 15 firms yearly from 1977 through 1982. The predicted prices

are not systematically different from actual prices for the sample as a whole.

However, predicted prices are systematically different from actual prices for

various types of bonds in the sample. Evidence exists for a systematic tax

effect and a systematic variance effect in the results. There is also evidence

for a less significant dilution effect associated with the option to refund.


        Establishing the empirical validity of contingent claims analysis

as a corporate liability pricing model is a large and complex task. A number

of theoretical and methodological problems must be addressed. For example,

as demonstrated in this paper, sinking funds and optimal call policies for

multiple bond capital structures warrant further theoretical study.   It has

also been demonstrated the detailed consideration of the interaction of

multiple bond covenants can significantly increase the dimensionality of the

overall valuation problem. This underscores the need for research into more

efficient numerical analysis methods.

        We view this paper as an important first step in establishing the

empirical validity of contingent clains analysis. Given the results of the

paper, current research is underway, using an expanded data base, where the

problem formulation takes explicit account of personal taxes, the option

to refund, the cost of financial distress and changing variance rates. Once

the results of this current research are known, a portfolio test will be con-

ducted to determine if market inefficiencies can explain any of the discrepan-

cies between the model prices and market prices.
                              References


Black, F. and M. Scholes 1973. The pricing of options and corporate
liabilities. Journal of Political Economy 81: 637—659.

Brennan M. and E. Schwartz 1976a. Convertible bonds: valuation and optimal
strategies for call and conversion. Journal of Finance.

__________________________ 1976b. The valuation of American put options.
Journal of Finance.

__________________________ 1978. Finite difference methods and jump processes
arising in the pricing of contingent claims: A synthesis. Journal of Financial
and Quantitative Analysis.

Cox, J., S. Ross and M. Rubinstein 1979. Option pricing: A simplified
approach. Journal of Financial Economics 7: 229—263.

Ingersoll, J. 1976. A theoretical and empirical investigation of the dual
purpose funds. Journal of Financial Economics 3: 83—123.

____________ 1977.   A contingent claims valuation of convertible securities.
Journal of Financial Economics, 4: 269—322.

Mason, S. 1978. The numerical analysis of certain free boundary problems
arising in financial economics. Harvard Business School, Boston, MA.

_________ 1978. The numerical analysis of risky coupon bond contracts. Work-
ing Paper No. 79—35. Harvard Business School, Boston, MA.

Merton, R. C. 1973. Theory of rational option pricing. Bell Journal of
Economics and Management Science 4: 141—183.

_____________ 1974. On the pricing of corporate debt: the risk structure
of interest rates. Journal of Finance 29: 449—470.

Parkinson, M. 1977. Option pricing: the American put. Journal of Business
5: 21—36.
