                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                 PRENATAL DRUG USE AND
                            THE PRODUCTION OF INFANT HEALTH

                                             Kelly Noonan
                                            Nancy Reichman
                                             Hope Corman
                                             Dhaval Dave

                                         Working Paper 11433
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w11433


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       June 2005




This paper was presented at the annual meeting of The Population Association of America, Philadelphia, PA,
March 31-April 2, 2005. The research was supported by Grants #R01-HD- 45630 and #R01-HD-35301 from
the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development. We are grateful for valuable input from
Justin DePrince, William Greene, Michael Grossman, Robert Kaestner, Magdalena Ostatkiewicz, Laura
Penrose, Ofira Schwartz-Soicher, and Judith Shinogle. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by Kelly Noonan, Nancy Reichman, Hope Corman, and Dhaval Dave. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Prenatal Drug Use and the Production of Infant Health
Kelly Noonan, Nancy Reichman, Hope Corman, and Dhaval Dave
NBER Working Paper No. 11433
June 2005
JEL No. I12

                                           ABSTRACT

We estimate the effect of illicit drug use during pregnancy on low birth weight. We use data from
a national longitudinal study of urban parents that includes post-partum interviews with mothers,
hospital medical record data on the mother and newborn, extensive demographic information on both
parents, and information about the city where the mother resides. We address the potential
endogeneity of prenatal drug use and present estimates using alternative measures of prenatal illicit
drug use. Depending on how drug use is measured, we find deleterious effects of illicit drug use on
low birth weight that range from 3 to 5 percentage points.

Kelly Noonan                                            Hope Corman
Department of Economics                                 Department of Economics
Rider University                                        Rider University
2083 Lawrence Road, Room SWG 30                         Lawrenceville, NJ 08648-3099
Lawrenceville, NJ 08648                                 and NBER
and NBER                                                corman@rider.edu
knoonan@rider.edu
                                                        Dhaval Dave
Nancy E. Reichman                                       National Bureau of Economic Research
Robert Wood Johnson Medical School                      365 Fifth Avenue, Suite 531
University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey      New York, NY 10016-4309
97 Paterson St., Room 435                               and Bentley College
New Brunswick, NJ 08903                                 ddave@bentley.edu
reichmne@umdnj.edu
Introduction

          Pregnant women can invest in the health of their unborn children through the use of

prenatal inputs such as nutrition and prenatal care, and by avoiding unhealthy behaviors such as

smoking cigarettes and using drugs. Economists have been modeling the production of infant

health for about 20 years (see, for example, Corman, Joyce and Grossman, 1987). Most of the

early studies focused on the effects of positive health inputs such as prenatal care. More recently,

economists have examined the unhealthy behavior of cigarette smoking during pregnancy.

Although there is considerable interest among economists in studying the effects of prenatal

illicit drug use on infant health, this line of inquiry has been hampered by the fact that reliable

and representative data on drug use, birth outcomes, and maternal characteristics are rare, and

because with available data it has been difficult to establish whether observed associations are

causal.

          The medical research on the topic is more extensive than the social science literature.

Although the former is generally based on more refined measures of drug use than what is

available in surveys, most of the studies have relied on non-random samples from individual

hospital sites. As a result, the findings may not be generalizeable to a broader population. One

exception is a recent multi-site analysis of over 11,000 women, which found that cocaine use

during pregnancy was associated with a 150-gram decrease in birth weight, controlling for

mother's age, race, marital status, education, Medicaid receipt, and a range of prenatal inputs

(Bada et al. 2002). It is not clear, however, whether the estimated birth weight detriment is a

direct result of prenatal cocaine use or whether it is due to an unmeasured “third” factor, such as

a taste for risky behavior, that is correlated with both prenatal drug use and birth weight.




                                                                                                      2
       We use an economic framework to estimate the effect of maternal illegal drug use on one

important birth outcome—low birth weight, which is associated with numerous long-term health

and developmental problems (see Reichman 2005). We use rich data from a national longitudinal

study of urban parents that includes retrospective self-reports of drug use during pregnancy,

reports of maternal drug use from hospital medical records, extensive demographic information

on the mother and the father, and information about the city in which the mother resides. We use

a multi-pronged approach to address the endogeneity of prenatal drug use: controlling for a large

set of measures that are correlated with both drug use and birth outcomes, estimating bivariate

probit models to estimate both prenatal drug use and low birth weight, and assessing the

estimates to different measures of drug use and alternate model specifications. While no one

strategy addresses the endogeneity issue completely, together they produce the best estimates to

date of the effects of prenatal illicit drug use on low birth weight.



Literature Review

       Previous research on the effects of prenatal cigarette smoking on birth weight is much

more extensive and conclusive than that on the effects of illicit drug use. Although the

mechanisms may be different, the empirical issues in estimating the effects of the two behaviors

are similar. Below we briefly review the past research on the effects of prenatal smoking and

then highlight relevant studies on illicit drugs.


Prenatal cigarette smoking

       The medical literature has consistently found large and strong negative associations

between prenatal cigarette smoking and birth weight, even after controlling for numerous

potentially confounding factors (see Visscher et al. 2003 for an excellent review of the



                                                                                                   3
literature). All low birth weight babies are either growth retarded or preterm (they can be both),

and cigarette smoking during pregnancy is strongly associated with both of these outcomes.

       The economics literature on the effects of prenatal smoking, most of which

relies on birth certificate data or self-reported smoking from maternal interviews, is much

smaller than the medical literature but has produced results that are consistent with it. Evans &

Ringel (1999), using data on all births in Pennsylvania from 1989 to 1992, examined the impact

of variation in tax rates on smoking during pregnancy and birth weight. They inferred that the

direct effect of smoking on birth weight is about -370 grams. Conway & Kennedy (2004), using

data on 2,600 births to white mothers and 2,600 births to black mothers in the 1988 National

Maternal and Infant Health Survey, found that poor maternal mental health is associated with an

increased probability of low birth weight and that part of the association can be explained by an

increased probability of smoking. Almond, Chay & Lee (2004), as part of a much broader study

of 500,000 births in Pennsylvania between 1989 and 1991, found that smoking was associated

with a 3.5 percentage point increase in the probability of low birth weight.

       Preliminary results from a recent study by Swaminathan & Sen (2005), based on 11,000

births from the 1988 National Maternal and Infant Health Survey, indicate that smoking

decreases birth weight by 200-250 grams. The authors estimated Two Stage Least Squares

(2SLS) models, using the mother’s future smoking as an identifier for prenatal smoking. Their

comparison of Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) and 2SLS estimates suggests that, in their

specifications, unobserved determinants of smoking are positively related to birth weight.

However, because they used only one identifier, they could not implement tests to determine

whether the OLS or 2SLS estimates were more appropriate.

       Finally, a recent study by Lien and Evans (2005) used U.S. birth certificate data to




                                                                                                     4
estimate the effect of smoking during pregnancy on birth weight and low birth weight, using

TSLS models in which prenatal smoking was estimated as a function of tax hikes on cigarettes

and other covariates. They found that prenatal smoking reduces birth weight by 182 grams and

increases the probability of low birth weight by approximately 7 percentage points. These

estimates were similar in magnitude to those from single-equation models.

Prenatal illicit drug use

       The medical literature on the effects of prenatal drug use is less conclusive than that for

smoking. The studies generally use measures of drug use that are more precise than those used in

economic studies (the latter generally use birth certificates). Most of the medical studies are

analyses of single sites. For example, Sprauve et al. (1997) studied 483 crack cocaine users and

3158 non-users in one urban hospital. Controlling for individual-level characteristics, including

prenatal care, alcohol, and tobacco use, they found that crack cocaine use (determined from urine

tests) was positively associated with low birth weight (approximately a 9 percentage point

increase). Little et al. (1999) found a positive association between prenatal cocaine use

(determined by blood samples) and low birth weight (approximately 10 percentage points)

among all mothers giving birth in one hospital in Dallas, TX over a three-week period. The

sample consisted of 101 mothers who used cocaine but no other drug and 469 who used no

drugs. The authors did not control for any covariates.

       Two major studies in the medical literature examined data from multiple sites. Shiono et

al. (1995) studied 7500 women in seven clinical centers. Controlling for numerous individual-

level characteristics including prenatal cigarette smoking, they found no significant associations

between either prenatal cocaine or marijuana use (obtained from self-reports or blood tests) with

birth weight, but large and significant negative associations between prenatal cigarette smoking




                                                                                                     5
and birth weight. Bada et al. (2002) used data on newborns in four large centers, measuring drug

use with both maternal reports and meconium samples. They compared 1,072 cocaine-exposed

infants to 7,565 cocaine-negative infants (they excluded another 3,174 cases for which cocaine

use could not be determined). Controlling for a rich set of covariates, they found that cocaine use

was associated with a 150-gram decrease in birth weight among infants born at 32 weeks

gestation or more. They also found that smoking at least a half a pack of cigarettes a day during

pregnancy was associated with a decrease in birth weight of 172 grams, while opiate use was

associated with a reduction in birth weight of 72 grams. Taken together, the medical studies

indicate that although there is some evidence of a negative association between prenatal drug use

and birth weight, the relationship is less clear-cut and less consistent than that between cigarette

smoking and birth weight. This may be because cigarettes are a homogeneous good, whereas

illicit drug use can involve a number of different substances.

       The economics literature on the effects of illicit drug use on birth weight is in its infancy

and thus far suggests that the potential negative effect of drug use on birth weight is smaller than

that of cigarette smoking. None of the existing studies addressed the potential endogeneity of

prenatal drug use. Most used data from New York City. Joyce et al. (1992) use pooled time-

series cross-sectional data on health districts in New York City from 1980-1989 to investigate

the relationship between drug use and low birth weight. Controlling for prenatal care, marital

status, smoking, and parity, they found that a one percentage point increase in the number of

pregnant women using drugs was associated with increased rates (from .14 to .43 percentage

points) of low birth weight among blacks. The associations were not as strong for whites or

Hispanics. Mocan & Topyan (1995) used monthly birth certificate data from 1978-1990 for New

York City. Controlling for prenatal tobacco use and prenatal care, they estimated that a 10




                                                                                                       6
percent increase in prenatal drug use (other than marijuana use) was associated with a 1 percent

increase in the rate of low birth weight among black women. The corresponding association for

tobacco use was slightly larger than that. The authors found no associations of tobacco or drugs

with low birth weight among whites.

        Particularly relevant to the present study is a study by Kaestner, Joyce & Wehbeh (1996)

of 1,300 births in one hospital in New York City in 1991-1992. The authors compared the

associations of self-reported drug use and “actual” drug use (from urine screens) with birth

weight, controlling for tobacco use, prenatal care, mother’s age, parity, race, and multiple birth.

They found that actual drug use was associated with a 6 percent decrease in the likelihood of low

birth weight, whereas self-reported drug use was associated with an 8 percent decrease. This

result indicates that self-reported measures of prenatal drug use lead to upward biased estimates

of the effects of prenatal drug use on birth weight, and that results based on survey reports of

prenatal drug use should be interpreted with caution.

        In another study using a measure of “actual use,” Norton et al. (1996) examined the

associations of prenatal drug and alcohol use with the cost of neonatal care using data on all live

births in 54 Maryland hospitals in 1991. They considered birth weight as an intermediate

outcome. Their measures of drug and alcohol use were based on whether the newborn had a drug

or alcohol-related disorder. They controlled for race, baby’s sex, and payment source, but for no

maternal characteristics (including smoking). They found that the newborn hospital costs of

drug-addicted infants were about twice as high as those of non-addicted infants and that about

half of the increased costs were due to low birth weight, short gestational age, or other conditions

at birth.




                                                                                                      7
        In the present study, we contribute to the small economics literature on the effects of

prenatal drug use on birth weight in several ways: (1) We use exceptionally detailed data on both

maternal and paternal characteristics; (2) we use a sample of births from a national birth cohort

study of urban America; (3) we use information on substance use from both medical records and

self-reports; and (4) we use statistical techniques to address the potential endogeneity of prenatal

drug use and address the robustness of the results to a number of different model specifications.



Data

        We use data from a recent national birth cohort survey that has been linked to medical

records of mother respondents and their babies. The Fragile Families and Child Wellbeing

(FFCWB) survey follows a cohort of parents and their newborn children in 20 U.S. cities (in 15

states). The survey data are rich in sociodemographic characteristics of both mothers and fathers.



        The FFCWB study randomly sampled births in 75 hospitals between 1998 and 2000. By

design, approximately three quarters of the mothers interviewed were unmarried. Face-to-face

interviews were conducted with 4898 mothers while they were still in the hospital after giving

birth.1 Mothers were re-interviewed over the telephone approximately one year later. Eighty six

percent of mothers eligible for the study completed baseline interviews. Of those mothers, 90

percent completed one-year follow-up interviews. The data, when weighted, are representative of

births in US cities with over 200,000 people. Additional data were collected from the hospital

medical records (from the birth) for a sub-sample of 2399 non-multiple births in 14 cities (in 10

states). The medical record data contain information on prenatal drug use from laboratory tests of


1
 Additional background on the research design of the Fragile Families and Child Wellbeing Study is available in
Reichman et al. (2001).


                                                                                                                  8
the mother or baby and in notes by physicians or social workers (more detail is given below,

under “Measures”).

        We use data on the 1,988 births that have medical records data as well as complete data

on all analysis variables from the baseline and one-year follow-up surveys. Our sample is not

representative of the population of births in the United States because: (1) births were sampled

exclusively in large cities, (2) we use only a subset of the FFCWB sample for which medical

record data have been collected, and (3) non-marital births are over-represented and we do not

use weighted data. Nevertheless, our sample represents an important group to study from a

public policy standpoint in that it is likely to include chronic or heavy users.



Measures

Low birth weight

        We focus on low birth weight (< 2500 grams) as a dichotomous outcome rather than birth

weight in grams because the former is the more clinically relevant measure. However, we

conduct auxiliary analyses of birth weight in grams and report those results. The rate of low birth

weight in our sample, at 9.4 percent, is somewhat higher than the corresponding figure for all

births in U.S. cities with over 100,000 people—8.4 percent (National Center for Health Statistics

1999), likely reflecting the over-sampling of non-marital births in the FFCWB study.


Prenatal illicit drug use

        Risky behaviors are notoriously under-reported. New mothers may be particularly likely

to under-report prenatal drug use because of the illegal nature and stigma associated with that

behavior and fear of child protective services involvement. Kaestner et al. (1996) modeled the

measurement error in self-reported drug use by combining data on self-reports with "actual use"



                                                                                                   9
based on urine tests. They found that only 17 percent of women who tested positive for illicit

drug use at the time their children were born reported that they had used drugs.

         Arendt et al. (1999) compared the sensitivity of different sources of data on prenatal

cocaine use (medical records, urine screens, meconium analyses, and postpartum interviews) for

323 births. They assumed no false positives from any source. Surprisingly, the clinical measures

(urine and meconium screens, together) revealed fewer cases of cocaine use than medical records

in conjunction with post-partum interviews. They concluded that a combination of medical

records analysis and post-partum interview is the best way to ascertain prenatal cocaine use.

         Although the Fragile Families interview was far less detailed on illicit drug use than that

used by Arendt et al., we adopt the strategy of combining responses to a post-partum survey with

a review of the mothers’ and babies’ medical records. During the mother’s interview in the

hospital after giving birth, she was asked whether she had used any illicit drugs during her

pregnancy, but not about the specific types of drugs she may have used.2 One hundred six

mothers (5.3%) in our sample reported that they had used drugs (at all) during pregnancy.

         The medical records contain information about the mother’s drug use during pregnancy

from laboratory tests of the mother or baby and in notes by physicians, nurses, or social workers.

Forty five percent of the 1,988 mothers in our sample had results from urine toxin screens in

their charts; of these, 111 (12.4%) tested positive for cocaine, heroin, marijuana, other drugs

(including amphetamines, methadone and barbiturates/benzioazepines) or unspecified drugs, or a

combination of drugs. Another 88 cases of prenatal drug use were picked up from notes in

various places in the mothers’ and babies’ charts. Overall, 199 (10%) of the mothers in our


2
 The exact question asked was: "During your pregnancy, about how often did you use drugs such as marijuana,
crack cocaine, or heroin-- nearly every day, several times a week, several times a month, less than once a month, or
never." When coding prenatal drug use based on the interview responses, those answering anything but "never"
were considered prenatal drug users.


                                                                                                                   10
sample had some indication of prenatal drug use recorded in their own or their baby’s chart; of

those, 16.1 percent used cocaine, 3.5 percent used heroin, 46.7 percent used marijuana, 3.5

percent used other or unspecified drugs, and 30.2 percent used a combination of drugs.

        We constructed three measures of prenatal drug use: whether the mother indicated in the

postpartum interview that she had used illicit drugs at all during the pregnancy (5.3%), whether

there was any indication of prenatal drug use from the interview or medical records (10.9%), and

whether there was any indication of prenatal drug use other than marijuana from the medical

records (6.2%). We refer to the last measure as “hard drug” use.3 These percentages are in the

range presented in a review of sixteen studies by Howell et al. (1999). They are higher than the

rates found in a recent survey that asked individuals whether they were pregnant, and if they

were, whether they had used any illicit drugs in the past month (about 3.3%) and whether they

had used any hard drugs in the past month (1.1%) (Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services

Administration [SAMHSA], 2000).4



Prenatal cigarette smoking

        Three hundred seventy four (19%) of the mothers in our sample reported smoking

cigarettes during pregnancy in their baseline interviews, compared to 452 (23%) who smoked

according to either their interview self-reports or their medical records. These figures are




3
  The measure of hard drugs is based solely on the medical records, since we cannot distinguish marijuana from
other drugs using the survey reports. Thus, this measure may not capture all of the self-reporters who used hard
drugs.
4
  The SAMHSA data are from the National Household Survey on Drug Abuse for 2000 and, when weighted, are
representative of the U.S. population age 12 and over. The specific computation was for pregnant women age 15 to
44 within the overall sample. http://www.oas.samhsa.gov/nhsda/2kdetailedtabs/Vol_1_Part_4/sect6v1.htm#6.23b .


                                                                                                               11
comparable to national estimates, which indicate that about 19 percent of pregnant women report

smoking in the past month.5



Other analysis variables

         One of the advantages of the FFCWB data is that they include a rich set of characteristics

on the mother, father, and the parents’ relationship status that may be associated with both

prenatal drug use and low birth weight. Table 1 shows the means of the analysis variables other

than low birth weight, prenatal drug use, and prenatal smoking. We include a basic set of

covariates that are typically used in analyses of prenatal substance use and are available in birth

certificate data—maternal age (in years), education (which we code as high school graduate,

some college but not a graduate, or college graduate—compared to less than high school),

race/ethnicity (non-Hispanic black, Hispanic, or other non-white non-Hispanic—compared to

non Hispanic white), nativity (whether the mother was foreign-born), and parity (whether it was

the mother’s first birth). We also include insurance information (whether the birth was covered

by Medicaid or other government program—henceforth referred to as “Medicaid”), whether the

mother lived with both of her parents at age 15, whether she reported that she attends religious

services regularly (several times per month), whether she was married at the time of conception,6

whether she knew the father at least a year prior to conception,7 the number of previous

pregnancies that the mother had (whether they resulted in live births or not), the father’s age

(expressed as the number of years the father’s age exceeded the mother’s age), whether the father


5
   Source: SAMHSA, National Household Survey on Drug Abuse, 2000.
http://www.oas.samhsa.gov/nhsda/2kdetailedtabs/Vol_1_Part_4/sect6v1.htm#6.26b.
6
  This variable is based on marriage dates, birth dates, and the baby’s gestational age. It reflects whether the mother
was married to the baby's father rather than whether she was married at all, and is used instead of marital status at
birth in order to purge “shotgun marriages” from the married group.
7
  This variable is based on the baby’s birth date and gestational age, as well as the mother’s report of how long she
knew the father.


                                                                                                                     12
was a different race-ethnicity than the mother, and the father's education (using the same

educational categories as for the mother).8 We also control for whether the infant was male.

         In certain analyses, we included whether the mother consumed any alcohol during

pregnancy, ascertained from either the interview or the medical records. Two hundred one

women (10.1 %) reported that they had consumed alcohol (at all) during the pregnancy, and

another 83 cases of prenatal alcohol use were picked up from the medical records. In some

analyses, we use a measure of mother’s future drug use (from the mothers’ reports at the one-

year follow-up interview of whether they had used marijuana, cocaine, crack, speed, LSD,

heroin, or any other kind of hard drug in the past month) and future smoking (from the mothers’

reports at one year whether they had smoked cigarettes at all in the past month). Finally, we used

the three-year average price per gram of pure cocaine (in tens of dollars) in the city in which the

mother gave birth (for the year of the birth and the two previous years). These data are from The

System to Retrieve Information from Drug Evidence (STRIDE), maintained by the Drug

Enforcement Agency (see Corman et al. 2004 for more information about the STRIDE data).



Illicit drug use, cigarette smoking, and low birth weight

         Kaestner et al. (1996) found that self-reported drug use had a stronger association with

birth weight than did any evidence of drug use. The authors inferred that users who self-report

are either heavier users or use more addictive drugs than are users who do not self-report.

Approximately half of the mothers in our sample who used drugs (according to self-reports or

medical records) reported that they had done so, whereas over 80 percent of cigarette smokers

(according to self-reports or medical records) reported having engaged in that behavior during


8
 Because of cell sizes, we collapsed fathers’ education to high school or more versus less than a high school
diploma in the probit model with self-reported drug use.


                                                                                                                13
pregnancy (see Table 2).9 We find that the hard drug users were more likely to self-report than

were all drug users (56% versus 49%). Even so, a sizeable fraction of known hard drug users

reported that they had not used drugs during pregnancy.

           Substance users are far more likely than non-users to have low birth weight babies (see

Table 2). The percentage of drug users having low birth weight babies ranged from about 20

percent for all drug users to 25 percent for self-reported drug users. The rate of low birth weight

among cigarette smokers was 19 to 20 percent. From Table 2 it appears that: (1) illicit drug use is

an even more substantial risk factor for low birth weight than smoking, (2) both smoking and

drug use more than double the risk for low birth weight, and (3) drug users who self-report are at

greater risk for having low birth weight babies than users who do not self-report.

           Since both illicit drug use and smoking appear to be important risk factors for low birth

weight, it is important to consider the co-occurrence of the two behaviors. Among drug users, the

rate of smoking is very high (see Table 3). Almost two thirds (62 % = 66/106) of self-reported

drug users also self-reported smoking. About 69 percent (86/124) of hard drug users also smoked

(according to self-reports or medical records). Less than one fifth (18 % = 66/374) of self-

reported smokers also self-reported drug use, and about one third (31 % = 141/452) of all

smokers (according to self-reports or medical records) used any illicit drugs (again, according to

self-reports or medical records). Due to the considerable co-occurrence of drug use and smoking,

associations of each of these behaviors with birth weight, when not controlling for the other,

should be interpreted with caution.




9
    Kaestner et al. (1996) found that about 27 percent of drug users self-reported.


                                                                                                       14
Estimation Strategy

       We estimate the effects of prenatal illicit drug use on low birth weight among a sample of

urban, mostly unmarried mothers. Following the basic structure of Corman, Joyce and Grossman

(1987), we can model a birth weight production function as follows:

   (1) Low birth weight = f (input1, input2,…inputn), with the following input demand functions:

   (2) Input1 = g1( price of input 1, prices of substitute and complementary inputs, income,

       tastes)

       Input2 = g2( price of input 2, prices of substitute and complementary inputs, income,

       tastes)

       Inputn = gn( price of input n, prices of substitute and complementary inputs, income,

       tastes)

       One approach is to estimate Equation 1 and treat all inputs, such as smoking, drug use,

and prenatal care as endogenous.10 Such a system of equations is difficult to implement

empirically. An alternative approach, implemented by Corman, Joyce and Grossman (1987), is to

treat only a subset of inputs as endogenous and substitute the right-hand variables of the input

demand equations for the other potentially endogenous inputs. This is referred to as a "quasi-

structural production function." This approach is particularly useful in the current case, as we are

interested primarily in the effect of one input--illicit drug use. Therefore, we substitute factors

related to the demand for other inputs into Equation 1, and estimate the following quasi-

structural production function:

       (3) Low birth weight = h(illicit drug use, smoking, gender of child, parents’

           characteristics)




                                                                                                      15
Maternal and paternal characteristics serve as proxies for income and tastes. We include smoking

in the production function because that behavior is negatively associated with birth weight and it

is highly correlated with drug use. As discussed earlier, excluding smoking would likely result in

overestimation of the effect of illicit drug use on birth weight.

           Estimation of Equation 3 poses several challenges for researchers. First, most data sets

contain information on prenatal drug use that comes from mothers’ own reports. If mothers who

self-report are a non-random sample of prenatal drug using mothers, then estimates of the effects

of drug use on birth weight would be biased. Indeed, Kaestner et al. (1996) found that self-

reported drug use overestimates the negative effect of actual drug use on birth weight. For this

reason, we include measures of prenatal drug use from both self-reports and from medical

records in our analyses.

           Another issue is that different types of illicit drugs could have differential impacts on

birth weight. For example, most research does not find a deleterious effect of marijuana on birth

weight (see, for example, Bada et al. 2002). For these reasons, we examine whether the estimated

effects of prenatal drug use on low birth weight vary across three different measures of prenatal

drug use: self-reported, any indication, and hard drug use (as defined earlier).

           Finally, and most importantly, if there are unobserved factors that are associated with

both illicit drug use and birth weight, estimates of the effect of drug use on low birth weight will

be biased. As prenatal drug use is a choice made by the mother, it is possible that, even with rich

data, there are unmeasured characteristics of mothers that are associated with both prenatal drug

use and low birth weight. For example, if mothers have tastes for risky behavior that are

unmeasured, then we might expect a positive correlation between the unobserved determinants

of drug use and low birth weight. In this case, the coefficient for drug use in Equation 3 would

10
     For example, see Rosenzweig and Schultz (1983).

                                                                                                       16
overstate the deleterious effects of drug use on birth weight. It is also possible that mothers with

poor health endowments are more likely to refrain from using illicit substances during pregnancy

in order to protect the baby. In this case, the correlation between the unobserved determinants of

drug use and low birth weight would be negative and Equation 3 would understate the true

deleterious effect.

       Since randomized experiments would not be feasible, the effects of prenatal drug use on

birth outcomes must be ascertained from retrospective data analysis, which is limited in its

ability to establish causal relationships. Studies relying on multivariate regression analysis,

exploiting geographic variations in policies or services, or comparing siblings all have

limitations (see Moffitt 2005 for an excellent discussion of the issues). Because we have very

rich and well-measured data, we estimate Equation 3 directly. We also estimate a two-equation

system that models both prenatal drug use and low birth weight, recognizing that such techniques

are also limited, perhaps even more so than the models they are intended to improve. We assess

robustness of the results to different measures and model specifications. Although no

retrospective analysis provides an airtight and generalizable case for causal relationships, our

analyses produce the best estimates to date of the effects of prenatal illicit drug use on low birth

weight—a topic on which there has been very little social science research.

       We use a probit model to estimate low birth weight in a single equation form (Equation

3). As discussed above, we also estimate a bivariate probit model, in which there is one equation

for birth weight (Equation 3) and another that is an input demand function for illicit drug use, as

follows:

       (4) Illicit Drug Use = j(maternal and paternal characteristics, gender of the child,

       smoking, identifiers)




                                                                                                   17
        For the identifiers in Equation 4 to be valid, they must be conceptually valid and they

need to be significant predictors of drug use (Equation 4), but not of low birth weight when

controlling for drug use and the other covariates (Equation 3). We use three identifiers that fit

these criteria: city-level cocaine prices, whether the mother consumed alcohol during the

pregnancy, and whether the mother reported in the one year follow-up interview that she had

used drugs in the past month. In previous research (Corman et al. 2005), we found that prenatal

drug use is fairly responsive to variations in price. Alcohol and illicit drugs are complementary

goods, and although prenatal alcohol use is associated with fetal alcohol syndrome and certain

other child disabilities, few to no studies have found associations between prenatal alcohol

consumption and birth weight (see Tough et al. 2001). Among the mothers who did not use drugs

in our sample, 8 percent of those who consumed alcohol and 9 percent of those who did not

consume alcohol had low birth weight babies, and the difference is not statistically significant.

Future drug use, which has been used in empirical models of rational addiction (see, for example,

Chaloupka 1991), should not affect current birth outcomes conditional on prenatal drug use. We

estimate bivariate probit models with all three of these identifiers, as well as with pairs of them.



Results

        We present single equation probit estimates of the effects of prenatal illicit drug use and

the other covariates on low birth weight, as well as bivariate probit estimates for both low birth

weight and prenatal drug use. In all cases, we present coefficients, marginal effects, and robust

standard errors that are corrected for clustering at the city level.




                                                                                                     18
Single-equation estimates

           Table 4 presents results for the probit models. As discussed earlier, we use three different

measures of drug use: self-reports, any indication of drug use (from self-reports or medical

records), and hard drug use (as defined earlier). In all models, drug use is found to increase the

probability of low birth weight, controlling for cigarette smoking and the other covariates. Probit

models yield estimates ranging from 3 to 5 percentage points.11 The associations of drug use with

low birth weight are statistically significant when using self-reports or hard drugs. The

associations are smaller and are not statistically significant when using the broadest measure—

any drug use. The multivariate associations between drug use and low birth weight are much

smaller than the unadjusted associations (from Table 2).

           The associations of cigarette smoking with low birth weight are slightly larger than those

of drug use with low birth weight and they are uniformly significant at the 1 percent level. In

contrast, the unadjusted associations (from Table 2) of prenatal smoking with low birth weight

appeared to be stronger for than those of prenatal drug use and low birth weight. The

multivariate result is more consistent with the past research discussed earlier.

           Other than substance use, the variable most associated with low birth weight and

significant is whether the birth was financed by Medicaid—a proxy for poverty, and possibly for

reduced availability of high-quality prenatal care. Another variable associated with low birth

weight in the multivariate context is our indicator for the father being of a different race-ethnicity

than the mother. Surprisingly few of the other variables are significant predictors of low birth

weight in our models. These results are similar across measures of illicit drug use.




11
     For the probit models, marginal effects are calculated at the mean values of the independent variables.


                                                                                                               19
Two-equation estimates

       As part of our multi-pronged estimation strategy, we estimate bivariate probit models.

The results are presented in Appendix Table 1; the low birth weight estimates are in 1(a) and the

prenatal drug use estimates are in 1(b). The estimates of the effects of prenatal drug use on low

birth weight are very similar to those from the single-equation models, although the standard

errors are higher in the bivariate probit models so the coefficients of drug use are not statistically

significant. Each of the three identifiers—city-level cocaine price, alcohol use during pregnancy,

and future self-reported drug use—is significantly related to prenatal drug use. Both alcohol use

and future drug use are significant at the 1 percent level and cocaine price is significant at the 10

percent level or better. As expected, prenatal alcohol use and future drug use are positively

related to, and cocaine prices are negatively related to, prenatal drug use. The three identifiers are

jointly significant at the 1 percent level in all models (test statistics and p-values are shown in

Appendix Table 1b).

       In all bivariate probit models, each is the identifiers is insignificant in predicting low

birth weight and therefore excludable from the low birth weight equation (test statistics and p-

values shown in Appendix Table 1b). In all cases, the correlations between the error terms of the

drug use and the low birth weight equations are not statistically different from zero. Therefore,

we are unable to reject the null hypothesis of zero correlation between the error terms in the two

equations (test statistics and p values in Appendix Table 1b). Based on these model

specifications, we should rely on the single-equation models to get unbiased estimates of the

effects of prenatal drug use on low birth weight.




                                                                                                      20
Auxiliary analyses

           Here we report results from auxiliary analyses that address: how the effects of drug use

on low birth weight translate to average effects on birth weight in grams, the potential

endogeneity of prenatal cigarette smoking, the sensitivity of our bivariate probit results to which

of the three identifiers are used, whether the estimates are sensitive to the inclusion of prenatal

care in the model, and whether the results can be generalized to the entire Fragile Families

sample.12

Effects of prenatal drug use on mean birth weight

           Although low birth weight is a more clinically relevant measure than birth weight in

grams, estimating the latter is informative for comparison with other studies. In a separate set of

analyses, we estimated single-equation models with birth weight as a continuous variable. The

results are presented in Table 5. We found that prenatal drug use led to a reduction in birth

weight of between 99 and 164 grams. The associations between the other covariates and birth

weight were similar to those in other studies.

Endogeneity of prenatal smoking

           Both our single-and two-stage estimates of drug use on low birth weight treated prenatal

cigarette smoking as an exogenous variable. We test this assumption. Swaminathan and Sen

(2005) recently estimated a birth weight production function that treated smoking as endogenous,

but used only one identifier and therefore were unable to conduct overidentification tests. We use

two identifiers to estimate two-stage models of the effects of cigarette smoking on low birth

weight: alcohol use during pregnancy and self-reported smoking at the one year follow-up




12
     The latter four auxiliary analyses are not shown, but are available upon request.


                                                                                                      21
interview.13 In each of our models (bivariate probit using smoking from self reports or medical

records, results not shown), we find that: the two identifiers significantly predict smoking in the

expected direction, both are excludable from the low birth weight equation, and the correlations

of the error terms in the smoking and the low birth weight equations are insignificant. Thus,

smoking is not found to be endogenous in our models that control for a rich set of covariates and

therefore unlikely biases the estimated effects of prenatal drug use.

         Although the single equation model is preferred, the marginal effects of smoking on low

birth weight are very similar in the single-equation models (8 to 9 percentage points) and the

two-stage models (13 to 14 percentage points). Additionally, smoking is uniformly significant at

the 1 percent level, regardless of specification. Overall, we find somewhat stronger and more

robust effects of smoking than of illicit drug use on low birth weight.14

Robustness of estimates to choice of identifiers

         To be sure that our two-stage results present in the Appendix do not hinge on any one of

the three identifiers, we estimated (results not shown) all two-stage models with pairs of those

identifiers (instead of all three). Regardless of the measure of actual drug use used, each

identifier significantly predicted drug use and was excludable from the low birth weight

equation. In all cases, we were unable to reject the null hypothesis of zero correlation between

the error terms in the two equations.

Inclusion of prenatal care

         We excluded prenatal care from the main models because of the empirical difficulties,

discussed earlier, of treating multiple inputs as endogenous. We ran a full set of low birth weight

13
  State cigarette prices were not significant in predicting prenatal smoking and were therefore not included in the
analyses.




                                                                                                                      22
models that also included a dichotomous indicator for whether the mother obtained prenatal care

during the first trimester (results not shown). The estimated effects of drug use on low birth

weight were not sensitive to whether prenatal care was included.

Full Sample Results

         Since we limited most of the analyses to 1,988 of the 4,898 mothers in the Fragile

Families study, we were concerned about sample selectivity. We ran a probit model using self-

reported drug use using the full sample (results not shown). We found the effect of self-reported

drug use on low birth weight in the full sample to be similar to the corresponding estimate for the

smaller sample with medical records data.



         Overall, the evidence suggests that illicit drug use has deleterious effects on low birth

weight of between 3 and 5 percentage points. The estimates are robust across numerous different

model specifications and using different measures of drug use. Consistent with Kaestner et al.

(1996) and a previous finding of our own that prenatal drug users with relatively inelastic

demand are more likely than those with more elastic demand to report prenatal drug use (Corman

et al. 2004), we find that the effects are larger and more significant for mothers who self-report

and those who use hard drugs than for those with any indication of illicit drug use during

pregnancy. We also find that the effect of cigarette smoking on low birth weight—8 to 9

percentage points—is larger and even more robust than that of illicit drug use.




Conclusion

14
  The more robust results for cigarette smoking than illicit drug use likely reflect that cigarettes are a homogeneous
good, whereas illicit drug use can involve a number of different substances. Our three different measures of drug use



                                                                                                                   23
         Our result that prenatal illicit drug use increases the likelihood of low birth weight by 3 to

5 percentage points confirms the widespread belief that prenatal drug use is harmful to the fetus.

It also underscores the importance of preventing drug use among women of childbearing age,

collecting reliable data on illicit drug use as part of regular medical care (preferably prior to

pregnancy), and providing substance abuse treatment to users of illicit drugs. In previous work,

we found that demand for illicit drugs among pregnant women is fairly elastic (Corman et al.

2004), which with our results from this study suggests that drug enforcement is a potentially

promising tool for improving birth outcomes. This study also provided evidence that the well-

established association between prenatal cigarette smoking and low birth weight appears to be

causal, underscoring the importance of reducing cigarette smoking among women of

childbearing age.




are intended to give ranges of estimates that take into consideration that drugs are a heterogeneous good.


                                                                                                             24
References

Almond, Douglas, Kenneth Y. Chay and David S. Lee (2004) " The Costs of Low Birth Weight,"
     NBER Working Paper No. w10552.

Arendt, R. E., L. T. Singer, S. Minnes and A. Salvator. (1999). "Accuracy in Detecting Prenatal
       Drug Exposure." Journal of Drug Issues 29(2): 203-214.

Bada, H.S., A. Das, C.R. Bauer, S. Shankaran, B. Lester, L. L. Wright, J. Verter, V.L. Smeriglio,
       L. P. Finnegan and P. L. Maza (2002). “Gestational Cocaine Exposure and Intrauterine
       Growth: Maternal Lifestyle Study” Obstetrics and Gynecology 100 (5/1): 916-924.

Chaloupka (1991). “Rational Addictive Behavior and Cigarette Smoking.” Journal of Political
      Economy 99(4): 722-42.

Conway, K.S. and L.D. Kennedy (2004) “Maternal Depression and the Production of Infant
     Health.” Southern Economic Journal 71(2): 260-286.

Corman, H., T. Joyce and M. Grossman (1987). "Birth Outcome Production Function in the
      United States." The Journal of Human Resources 22(3): 339-360.

Corman, H., K. Noonan, N.E. Reichman and D. Dave (2005). “Demand for Illicit Drugs Among
      Pregnant Women.” Advances in Health Economics and Health Services Research
      16: 41-60.

Evans, W. N. and J. S. Ringel (1999). “Can Higher Cigarette Taxes Improve Birth Outcomes?”
       Journal of Public Economics 72: 135-154

Howell, E. M., N. Heiser and M. Harrington. (1999). "A Review of Recent Findings on
      Substance Abuse Treatment for Pregnant Women." Journal of Substance Abuse
      Treatment 16(3): 195-219.

Joyce, T., A. D. Racine and N. Mocan (1992) “The Consequences and Costs of Maternal
        Substance Abuse in New York City: A Pooled Time-Series, Cross-section Analysis.”
       Journal of Health Economics 11(3): 297-314.

Kaestner, Robert, Theodore Joyce and Hassan Wehbeh (1996). "The Effect of Maternal
      Drug Use on Birth Weight: Measurement Error in Binary Variables." Economic
      Inquiry 34:326-352.

Lien, Diana S. and William N. Evans. (2005) “Estimating the Impact of Large Cigarette Tax
       Hikes: The Case of Maternal Smoking and Infant Birth Weight.” Journal of Human
       Resources 40(2): 373-392.




                                                                                               25
Little, B. B. L.M. Snell, K.J. Trimmer, S. M. Ramin, F. Ghali, C. A. Blakely and
        A. Garret (1999). “Peripartum Cocaine Use and Adverse Pregnancy Outcome.” American
        Journal of Human Biology 11:598-602.

Moffitt, R. (2005). “The Analysis of Causal Relationships in Population Research.” Demography
       42 (1): 91-108.

Mocan, N. and K. Topyan (1995). “Illicit Drug Use and Health: Analysis and Projections of New
      York City Birth Outcomes Using a Kalman Filter Model.” Southern Economic Journal
      62(1): 164-82.

National Center for Health Statistics, Vital Statistics of the United States, 1999.
       http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/datawh/statab/unpubd/natality/natab99.htm.

Norton, E.C., G.A. Zarkin, B. Calingaert and C. J. Bradley (1996). “The Effect of Maternal
       Substance Use on the Cost of Neonatal Care.” Inquiry 33: 247-257

Reichman, N. (2005). Low Birth Weight and School Readiness. The Future of Children
      15(1): 91-116.

Reichman, N. E., J. O. Teitler, I. Garfinkel and S. S. McLanahan (2001). "Fragile Families:
      Sample and Design." Children and Youth Services Review 23(4/5): 303-326.

Shiono, P. H., M. S. Klebanoff, R. P. Nugent, M. F. Cotch, D. G. Wilkins, D. E. Rollins, J. C.
       Carey and R. E. Behrman (1995). “The Impact of Cocaine and Marijuana Use on Low
       Birth Weight and Preterm Birth: A Multicenter Study.” American Journal of Obstetrics
       and Gynecology 172: 19-27

SAMHSA, National Household Survey on Drug Abuse for 2000. http://www.oas.samhsa.gov

Sprauve, M. E., M. Lindsay, S. Herbert and W. Graves (1997). “Adverse Perinatal Outcome in
      Parturients Who Use Crack Cocaine.” Obstetrics and Gynecology 89(5/1): 674-678

Swaminathan S. and B. Sen (2005). “Effects of Maternal Substance Abuse During Pregnancy on
     Child Birth weight: The Bias Due to Selective Fetal Mortality” Presented at the American
     Economics Association meeting, Jan. 2005, Philadephia, PA.

Tough, S. C., L/W. Svenson, D.W. Johnston and D. Schopflocher (2001). “Characteristics of
       Preterm Delivery and Low Birthweight Among 113,994 Infants in Alberta: 1994-1996.”
       Canadian Journal of Public Health 92(4): 276-280.

Visscher, W. A., M. Feder, A. M. Burns, T. M. Brady and R. M. Bray (2003). “The Impact of
       Smoking and Other Substance Use on Urban Women on the Birthweight of Their
       Infants.” Substance Use and Misuse 38(8): 1063-2003.



                                                                                                 26
Table 1: Means (N = 1,988)

Mother Characteristics
    Less Than High School*                        .36
    High School Graduate                          .31
    Some College                                  .24
    College Graduate                              .09
    Medicaid Birth                                .67
    Non-Hispanic White*                           .82
    Hispanic                                      .31
    Non-Hispanic Black                            .45
    Other Non-White Non-Hispanic                  .04
    Immigrant                                     .17
    Lived With Both Parents At Age 15             .42
    First Birth                                   .37
    Number of Previous Pregnancies                .76
                                                 (.43)
      Attends Religious Services                  .38
      Several Times/Month

Child Characteristic
     Male                                         .52

Father Characteristics
     Less Than High School*                       .36
     High School Graduate                         .35
     Some College                                 .21
     College Graduate                             .08
     Different Race-Ethnicity Than Mother         .16
     Age Difference in Years                      2.63
     (father minus mother)                       (5.08)

Parents’ Relationship
     Knew Each Other 12 Months                    .85
     Married at Conception                        .22

Other Measures
    Mother Used Drugs (1Year)                     .02
    Price Per Gram of Cocaine in City (tens of    9.16
    dollars)                                     (2.02)
    Prenatal Alcohol Use                          .14
    Mother Smoked Cigarettes (1Year)              .26
*Omitted Category




                                                          27
Table 2. Prenatal Drug Use, Prenatal Smoking, and Low Birth Weight
                                            Number of       % of sample   % Users Who       % Low
                                           observations                   Self-Reported   Birth weight

 Full Sample                                 1988              100                           9.41

 Self-Reported Drug Use                       106              5.3            100            24.53

 Any Drug Use
                                              217              10.9           48.85          19.82
 (from self-report or medical records)
 Hard Drug Use
                                              124              6.2            56.45          23.39
 (from medical records)

 Self-Reported Smoking                        374              18.9           100            19.79

 Any Smoking
                                              452              22.7           82.74          18.58
 (from self-report or medical records)




                                                                                                         28
 Table 3. Numbers of prenatal drug users and smokers in sample, according to source of information
                                   Used Drugs        Used Drugs        Used Hard Drugs          Total*
                                   (self-report)      (self-report     (medical record)
                                                 or medical record)

 Smoked                                   66             116                  74                374
 (self-report)

 Smoked
 (self-report or medical record)          75             141                  86                452


 Total**                                  106            217                  124

*Figures do not represent column totals
**Figures do not represent row totals




                                                                                                         29
Table 4: Probit estimates of the effects prenatal drug use on low birth weight (< 2500 grams)
                                                     Self-Reported         Any Drug Use         Hard Drug Use
                                                                               Coefficient
                                                                           [Marginal Effect]
                                                                            (Standard Error)

Mother Characteristics

   Self-Reported Drug Use                              .31**
                                                        [.05]
                                                       (0.13)

   Any Drug Use                                                                 .18
                                                                               [.03]
                                                                              (0.14)

   Hard Drug Use                                                                                    .26**
                                                                                                     [.05]
                                                                                                    (0.12)

   Self-Reported Smoking                               .49***
                                                         [.09]
                                                        (0.10)

   Any Smoking During Pregnancy                                              .47***                 .47***
                                                                               [.08]                  [.08]
                                                                              (0.13)                 (0.12)


                                                        -.03                   -.02                  -.03
   Age, in years                                       [-.00]                 [-.00]                [-.00]
                                                       (0.06)                 (0.05)                (0.06)

                                                         .00                    .00                   .00
   Age Squared                                          [.00]                  [.00]                 [.00]
                                                       (0.00)                 (0.00)                (0.00)

                                                         .00                   -.00                   .01
   High School Graduate                                 [.00]                 [-.00]                 [.00]
                                                       (0.09)                 (0.10)                (0.10)

                                                        -.14*                  -.14*                 -.13
   Some College (but not graduate)                     [-.02]                 [-.02]                [-.02]
                                                       (0.08)                 (0.08)                (0.08)

                                                        -.03                   -.02                  -.00
   College Graduate                                    [-.00]                 [-.00]                [-.00]
                                                       (0.20)                 (0.21)                (0.22)

                                                       .35***                .35***                 .35***
   Medicaid Birth                                        [.05]                 [.05]                  [.05]
                                                        (0.11)                (0.11)                 (0.11)
                                                                                            Continued on next page




                                                                                                                30
Table 4 (cont’d)
                                        Self-Reported     Any Drug Use          Hard Drug Use
                                                            Coefficient
                                                        [Marginal Effect]
                                                         (Standard Error)

                                            -.16              -.17                   -.16
   Hispanic                                [-.02]            [-.02]                 [-.02]
                                           (0.12)            (0.13)                 (0.12)

                                             .12               .12                    .13
   Non-Hispanic Black                       [.02]             [.02]                  [.02]
                                           (0.10)            (0.10)                 (0.10)

                                             .16               .16                    .15
   Other Non-White Non-Hispanic             [.03]             [.03]                  [.02]
                                           (0.22)            (0.22)                 (0.22)

                                            -.03              -.01                   -.00
   Immigrant                               [-.00]            [-.00]                 [-.00]
                                           (0.12)            (0.12)                 (0.11)

   Lived with Both Parents at Age 15        -.09              -.08                   -.08
                                           [-.01]            [-.01]                 [-.01]
                                           (0.07)            (0.06)                 (0.06)

   Attends Religious Services Several       -.09              -.10                   -.10
   Times/Month                             [-.01]            [-.01]                 [-.01]
                                           (0.07)            (0.07)                 (0.07)

   First Birth                               .18               .17                    .17
                                            [.03]             [.03]                  [.03]
                                           (0.15)            (0.15)                 (0.15)

   Number of Pregnancies                    -.02              -.03                   -.03
                                           [-.00]            [-.00]                 [-.00]
                                           (0.18)            (0.17)                 (0.17)

Father Characteristics

                                                               .13                    .12
   High School Graduate                                       [.02]                  [.02]
                                                             (0.08)                 (0.08)

                                                               .08                    .08
   Some College (but not graduate)                            [.01]                  [.01]
                                                             (0.12)                 (0.12)

   College Graduate                                            .11                    .10
                                                              [.02]                  [.02]
                                                             (0.29)                 (0.30)

   High School or More                       .11
                                            [.02]
                                           (0.09)
                                                                            Continued on next page


                                                                                                31
Table 4 (cont’d)
                                                    Self-Reported          Any Drug Use      Hard Drug Use
                                                                             Coefficient
                                                                         [Marginal Effect]
                                                                          (Standard Error)
   Different Race-Ethnicity Than Mother                 -.28**                 -.27**           -.26**
                                                        [-.04]                 [-.03]           [-.03]
                                                        (0.13)                 (0.13)           (0.13)

                                                          .01                    .01               .01
   Age Difference in Years (father minus
                                                         [.00]                  [.00]             [.00]
   mother)
                                                        (0.01)                 (0.01)            (0.01)

Child Characteristic

                                                         -.00                   -.02              -.02
   Male                                                 [-.00]                 [-.00]            [-.00]
                                                        (0.09)                 (0.09)            (0.09)

Parents’ Relationship

   Mother Knew Father 12 Months Prior to                 -.10                   -.09              -.09
   Conception                                           [-.01]                 [-.01]            [-.01]
                                                        (0.11)                 (0.10)            (0.10)

   Married at Time of Conception                         -.15                   -.14              -.14
                                                        [-.02]                 [-.02]            [-.02]
                                                        (0.12)                 (0.12)            (0.12)

   Pseudo R2                                              .08                   .08               .08

   N                                                      1988                   1988            1988
*** significant at 1% level; ** significant at 5% level; * significant at 10% level




                                                                                                             32
Table 5: OLS estimates of the effects of prenatal drug use on birth weight in grams
                                                    Self-Reported         Any Drug Use             Hard Drug Use
                                                                              Coefficient
                                                                            (Standard Error)

Mother Characteristics

   Self-Reported Drug Use                             -158.44*
                                                       (82.35)

   Self-Reported Smoking                             -247.72***
                                                       (33.79)

   Any Drug Use                                                               -99.32
                                                                              (65.04)

   Any Smoking During Pregnancy                                            -227.83***                -228.50***
                                                                             (41.03)                   (39.06)

   Hard Drug Use                                                                                     -163.50**
                                                                                                      (58.81)

                                                        12.74                  11.33                    13.32
   Age, in years
                                                       (12.04)                (11.18)                  (11.65)

                                                        -.27                   -.24                     -.27
   Age Squared
                                                       (0.20)                 (0.19)                   (0.20)

                                                       -34.76                 -32.33                   -36.21
   High School Graduate
                                                       (25.16)                (26.80)                  (28.58)

                                                        34.99                  35.83                    32.89
   Some College (but not graduate)
                                                       (34.29)                (37.43)                  (36.21)

                                                        17.24                  16.68                    8.83
   College Graduate
                                                       (49.59)                (49.83)                  (49.17)

                                                      -91.81**               -91.25**                 -90.14**
   Medicaid Birth
                                                       (37.17)                (38.26)                  (37.13)

                                                        -9.98                  -2.44                    -5.86
   Hispanic
                                                       (46.13)                (47.12)                  (47.07)

                                                     -160.51***            -156.36***                -160.66***
   Non-Hispanic Black
                                                       (41.15)               (40.56)                   (40.75)

                                                       -140.93               -136.03                   -134.49
   Other Non-White Non-Hispanic
                                                       (94.23)               (94.54)                   (94.66)

                                                       74.33*                  64.90                    62.76
   Immigrant
                                                       (37.67)                (37.19)                  (37.57)

   Lived with Both Parents at Age 15                   -19.81                 -21.93                   -22.19
                                                       (26.71)                (28.18)                  (28.40)
                                                                                               Continued on next page


                                                                                                                   33
Table 5 (cont’d)
                                                    Self-Reported          Any Drug Use       Hard Drug Use
                                                                             Coefficient
                                                                           (Standard Error)
   Attends Religious Services Several                     -.64                   .25              1.37
   Times/Month                                          (18.74)                (18.00)           (17.97)

   First Birth                                          -94.25*                -87.98*           -88.08*
                                                        (45.99)                (46.20)           (47.20)

   Number of Pregnancies                                 12.09                  14.02             14.25
                                                        (54.23)                (52.62)           (54.40)

Father Characteristics

                                                         -4.84                  -6.97             -4.86
   High School Graduate
                                                        (32.33)                (32.01)           (31.37)

                                                         39.93                  40.93             40.14
   Some College (but not graduate)
                                                        (34.43)                (34.36)           (34.84)

   College Graduate                                      -6.67                  -6.82             -5.27
                                                        (61.88)                (60.71)           (61.14)

   Different Race-Ethnicity Than Mother                 60.49*                  60.72             56.69
                                                        (33.64)                (34.75)           (34.61)

   Age Difference in Years (father minus                  -2.25                  -2.10             -1.83
   mother)                                               (2.59)                 (2.35)            (2.38)

Child Characteristic

                                                       92.64***               97.45***          97.54***
   Male
                                                        (18.08)                (19.08)           (18.92)

Parents’ Relationship

   Mother Knew Father 12 Months Prior to                 5.54                   2.44              1.69
   Conception                                           (51.97)                (52.53)           (52.10)

   Married at Time of Conception                        74.43*                 73.55*            71.74*
                                                        (38.58)                (38.19)           (37.19)

   R2                                                     .09                    .09               .09

   N                                                     1988                   1988              1988

*** significant at 1% level; ** significant at 5% level; * significant at 10% level




                                                                                                              34
Appendix Table 1(a): Bivariate probit estimates of the effects of prenatal drug use on low birth weight (N = 1988)
                                                   Self-Reported           Any Drug Use           Hard Drug Use
                                                                              Coefficient
                                                                           [Marginal Effect]
                                                                            (Standard Error)

Mother Characteristics

   Self-Reported Drug Use                                .20
                                                        [.03]
                                                       (0.33)

   Self-Reported Smoking                               .51***
                                                         [.09]
                                                        (0.12)

   Any Drug Use                                                                 .18
                                                                               [.03]
                                                                              (0.35)

   Any Smoking During Pregnancy                                              .47***                  .43***
                                                                               [.08]                   [.07]
                                                                              (0.16)                  (0.15)

   Hard Drug Use                                                                                        .58
                                                                                                       [.12]
                                                                                                      (0.63)

                                                        -.03                   -.02                    -.03
   Age, in years                                       [-.00]                 [-.00]                  [-.00]
                                                       (0.06)                 (0.05)                  (0.06)

                                                         .00                    .00                     .00
   Age Squared                                          [.00]                  [.00]                   [.00]
                                                       (0.00)                 (0.00)                  (0.00)

                                                        -.00                   -.00                     .02
   High School Graduate                                [-.00]                 [-.00]                   [.00]
                                                       (0.09)                 (0.10)                  (0.10)

                                                        -.15*                  -.14*                   -.12
   Some College (but not graduate)                     [-.02]                 [-.02]                  [-.02]
                                                       (0.09)                 (0.08)                  (0.08)
                                                         -.03                   -.02                    .02
   College Graduate                                    [-.00]                 [-.00]                   [.00]
                                                       (0.19)                 (0.22)                  (0.22)

                                                       .35***                .35***                  .34***
   Medicaid Birth                                        [.05]                 [.05]                   [.05]
                                                        (0.11)                (0.11)                  (0.11)

                                                        -.16                   -.17                  -.16
   Hispanic                                            [-.02]                 [-.02]                [-.02]
                                                       (0.12)                 (0.12)                (0.12)
                                                                                            Continued on next page



                                                                                                                     35
Appendix Table 1(a) (cont’d)
                                        Self-Reported   Any Drug Use            Hard Drug Use
                                                           Coefficient
                                                        [Marginal Effect]
                                                         (Standard Error)

                                             .13              .12                     .12
   Non-Hispanic Black                       [.02]            [.02]                   [.02]
                                           (0.10)           (0.11)                  (0.10)

                                             .16              .16                     .14
   Other Non-White Non-Hispanic             [.03]            [.03]                   [.02]
                                           (0.22)           (0.22)                  (0.22)

                                            -.04             -.01                     .01
   Immigrant                               [-.01]           [-.00]                   [.00]
                                           (0.12)           (0.12)                  (0.11)

   Lived with Both Parents at Age 15        -.09             -.08                    -.09
                                           [-.01]           [-.01]                  [-.01]
                                           (0.07)           (0.06)                  (0.06)

   Attends Religious Services Several       -.10             -.10                    -.10
   Times/Month                             [-.01]           [-.01]                  [-.01]
                                           (0.07)           (0.07)                  (0.07)

   First Birth                               .18              .17                     .17
                                            [.03]            [.03]                   [.03]
                                           (0.15)           (0.15)                  (0.15)

   Number of Pregnancies                    -.02             -.03                    -.03
                                           [-.00]           [-.00]                  [-.00]
                                           (0.18)           (0.17)                  (0.18)

Father Characteristics

                                                              .13                     .13
   High School Graduate                                      [.02]                   [.02]
                                                            (0.09)                  (0.09)

                                                              .08                     .09
   Some College (but not graduate)                           [.01]                   [.01]
                                                            (0.12)                  (0.13)

   College Graduate                                           .11                     .11
                                                             [.02]                   [.02]
                                                            (0.29)                  (0.30)

   High School or More                       .11
                                            [.02]
                                           (0.09)
                                                                            Continued on next page




                                                                                                36
Appendix Table 1(a) (cont’d)
                                                    Self-Reported           Any Drug Use        Hard Drug Use
                                                                               Coefficient
                                                                            [Marginal Effect]
                                                                             (Standard Error)

   Different Race-Ethnicity Than Mother                  -.28**                 -.27**               -.26*
                                                          [-.04]                 [-.03]             [-.03]
                                                         (0.13)                 (0.13)              (0.13)

                                                          .01*                    .01                 .01
   Age Difference in Years (father minus
                                                          [.00]                  [.00]               [.00]
   mother)
                                                         (0.01)                 (0.01)              (0.01)

Child Characteristic

                                                          -.00                   -.02                -.02
   Male                                                  [-.00]                 [-.00]              [-.00]
                                                         (0.10)                 (0.09)              (0.09)

Parents’ Relationship

   Mother Knew Father 12 Months Prior to                  -.10                   -.09                -.09
   Conception                                            [-.01]                 [-.01]              [-.01]
                                                         (0.11)                 (0.10)              (0.10)

   Married at Time of Conception                           -.15                   -.14               -.13
                                                          [-.02]                 [-.02]             [-.02]
                                                         (0.12)                 (0.12)              (0.12)
*** significant at 1% level; ** significant at 5% level; * significant at 10% level




                                                                                                                37
Appendix Table 1(b): First stage bivariate probit estimates (dependent variable is prenatal drug use)
                                                    Self-Reported        Any Drug Use             Hard Drug Use
                                                                             Coefficient
                                                                           (Standard Error)

Mother Characteristics

   Self-Reported Smoking                             .65***
                                                      (0.17)

   Any Smoking During Pregnancy                                            .89***                  .71***
                                                                            (0.14)                  (0.13)

   Any Alcohol Use During Pregnancy                  .72***                .79***                  .83***
                                                      (0.13)                (0.14)                  (0.15)

   Any Future Drug Use                               1.64***               1.29***                1.18***
                                                      (0.32)                (0.27)                 (0.24)

   Price of Cocaine                                    -.06*               -.12***                 -.11***
                                                      (0.03)                (0.04)                  (0.03)

                                                       .06                   -.01                   .12**
   Age, in years
                                                      (0.05)                (0.04)                  (0.06)

                                                       -.00                  .00                     -.00
   Age Squared
                                                      (0.00)                (0.00)                  (0.00)

                                                     -.31***                 -.04                    -.22
   High School Graduate
                                                      (0.09)                (0.09)                  (0.18)

                                                     -.38***                 -.05                    -.15
   Some College (but not graduate)
                                                      (0.13)                (0.15)                  (0.12)

                                                      -.53**               -.58***                -1.12***
   College Graduate
                                                      (0.26)                (0.20)                 (0.38)

                                                       .06                   .24*                    .31*
   Medicaid Birth
                                                      (0.14)                (0.13)                  (0.16)

                                                       -.21                  -.08                  -.47***
   Hispanic
                                                      (0.15)                (0.11)                  (0.05)

                                                     .35***                 .43**                     .01
   Non-Hispanic Black
                                                      (0.09)                (0.18)                  (0.11)

                                                       .30                   .08                      .14
   Other Non-White Non-Hispanic
                                                      (0.30)                (0.39)                  (0.29)

                                                       -.27                -.68***                 -.72***
   Immigrant
                                                      (0.21)                (0.15)                  (0.14)

   Lived with Both Parents at Age 15                   -.01                 .15**                     .10
                                                      (0.07)                (0.06)                  (0.07)

                                                                                             Cont’d on next page


                                                                                                                  38
                                                    Self-Reported          Any Drug Use       Hard Drug Use
                                                                             Coefficient
                                                                           (Standard Error)
   Attends Religious Services Several                   -.31***                  -.16              -.02
   Times/Month                                           (0.11)                 (0.11)            (0.11)

   First Birth                                            .19                    .08                .01
                                                         (0.15)                 (0.11)            (0.19)

   Number of Pregnancies                                  .19                    .08                .15
                                                         (0.17)                 (0.13)            (0.21)
Father Characteristics

                                                                                -.12**             -.01
   High School Graduate
                                                                                (0.06)            (0.17)

                                                                               -.35***           -.51**
   Some College (but not graduate)
                                                                                (0.08)           (0.20)

   College Graduate                                                              -.20               .07
                                                                                (0.18)            (0.24)

   High School or More                                    -.12
                                                         (0.12)

   Different Race-Ethnicity Than Mother                   .15                    .12*              -.19
                                                         (0.11)                 (0.08)            (0.15)

  Age Difference in Years (father minus                   .01                    .01             .02***
  mother)                                                (0.01)                 (0.01)            (0.01)
Child Characteristic

                                                          .08                   .18**               .18
   Male
                                                         (0.12)                 (0.08)            (0.14)
Parents’ Relationship

   Mother Knew Father 12 Months Prior to                  .19*                   .06               -.05
   Conception                                            (0.10)                 (0.13)            (0.18)

   Married at Time of Conception                        -.57***                  -.24              -.22
                                                         (0.18)                 (0.20)            (0.28)
Test Results
  Chi-Square joint significance test of                  80.81                  56.94            106.45
  instruments                                            (.00)                  (.00)             (.00)
  (p-value)

   Exclusion tests (p values):
   Price per gram of cocaine in city                      .35                    .29               .29
   Alcohol use during pregnancy                           .71                    .85               .77
   Any future drug use                                    .44                    .76               .78

   Wald test of rho=0                                     .19                     .00              .27
   (p-value)                                             (.67)                   (.99)            (.60)

*** significant at 1% level; ** significant at 5% level; * significant at 10% level



                                                                                                              39
