NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FIRMS’ DEMAND FOR EMPLOYMENT-BASED
MENTAL HEALTH BENEFITS
Judith A. Shinogle
David S. Salkever
Working Paper 11436
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11436
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2005

Financial support from National Institute of Mental Health Grant MH 43703 is gratefully acknowledged.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by Judith Shinogle and David Salkever. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Firms’ Demand for Employment-Based Mental Health Benefits
Judith A. Shinogle and David S. Salkever
NBER Working Paper No. 11436
June 2005
JEL No. I
ABSTRACT

Employment-based health insurance is the main source of health coverage for the non-elderly. Few
previous studies have examined the factors that impact employer decision-making in selecting the
coverage to offer to their employees and none have examined generosity of mental health coverage.
This paper uses cross-sectional data from a survey of medium to large firms, including information
on employee characteristics, to examine the empirical determinants of mental health coverage
choices. We find that the firm's demand for mental health coverage is strongly influenced by
employee characteristics. We also find that certain state and local policy interventions directed at
enhancing access to mental health care have impacts on coverage decisions. Specifically, public
provision of mental health lowers mental health coverage generosity and parity legislation increases
mental health generosity. Future research with panel data is warranted to examine the causal effects
of these policies.
Judith Shingole
Senior Economist
RTI International
1615 M Street NW, Suite 740
Washington, DC 20036-3209
jshinogle@rti.org
David Salkever
Department of Health Policy
Johns Hopkins University
Hampton House, Room 429
624 N Broadway
Baltimore, MD 21205
and NBER
dsalkeve@jhsph.edu

Employment-based health insurance is the main source of health care coverage
for the non-elderly. Currently, 61.3 percent of the under 65 population are covered
through employer-provided policies (Denaus-Walt et al., 2003). Evidence from data over
the past several decades also indicates that this coverage is usually fairly generous. Gabel
et al. (2002) examine trends in generosity of health insurance benefits and find little
variability in generosity with, on average, employees expecting to pay 25 percent of their
expenditures out of pocket. Bundorf (2002) develops plan generosity estimates from the
1993 Robert Wood Johnson foundation employer survey. Within each of four different
categories of plans (HMO, POS, PPO and indemnity), she finds that the coefficient of
variation of estimated plan value ranged from 0.68 to 0.125. Moreover, her estimated
plan value means are very similar across plan types, ranging from $1,133 to $1,220.
The fairly uniform pattern of generous coverage (at least among employers who
offer coverage) may not be surprising in light of the strong tax incentives for
compensating workers via their health benefits (Sheils and Haught, 2004). Some recent
studies, however, suggest that this level of benefit generosity is beginning to trend
downward in response to increasing premium cost pressures on employers (Strunk and
Ginsburg, 2003).
In the case of coverage specifically for mental health services, comparable
national data on levels and trends of benefit generosity have not been produced, but the
evidence that is available suggests the possibility that the burden of cost sharing is greater
for persons with mental disorders and that increases in this burden may outpace
comparable increases for health services in general. Using BLS data, Jensen et al. (1998)

1

find that 82 percent of firms provided less coverage for mental health inpatient services
compared to general health services and that 98 percent provided less coverage for
mental health outpatient services compared to general health. In 2002, 74 percent of
covered workers were subject to annual outpatient visit limits and 64 percent were
subject to an annual inpatient day limit (Barry C et al., 2003). State and Federal
governments have responded to these differentials via enactment of so-called mental
health “parity” laws, as well as laws mandating mental health benefits, though it is clear
that these laws have not eliminated coverage differentials (U.S. General Accounting
Office, 2000). Anecdotal evidence suggests that in responding to cost pressures and
premium increases, employers may look specifically to reductions in mental health
benefits (Rosenheck et al., 1999). At the national level, McKusick et al. (2002) simulate
coverage under typical private health insurance plans in 1987 and 1995 and report that
the share of mental health spending covered by the typical plan declined from 65.8 to
60.1 percent.
In the current economic climate, with most observers expecting further reductions
in mental health coverage generosity, it is important that policy-makers understand the
factors that impact on employer decision-making in selecting the coverage packages to
offer to their employees. Prior economic research on this question is sparse. Bundorf
(2002) is the first to examine what factors may be associated with the overall health
benefit generosity of employer sponsored insurance. Supporting the presumption that
employers seek to provide compensation packages that are most valued by their
employees, she finds evidence of employee characteristics (specifically wage levels and a
measure of variation in health risk) affecting the generosity of the health plan for firms

2

with 100 employees or less; however she finds no significant effect of employee
characteristics on generosity for firms with greater than 100 employees.
In this paper, we focus specifically on employer decisions about the generosity of
the mental health benefits offered to their employees. Following Bundorf (2002), our
dependent variable is a measure of generosity averaged across all plans offered by the
employer and explanatory variables include employee characteristics, as well as
employer and area characteristics. We also examine impacts of state-level policy
measures (benefit mandates and parity laws) on benefit generosity. The next section of
the paper presents our conceptual approach to employers’ mental health benefit choices.
The following sections describe our data sources and variables, and our estimation
methods and results. We conclude with a discussion of the implications of our findings
and directions for future research.

I. Conceptual Approach

The view that employer-sponsored health insurance should reflect the preferences
of the employees has a long history in the health economics literature. (For an early
exposition, see Goldstein and Pauly, 1976). Several recent papers (Dowd and Feldman
1987; Bundorf 2002) have formalized this notion by assuming that employers choose the
health insurance plans to offer by minimizing their compensation costs subject to a
market-determined utility constraint for their workers. We follow the same general
approach here in modeling an employer’s mental health insurance coverage decision, but
we also incorporate an extension suggested by earlier work on job safety (Rea, 1981)

3

which allows the characteristics of the insurance plan offered to impact on employers’
profits both through compensation costs (as in Dowd and Feldman and in Bundorf) and
through effects on workers’ health.
We model the employer’s mental health insurance decision as a short-run profitmaximization problem (with capital inputs fixed) for a competitive firm. The firm
simultaneously chooses a quantity of labor to employ (L), a “wage” to pay (w), and a
level of generosity of mental health coverage (G) to maximize the profit LaGrangian (H)
which is defined as follows:

[

]

(1) H = pQ{a(G)L}− mGL− wL+ λ Ψ − {a(G)V (w) + (1− a(G)U(w,G))}
where
p = price of product
Q(⋅) = production function for output quantity
a = probability of NO mental illness for the worker
G= generosity of mental health benefit
L= quantity of labor
m= price per unit of generosity of the mental health benefit
w= dollar cost of wages (and other benefits besides mental health coverage)
Ψ = the firm’s labor market compensation constraint (in expected worker utility)
V = worker’s utility function with no mental illness
U = worker’s utility function with mental illness.

4

For simplicity, we assume (1) that workers are only in one of two possible health states
(healthy or mentally ill), (2) that workers with mental illness do not work, and (3) that the
employer’s workforce is large enough that her/his labor supply will be known with
certainty to be aL. (The labor-market constraint assumes that workers are expected utility
maximizers.) The employer’s first-order conditions for profit maximization are as
follows:

(2)

∂Η
∂L

=

pQL a − (mG + w) = 0

(3)

∂Η
∂G

=

pQL aG L − Lm + λ[−aGV − UG + aGU + aUG ] = 0

(4)

∂Η
∂w

= − L − λ(aVw + (1− a)U w ) = 0

(5)

∂Η
∂λ

= Ψ − (aV + (1− a)U ) = 0

Condition (2) is a direct analog of the standard condition for profit maximization
of a competitive firm. Condition (3) indicates that the firm chooses a benefit generosity
level such that the marginal cost of an additional increment of generosity (Lm) is just
equal to the marginal revenue product of an additional increment of generosity plus the
effect of that increment on workers’ expected utility multiplied by λ, which is the
marginal effect on profit of a change in the expected-utility (market) constraint.
Condition (4) shows that wages are set at the point where the marginal cost of an
increment to the wage, L, equals the effect of that increment on workers’ expected utility

5

multiplied by λ. Since an increase in wages increases workers’ expected utility, λ must
be negative; in other words, a one-unit increase in the level of the expected utility (labor
market) constraint reduces profit by λ.
Also note that when condition (3) is divided by condition (4), we find that the
ratio of marginal expected utility for an extra unit of coverage (G) to that for an extra
dollar of wage is equal to (m - pQLaG). In comparison, if w and G were chosen to
maximize worker expected utility subject to a budget constraint of B = w + mG, the
corresponding ratio would be equal to m. Thus, in this model the firm has a stronger
incentive to purchase generous coverage to obtain the marginal revenue product of lower
disability rates among its workforce.1
Several simple extensions of the model provide direct links with some current
policy concerns. One is the inclusion of the tax preference for benefits, which would
imply changing the wage argument in the workers’ utility functions to (1-t)w, where t is
the marginal tax rate. A second is inclusion of a parameter, z, representing the influence
of G on the adverse selection costs to the employer of attracting a workforce with greater
demand for mental health care as G increases. This adverse selection process would
imply that the benefit price (m) should be an increasing function of G (with the rate of
increase depending on z) and that the influence of G on the probability of disability
would also depend upon z. As will be noted later, such adverse selection effects may be

1

In the polar case where mental health coverage has no effect in reducing the probability
of disability, employee expected utility maximization conditions apply and the
employer’s choice reduces to the cost-minimization framework as in Bundorf (2002). For
evidence of coverage effects on disability rates, see Salkever et al. (2000, 2003). Also
note that in our model if workers’ incomes in the disabled state are reduced to Ω⋅w
(where 0 ≤ Ω < 1), the relevant ratio becomes {m – [pQ-(1-Ω)w]aG}.

6

particularly relevant for understanding the ways in which parity legislation impacts on the
employer’s choice of G.
The foregoing discussion of the model indicates that the employer’s optimal
choice of G should depend upon the following exogenous factors: the prevailing market
price of her/his product (p), the prevailing compensation constraint for her/his workers
(Ψ), tax rates, the price (m) of each unit of G, risk factors that influence the marginal
effect of G on the probability of mental illness, and worker characteristics that influence
their productivity and their preferences in both the no-mental-illness and mentally-ill
states.

II.

Data Sources and Study Sample of Employers

The primary data source for this research is a survey of employer practices
regarding benefits and disability management that was conducted in 1996 by the
Department of Health Policy and Management of The Johns Hopkins University. In
cooperation with a private disability insurer, a survey target population of 1,433
employers was identified based on the following criteria: 1) having an active long-term
disability policy with this insurer over the past three years and 2) having at least 300
covered lives on the LTD policy at some time during that three-year period.
These employers received a mailed questionnaire as well as up to two follow-up
calls to encourage responses and to answer any questions about the survey. Besides the
mailed survey, firms were asked to send summary plan descriptions or a detailed plan
abstract form (nine firms sent abstract forms) for each health plan offered to their

7

employees. Data were obtained on 577 health plans offered by 250 employers. (An
additional 28 firms responded in the survey that they offered health plans but did not
provide the detailed information we requested on these plans.) This health plan data was
abstracted and used for our analyses.2 More detailed descriptions of the survey data are
provided in Salkever et al. (1999).
Additional variables, defined for the geographic location of each employer and for
their industry (SIC) category, were obtained from public sources noted below.
Additional data on employee characteristics for those employees who are covered by the
employer’s long-term disability (LTD) plan were obtained from the private insurer’s
administrative data files.3
Characteristics of the employers in our study sample (unweighted means averaged
across employers) are presented in Table 1. While all regions of the country are
represented, the largest numbers of employers are located in the East North Central
region (24.8 percent) and the Middle Atlantic region (17.2 percent). Over half (57.2
percent) of the employers have employees located in more than one state and 38.8
percent have locations in four or more states. Most of the employers are in either the
services (47.2 percent) or manufacturing (24.8 percent) sectors. Among the 91 percent of

2

Since the overall response rate was low (17 percent), as is often the case in employer
mail surveys (Jensen and Gabel, 1992; Freeman and Kleiner, 2000), we have carefully
analyzed administrative data on respondents and nonrespondents for evidence of
respondent bias. Our analysis (available from the authors) consistently supports the null
hypothesis of no respondent bias.

3

While some employees are not covered by the LTD benefit, the median for the ratio of
the total lives covered under LTD to the total number of employees reported on the
survey is 0.90. Thus, the characteristics of LTD covered employees should provide a
close approximation to the firm's overall employee characteristics.

8

employers who report their distribution of employees by salaried versus hourly status,
53.7 percent of employees are salaried. Union employees are present in 26 percent of the
firms.
Responding employers are mainly medium-sized or large: the mean number of
employees is 1,776 and the median is 773. Given their size, and the fact that all offer
LTD benefits to at least some of their employees, it is not surprising that their other
benefit offerings are generous. For example, 89.6 percent of employers offer retirement
benefits, and the mean total days offered for sick and paid vacation leave is 21.5 days per
year. Employment-based health insurance coverage is offered by all of the employers.
(This also applies to the 28 employers who responded to our survey but did not provide
detailed information on the health benefits available to their employees.) The employers
pay, on average, approximately 82 percent of the health insurance premium4 and 23.6
percent of employers pay the entire health insurance premium.

III.

Specification of Variables
Dependent Variables: Our measures of mental health coverage generosity are

summary variables that incorporate various specific features of coverage such as
copayments, coinsurance, deductibles, and expenditure and utilization limits.
Information on the characteristics of each health plan offered by a firm is obtained from
the summary plan descriptions or detailed abstraction forms each firm provided.5 The

4

Approximately 9 percent of respondents did not respond to this survey question.

5

Descriptions of the mental health coverage features under these various health insurance
plans are reported elsewhere (Salkever et al., 1999). The Salkever et al. (1999) study
9

generosity measures are first constructed at the health plan level and then averaged over
all health plans the firm offers to obtain a firm level measure.
In order to summarize the generosity of health plans offered by the firm, variables
representing the dollar amount of benefits covered are constructed by combining planspecific data with simulated utilization data. Since we do not have actual health plan
enrollment or claims history data, we use distributional parameters from the literature to
simulate the utilization of a covered population and apply the resulting simulated data to
the benefit structure for each health plan offered by the firm. The process simulates the
utilization patterns for mental health inpatient days and outpatient visits.6 A total of
100,000 random draws is simulated.
Prices for each service are added to create our simulated expenditure data. All
prices are for the year 1995. The inpatient price per day is obtained from Leslie and
Rosenheck (1998, Table 2) and the outpatient price per visit is from a price list of a large
managed behavioral health care provider.
Information on health plan coverage provisions obtained from employers is
combined with the simulated utilization data and expenditures to determine the amount of
out-of-pocket expenditures for each random “person” for each service. The health plan
coverage provisions incorporated into the simulation are: deductibles including mental
health and/or inpatient specific deductibles, copayment amounts, coinsurance rates,
annual limits on mental health inpatient days or outpatient visits, annual benefit limits for
reported that in general, the HMO plans in this data are more likely to use day and visit
limits than the non-HMO plans.
6

Distributional parameters are obtained from Goldman et al, 1998 and Sturm 1997. See
Shinogle, 2001 for complete details of these calculations.

10

mental health or a specific mental health service such as outpatient or inpatient, per
admission copayments, out-of-pocket expenditure limits, and scope of out-of-pocket
expenditure limits (e.g. mental-health specific limits vs. overall limits).
The generosity indicators for each plan are computed as one minus the ratio of the
mean simulated out-of-pocket expenditure to the mean simulated total expenditures for
each service category (outpatient, inpatient, total). The unweighted averages of plan
generosity are then computed among all plans offered by an employer.7
The means and standard deviations for the mental health generosity measures are
presented in Table 2. The percent of total mental health expenditures covered (MHCOV)
range from zero (no coverage) to 100 (complete coverage) with an average of 62.01
percent of total simulated mental health expenditures covered. The average coverage of
outpatient mental health expenditures (MHOPCOV) is 62.11 percent and the average
coverage of inpatient mental health (MHIPCOV) is 60.92. Table 2 also presents the
medians of the mental health generosity measures, which are almost identical to the
means.8 The last two columns of the table report the number of cases with either zero or
full coverage for each of the three measures.

7

Note that we assume the same distribution of utilization and expenditures for all plans.
Thus we abstract from moral hazard considerations in computing our generosity
measures.
8

Salkever and Shinogle (2000) present information on the generosity of the health plan
benefits by health plan type. This study found that preferred provider organization
(PPOs) have a higher simulated coverage of total and outpatient mental health coverage
than fee-for-service (FFS) plans and a higher simulated inpatient mental health coverage
than heath maintenance organizations (HMO) plans. FFS plans in this data have higher
simulated inpatient mental health coverage than HMO plans but HMO plans have higher
outpatient mental health coverage than FFS plans.
11

The descriptions and data sources for all explanatory variables used in the
analysis are presented in Table 3; the corresponding means and standard deviations are
presented in Table 4. Employer characteristics such as dummies for the total number of
employees, a 0-1 dummy for the presence of any union employees (UNION), and the
percent of employees who are salaried (PCTSAL) are obtained from the employer survey
described above. Note that we include dummies for the employer size categories (based
on numbers of employees) rather than the exact number of employees since the number
of employees is a choice variable in our conceptual model and therefore arguably
endogenous. At the same time, we expect that factors such as economies of scale in
benefits provision and the feasibility of self-insurance are strongly related to numbers of
employees; the employer size dummies are intended to control for these factors while
being less susceptible to endogeneity bias.9 Since detailed information on employees’
education levels and specific job types are lacking in our data base but are potentially
important predictors of employee preferences with regard to benefits, the percent of
salaried employees (PCTSAL) is included to control for these preferences. (Since 25
employers did not provide information on the number of salaried employees, the
PCTSAL variable is coded as zero for these employers and a dummy variable
(MISS_SAL) is created that is equal to one if salaried employee information is missing.)
Characteristics of employees who are covered under the firm’s LTD insurance
benefit are obtained from administrative data collected by the insurer. This

9

Note that seventeen employers failed to report their total number of employees in the
survey. To include these respondents in the analysis, information on their number of
employees was obtained from 1996 Dunn and Bradstreet Information Services data, from
employer web sites, or from regional economic web sites (e.g., the Greater Toledo
Regional Growth Partnership, http:\\www.rgp.org).
12

administrative data is available for all 1,433 firms in the sample universe. As noted
above, not all employees are covered by the LTD benefit, but the median for the ratio of
the total lives covered under LTD benefit to the total number of employees reported on
the survey is 0.90. Thus, the characteristics of LTD covered employees should provide a
close approximation to the firm’s overall employee characteristics. This administrative
data contains employee characteristics such as the percent of employees covered under
the firm’s LTD benefit that are: 1) female (FEMALE), 2) age 35 years old or younger
(AGE ≤35), and 3) age 50 and older (AGE50+). These data also describe the distribution
of the firm’s employees among four different occupational categories: white collar
(OCCWC), skilled blue-collar (OCCBL), unskilled (OCCU), and semi-skilled.10
To measure the tightness of the local labor market, data on the 1995 state
unemployment rate (UNEMP) is acquired from the Local Area Unemployment Statistics
on the U.S Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) web site (www.bls.gov). This variable is
matched to employers by the address of the main company headquarters.
As a proxy for the market compensation constraint, we construct a measure of
total compensation per employee (TOT_COMP) from administrative data on the median
salary for LTD covered employees, from survey data on the generosity of health
insurance benefits offered by the firm, and from information on retirement benefits
offered by the firm. The dollar value of health coverage is computed as the product of 1)
the simulated percentage of general plus mental health expenditures covered on average

10

For firms with incomplete administrative data, missing information on employee
characteristics is imputed using data from all employers in the sample universe that
reported complete information (See Salkever et al., 2000 for more information on this
imputation).

13

by the plans offered by the employer, 2) the percentage of the health plan cost paid by the
employer, and 3) the mean per capita spending for physicians, hospitals, drugs, and other
health professionals by persons with active employer-sponsored health insurance as
calculated from the 1996 Medical Expenditure Panel Survey.11 The cost of retirement
benefits is computed as the product of 1) a dummy variable for firms offering retirement
benefits, 2) the firm’s median salary, and 3) the estimated cost (in percentage terms) of
retirement benefits. The last term is calculated based on the Standard Industry
Classification (SIC)-category-specific percentage of compensation going to retirement
benefits as reported in the BLS Employment Cost Index (ECI), and the state-and-SICspecific percentage of employees reporting the receipt of retirement benefits in the April
1993 CPS.12
It is hypothesized (Dowd and Feldman, 1987) that risk of illness should increase
the demand for coverage. The only available risk factor that could be used in this study is
the percent of employees with heavy alcohol consumption (HEAVY_ALC) in the
industry of the employer (Hoffman et al. 1997).
The marginal tax rate (MTR) is calculated using 1994 state and federal rates and
tax laws compiled by the Advisory Commission of Intergovernmental Relations (ACIR,

11

The method for simulating the generosity (i.e., percent coverage) of non-mental health
expenditures is analogous to that used for simulating mental health coverage generosity.
Further details are available from the authors.

12

The CPS data are used to adjust for the fact that the compensation cost percentages in
the ECI data are for all firms rather than just for firms providing retirement benefits.

14

1995). The rate is based on the median income for full-time workers in 1994
(www.bls.gov). The rate is calculated assuming a standard deduction.
Local health care and mental health care market characteristics pertain to the
health maintenance organizations (HMO) enrollment, expenditures on mental health
specialty services, and the area costs to Medicare. The 1995 per capita enrollment in
health maintenance organizations (HMO) is obtained from the Area Resource File
produced by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. This county level
measure is summed over the state and divided by state population to obtain state level per
capita HMO enrollment. Greater availability of HMO plans in the local market is
expected to be positively related to coverage generosity in that HMOs can presumably
offer more effective control of moral hazard costs arising from generous benefits relative
to PPO or traditional fee-for-service plans. We note, however, that simple descriptive
comparisons of plan types do not show that HMOs provide more generous coverage on
average and also show that HMOs tend to make more use of various benefit limitations
(Salkever and Shinogle, 2000; Salkever et al., 1999).
To measure the importance of publicly funded mental health services in the state,
the percent of the mental health specialty expenditures (primarily for clinics and
hospitals) accounted for by public facilities is computed (PCTPUBEXP) from the 1994
Inventory of Mental Health Organizations Survey data (Substance Abuse and Mental
Health Services Administration, 1995).13 Since no state level measure of price for mental
health treatment is available, the 1996 local costs to Medicare (AAPCC) for health care

13

The public facilities included state, regional, county, and other public mental health
facilities but excluded Veterans Administration or Tribal facilities.

15

services for the elderly are used. This measure reflects the price of health care services as
well as the average level of use of these services by Medicare beneficiaries.
State laws relating to 1) mental health benefits parity, 2) substance abuse
treatment and mental health treatment coverage mandates, and 3) premium taxes are
obtained from several sources. For each of the three types of laws, two variables are
included in the analysis: a 0 -1 dummy variable for firms located in states with the law in
effect in 1995 or earlier, and an interaction dummy which equaled one if the firm had less
than 1000 employees and the firm was located in a state with the specific benefit law in
effect. (The interacted variables are labeled with an "_EMP" extension (MAN_EMP,
PAR_EMP, and PREM_EMP).) Firm size is included in the interaction variables since
state insurance laws are not applicable to firms who self-insure. Our data contain no
information on the insured versus self-insured status of the health plan; thus we use firm
size as a proxy measure for self-insurance.14 To determine if the firm is located in a state
that had a mental health parity law in effect in 1995 (PARITY), information is obtained
from the National Institutes of Mental Health Parity Report (National Institutes of Mental
Health, 1998). For this analysis, only states with a full parity law are coded as having
parity. Information on states mandating coverage of mental health, alcohol abuse
treatment, and/or drug abuse treatment benefits were obtained from the National
Conference of State Legislators Health Tracking service (www.ncsl.org) as well as a
recent General Accounting Office report (U.S. GAO, 2000). (Laws mandating only the
14

Uccello (1996) finds that for firms with 1000 or more employees, 75 percent are selfinsured; for firms with 500 to 999 employees, 46 percent are self-insured; for firms with
250 to 499 employees, 49 percent are self-insured; for firms with 100 to 249 employees,
27 percent are self insured and for firms with less than 100 employees approximately 10
percent are self-insured.

16

offer of optional coverage are not considered.) If the firm was in a state that mandated all
three benefits (mental health, alcohol abuse, and drug abuse treatment) then the mandate
(MANDATE) variable is coded as one. State health insurance premium taxes vary with
the type of insurance product (HMO, Blue Cross and Blue Shield, or other private
insurance). The information on state health insurance premium taxes is derived from a
U.S. General Accounting Office Report (U.S. GAO, 1996). For our premium tax measure, we

use the maximum tax rate for any health insurance product within the state (PREMTAX).
IV.

Estimation Methods

Since our dependent variables have upper and lower limits (of no coverage and
full coverage), we use a two-limit Tobit regression approach. Results are reported for the
full model; to assess the stability of our strongest results to inclusion or exclusion of
explanatory variables with non-significant coefficients, we also report results obtained
when insignificant variables are selectivity removed in a backward selection process with
an exclusion criterion of p > 0.3. 15
Since our total compensation constraint measure is based on firm-specific data
and uses our dependent variable (MHCOV) as one of the elements in its construction, it is
reasonable to consider the possibility that the coefficient for this variable is subject to
simultaneity bias.16 Accordingly, we re-estimate our full models using Amemiya’s

15

In addition, we replicated our Tobit results using the GLM approach suggested by
Mullahy (2003) and by Papke and Wooldridge (1996). We also estimated linear OLS
models. Findings are virtually identical to those reported here.
16

In relative terms, however, MHCOV accounts for only 0.003 percent of TOT_COMP
since mental health spending is only about 4 percent of total health spending.

17

Generalized Least-Squares method for simultaneous equation Tobit models (Amemiya,
1979; Newey, 1987) and include two additional variables as instruments. These are the
population density in the county where the employer is located or headquartered
(DENSITY) and a dummy variable for firms that experience a layoff that changed the
number of employees by more than 15 percent in the five years preceding the survey
(ANYLAYOFF).17
V.

Results

Results of regressions on the overall (outpatient plus inpatient) generosity
measure (MHCOV) are reported in Table 5. Columns 1 through 4 present the results
with the occupation group variables included. Since we presume that these variables are
strongly correlated with our market compensation constraint variable (TOTCOMP), we
estimate our models both with and without these variables. Results obtained when they
are excluded are shown in Columns 5 through 8. As a group, variables relating to
employee characteristics are found to exert a strong influence on the generosity of mental
health benefits. Percent female is a strong positive predictor of generosity and the
industry-level risk-factor variable (HEAVYALC) also has a significantly positive
coefficient. The fraction of total employees who are salaried is a positive predictor of
generosity up to approximately 68 percent, beyond which further increases in percent
salaried reduce generosity. If salaried workers generally have higher levels of education,
we might expect a positive relationship of PCTSAL to generosity throughout the 0 to 100
percent range based on the empirical literature on demand for mental health services
17

Analogous linear IV models were also estimated since the numbers of limit dependent
variable observations in our data were small. Here again the results were essentially the
same as for the Tobit models.

18

(Newhouse JP, 1993). The reasons for our finding of a more pronounced downturn at
higher levels of PCTSAL are unclear.18 Results for the variables describing the
occupational mix of employees are not quite as strong, but there is some support for the
expectation that workers in white-collar jobs (OCCWC) and skilled blue-collar jobs
(OCCBL) have a stronger demand for generous mental health coverage.
Results for the firm size dummies indicate a positive effect on generosity as the
employee pool increases from under 500 to over 500 employees and from under 2000 to
over 2000 employees; a positive effect over the range from 500 to 2000 is not observed.
The presence of unions per se does not appear to affect generosity while the per capita
HMO enrollment rate in the state is a strongly negative predictor of generosity.
A number of the variables typically found in economic models of insurance
demand do not have significant coefficients in our regressions. These include the
marginal tax rate (MTR), the premium tax rate (PREMTAX), and our proxy for the price
per unit of generosity (AAPCC). The tightness of the local labor market, as measured by
UNEMP, is also not significant. The market compensation variable (TOT_COMP) is
weakly positive; since some previous studies (e.g., Wells et al., 1986; Taube et al. 1986)
have reported positive relationships between income and mental health utilization or
expenditures, we suspect that the weakness of our result may be at least partly due to
measurement errors in this variable.
Finally, several results for variables relating to public policies are of interest. The
strongly negative coefficients for PCTPUBEXP indicate a crowding out of private
18

One might speculate that the strength of adverse selection also is stronger for salaried
employees and that this tends to cause a decline in average generosity of coverage as the
percent of salaried workers increases, offsetting other positive effects.

19

coverage by public spending. The magnitude of this effect is fairly small however; a 10
percent increase in PCTPUBEXP predicts a reduction of about 1 percent in mental health
coverage. State legislation of benefit mandates does not show any effect on coverage but
we do observe a large and strongly positive effect of parity laws on coverage generosity
for firms with less than 1,000 employees. A reasonable interpretation of this result is that
state parity laws have diminished problems with adverse selection by excluding plans
with minimal mental health coverage from the underwritten portion of the market. Selfinsured firms, which are typically larger, are not affected directly by these parity laws and
our results suggest that there are minimal spill-over indirect effects on their coverage
decisions.
Analogous regression results for outpatient coverage generosity (MHOPCOV) are
reported in Table 6. For the most part, these results closely parallel the findings for total
mental health coverage. Evidence for the crowd-out effect of public expenditures and for
the impact of parity on smaller firms is slightly stronger.
In the regression results for inpatient coverage generosity (MHIPCOV) in Table
7, we find that a smaller number of our explanatory variables are significant. Firm size
effects do not occur above 500 employees. AAPCC has a strongly positive coefficient but
this may be primarily due to inter-area variations in utilization (rather than prices) since
areas where general hospitalization use is high may also display greater hospitalization
use for mental health treatments. The positive effect of PCTSAL does not diminish at
higher values.19 Apart from the industry-level risk factor (HEAVYALC), employee
19

If inpatient coverage is less affected by adverse selection, this finding would be
consistent with our earlier speculation (in Note 18).

20

characteristics do not appear to exert a strong influence on observed demand for inpatient
coverage. Results for our policy variables are also rather different than in Tables 5 and 6.
Coverage mandates appear to have a negative effect for all firms regardless of size and
parity laws have a positive effect for all firms. Public-sector spending does not appear to
crowd out private coverage for inpatient treatment. Finally, the results for UNEMP do
show some evidence of a negative relationship between labor-market slack and inpatient
coverage.
Instrumental variable results with total compensation treated as endogenous are
reported in Appendix Tables 1-3. The IV estimates are generally quite close to the simple
Tobit results but a few differences are noteworthy. First, the positive effect of
TOT_COMP on insurance demand is somewhat stronger in the IV results, particularly in
the total and outpatient generosity regressions when other non-significant variables are
deleted from the models.20 These coefficient estimates suggest a coverage demand
elasticity, evaluated at mean values, of approximately 0.15. Second, the parity effect for
smaller firms is somewhat weaker in the IV models when all explanatory variables are
included; exclusion of non-significant explanatory variables yields results that are more
similar to the simple Tobit estimates. Finally, we test for overidentification by reestimating our models as standard linear IV regressions and computing Basmann’s
(1960) test statistic. We generally fail to reject our null hypothesis with p-values ranging
from 0.166 to 0.387. The only exception is the inpatient coverage regressions with the
occupational variables excluded (Columns 5 and 6).

20

Note that in the IV regressions with non-significant variables deleted, these variables
were retained as instruments.

21

VI.

Discussion

The demand for mental health coverage under employer-sponsored health
insurance is strongly driven by employee characteristics. Our results show a strong
positive demand effect for the firm-level percent of workers who are female and percent
of salaried workers, and the industry-level percent of employees with heavy alcohol
consumption. Our results are similar to Bundorf’s (2002) small-firm results in that she
finds a positive effect for the variation in worker characteristics (measured through a
health risk variable that includes demographic information) on choice of plan and plan
generosity. Our gender result also accords with the finding of Long and Scott (1982) that
the percent of total employment that is female has a significantly positive effect on the
percent of compensation received as health insurance.
As in Bundorf’s (2002) small-firm results, we also find some support for the
hypothesis that the income or total compensation effect is positive. Our results are not,
however, very strong. Future research should further examine the effects of area
compensation on health plan generosity.
We find other economic factors, such as labor market tightness, premium taxes
and marginal income tax rates, to be weak predictors of mental health coverage
generosity. These variables have had mixed effects in previous studies. Gruber and
Lettau (2004) find significant marginal tax effects on health insurance offering, but their
results are also driven by smaller establishment data (<100 employees). Similarly,
Leibowitz and Chernew (1992) find tax rates significantly associated with firms offering
health insurance but only for firms with less than 50 employees.

22

State benefit mandates do not appear to lower the fraction of total and outpatient
mental health expenditures covered but are negative predictors of the fraction of inpatient
mental health expenditures covered. On the other hand, state mental health parity laws
significantly increase the fraction of mental health expenditures covered for smaller
firms. This supports the concept that the parity laws may lower the potential adverse
selection effects. This could lower the marginal benefit costs of more generous coverage.
Other direct evidence on this finding is limited; Bao and Sturm (2004) found little effect
of parity on employee’s perceived quality of health insurance coverage, perceived access
or use of specialty services. To the extent that parity simultaneously increases coverage
generosity and the use of utilization management mechanisms, the two findings could be
consistent.
Finally, the lower coverage of mental health (total and outpatient) expenditures
for firms located in states where the public facilities account for a higher percentage of
the total mental health specialty expenditures supports the expectation of crowding out of
private benefits by public services. This is consistent with a recent finding of crowd-out
effects for public hospital facilities on individual’s private insurance coverage status
reported by Rask and Rask (2000). Other recent crowd-out estimates of public insurance
programs (such as Medicaid) on employer offers of health insurance have reported
similar results. Marquis and Long (2003) find a substitution between the employer offer
of health insurance and pubic coverage of children during the Medicaid expansions.
Shore-Shepard et al. (2000) find no effect of the expansion on employer offers of
insurance, but they did find a significant decline in coverage generosity measured as

23

offering family coverage and employees’ share of premiums (both single and family
coverage).
While we believe that a strength of this study is in its bringing together of
employer-level data on mental health benefit offerings and data on employee
characteristics, the reader should note several important limitations in these data. First,
the cross-sectional nature of the data suggests the need for caution in drawing causal
inferences about policy variables. In particular, it is possible that omitted state-specific
population characteristics which influence the adoption of mandate and parity laws, or
the provision of publicly funded mental health services, may also be related to
employees’ preferences for insurance coverage. Panel data are clearly needed to control
for these omitted state characteristics and to provide more definitive estimates of impacts
for these factors.
Second, the generalizability of our results to a broader universe of firms may be
problematic. Since only 17 percent of surveyed firms responded to our detailed
questionnaire, there is clearly some potential for response bias, though our tests have
failed to detect it. (See Salkever et al., 2000 and 2003; additional information is available
from the authors.) A more serious concern arises from the fact that our sample of firms
was drawn from a list of firm's that offer employees long-term disability insurance
coverage. These firms are presumably larger and offer a richer fringe benefit package
than a representative sample of all U.S. firms. Comparing our firms to establishments
who cover long-term disability insurance from the 1993 National Employer Health
Insurance Survey finds a similar geographic distribution and similar firm size.

24

One other data deficiency, which of course is common to most studies, is gaps in
available data on explanatory variables. Given the focus of this analysis, it would clearly
be desirable to have more information on employee characteristics such as education that
could be expected to influence demand for coverage. Our area total compensation
variable is also incomplete; important parts of the compensation package such as shortterm and long-term disability insurance, are not valued due to the lack of data while
national averages (rather than firm-specific data) are used in several parts of our method
for constructing this variable.

VII.

Conclusions and Future Directions

ThIs study provides some additional empirical support for the long-standing
proposition in the economic literature that demand for employer-provided health
insurance is derived from the preferences and characteristics of the covered employees.
While the previous empirical support for this proposition has come from results for small
firms, our results pertain primarily to medium-size and larger firms. Of course, the
support we provide is somewhat qualified in that some of our employee characteristics
variables are not significant predictors or displayed unexpected patterns of influence (as
in the case of the percent of workers who are salaried). Further testing of this general
proposition is certainly warranted, perhaps including a more detailed examination of the
differences between small and large firm results reported in previous studies.
One could also view the consistency of our results with earlier studies as
supporting the view that demand for mental health coverage generally responds to the

25

same incentives and factors as demand for general health coverage. We do, however,
find that some policy interventions directed at enhancing access to mental health care
(specifically public provision and parity legislation) do impact on coverage decisions. As
noted above, further testing of these policy impacts with panel data sets is clearly needed.
The comparison of the simple conceptual model that we use to motivate our
empirical research with the compensation-cost-minimizing models described in previous
studies also raises some interesting questions for future investigation. While the latter
model focuses on employee preferences and utility, the recent literatures on the cost of
mental disorders in the workplace to employers (Goetzel et al. 2003; Goldberg and
Steury, 2001; Goetzel et al. 1998; Kessler and Frank, 1997) and the effectiveness of
interventions to prevent or treat these disorders (Goetzel et al. 2002); implies that the
employers may also have a direct interest in the mental health coverage decision.21 If
empirical indicators that may relate to employer costs can be developed (e.g., amount of
firm-specific human capital, the prevalence of team production methods), their inclusion
in models of coverage demand would provide an empirical test of the view that both
employers and employees have distinct stakes in this decision.
Finally, extension of this research with more recent data should expand its scope
by including information about drug coverage. Pharmacotherapies are now a critical
element in the treatment of mental disorders, and studies of insurance coverage for the
costs of treating these disorders must recognize this fact.

21

A similar point about employer benefits from employee health coverage has been
noted, in a somewhat different context, by Dey and Flinn (2005).

26

References:
Amemiya, T. 1979. The Estimation of Simultaneous Equation Tobit Models.
International Economic Review. 20(1):169-181.
Advisory Council on Intergovernmental Relations (ACIR). 1995. Significant Features of
Fiscal Federalism, Volume 1. Budget Process and Tax Systems. (September, 1995 M197).
Bao Y and Sturm R. 2004. The Effects of State Mental Health Parity Legislation on
Perceived Quality of Insurance Coverage, Perceived Access to Care, and Use of Mental
Health Specialty Care. Health Services Research, in press.
Barry CL, Gabel JR, Frank RG, Hawkins S, Whitmore HH, Pickreign, JD. 2003. Design
of Mental Health Benefits: Still Unequal After All These Years. Health Affairs.
22(5):127-137,
Basmann R.L., 1960. On Finite Sample Distributions of Generalized Classical Linear
Identifiability Test Statistics. Journal of the American Statistical Association 55(292):
650-59.
Bundorf MK, 2002. Employee Demand for Health Insurance and Employer Health Plan
Choices. Journal of Health Economics. 21:65-88.
Denaus-Walt C, Procter BD, Mills, RC. 2003. U.S. Census Bureau. Income, Poverty,
and Health Insurance Coverage in the U.S., 2003. Current Population Reports p60-226.
U.S. Government Printing Office. Washington, DC. 2004
Dey MS and Flinn CJ. 2005. An Equilibrium Model of Health Insurance Provision and
Wage Determination. Econometrica 73(2):571-627.
Dowd BE. and Feldman R. 1987. Voluntary Reduction in Health Insurance:
Theoretical Analysis. Eastern Economic Journal. 13:3; 215-2. (July-September).

A

Freeman RB. and Kleiner MM. 2000. Who Benefits Most from Employee Involvement:
Firms or Workers? In NBER/Sloan Project Report: Industrial Technology and
Productivity: Incorporating Learning from Plant Visits and Interviews into Economic
Research. Pages 7-13. Presented at the American Economic Association Meeting,
January 2000.
Gabel JR, Long SH and Marquis MS. 2002. Employer-sponsored Insurance: How
Much Financial Protection Does it Provide? Medical Care Research and Review.
59(4):440-454. (December).
Goetzel RZ, Anderson DR, Whitmer WR, Ozminkowski RJ, Dunn RL, Wasserman JL
HERO Research Committee. 1998. The Relationship between Modifiable Health Risks

27

and Health Care Expenditures: An Analysis of the Multi-Employer HERO Health Risk
and Cost Database. Journal of Occupational and Environmental Health. 40(10):843854.
Goetzel RZ, Hawikins K, Ozminkowski R, Wang S. 2003. The Health and Productivity
Cost Burden of the “Top 10” Physical and Mental Health Conditions Affecting Six Large
U.S. Employers in 1999. Journal of Occupational and Environmental Medicine.
45(1):5-14.
Goetzel RZ, Ozmnikowski RJ, Sederer LI, Mark TL. 2002. The Business Case for
Quality Mental Health Services: Why Employers Should Care About the Mental Health
and Well-Being of Their Employees. Journal of Occupational and Environmental
Medicine. 44(4):320-330.
Goldberg RJ and Steury S. 2001. Depression in the Workplace: Costs and Barriers to
Treatment. Psychiatric Services. 52(12):1639-1643.
Goldman W, McCulloch J. and R. Sturm. 1998. Costs and Use of Mental Health
Services Before and After Managed Care. Health Affairs. 17(2): 40-52. March/April.
Goldstein GS and MV Pauly. 1976. Group Health Insurance as a Local Public Good. In
Rosett, RN. The Role of Health Insurance in the Health Services Sector. National
Bureau of Economic Research. NY. 1976. pp. 73 - 113.
Gruber J and Lettau M. 2004. How Elastic is the Firm’s Demand for Health Insurance?
The Journal of Public Economics. 88:1273-1293.
Hoffman JP, Larison C, Sanderson A. 1997. An Analysis of Worker Drug Use and
Workplace Policies and Programs. Office of Applied Studies. Substance Abuse and
Mental Health Services Administration. Department of Health and Human Services.
Jensen GA. and JR. Gabel. 1992. State Mandated Benefits and the Small Firm’s
Decision to Offer Health Insurance. Journal of Regulatory Economics. 4:372-404
(1992).
Jensen GA. and MA Morrisey. 1999. Small Group Reform and Insurance Provision by
Small Firms, 1989-1995. Inquiry. 36:176-187 (Summer 1999).
Jensen GA, Rost K, Burton RP et al. 1998. Mental Health Insurance in the 1990s: Are
Employers Offering less to More? Health Affairs. 17(3):201-208.
Kessler R and Frank R. 1997. The Impact of Psychiatric Disorders on Work Loss Days.
Psychological Medicine. 27:861-873.
Leibowitz A. and M. Chernew. 1992. The Firm's Demand for Health Insurance. Health
Benefits and the Workforce. Washington DC: USGPO, 1992.

28

Leslie D. and Rosenheck R. 1998. Shifting from Inpatient to Outpatient Care? Mental
Health Utilization and Costs in a Privately Insured Population. Unpublished paper.
Connecticut-Massachusetts VA Mental Illness Research, Education and Clinical Center.
Long JE and FA Scott. 1982. The Income Tax and Nonwage Compensation. The
Review of Economics and Statistics. 64;211-219.
Marquis S and Long S. 2003. Public Insurance Expansions and Crowd Out of Private
Coverage. Medical Care. 41(3):344-356.
McCulloch J, Ozminkowski RJ, Cuffel B, Dunn R, Goldman W, Kelleher D, Comporato
A. 2001. Analysis of Managed Psychiatric Disability Program. Journal of Occupational
and Environmental Medicine. 43(2):101-109
McKusick DR, Mark TL, King EC, Coffey RM, and Genuardi J. 2002. Trends in Mental
Health Insurance Benefits and Out-of-Pocket Spending. Journal of Mental Health Policy
and Economics 5:71-78.
Mullahy J. 2003. Statistical Models for Health-related Quality of Life and other Bounded
Health Outcome Measures. Presentation at the Medical University of South Carolina,
Center for Health Economics and Policy, May 1.
National Institute of Mental Health. 1998 Parity in Financing Mental Health Services:
Managed Care Effects on Cost, Quality and Access. An Interim Report to Congress by
the National Advisory Mental Health Council.
http://www.nimh.nih.gov/publist/984322.htm
Newey WK. 1987. Efficient Estimation of Limited Dependent Variable Models with
Endogenous Explanatory Variables. Journal of Econometrics. 36:231-250.
Newhouse JP and The Insurance Experiment Group. 1993. Free for All? Lessons from
the RAND Health Insurance Experiment. Harvard University Press. Cambridge, MA
Papke LE and Wooldridge JM. 1996. Econometric Methods for Fractional Response
Variables with Application to 410(K) Plan Participation Rates. Journal of Applied
Econometrics. 11:619-632.
Rask KN and Rask KJ. 2000. Public Insurance Substituting For Private Insurance: New
Evidence Regarding Public Hospitals, Uncompensated Care Funds, and Medicaid.
Journal of Health Economics 19(1):1-31.
Rea Jr. SA. 1981. Workmen's Compensation and Occupational Safety under Imperfect
Information. American Economic Review. 71(1):80-93. (March).

29

Rosenheck R, Druss B, Stolar M, Leslie D, and Sledge W. 1999. Effect of Declining
Mental Health Service Use on Employees of a Large Corporation. Health Affairs
18(3):192-203.
Salkever DS, Shinogle JA, and H. Goldman. 1999. Mental Health Benefit Limits and
Cost Sharing Under Managed Care: A National Survey of Employers. Psychiatric
Services. 50(12):1631-1633.
Salkever DS, Goldman H, Purushothaman M, and Shinogle J. 2000. Disability
Management, Employee Health and Fringe Benefits, and Long-Term-Disability Claims
for Mental Disorders: An Empirical Exploration. Milbank Quarterly. 78(1):79-114.
Salkever DS, Goldman H, and Shinogle J. 2003. Return to Work and Claim Duration for
Workers with Long-Term Mental Disabilities: Impacts of Mental Health Coverage,
Fringe Benefits, and Disability Management. Mental Health Services Research 5(3):173186.
Salkever D. and Shinogle J. 2000. Empirical Evidence on the Demand for Carve-Outs in
Employment Group Mental Health Coverage. Journal of Mental Health Policy and
Economics, 3:83-95.
Sheils J and Haught R. 2004. The Cost of Tax Exempt Health Benefits in 2004. Health
Affairs. W4-106. www.healthaffairs.org.
Shinogle, JA. 2001. Firms’ Demand for Mental Health and Substance Abuse Benefits.
Doctoral dissertation, The Johns Hopkins University.
Shore-Sheppard L., Buchmueller TC, and Jensen G. 2000. Medicaid and Crowding Out:
A Re-examination Using Firm Level Data. Journal of Health Economics. 19:61-91.
Strunk BC and Ginsberg PB. 2003 Tracking Health Care Costs: Trends Stabilize But
Remain High in 2002. Health Affairs. 22(4):W266-W274. July-August.
Sturm, R. 1997. How Expensive is Unlimited Mental Health Care Coverage Under
Managed Care? RAND Working Paper No. 107. January.
Taube CA, Kessler LG, Burns BJ. 1986. Estimating the Probability and Level of
Ambulatory Mental Health Service Use. Health Services Research. 21(2 Pt 2):321-340.
Uccello C. 1996. Firm’s Health Insurance Decisions: The Relative Effects of Firm
Characteristics and State Insurance Regulations. The Urban Institute. (July).
U.S. General Accounting Office. 2000. Mental Health Parity Act: Despite New Federal
Standards, Mental Health Benefits Remain Limited. Report to Chairman, Committee on
Health Education, Labor and Pensions, U.S. Senate. GAO/HEHS-00-95. (May).

30

U.S. General Accounting Office. 1996. Health Insurance Regulation: Varying State
Requirements Affect Cost of Insurance. Report to Senator James M. Jeffords.
GAO/HEHS-95-161. (August).
U.S. Public Health Services, Office of the Surgeon General. 1999. Report on Mental
Health.
U.S. Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration, 1995, Inventory of
Mental Health Organizations Data.
Wells KB, Manning WG Duan N, Newhouse JP, Ware JE Jr. 1986. Sociodemographic
Factors and the Use of Outpatient Mental Health Services. Medical Care. 24(1):75-85

31

Table 1: Characteristics of Employers in the Study Sample (N=250)
Region
Percent
Firm Characteristics
East North Central
24.80% Percent with union employees
East South Central
2.40%
Total employees, mean
Middle Atlantic
17.60%
Total employees, median
Mountain
4.80%
Benefits Characteristics
New England
4.00%
Percent of firms that offer
retirement benefits
Pacific
12.00%
Total leave, mean days
South Atlantic
17.20%
% of health insurance
premium employer pays
West North Central
8.40%
% of firms that pay entire
health insurance premium
West South Central
8.80% Employee Characteristics
% of workforce that is
Industry
salaried
Finance, Insurance, Real Estate
14.40% % with any union employees
Manufacturing
24.80%
% workforce in unions for
firms with union employees
Services
47.20%
Retail/Wholesale Trade
5.60%
Other
8.00%

Table 2: Dependent Variables
Dependent Definition
Variable
MHCOV
% simulated total mental health
expenditures covered
MHOPCOV % simulated outpatient mental
health expenditures covered
MHIPCOV % simulated inpatient mental
health expenditures covered

Percent
26.00%
1776
773
89.60%
21.5
81.90%
23.60%

53.70%
26.0%
43.4%

Mean

Std.
Median # of 0.0 # of 1.0
Dev.
cases
cases
62.01 % 0.1353 61.63 %
2
1
2

1

60.92 % 0.2167 58.58 %

2

15

32

62.11 % 0.1411 61.95 %

Table 3: Explanatory Variable Names, Definitions and Sources
Variable
Definition
Source
PCTSAL
Percent of salaried workers
Survey
SQPCTSAL
Percent of salaried workers – squared
Survey
MISS_SAL
=1 if percent salaried unknown
Survey
HEAVYALC Percent of employees with heavy alcohol consumption in SAMHSA
the firm's industry
Report
EMP 2, EMP3, Dummies for > = 500, > = 1000, >=2000 total employees Survey
EMP4
respectively
UNION
= 1 if firm has union employees
Survey
HMO
HMO enrollment per capita by state, 1995
Area
Resource File
MANDATE
= 1 if firm located in a state with alcohol abuse, drug abuse GAO Reports
and mental health treatment coverage mandates in 1995
MAND_EMP = 1 if MANDATE=1 and EMP3 = 0 (< 1000 employees) GAO Reports
PARITY
= 1 if firm located in a state with mental health parity law GAO Reports
in 1995
PAR_EMP
= 1 if PARITY =1 and EMP3 = 0
GAO Reports
UNEMP
State unemployment rate, 1995
BLS website
MTR
Marginal tax rate, 1994
ACIR Report
MULT
Firm has employees in four or more states
Survey
PCTPUBEXP Percent of specialty mental health expenditures in the state IMHO Survey
that are publicly funded
PREMTAX
Maximum state premium tax
GAO Reports
PREM_EMP = Maximum state premium tax if EMP <1000
GAO Reports
TOT_COMP Total compensation per employee (median salary + cost of Admin. Data,
health insurance plus cost of retirement benefits)
BLS, CPS
FEMALE
Percent of LTD covered workers who are female
Admin. Data
AGE < =35
Percent of LTD covered workers who are age 35 or less
Admin. Data
AGE > 49
Percent of LTD covered workers who are age 50 or greater Admin. Data
OCCWC
Percent of LTD covered workers who are white-collar
Admin. Data
OCCBL
Percent of LTD covered workers who are skilled blueAdmin. Data
collar
OCCU
Percent of LTD covered workers who are unskilled
Admin. Data
AAPCC
Average Adjusted Per Capita Costs for Medicare elderly HCFA
by county in 1996
Website

33

Table 4: Explanatory Variable Descriptive Statistics
Variable
Mean
Std. Dev
Variable
PCTSAL
0.4856
0.3318 MTR
SQPCTSAL
0.3454
0.3602 MULT
MISS_SAL
0.0960
0.2952 PCTPUBEXP
HEAVYALC
5.8928
2.8665 PREMTAX
EMP2 (>=500)
0.716
0.4518 PREM_EMP
EMP3 (>=1000)
0.416
0.4939 TOT_COMP
EMP4 (>=2000)
0.256
0.4373 FEMALE
UNION
0.2600
0.4395 AGE <=35
HMO
0.2021
0.1009 AGE > 49
MANDATE
0.1240
0.3302 OCCWC
MAND_EMP
0.0720
0.2590 OCCBL
PARITY
0.0800
0.2718 OCCU
PAR_EMP
0.0440
0.2055 AAPCC
UNEMP
5.5244
1.1927

34

Mean
Std. Dev
0.2006
0.0284
0.3880
0.4883
0.1933
0.1728
0.9480
0.2225
0.5560
0.4979
$32,976
$12,297
0.5193
0.2088
0.3586
0.1312
0.1840
0.0860
0.8116
0.2022
0.0603
0.1142
0.0443
0.0684
$392.74
$75.59

Table 5: Tobit Regression results for Total Mental Health Coverage (MHCOV)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
Coeff.
P>|t|
Coeff.
P>|t|
Coeff.
P>|t|
Coeff.
PCTSAL
0.372
0.010
0.346
0.013
0.333
0.017
0.336
SQPCTSAL
-0.275
0.021
-0.246
0.034
-0.247
0.034
-0.247
MISS_SAL
0.122
0.006
0.125
0.004
0.114
0.008
0.116
EMP2
0.031
0.147
0.034
0.100
0.035
0.092
0.037
EMP3
-0.012
0.815
-0.008
0.880
EMP4
0.042
0.102
0.044
0.055
0.040
0.115
0.041
HEAVYALC
0.007
0.035
0.007
0.021
0.007
0.037
0.007
UNION
-0.022
0.273
-0.021
0.283
-0.021
HMO
-0.208
0.055
-0.254
0.003
-0.207
0.057
-0.207
MANDATE
0.029
0.555
0.025
0.610
MAND_EMP
-0.019
0.755
-0.016
0.785
PARITY
0.023
0.690
0.026
0.643
PAR_EMP
0.136
0.063
0.172
0.000
0.133
0.070
0.154
MTR
-0.340
0.301
-0.300
0.360
PCTPUBEXP
-0.137
0.009
-0.111
0.020
-0.130
0.013
-0.111
PREMTAX
0.006
0.759
0.003
0.859
PREM_EMP
0.010
0.693
0.017
0.114
0.015
0.561
0.018
FEMALE
0.128
0.017
0.123
0.009
0.169
0.000
0.173
AGE < =35
0.041
0.704
0.042
0.691
AGE > 49
0.087
0.585
0.085
0.592
AAPCC
1.81E-04
0.136 1.41E-04
0.201 1.84E-04
0.132 1.87E-04
TOT_COMP 8.27E-07
0.296
1.07E-06
0.146 9.85E-07
MULT
-0.017
0.357
-0.020
0.262
-0.016
0.376
-0.019
UNEMP
-0.007
0.433
-0.008
0.361
-0.010
OCCWC
0.089
0.287
0.103
0.099
OCCBL
0.189
0.102
0.198
0.076
OCCU
0.034
0.844
CONSTANT
0.363
0.002
0.353
0.000
0.420
0.000
0.432
Note: P = 0.000 signifies a p-value <0.0005.

35

(8)
P>|t|
0.014
0.033
0.006
0.070
0.075
0.032
0.286
0.024

0.000
0.020
0.098
0.000
0.121
0.174
0.294
0.224

0.000

Table 6: Tobit Regression Results for Outpatient Mental Health Coverage (MHOPCOV)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
Coeff.
P>|t|
Coeff.
P>|t|
Coeff.
P>|t|
Coeff.
P>|t|
PCTSAL
0.397
0.008
0.378 0.009
0.339
0.019
0.322 0.022
SQPCTSAL
-0.298
0.015
-0.286 0.018
-0.257
0.034
-0.243 0.041
MISS_SAL
0.137
0.003
0.133 0.003
0.123
0.006
0.122 0.005
EMP2
0.028
0.207
0.034
0.124
0.031 0.140
EMP3
-0.013
0.809
-0.009
0.870
EMP4
0.046
0.080
0.037 0.057
0.044
0.099
0.042 0.084
HEAVYALC
0.007
0.042
0.007 0.044
0.007
0.043
0.007 0.043
UNION
-0.025
0.225
-0.029 0.158
-0.023
0.271
-0.025 0.221
HMO
-0.222
0.049
-0.242 0.016
-0.224
0.047
-0.259 0.010
MANDATE
0.047
0.356
0.039 0.185
0.042
0.408
0.038 0.202
MAND_EMP
-0.032
0.604
-0.028
0.649
PARITY
0.003
0.955
0.010
0.873
PAR_EMP
0.159
0.036
0.159 0.001
0.154
0.043
0.160 0.001
MTR
-0.430
0.206
-0.479 0.154
-0.368
0.280
-0.403 0.230
PCTPUBEXP
-0.146
0.007
-0.134 0.008
-0.137
0.012
-0.129 0.010
PREMTAX
0.003
0.889
0.000
0.993
PREM_EMP
0.008
0.750
0.014
0.596
0.014 0.200
FEMALE
0.141
0.011
0.140 0.008
0.192
0.000
0.193 0.000
AGE < =35
0.041
0.719
0.035
0.752
AGE > 49
0.059
0.722
0.052
0.751
AAPCC
1.63E-04
0.196 1.33E-04 0.253 1.70E-04
0.181 1.30E-04 0.269
TOT_COMP 8.76E-07
0.284 8.85E-07 0.265 1.10E-06
0.154 1.00E-06 0.182
MULT
-0.015
0.420
-0.015
0.425
UNEMP
-0.006
0.553
-0.007
0.454
OCCWC
0.105
0.224
0.093 0.170
OCCBL
0.239
0.046
0.254 0.029
OCCU
0.082
0.643
CONSTANT
0.358
0.003
0.407 0.000
0.435
0.000
0.436 0.000
Note: P = 0.000 signifies a p-value <0.0005.

36

Table 7: Tobit Regression Results for Inpatient Mental Health Coverage (MHIPCOV)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
Coeff.
P>|t|
Coeff.
P>|t|
Coeff.
P>|t|
Coeff.
PCTSAL
0.101 0.682
0.096 0.042
0.268 0.271
0.112
SQPCTSAL
-0.021 0.919
-0.132 0.521
MISS_SAL
-0.043 0.567
0.368 0.033
0.007 0.920
EMP2
0.065 0.079
0.063 0.079
0.055 0.135
0.057
EMP3
0.004 0.968
0.010 0.915
EMP4
-0.010 0.816
4.68E-06 1.000
HEAVYALC
0.007 0.214
0.009 0.090
0.007 0.249
UNION
0.012 0.730
-0.007 0.832
HMO
-0.081 0.668
-0.038 0.842
MANDATE
-0.165 0.051
-0.097 0.071
-0.162 0.060
-0.102
MAND_EMP
0.118 0.257
0.103 0.330
PARITY
0.238 0.017
0.167 0.008
0.216 0.033
0.171
PAR_EMP
-0.093 0.466
-0.073 0.573
MTR
0.707 0.218
0.691 0.183
0.502 0.386
0.551
PCTPUBEXP
-0.041 0.647
-0.052 0.570
PREMTAX
0.039 0.259
0.035 0.152
0.041 0.233
0.041
PREM_EMP
0.030 0.501
0.034 0.041
0.026 0.568
0.026
FEMALE
-0.013 0.889
-0.078 0.335
-0.113
AGE < =35
0.063 0.741
0.131 0.487
AGE > 49
0.431 0.122
0.470 0.094
0.283
AAPCC
4.07E-04 0.057
4.19E-04 0.047
3.67E-04 0.091
3.92E-04
TOT_COMP
5.23E-07 0.705
1.07E-06 0.416
MULT
-0.039 0.224
-0.036 0.246
-0.034 0.308
UNEMP
-0.026 0.108
-0.028 0.050
-0.024 0.147
-0.023
OCCWC
-0.101 0.484
OCCBL
-0.345 0.086
-0.266 0.053
OCCU
-0.522 0.078
-0.330 0.142
CONSTANT
0.402 0.049
0.295 0.010
0.235 0.204
0.365

37

(8)
P>|t|
0.013
0.117

0.063
0.007
0.294
0.100
0.136
0.096
0.092
0.068
0.106

0.001

Appendix Table 1: IV Tobit Results for Total Mental Health Coverage (MHCOV)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Coeff.
P>|t|
Coeff.
P>|t|
Coeff.
P>|t|
PCTSAL
0.405 0.010
0.335 0.016
0.323 0.017
SQPCTSAL
-0.337 0.017
-0.269 0.023
-0.255 0.026
MISS_SAL
0.116 0.015
0.104 0.016
0.103 0.014
EMP2
0.020 0.430
0.028 0.205
0.032 0.131
EMP3
-0.025 0.668
-0.017 0.754
-0.032 0.195
EMP4
0.031 0.297
0.035 0.173
0.040 0.114
HEAVYALC
0.009 0.027
0.008 0.021
0.008 0.019
UNION
-0.030 0.195
-0.022 0.272
-0.023 0.239
HMO
-0.197 0.094
-0.212 0.051
-0.217 0.018
MANDATE
0.016 0.768
0.020 0.685
MAND_EMP
-0.002 0.976
-0.007 0.905
PARITY
0.025 0.690
0.031 0.595
PAR_EMP
0.108 0.192
0.117 0.119
0.148 0.000
MTR
-0.617 0.166
-0.414 0.227
PCTPUBEXP
-0.177 0.010
-0.150 0.006
-0.111 0.021
PREMTAX
0.012 0.593
0.007 0.721
PREM_EMP
-0.004 0.903
0.007 0.792
FEMALE
0.242 0.053
0.203 0.000
0.199 0.000
AGE < =35
0.191 0.307
0.091 0.427
AGE > 49
0.215 0.313
0.127 0.437
AAPCC
1.34E-04 0.335
1.68E-04 0.174
1.65E-04 0.167
TOT_COMP
5.89E-06 0.237
3.16E-06 0.087
2.54E-06 0.109
MULT
-0.018 0.363
-0.019 0.317
-0.019 0.274
UNEMP
-0.014 0.241
-0.011 0.244
-0.011 0.188
OCCWC
-0.063 0.714
OCCBL
0.055 0.761
OCCU
0.041 0.826
CONSTANT
0.310 0.024
0.368 0.001
0.427 0.000
Bassman P
0.1663
0.3867
Notes: P = 0.000 signifies a p-value <0.0005. Bassman statistic based on linear IV model.

38

Appendix Table 2: IV Tobit Results for Outpatient Mental Health Coverage
(MHOPCOV)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Coeff.
P>|t|
Coeff.
P>|t|
Coeff.
P>|t|
PCTSAL
0.430 0.008
0.340 0.018
0.315 0.025
SQPCTSAL
-0.359 0.014
-0.278 0.023
-0.260 0.029
MISS_SAL
0.131 0.007
0.114 0.011
0.106 0.015
EMP2
0.017 0.512
0.027 0.241
EMP3
-0.025 0.669
-0.017 0.757
EMP4
0.035 0.244
0.039 0.144
0.032 0.101
HEAVYALC
0.009 0.032
0.008 0.025
0.008 0.019
UNION
-0.033 0.164
-0.023 0.259
-0.029 0.143
HMO
-0.210 0.082
-0.229 0.042
-0.237 0.014
MANDATE
0.034 0.541
0.038 0.461
0.036 0.212
MAND_EMP
-0.016 0.819
-0.020 0.752
PARITY
0.005 0.935
0.013 0.822
PAR_EMP
0.132 0.122
0.139 0.071
0.154 0.001
MTR
-0.703 0.125
-0.473 0.181
-0.544 0.108
PCTPUBEXP
-0.185 0.008
-0.155 0.006
-0.137 0.007
PREMTAX
0.008 0.708
0.003 0.877
PREM_EMP
-0.005 0.869
0.007 0.804
FEMALE
0.253 0.048
0.224 0.000
0.227 0.000
AGE < =35
0.187 0.329
0.080 0.500
AGE > 49
0.184 0.399
0.091 0.589
AAPCC
1.17E-04 0.415
1.55E-04 0.225
TOT_COMP
5.86E-06 0.252
3.02E-06 0.113
3.13E-06 0.048
MULT
-0.017 0.420
-0.018 0.366
UNEMP
-0.012 0.316
-0.010 0.328
OCCWC
-0.045 0.801
OCCBL
0.106 0.566
OCCU
0.089 0.640
CONSTANT
0.306 0.030
0.387 0.001
0.455 0.000
Bassman P
0.2027
0.2696
Notes: P = 0.000 signifies a p-value <0.0005. Bassman statistic based on linear IV model.

39

Appendix Table 3: IV Tobit Results for Inpatient Mental Health Coverage
(MHIPCOV)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Coeff.
P>|t|
Coeff.
P>|t|
Coeff.
P>|t|
PCTSAL
0.142
0.590
0.270 0.266
SQPCTSAL
-0.096
0.684
-0.171 0.408
0.074 0.203
MISS_SAL
-0.050
0.526
-0.010 0.899
-0.035 0.539
EMP2
0.052
0.218
0.042 0.273
0.042 0.244
EMP3
-0.012
0.902
-0.006 0.945
EMP4
-0.024
0.632
-0.008 0.852
HEAVYALC
0.009
0.161
0.009 0.155
0.007 0.167
UNION
0.002
0.949
-0.009 0.800
HMO
-0.066
0.738
-0.047 0.805
MANDATE
-0.181
0.045
-0.170 0.047
-0.092 0.070
MAND_EMP
0.138
0.214
0.120 0.258
PARITY
0.240
0.020
0.223 0.026
0.164 0.010
PAR_EMP
-0.127
0.365
-0.104 0.430
MTR
0.369
0.620
0.296 0.621
PCTPUBEXP
-0.090
0.430
-0.087 0.362
PREMTAX
0.045
0.214
0.048 0.169
0.037 0.124
PREM_EMP
0.013
0.801
0.011 0.803
0.024 0.158
FEMALE
0.126
0.546
-0.017 0.852
AGE < =35
0.244
0.435
0.216 0.278
AGE > 49
0.587
0.100
0.544 0.056
0.307 0.071
AAPCC
3.49E-04
0.135
3.38E-04 0.119
3.29E-04 0.119
TOT_COMP
6.67E-06
0.423
4.77E-06 0.139
3.62E-06 0.105
MULT
-0.041
0.227
-0.037 0.257
UNEMP
-0.034
0.088
-0.028 0.088
-0.023 0.096
OCCWC
-0.285
0.322
OCCBL
-0.508
0.091
OCCU
-0.514
0.095
CONSTANT
0.338
0.138
0.143 0.471
0.236 0.041
Bassman P
0.1715
0.0478
Note: Bassman statistic based on linear IV model.

40

