                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         THE INFLUENCE OF UNIVERSITY RESEARCH
                               ON INDUSTRIAL INNOVATION

                                              Jinyoung Kim
                                            Sangjoon John Lee
                                             Gerald Marschke

                                          Working Paper 11447
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w11447


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       June 2005




We would like to thank Adam Jaffe and participants of the NBER conference “Academic Science and
Entrepreneurship: Dual Engines of Growth?” April 2005, Santa Fe, New Mexico. All errors are exclusively
the responsibility of the authors. Lee is grateful to the National Bureau of Economic Research for the NBER-
Sloan Science and Engineering Workforce Project Fellowship. Comments welcome at Jinyoung Kim,
Department of Economics, SUNY Buffalo, 441 Fronczak Hall, Buffalo, NY 14620, jinkim@buffalo.edu; and
Gerald Marschke, Department of Economics, SUNY Albany, BA-110, Albany, NY 12222,
marschke@albany.edu. We thank Courtney Hayden and Lei Zhang for their excellent research assistance.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by Jinyoung Kim, Sangjoon John Lee, and Gerald Marschke. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Influence of University Research on Industrial Innovation
Jinyoung Kim, Sangjoon John Lee, and Gerald Marshke
NBER Working Paper No. 11447
June 2005
JEL No. J62, O31, O33

                                            ABSTRACT

We use U.S. patent records to examine the role of research personnel as a pathway for the diffusion

of ideas from university to industry. Appearing on a patent assigned to a university is evidence that

an inventor has been exposed to university research, either directly as a university researcher or

through some form of collaboration with university researchers. Having an advanced degree is

another indicator of an inventor's exposure to university research. We find a steady increase in

industry's use of inventors with university research experience over the period 1985-97, economy

wide and in the pharmaceutical and semiconductor industries in particular. We interpret this as

evidence of growth in the influence of university research on industrial innovation. Moreover,

during this period we find that firms with large research operations in both industries, and young and

highly capitalized firms in the pharmaceutical industry, are disproportionately active in the diffusion

of ideas from the university sector. Finally, we find that the patents of firms that employ inventors

with university research experience are more likely to cite university patents as prior art, suggesting

that this experience better enables firms to tap academic research.

Jinyoung Kim                                           Gerald Marschke
Department of Economics                                Department of Economics
SUNY Buffalo                                           SUNY Albany
441 Fronczak Hall                                      BA-110
Buffalo, NY 14260                                      Albany, NY 12222
jinkim@buffalo.edu                                     marschke@albany.edu
I. Introduction

        This paper examines the influence of university research on innovation in

industry. The results of university research disseminate along a number of pathways:

through scholarly publications and the material published in universities’ patent

applications, at conferences where scholarly work is presented and where industry and

academic research personnel commingle, and via informal social networks.1 But firms

also learn about university research after employing or collaborating with researchers

who work or have worked in university laboratories. In fact, social scientists who study

innovation suspect that certain kinds of important knowledge become available to a firm

only with sustained, close interaction with researchers who possess this knowledge as

through an employment or collaborative research arrangement.

        We use U.S. patent data to study the role of research personnel as a pathway for

the diffusion of ideas from university to industry. The inventors behind the patented

invention are listed on each patent, as are the firms, government organizations, and

universities to which the patents are assigned. Using a procedure similar to one proposed

by Trajtenberg (2004), we match names on patents to construct a panel data set of

inventors that contains the patents in each year of the inventors’ careers. We are thus

able to identify for each inventor when and how often he or she is innovating for

university and industry assignees. For each patent assigned to industry we can tell

whether its inventors had previously appeared as an inventor on a patent assigned to a

university. Appearing on a patent assigned to a university is evidence that the inventor

had exposure to university research, either directly as a university researcher or through

1
 See Cohen, Nelson and Walsh (2002) on the various means by which innovating firms access know-how
developed externally. See Agrawal, Cockburn, and McHale (2003) for evidence of the importance of
social networks in promoting diffusion.


                                                1
some form of collaboration with university researchers. We also use data from the

Dissertation Abstracts to establish whether the inventor has an advanced degree

(doctorate or master’s), another measure of exposure to university research. In this paper,

we investigate how the influence of university research on industry innovation has

evolved over the last two decades, through inventors’ university inventing and research

experience. In addition, we investigate how the trend of university influence can be

attributed to various factors like the demand and the supply of university-affiliated

scientists by decomposing the change in university influence into components

representing various factors.

        We also use patent citations to infer the extent of industry access to university-

produced knowledge and how that access has changed. Patent applicants are legally

obligated to disclose any knowledge they have of previous relevant inventions. The patent

examiner may add to the application relevant citations omitted by the applicant. Thus,

through the patent citations each patent documents the “prior art” upon which the new

innovation builds, and because we know each cited patent’s assignee type, we know

whether the prior art originated in university laboratories.2 We also investigate if the

presence of university-affiliated inventors instigates firms to cite university patents and

access university research.

        Another objective of our paper is to identify factors that influence an innovating

firm’s interaction with university R&D. A focus of this analysis is the pharmaceutical

and semiconductor industries, two industries that are especially prolific generators of

innovations and patents. After combining the inventor panel data with firm information


2
 Other studies have examined citations to university patents (e.g., Jaffe and Trajtenberg, 2002), but to our
knowledge, none have looked at how the phenomenon has been evolving.


                                                     2
in these industries, we relate various firm-level characteristics with our measures of

exposure to university research to sort out the factors that influence an innovating firm’s

interaction with university research.    We also repeat the analyses conducted on the

comprehensive industry-wide data separately for the pharmaceutical and semiconductor

industries to find how the influence of university research has evolved in these two

industries.

        Our main findings are the following.       Over the period 1985-1997, we find

industry increased its employment of inventors with experience on university research

projects and with advanced university degrees. For the decade of the 1990s we also find

(1) the pharmaceutical industry made greater use of inventors with university

backgrounds than the semiconductor industry, (2) the percentage of patents assigned to

firms that involved inventors with university backgrounds increased substantially in both

industries, (3) that firms with large research enterprises in both industries and young and

highly capitalized firms in the pharmaceutical industry were disproportionately active in

the diffusion of ideas from the university sector, and (4) the patents of firms that employ

inventors with university patenting experience are more likely to cite university patents as

prior art.

        The paper is organized as follows. The next section summarizes the literature on

the various mechanisms for university technology transfer to industry, technology

spillovers, scientist collaboration and mobility, and the use of patent citations to trace

technological diffusion. Section III describes our data, focusing on the construction of

the inventor panel. Section IV describes levels and trends in university involvement in

all industries and by industry, and reports the decomposition results. This section also




                                             3
describes our empirical estimation of the determinants of firm use of university-

experienced inventors and inventors with advanced degrees, and of citations to university

patents. Section V offers concluding remarks.



II. Literature Review

           Two decades of empirical work suggests important and pervasive effects of

university research on industry R&D and innovation (e.g., Jaffe, 1989; Adams, 1990;

Mansfield, 1991, 1998; Nelson and Rosenberg, 1993; Cohen, Nelson, and Walsh, 2002).3

Mansfield (1991) roughly estimates the annual social rate of return to university research

over the years 1975 through 1978 to be 28 percent. While the diffusion of technology

from the academic to the industrial sector is thought to be important, little is known about

the transmittal mechanisms. Scholars writing in both the economics and sociology of

innovation literatures argue that new technologies are frequently difficult to transmit to

the uninitiated via spoken or written communication (see Polyani, 1958, for an early

discussion of the ‘tacitness’ of knowledge).                  Often the most efficient means of

transmission across organizational boundaries for tacit knowledge is via person-to-person

contact involving a transfer or exchange of personnel. Recent findings that technological

diffusion appears to be geographically limited (e.g., Jaffe, 1989; Jaffe, Trajtenberg, and

Henderson, 1993; Zucker, Darby, and Brewer, 1998; and Mowery and Ziedonis, 2001) is

often interpreted as evidence of the tacitness of knowledge.

           More direct evidence exists that person-to-person interaction is important for the

diffusion of technology. Cohen, Nelson, and Walsh (2002) surveyed R&D managers on

the means by which they gather and assimilate new technologies. They find that firms
3
    See Cohen, Florida, Randazzese, and Walsh (1998) for a survey of this evidence.


                                                      4
access externally-located technology partly through the hiring of and collaboration with

researchers from the outside. Moreover, they find that hiring/collaboration with outside

scientists is complementary to other means of accessing externally produced knowledge,

such as through informal communications with outsiders and more formal (such as

consulting) relationships with outsiders. Almeida and Kogut (1999) find that scientific

references that firms cite in their patent applications reflect the employment histories of

their inventors, suggesting that ideas in the semiconductor industry are spread by the

movement of key engineers among firms, especially within a geographical area.4 Zucker,

Darby, and Armstrong (2001) find evidence of a pay-off to firms that seek interactions

with outside researchers. They find a positive impact on patent productivity for biotech

firms that collaborate with university researchers on research and scholarly publications.

        We therefore anticipate that the evidence, while presently incomplete, will

eventually show that the migration of university-experienced scientific personnel to

industry is an important means of technology transfer and that it complements other

mechanisms.        Assuming this to be the case, we use measures of the industrial

employment of university-experienced researchers to track the extent to which industry is

accessing university technologies.

        We also use patent citations to track the diffusion of university innovations.

Some scholars have used citations to university and industrial patents to compare the

relative importance of innovations arising from these sectors and to examine how

changes in patent law have influenced the importance of university patents (Henderson,

Jaffe, and Trajtenberg, 1998; Sampat, Mowery, and Ziedonis, 2003). Others have looked


4
 See also the (indirect) evidence of a link between scientific mobility and technological diffusion in Kim
and Marschke (2005) and Moen (2005).


                                                    5
at the determinants of a university patent’s likelihood of being cited (Jaffe and

Trajtenberg, 2002) and the trend in citations of industry patents to university research

publications (Narin et al., 1997). To our knowledge, ours is the first study that examines

the extent to which industrial patents cite university patents.



III. Data Description

       Our data are derived from six sources: (1) Patent Bibliographic data (Patents BIB)

released by the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO) that contain bibliographic

information for U.S. utility patents issued from 1975 to 2002; (2) the ProQuest Digital

Dissertation Abstracts database which contains information on the date, field, and type of

degree for those who earned degrees in all natural science and engineering fields between

1945-2003; (3) the Compact D/SEC database since 1989 which contains firm information

taken primarily from 10-K reports filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission;

(4) the Standard & Poor’s Annual Guide to Stocks-Directory of Obsolete Securities

which include a history of firm name changes; (5) the Thomas Register, Mergent, and

Corptech data which report a firm’s founding year, and finally (6) the NBER Patent-

Citations data collected by Hall, Jaffe and Trajtenberg (2001) which contain all citations

made by patents granted in 1975-1999. To create our database from these sources, we

first match inventor names in the Patents BIB and Dissertation Abstracts databases. We

then match firms in the Compact D/SEC database to assignees in the Patent BIB database

with founding information added. Finally, we combine the two databases from the first

two steps and add information from the citation data.




                                              6
Inventor name matching

       Since the 1960’s researchers have extensively used the information contained in

patent data to investigate various issues such as technology spillovers and R&D

productivity at the industry or firm level. The information on inventors contained in

patent data, however, has not been fully utilized possibly because of the difficulty in

identifying whether two names in the inventor name field from two patents belong to the

same inventor. Using inventor’s name (last, first, and middle), address, city, state, zip

(often missing), and country at the time of grant of the patent, we attempt in this paper to

match inventor names and produce each inventor’s life-cycle productivity in patenting.

       There are various potential problems in name matching in the patent data. First,

full middle names are reported in some cases while only their initials are spelled out or

they are missing in other cases. Second, there is a risk of two inventors with the same

common names being mistakenly matched. Third, there can be a problem of name

misspelling, especially for non English names.       As an attempt to circumvent these

potential problems, we rely on other information available from the patent data such as

inventors’ addresses, citation records, and postal zip codes.       Our methodology for

inventor name matching is similar to that in Trajtenberg (2004), which is the only other

attempt for inventor name matching to our knowledge.

       To start, we treat each entry that appears in the inventor name field of every

patent in the Patents BIB data as a unique inventor. Given, let’s say, N number of names

in this name pool, we pair each name with all other names, which generates N(N-1)/2

number of unique pairs. In fact our data have 5.1 million names in total (2.05 inventors

per patent) and thus 13 trillion unique pairs. For each pair, we consider the two names as




                                             7
belonging to the same inventor if the SOUNDEX codes of their last names and their full

first names are the same, and at least one of the following three conditions is met: (1) the

full addresses for the pair of names are the same; (2) one name from the pair is an

inventor of a patent that is cited by another patent whose inventors include the other

name from the pair; or (3) the two names from the pair share the same co-inventor.

These three criteria in our name matching method are similar to the “Strong” criteria of

Trajtenberg (2004).

       The SOUNDEX is a coded index for last names (surnames) based on the way a

surname sounds rather than the way it is spelled. Surnames that sound the same, but are

spelled differently, like SMITH and SMYTH, have the same SOUNDEX code. We use

the SOUNDEX coding method to expand the list of similar last names to overcome the

potential for misspellings and inconsistent foreign name translations to English;

misspellings are common in the USPTO data as are names of non-Western European

origin (see Appendix A for the detailed SOUNDEX coding method).

       We also consider a pair of names as a match if two have the same full last and

first names, and at least one of the following two conditions is met: (1) the two have the

same zip code; or (2) they have the same full middle name.             These two criteria

correspond to the “Medium” criteria of Trajtenberg (2004).

       Given all pairs of names that are considered as matches by the preceding

procedures, we impose an additional matching criterion that a pair of names is not treated

as a match if their middle name initials are different. We then impose transitivity in the

following sense: If name A is matched to name B and name B is matched to name C,

name A is then matched to name C. We iterate this process until all possible transitivity




                                             8
matches are completed. At this point we assign the same inventor ID number for all the

names matched.5

        Trajtenberg (2004) assigns scores for each matching criteria and considers a pair

matched only if its total score from all matching criteria exceeds a threshold. We do not

use this score method in our data construction because different scores given to each

criterion and the threshold score can be quite arbitrary. Our methods also differ in that

we do not match the pair of names with the same assignee because name matching based

on this criterion can produce data with a bias in mobility among inventors. Instead we

apply the criterion that a pair of names is not treated as a match if their middle name

initials differ. From our experience with the patent data, imposing this criterion is

necessary because the SOUNDEX coding system sometimes so loosely specifies names

that apparently different last names are considered a match.

        In the end, because of these differences the number of distinct inventors identified

with our procedure is a little higher than the number of distinct inventors produced by

Trajtenberg’s method. We identified 2.3 million unique inventors (45%) out of 5.1

million names in the entire patent data while Trajtenberg (2004) found 1.6 million

distinctive inventors (37%) out of 4.3 million names. Note that our patent database is

larger because it includes additional years, 2000-2002.

        After name matching in the patent data, we match the Dissertation Abstract data

to the inventors in the patent data. Each inventor identified through the preceding



5
  Imposing transitivity after our name matching procedure, however, poses a possibility of name mismatch.
Suppose, for example, Adam E. Smith and Adam Smith are matched based on our criteria in one pair, and
the same Adam Smith and Adam J. Smith are matched in another pair. According to our transitivity
procedure, Adam E. Smith and Adam J. Smith are identified as a match although their middle name initials
are different. We thank Adam Jaffe for raising this issue. See Appendix B for the magnitude and the
correction of this problem in our data.


                                                   9
procedure may have a list of names matched to him or her (for example, John Maynard

Keynes, John M. Keynes, John Keynes) due to names linked to each other by satisfying

the criteria described above.           Since the Dissertation Abstract data contain for each

individual a full name in a string instead of separate last, first and middle name fields, we

convert all the names under each inventor ID number in the patent data to strings to

search for them within the Dissertation Abstract data.6 On rare occasions when multiple

names from the Dissertation Abstract data are matched to one ID number in the patent

data, we randomly pick one name. Out of 2.3 million unique inventors in our patent data,

3 percent (64,507) are identified as holders of advanced degrees.



Firm-assignee matching

         We choose all firms whose primary SIC code is 2834 (pharmaceutical

preparation) or 3674 (semiconductor and related devices) in the Compact D/SEC data.7

We select these two industries for our study because the firms in these industries are

active in patenting and produce homogenous products relative to other industries. By

focusing on two relatively homogenous industries, we avoid problems due to the

incomparability in utility and marketability of innovations, and in patent propensities

across industries. Note that we select only the years 1989 through 1997 for our study,

because the Compact D/SEC data before 1989 are unavailable to us and we found that




6
  In addition, we impose conditions regarding the timeframe of the inventor’s patenting history, wherein the
inventor’s last patent is no later than forty years following the dissertation date, and the first patent is no
more than twenty years before the dissertation date.
7
  Because the Compact D/SEC database contains only publicly traded firms that have at least $5 million in
assets, our sample contains firms that are on average larger and more successful than the firms in the
general population in these industries. Also, most biotech firms are not included in our pharmaceutical
industry sample because we selected only those firms under one SIC code of pharmaceutical preparation.


                                                     10
starting with application year 1998 the patent time series tailed off due to the review lag

at the USPTO.

       Because parent firms patent sometimes under their own names and at other times

under the names of their subsidiaries, merging the Patents BIB data with firm-level data

in the Compact D/SEC data is not straightforward. Mergers and acquisitions at both the

parent firm and subsidiary levels, common in these two industries during the 1990s, and

name changes further complicate linking the patent to firm-level data. (The USPTO does

not maintain a unique identifier for each patenting assignee at the parent firm level nor

does it track assignee name changes.) Thus, to use the firm-level information available in

the Compact D/SEC data, the names of parent firms and their subsidiaries and the

ownership of firms must be tracked over the entire period of the study, which is

accomplished based on the subsidiary information in the Compact D/SEC data.

       Since the Compact D/SEC data do not report old names of the firms that change

their names (in many cases, after mergers), we use the S&P data to track the history of

name changes of each assignee and link firm level information in the Compact D/SEC

data before and after a name change. Finally, we merge information on firms’ founding

years to the firm database.



Combining databases from the preceding steps

       As the final step, we link the patent inventor database from the first step to the

firm database from the second step to produce a data set on inventors and patents that

includes firm-level data (e.g., R&D expenditures, sales, and employment level) on the

patents’ assignees. Because patents are typically assigned to the firm (the assignee) that



                                            11
employs the inventors, we identify the inventors’ employers in the Patents BIB data by

patent assignees. We then add information on all citations from the NBER Patent-

Citations data collected by Hall, Jaffe and Trajtenberg (2001) where each citing patent

that was granted between 1975 and 1999 is matched to all patents cited by the patent.



IV. Results

Trends

        Figures 1A, B, and C show the annual percentage of industry-assigned patents

that list at least one inventor who had previously been named an inventor on a university-

assigned patent applied for sometime in the previous ten years (UNIV).8 Because our

data included patents granted in 1975 and later, we imposed a cut-off for the patents used

to define whether an inventor was university-experienced at the time of the industry

patent’s application. We chose to consider only those university-assigned patents on

which the inventor appeared in the ten years prior to the date of the industry patent’s

application because ten years still leaves us a long period over which to conduct our

analysis and because skills or knowledge acquired in a university setting far in the past

may not be very valuable. Figure 1A shows this measure for all patents granted to U.S.

industry assignees by application year for the years 1985 through 1997. Figures 1B and

C isolate the pharmaceutical and semiconductor industries, respectively, for the period

1989 through 1997.

        Figure 1A shows a steady increase in UNIV between 1985 and 1995, from 0.9 to

2.6 percent. UNIV then drops from 2.6 percent in 1995 to 1.9 percent in 1996 before


8
 Our university assignees include domestic universities, hospitals, research laboratories (non-government),
and non-profit organizations in the U.S.


                                                    12
recovering somewhat in 1997. This precipitous rise and fall of UNIV is puzzling—we

observe this phenomenon in the other figures discussed below—but may be related to a

change in patent law in 1995. Until 1995, successful patent applicants received a 17 year

monopoly on the use of their invention from the date the patent was granted. For

applications filed after June 8, 1995, patented applicants received a 20 year monopoly

commencing from the date of the patent application. This new law may have changed the

duration of the monopoly for many patent holders, affording longer monopoly periods for

patents that are approved quickly, and shorter periods for patents whose review procedure

is delayed, as by an appeal or an interference proceeding. In addition, the new law

provided that patents applied for prior to June 8, 1995 and issuing on or after June 8

would expire either 17 years from issuance, or 20 years from the date of original

application, whichever generated the longer monopoly period (Radack, 1995; Elman,

Wilf, and Fried, 1995).          These relatively generous terms may have for the short

transitional period made some marginal innovations worth the opportunity cost of

patenting. The figure in appendix C shows the patent applications by application year

over the period 1985 through 1997. The applications time series show a distinctive blip

in 1995 that may reflect a rush to file applications before the June 7 expiration date to

take advantage of the opportunity to lock in an extended monopoly period. Moreover,

because basic research has a longer shelf life, firms with inventions constituting basic

research may have been especially keen to obtain the longer monopoly period. Thus it

seems to us natural to see an increase in university influence in our figures during the

transition period.9


9
 Another possibility we considered was a truncation effect. Our data set may exclude some patents applied
for in the late 1990s that had not been granted by February 2002, the end date of our data. Thus, if the


                                                   13
         Figures 1B and C show the measure UNIV for firms in the pharmaceutical and

semiconductor industries, respectively, for the period 1989 through 1997. First, note in

this period in both industries an increase in the percentage of patents that name at least

one inventor who has invented for university-assigned patents. Second, note that patents

in the pharmaceutical industry were more likely than those in the semiconductor industry

to include an inventor who had university patent experience: over this period, about 6.6

percent of patents in the pharmaceutical industry included at least one inventor with

university patenting experience compared to about 1.9 percent in the semiconductor

industry. Also note that the rate of increase was greater for the semiconductor industry.

Finally, note the blip centered on 1995 in the pharmaceutical time series, which is absent

in the semiconductor time series. For the pharmaceutical industry the length of time of

the monopoly may be more important as pharmaceutical patents typically still earn

substantial revenues at the end of the monopoly period (Elman et al, 1995), suggesting

the deadline may have provoked a greater behavioral response in the pharmaceutical

industry.

         One concern is that firms may have been interacting with university-experienced

inventors in earlier years at the same rate as in later years but because universities

infrequently patented before the 1980s we do not detect it. Figure 1D reports the fraction

of inventors with university patenting experience in the last 10 years who appear on

industry patents by application year; this measure does not suffer from the

aforementioned problem. Figure 1D shows that between 1985 and 1997 the alternative


more complicated patent applications tend also to be the patent applications involving university-
experienced inventors, than our time series might trail off at the end of the period, as depicted in Figure 1A.
We tested this hypothesis by using the patent granting dates to truncate the data artificially; we tossed out
all patents that had not been granted as of (the arbitrarily chosen year) 1994. This failed to produce a blip
leading us to conclude this phenomenon is not caused by truncation.


                                                     14
measure exhibits similar dynamics, more or less rising through 1995, then falling

precipitously.

        Figures 2A, B and C show the percentage of industry patents that include at least

one inventor with an advanced degree (ADVDEG). Figure 2A shows this figure for all

patents granted to U.S. industry assignees. Figures 2B and C show the pharmaceutical

and semiconductor industries, respectively.         Figure 2A shows a steady increase in

ADVDEG from 6.9 percent in 1985 to 13.9 percent 1995, where it dips slightly in 1996,

and then begins to rise again, reaching 14.7 percent in 1997. ADVDEG averages 33

percent for the pharmaceutical industry and 19 percent for the semiconductor industry.

This indicates that both industries are especially reliant on highly-educated labor for

research as the averages in both industries are higher than the overall average in the full

data set during the same period. Figures 2B and C confirm the findings in Figures 1B

and C in that (1) both time series increase through the period, (2) the level is higher in the

pharmaceutical industry, but the rate of increase is higher for the semiconductor industry,

and (3) the time series for the pharmaceutical industry demonstrate a blip centered at

1995.

        Similar to Figure 1D, Figure 2D reports the number of inventors named in

industry patents with advanced degrees (in science and engineering awarded by U.S. and

Canadian universities within the last 20 years) by application year as a percentage of the

stock of inventors holding advanced degrees.10 We produce Figure 2D because we are

concerned that the upward trend in the percentage of patents that name inventors with

advanced degrees is only a consequence of the fact that there are more inventors with


10
  Ideally we would like the stock of degree holders who are still in the labor market. Due to data
availability, however, we use the stock of degrees awarded in the last 20 years.


                                               15
advanced degrees. The measure in Figure 2D attempts to capture how active firms are in

recruiting inventors with advanced degrees. This measure exhibits a similar pattern as the

measure in Figure 1D, rising over the period of 1985 and 1997, with a hump, albeit small,

in 1995.

       Figures 3A, B, and C show the annual percentage of industry-assigned patents

that cite as prior art a university patent applied for within the previous ten years (UCITE).

Figure 3A displays UCITE for all industries for the period 1985 through 1997. Figures

3B and C display UCITE for the pharmaceutical and semiconductor industries,

respectively. Figure 3A shows a steady increase in UCITE between 1985 and 1995, from

3.1 percent to 8.4 percent, followed by a decline through the end of the period.

Qualitatively, Figures 3B and C display similar patterns to those displayed by Figures 1B

and C and 2B and C: UCITE’s average level is higher for the pharmaceutical industry

and in both industries UCITE rises over time. In both industries, UCITE peaks in 1995,

but the drop off is more striking in the pharmaceutical industry. Figures 3B and C show

an approximately two-fold increase in the relative importance of university patents in

both industries.

       Firms may have been influenced by university research in earlier years, but

because university research was patented at lower rates industry access was not as

apparent. Thus we create a measure of the likelihood that a university patent is cited by

industry. Figure 3D shows the percentage of 10-year old and younger university patents

that are cited, by application year. Like UCITE, this new measure generally increases

from 1985 through 1995, after which it falls precipitously.




                                             16
Decomposition of university influence

       An increase in the presence of university-experienced persons among the firm’s

inventors results either from an increase in their representation in the pool of available

scientific personnel from which it (perhaps randomly) hires, or from an increase in the

firm’s propensity to hire such workers. In fact, the purpose of Figures 1D, 2D and 3D is

to show a time trend in the contribution of the latter factor. While both of these factors

mix elements of demand and supply, measuring their separate contributions is still

informative of the channels through which the changes are operating. Thus in this

section, we attempt to decompose the change in university influence into components

representing various factors, including these two.

       We decompose an increase over our entire sample period in industry patents with

university-experienced inventors in the following way.

       Ut = (Ut/It) (It/Mt) (Mt/Pt) Pt,                                               (1)

where Ut denotes the number of industry patents in year t that have at least one inventor

with university patent experience in the last 10 years, It denotes the number of inventors

of industry patents in year t with university patent experience, Mt denotes the number of

all inventors that appear in university patents in the last 10 years, and Pt denotes the

number of industry patents in year t.

       Taking the logarithm of both sides of equation (1) and taking the difference

between year s and t, we have

       logUs − logUt = [log(Us/Is) − log(Ut/It)] + [log(Is/Ms) − log(It/Mt)]   (2)

                       + [log(Ms/Ps) − log(Mt/Pt)] + [logPs − logPt].




                                             17
This equation illustrates that the change in Ut is the sum of the changes in (a) the patent

productivity of university-experienced inventors in industry (Ut/It), (b) the probability

that university patent inventors later appear in industry patents (It/Mt), (c) the average

number of university inventors available for an industry patent (Mt/Pt), and (d) the

number of industry patents (Pt). The second ratio (It/Mt) can be loosely interpreted as an

indicator of firms’ propensity to hire university-experienced inventors (shown in Figure

1D) while the third ratio (Mt/Pt) as a measure of the prevalence of university-experienced

inventors in the pool of inventive talent.11

        In a similar fashion, we can decompose an increase in industry patents with

advanced-degree holding inventors. In this case, Ut is the number of industry patents in

year t that have at least one inventor with an advanced degree, It is the number of

inventors with advanced degrees on industry patents in year t, and Mt is defined as the

stock of inventors in year t holding advanced degrees (see footnote 10).

        In decomposing an increase in industry patents that cite university patents, Ut

denotes the number of industry patents that cite university patents granted within the last

10 years, It denotes the number of unique university patents cited, and Mt denotes the

stock of 10-year old and younger university patents citable.

        Figure 4 presents the decompositions of the increase in industry patents that name

inventors with university patents in their past, that name inventors with advanced

degrees, and that cite university patents. In examining these three decompositions, one

sees that the increase in patenting during the sample period explains much of the increase

in these variables, as one would expect.                 Because we are interested ultimately in

11
  We were unable to perform the decomposition exercise separately for our two industries because the
number of inventors that appear in university patents in the pharmaceutical or semiconductor field (that is
Mt) is not available.


                                                    18
understanding better the dynamics of U/P, however, we focus the discussion on the other

explanatory factors.

       Consider first decomposition (a). An increase in M/P—the stock of inventors

with university patenting experience relative to the flow of patents—explains most of the

increase in the number of industry patents naming university experienced inventors that is

not explained by P. Note also that decomposition (c) shows that the increase in industry

patents that cite university patents is largely driven by the growth in the stock of

university assigned patents that is available to cite. Thus, both the increase in UNIV and

in UCITE appears to be driven by the growth in university patents. The increased

likelihood of an inventor with university patenting experience appearing on a patent does,

however, explain some of the growth in UNIV. Finally, the increased likelihood of an

inventor with an advanced degree appearing on an industry patent is the largest factor in

the growth of patents naming inventors with an advanced degree (decomposition b). The

size of the available group of inventors with advanced degrees per industry patent

actually fell over the sample period. In all cases of decomposition, the change in the

patent productivity term (U/I) had a minimal explanatory power in the patent increase.



Determinants of university influence

       We are interested in learning which firms access university research.             For

example, are there scale or scope economies in exploiting university research that favor

large or diversified firms?     Do young firms that are developing and using new

technologies make greater use of university research than older firms? Tables 2, 3, and 4

present the results of our estimation of the determinants of accessing university research.




                                            19
These regressions relate measures of the firm’s access to university research in year t and

firm characteristics. The dependent variables in Tables 2, 3, and 4 are the logit transform

of the fractional form of the variables defined in Figures 1, 2, and 3, that is, of UNIV,

ADVDEG, and UCITE, respectively. We should note, however, that these variables in

our regressions are defined at the firm level, not at the economy or industry level. All

models are estimated with random (firm) effects.

         The means and standard deviations of the independent and dependent variables,

along with their definitions, are described in Table 1.12 All right-hand side variables are

logged. The base specification includes a measure of the size of the research operation,

proxied by the number of inventors of patents (INVENTOR), to examine the effect of

economies of scale at the R&D enterprise level. Alternatively, we use the number of

employees (EMPLOYEE) as a measure of organizational size at the firm level. The base

specification also includes the R&D-inventor ratio (R&D/INV) and the number of

business lines in the firm (NSIC), measured by the number of secondary SIC’s identified

with the firm. We include the R&D-inventor ratio (R&D/INV) as a regressor because a

highly capitalized firm may rely on more advanced technology, which may be reflected

in the nature of its innovation, or lead the firm to use skilled labor more intensively (see

Griliches, 1969, Goldin and Katz, 1998, for evidence on capital-skill complementarity).

We include NSIC as a regressor to estimate the impact of economies of scope on how a

firm’s reliance on university-originated research.




12
  Note that the means of the patent percentages in the figures for the two industries are not equal to those
reported in Table 1 because in Table 1 we average the percentages of patents for firms in each industry
while the figures show the total number of university-influenced patents in an industry as a ratio to the total
number of patents assigned to the industry.


                                                     20
       The results for the basic specification are included in the first column of each

panel. They consistently show a positive effect of size of the R&D enterprise on the use

of inventors with university patenting experience (Table 2) and on the use of inventors

with advanced degrees (Table 3), in both industries. The size of the R&D enterprise also

increases the likelihood that a firm’s patents cited university-assigned patents. On the

other hand, the size at the firm level shows no effect on the use of university research:

EMPLOYEE has insignificant effects in all tables.           The coefficient estimate on

logR&D/INV is generally positive but insignificant in all regressions. The coefficient

estimate on log NSIC is never significant by conventional criteria of significance.

       The second column in each panel describes the results from estimations that

include two additional regressors: median experience of all inventors in a firm (MEXP)

and years elapsed since the founding year of a firm (FIRMAGE). These variables are

excluded from our base specification because we lack these data for many firms in our

sample. The coefficient estimate on log MEXP is positive and significant for both

industries for the UNIV regressions. This may partly reflect that inventors who are more

experienced are also more likely to have invented for a university assignee. We also

observe a positive but insignificant relationship between median experience and

ADVDEG or UCITE. The coefficient estimate on log FIRMAGE is negative in most

cases and is negative and significant in the pharmaceutical regressions with UNIV as the

dependent variable. That is, we find evidence that older firms in the pharmaceutical

industry employ fewer inventors with university patenting experience. The marginal

effects of the regressors in the second column are reported in Table 5.




                                            21
       The key variables in our estimation may be time trended, in which case the

estimated effect of our independent variables on our measures of university research

influence could be spurious. To test the sensitivity of our result to a time trend effect, we

introduce the time trend as an additional right-hand side variable. These results are

reported in the third column of each panel. The addition of a time trend does not

generally change the inference; where coefficient estimates are significant in the time

trend’s absence, they are significant in its presence.

       Does the presence of university-experienced scientists in the firm increase the

firm’s ability to access university research?        Or, do firms with more university-

experienced inventors produce more patents that cite university patents?            Table 6

addresses the question on the mechanisms of spillovers. The first two columns for each

industry panel show the estimates of the determinants of the firm’s citing of at least one

university patent (ANYUCITE is the binary dependent variable). The results reported are

from a random-effects probit model. The next two columns report the estimates of the

determinants of the number of the firm’s patents that cite university patents (UCITE is

the dependent variable).     The results reported are from a random-effects regression

model. The key regressors in this table are binary variables for whether a firm has at

least one university-experienced inventor (ANYUSCI) or at least one inventor with an

advanced degree (ANYPHD).

       The results in Table 6 show that firms with more university-experienced inventors

in both industries are more likely to have patents that cite university patents: ANYUSCI

has a significantly positive effect in both models. Having inventors with advanced




                                             22
degrees is not shown to lead to more citations to university patents, as ANYPHD has an

insignificant, albeit positive, effect.



V. Conclusion

        Our results suggest that economy-wide and in the pharmaceutical and

semiconductor industries individually, industry’s use of inventors with past experience

conducting university research, and of inventors with advanced degrees, has increased.

This may mean that R&D-doing firms have increased their access to university-produced

knowledge through the knowledge imbedded in inventors’ human capital. That industry

is making greater use of university-produced knowledge is also reflected in the citation

data.    Economy-wide and in the pharmaceutical and semiconductor industries

individually we observe an increase in the citing of university patents.         Using our

inventor-based measures, we find a faster increase in access to university research in the

semiconductor industry. Using the citation-based measure, we find roughly equivalent

increases. The pharmaceutical industry shows greater access to university research (by

any of our three measures) than the semiconductor industry.

        The decomposition offers additional insight into the increase in industrial patents’

naming of inventors with university patenting experience and with advanced degrees, and

industrial patents’ citing of university patents. First, the growth in university patenting

may explain most of the increase in the fraction of industry patents that name inventors

with university patenting experience and the fraction of industry patents that cite

university patents—at least at the level of the economy. The increased likelihood of an

inventor with university patenting experience appearing on a patent does, however,




                                            23
explain some of the growth of industry patents by inventors with university patenting

experience. The increase in the fraction of industry patents that name inventors with

advanced degrees appears to be almost entirely due to the likelihood of inventors with

advanced degrees appearing on industry patents (i.e., it is not due to an increase in the

stock of inventors with advanced degrees).

        In our firm-level analyses, we find that firms with large research operations are

more likely to access university research than firms with small ones. Pharmaceutical

firms with higher R&D-inventor ratios are more likely to utilize inventors on their patents

who had previous university research experience. Firms in both industries with more

experienced inventors were more likely to utilize inventors with university research

experience. Younger pharmaceutical firms were more likely to utilize inventors with

university research experience. Finally, we find evidence that employing scientists with

university research experience may better enable firms to access university-produced

knowledge. Specifically, we find that inventors with university patenting experience

increases the extent that the patents of a firm cite university patents as prior art.

        Needless to say, we recognize a number of shortcomings in our analysis that we

plan to address in future work. For example, our name matching procedure undoubtedly

is subject to error, sometimes treating different inventors as a single inventor, and other

times treating the same inventor as different inventors. These matching errors are likely

more important in the analysis of levels of involvement with university research, as

opposed to the analysis of trends. Nonetheless future work will attempt alternative

matching rules for the sensitivity of our findings.




                                              24
       An interesting question which is not investigated in this paper is how the use of

university research affects the productivity of R&D in firms.       Another interesting

question is how start-up firms utilize university research. In future work, we plan to

explore theses issues.




                                          25
Appendix A. SOUNDEX coding system
A SOUNDEX code for a surname is an upper case letter followed by 6 digits. For
example the SOUNDEX code for Kim is K500000, while that for Marschke is M620000.
The first letter is always the first letter of the surname. The rules for generating a
SOUNDEX code are:
1. Take the first letter of the surname and capitalize it.
2. Go through each of the following letters giving them numerical values from 1 to 6 if
they are found in the Scoring Letter table (1 for B, F, P, V; 2 for C, G, J, K, Q, S, X, Z; 3
for D, T; 4 for L; 5 for M, N; 6 for R; 0 for Vowels, punctuation, H, W, Y).
3. Ignore any letter if it is not a scoring character. This means that all vowels as well as
the letters h, y and w are ignored.
4. If the value of a scoring character is the same as the previous letter then ignore it. Thus
if two ‘t’s come together in the middle of a name they are treated exactly the same as a
single ‘t’ or a single ‘d’. If they are separated by another non-scoring character then the
same score can follow in the final code. The name PETTIT is P330000. The second ‘T’ is
ignored but the third one is not since a nonscoring ‘I’ intervenes.
5. Add the number onto the end of the SOUNDEX code if it is not to be ignored.
6. Keep working through the name until you have created a code of 6 characters
maximum.
7. If you come to the end of the name before you reach 6 characters, pad out the end of
the code with zeros.
8. Optionally you can ignore a possessive prefix such as ‘Von’ or ‘Des’.
See "Using the Census SOUNDEX," General Information Leaflet 55 (Washington, DC:
National Archives and Records Administration, 1995) for the detailed method.


Appendix B. Problem of Transitivity
        Imposing transitivity can create a possibility of name mismatch in that two
inventors with different middle names are matched.
        We found, however, that there are a trivial number of inventors with this problem:
126 inventors out of 2.3 million uniquely identified inventors. Upon further investigation
of these cases, we found they are typically due to the following three reasons. First, some



                                              26
middle names in the Patent BIB data are incorrectly coded. For instance, our transitivity
procedure matched inventors named Laszlo Andra Szporny and Laszlo Eszter Szporny,
but we found that these two are the same inventor without middle name and those middle
names are in fact the first names of the next co-inventors in their patents. Second, an
inventor with two middle names is coded in the Patent BIB data with one middle name in
some cases and with the other middle name in other cases. The only case that can be
apparently identified as a mismatch is that when two inventors with the same last and
first name but different middle names appear in the same patent. However, it is not
simple to separate them because it can be rather arbitrary. For example, we can either
assign the records of Adam Smith to Adam J. Smith or Adam E. Smith.


Appendix C. Number of Patent Applications
                         120
          Number of applications ('000)
             80          60 100




                                          1985   1987   1989         1991        1993   1995   1997
                                                                Application year




                                                               27
                                     References

Adams, James D. 1990. “Fundamental Stocks of Knowledge and Productivity Growth.”
The Journal of Political Economy, 98(4), pp. 673-702.

Agrawal, Ajay K., Cockburn, Iain M., and McHale John 2003 “Gone but Not Forgotten:
Labor Flows, Knowledge Spillovers, and Enduring Social Capital,” NBER Working
Paper no. 9950

Cockburn, Iain M. and Henderson, Rebecca M. 1998. “Absorptive Capacity, Coauthoring
Behavior, and the Organization of Research in Drug Discovery.” The Journal of
Industrial Economics, 46(2), pp. 157-182.

Cohen, Wesley M., Nelson, Richard R., and Walsh, John P. 2000. “Protecting Their
Intellectual Assets: Appropriability Conditions and Why U.S. Manufacturing Firms
Patent (or Not),” NBER Working Paper no. 7552

Cohen, Wesley M., Nelson, Richard R., Walsh, John P. 2002. “Links and Impacts: The
Influence of Public Research on Industrial R&D.” Management Science, 48(1), pp. 1–23

Elman, Wilf, and Fried. 1995. “The Impact of GATT on Patent Tactics,” ‘Electric Law
Library, http://www.lectlaw.com/files/inp03.htm

Goldin, Claudia and Katz, Lawrence, 1998. “The Origins of Technology-Skill
Complementarity,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113, pp. 693-732.

Griliches, Zvi, 1969. “Capital-Skill Complementarity,” Review of Economics and
Statistics, 51, pp. 465-468.

Hall, B., Jaffe, A. and Trajtenberg, M. “Market Value and Patent Citations: A First
Look.” NBER Working Paper No. 7741, 2000.

Hicks, Diana, Breitzman, Tony, Olivastro, Dominic and Hamilton, Kimberly, “The
Changing Composition of Innovative Activity in the US--A Portrait Based on Patent
Analysis.” Research Policy, 30 (4), 2001, p 681-703.

Jaffe, Adam B. 1989. “Real Effects of Academic Research.” The American Economic
Review, 79(5), pp. 957-970.

Jaffe, Adam B. and Trajtenberg, Manuel. 1992. “Flows of Knowledge from Universities
and Federal Laboratories: Modeling the Flow of Patent Citations over Time,” in Patents,
Citations, and Innovations: A Window on the Knowledge Economy, Jaffe, Adam B. and
Trajtenberg, Manuel, eds. Cambridge, Massachusetts: The MIT Press.




                                          28
Kim, Jinyoung and Marschke, Gerald, 2005, “Labor Mobility of Scientists,
Technological Diffusion, and the Firm’s Patenting Decision,” The Rand Journal of
Economics, forthcoming, 2005.

Mansfield, E., 1991. “Academic research and industrial innovation.” Research Policy,
20(1), pp. 1-12.

Mansfield, E., 1998. “Academic research and industrial innovation: An update of
empirical findings.” Research Policy, 26 (7-8), pp. 773-776.

Moen, Jarle. (2005) “Is Mobility of Technical Personnel a Source of R&D Spillovers?,”
Journal of Labor Economics, 23(1), pp. 81-114.

Mowery, David C. and Ziedonis, Arvids Alexander, "The Geographic Reach of Market
and Non-Market Channels of Technology Transfer: Comparing Citations and Licenses of
University Patents" (October 2001). NBER Working Paper No. W8568.

Narin, Francis, Hamilton, Kimberly S. and Olivastro, Dominic, 1997. “The increasing
linkage between U.S. technology and public science,” Research Policy, 26, pp. 317-330.

Nelson, Richard R, Nathan Rosenberg (1993), “Technical Innovation and National
Systems”, in R. R. Nelson ed., National Systems of Innovation. A Comparative Analysis.
Oxford University Press: Oxford, pp. 3-21.

Parr, Russell L. and Sullivan, Patrick H. Technology Licensing: Corporate Strategies for
Maximizing Value, John Wiley & Sons, Inc, New York, NY, 1996.

Polanyi, Michael. Personal Knowledge: Towards a Post-Critical Philosophy (University
of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1958)

Radack, David V. 1995. “GATT Brings Major Changes in U.S. Patent Law,” JOM,
47(5), p. 79

Sampat, Bhaven N., Mowery, David C., and Ziedonis, Arvid A. 2003 “Changes in
University Patent Quality after the Bayh-Dole Act: A Re-Examination,” Working paper,
Georgia Institute of Technology.

Trajtenberg, Manuel, “The Names Game: Using Inventors Patent Data in Economic
Research,” Working paper, 2004.

Trajtenberg, Manuel. “A Penny for Your Quotes: Patent Citations and the Value of
Innovations.” The Rand Journal of Economics. Vol. 21, No. 1, pp. 172-87, Spring 1990.

Zucker, Lynne G.; Darby, Michael R.; Armstrong, Jeff S. “Commercializing Knowledge:
University Science, Knowledge Capture, and Firm Performance in Biotechnology”
NBER Working Paper No. 8499, October 2001



                                          29
Zucker, Lynne G.; Darby, Michael R.; and Brewer Marilynn B. “Intellectual Human
Capital and the Birth of U.S. Biotechnology Enterprises” The American Economic
Review, Vol. 88, No. 1. (Mar., 1998), pp. 290-306.




                                      30
   Figure 1 Patents by Inventors with University Patent Experience
A. All Industries
     Patents with inventors who had university patents (%)                               All Industries
          1             1.5           2            2.5




                                                             1985   1987          1989        1991        1993          1995   1997
                                                                                         Application year


B. Pharmaceutical Industry

                                                                              Pharmaceutical Industry
     Patents with inventors who had university patents (%)
       4         5        6       7        8         9




                                                             1989          1991               1993               1995          1997
                                                                                         Application year




                                                                                            31
                                                                                 Figure 1 (continued)
C. Semiconductor Industry
     Patents with inventors who had university patents (%)                       Semiconductor Industry
         .5           1        1.5        2          2.5




                                                                1989          1991               1993               1995          1997
                                                                                            Application year


D. Inventor Ratio for All Industries

                                                                                            All Industries
     Inventors who had univ. patents in the last 10 years (%)
        12       14       16       18         20       22




                                                                1985   1987          1989        1991        1993          1995   1997
                                                                                            Application year




                                                                                               32
         Figure 2 Patents by Inventors with Advanced Degrees
A. All Industries
     Patents with Inventors with Advanced Degree (%)                               All Industries
      6         8          10        12       14




                                                       1985   1987          1989         1991       1993          1995   1997
                                                                                   Application Year


B. Pharmaceutical Industry

                                                                        Pharmaceutical Industry
     Patents with inventors with advanced degree (%)
     25             30             35            40




                                                       1989          1991               1993               1995          1997
                                                                                   Application year




                                                                                      33
                                                                        Figure 2 (continued)
C. Semiconductor Industry

                                                                        Semiconductor Industry
                                                  25
     Patents with inventors with advanced degree (%)
     10              15             20




                                                       1989          1991               1993               1995          1997
                                                                                   Application year


D. Inventor Ratio for All Industries

                                                                                   All Industries
     Inventors with degrees / S&E degree holders (%)
     .2          .4         .6         .8         1




                                                       1985   1987          1989         1991       1993          1995   1997
                                                                                   Application Year




                                                                                      34
          Figure 3 Patents with Citations to University Patents
A. All Industries

                                                                                 All Industries
                                              8
     Patents that cite university patents (%)
        4         5        6 3       7




                                                     1985   1987          1989        1991        1993          1995   1997
                                                                                 Application year


B. Pharmaceutical Industry

                                                                      Pharmaceutical Industry
                                                25
     Patents that citing university patents (%)
                 15          10   20




                                                     1989          1991               1993               1995          1997
                                                                                 Application year




                                                                                    35
                                                                            Figure 3 (continued)
C. Semiconductor Industry

                                                                            Semiconductor Industry
                                9
     Patents that citing university patents (%)
              6            7    5      8




                                                           1989          1991               1993               1995          1997
                                                                                       Application year


D. Citation Ratio for All Industries

                                                                                       All Industries
                                                      50
     Citations to univ. patents in the last 10 years (%)
     30          35          40           45




                                                           1985   1987          1989        1991        1993          1995   1997
                                                                                       Application year




                                                                                          36
             Figure 4 Decomposing the Increase in Patents
(a) that name inventors with university patent experience, (b) that name
  inventors with advanced degrees, and (c) that cite university patents
                              (1985-1997)

                  (a) Univ. Patent      (b) Advanced          (c) Univ. Patent
                      Experience            Degree                Citation
            100
                                              I/M

            80
                                                                          M/P

            60                      P                     P

                                                                                P
            40                M/P
  Percent




                        I/M
            20
                  U/I                                               I/M
             0
                                        U/I
                                                              U/I
            -20

            -40
                                                    M/P

            -60




                                         37
                        Table 1. Variable Definition and Sample Statistics

                                     Definition                                    Mean (Standard Deviation)
                                                                             Pharmaceutical        Semiconductor
UNIV       Fraction of patents that involve inventors who have university        0.1287                0.0344
           patenting experience                                                 (0.2632)              (0.1458)
ADVDEG     Fraction of patents that have inventors on them who have              0.2988                0.1707
           advanced degrees                                                     (0.3277)              (0.2597)
UCITE      Fraction of patents citing past university-assigned patents           0.3036                0.0797
                                                                                (0.3567)              (0.1849)
INVENTOR   Number of Inventors                                                    60.23                 74.74
                                                                                 (114.5)               (246.8)
EMPLOYEE   Number of Employees                                                    9,046                 4,508
                                                                                (17,249)              (14,876)
R&D/INV    Real R&D expenditures in 1996 constant dollars over the                31.36                 22.88
           number of inventors                                                   (55.74)               (39.96)
NSIC       Number of secondary SIC’s assigned to a firm                          2.3456                 1.702
                                                                                 (1.716)               (1.214)
MEXP       Median experience of all inventors in a firm                          5.4796                 4.550
                                                                                 (3.555)               (3.107)
FIRMAGE    Years elapsed since the founding year of a firm                        29.88                 19.50
                                                                                 (39.81)               (19.74)
ANYUCITE   Binary variable for whether a firm has at least one citation to       0.6897                0.4017
           university patents in year t                                         (0.4629)              (0.4907)
ANYUSCI    Binary variable for whether a firm has at least one inventor          0.4347                0.1983
           with university patenting experience inventor in year t              (0.4961)              (0.3991)
ANYPHD     Binary variable for whether a firm has at least one inventor          0.6221                0.5034
           with advanced degree in year t                                       (0.4852)              (0.5004)
              Table 2 Determinants of Firm Use of Inventors with University Patenting Experience

Dependent variable = logit transform of UNIV
                                           Pharmaceutical                        Semiconductor

Log INVENTOR                   2.5045            2.1970      2.1777    1.4853        1.3832        1.1757
                                6.91              5.00        4.89      6.74          5.98          4.69
Log EMPLOYEE                   -0.5381           -0.1871     -0.1571   -0.1034      -0.0088        0.1427
                                -1.97             -0.46       -0.38     -0.48        -0.04          0.56
Log R&D/INV                    0.1258            0.1550      0.1482    0.0555        0.0641        0.0324
                                1.58              1.72        1.59      0.66          0.72          0.35
Log NSIC                       -0.2018           -0.3801     -0.3881   0.3815        0.4732        0.7109
                                -0.28             -0.46       -0.47     0.69          0.82          1.21
Log MEXP                                         3.0469      3.0339                  0.8233        0.8648
                                                  5.52        5.48                    2.31          2.43
Log FIRMAGE                                      -1.4772     -1.5380                 -0.2913       -0.5002
                                                  -2.03       -2.05                   -0.66         -1.09
Time trend                                                   0.0438                                0.2115
                                                              0.30                                  2.14
Observations                     631              505          505       576          556            556
R2                             0.1436           0.1940       0.1931    0.1789       0.1873         0.1930
Note: All models are estimated with random (firm) effects.
                      Table 3 Determinants of Firm Use of Inventors with Advanced Degrees

Dependent variable = logit transform of ADVDEG
                                           Pharmaceutical                        Semiconductor

Log INVENTOR                   2.7368            2.6377      2.4313    2.4983        2.3655      2.2626
                                6.62              5.31        4.86      7.02          6.31        5.56
Log EMPLOYEE                   -0.3520           -0.2187     0.0568    -0.4034       -0.3539     -0.2796
                                -1.18             -0.50       0.13      -1.11         -0.87       -0.66
Log R&D/INV                    0.1589            0.0939      0.0220    0.0391        0.0055      -0.0147
                                1.73              0.92        0.21      0.28          0.04        -0.10
Log NSIC                       -0.5999           -1.1006     -1.2289   -0.2679       -0.2634     -0.1500
                                -0.72             -1.17       -1.31     -0.30         -0.29       -0.16
Log MEXP                                         0.7651      0.6985                  0.2133      0.2435
                                                  1.22        1.12                    0.39        0.44
Log FIRMAGE                                      -0.5259     -0.9577                 -0.2985     -0.4422
                                                  -0.67       -1.20                   -0.40       -0.57
Time trend                                                   0.4469                              0.1060
                                                              2.69                                0.69
Observations                     631              505          505       576          556          556
R2                             0.1365           0.1226       0.1280    0.1786       0.1716       0.1739
Note: All models are estimated with random (firm) effects.
                                Table 4 Determinants of Citations to University Patents

Dependent variable = logit transform of UCITE
                                           Pharmaceutical                           Semiconductor

Log INVENTOR                   1.3889            1.0221      0.9042       2.2396          2.1427    1.7774
                                2.63              1.64        1.43         6.99            6.57      4.97
Log EMPLOYEE                   -0.7168           -0.5055     -0.3751      -0.3376         -0.3517   -0.1033
                                -1.90             -0.93       -0.68        -1.02           -0.99     -0.28
Log R&D/INV                    0.0656            0.0656      0.0335       0.0247          0.0060    -0.0629
                                0.60              0.53        0.26         0.19            0.05      -0.46
Log NSIC                       0.4175            0.3283      0.2993       -0.0938         -0.4115   -0.0429
                                0.42              0.29        0.27         -0.12           -0.53     -0.05
Log MEXP                                         0.3585      0.3768                       0.4991    0.5751
                                                  0.45        0.47                         1.05      1.21
Log FIRMAGE                                      -0.2034     -0.3948                      0.5248    0.0590
                                                  -0.21       -0.41                        0.79      0.09
Time trend                                                   0.2078                                 0.3196
                                                              1.03                                   2.42
Observations                     586              470          470          556             538       538
R2                             0.0394           0.0319       0.0376       0.2108          0.2298    0.2348
Note: All models are estimated with random (firm) effects.
                                 Table 5 Marginal Effects of Regressors in Tables 2-4

                                           Pharmaceutical                                        Semiconductor
  Dependent variable           UNIV            ADVDEG             UCITE              UNIV            ADVDEG             UCITE



Log INVENTOR                   0.2464            0.5526            0.2161           0.0459            0.3349            0.1572

Log EMPLOYEE                  -0.0210           -0.0458           -0.1069           -0.0003           -0.0501           -0.0258

Log R&D/INV                    0.0174            0.0197            0.0139           0.0021            0.0008            0.0004

Log NSIC                      -0.0426           -0.2306            0.0694           0.0157            -0.0373           -0.0302

Log MEXP                       0.3417            0.1603            0.0758           0.0273            0.0302            0.0366

Log FIRMAGE                   -0.1656           -0.1102           -0.0430           -0.0097           -0.0423           0.0385



Note: All the numbers in this table are based on the coefficients reported in the second column of each panel in tables 2-4. The
marginal effect is calculated by ym(1-ym)β where ym is the sample mean of the dependent variable and β is the estimated coefficient.
                    Table 6 Effect of University Affiliation on Citations to University Patents
                                            Pharmaceutical                                Semiconductor
        Dependent variable          ANYUCITE               UCITE                 ANYUCITE               UCITE
                   Model              Probit            Regression                 Probit            Regression
ANYUSCI                          0.8538                   4.8418              0.7960              2.4361
                                  3.98                     3.93                3.45                2.60
ANYPHD                                        0.2933                2.5764              0.2400              0.9853
                                               1.47                  1.86                1.39                1.32
Log INVENTOR                     0.4394       0.4893      0.1668    0.5024    0.6130    0.6490    1.8428    1.9605
                                  4.32         4.48        0.26      0.74      7.45      7.28      5.35      5.54
Log EMPLOYEE                     -0.0417      -0.0335     -0.4846   -0.4879   -0.1441   -0.1392   -0.3423   -0.3518
                                  -0.58        -0.45       -0.91     -0.90     -2.03     -1.89     -0.96     -0.98
Log R&D/INV                      0.0293       0.0326      0.0289    0.0720    -0.0223   -0.0164   -0.0058   -0.0005
                                  1.48         1.65        0.24      0.59      -0.78     -0.57     -0.04      0.00
Log NSIC                         0.0434       0.0532      0.2847    0.5269    -0.0645   -0.0219   -0.5106   -0.3965
                                  0.24         0.29        0.26      0.47      -0.37     -0.12     -0.66     -0.51
Log MEXP                         0.0371       0.1330      -0.1107   0.2697    0.0762    0.1061    0.4176    0.4851
                                  0.33         1.22        -0.14     0.34      0.65      0.88      0.88      1.02
Log FIRMAGE                      0.0103       -0.0239     0.0510    -0.1438   0.0600    0.0650    0.4983    0.5506
                                  0.08         -0.19       0.05      -0.15     0.49      0.51      0.75      0.82
Observations                        505         505          470      470       556       556      538        538
Log Likelihood or R2             -216.54      -223.83      0.0919   0.0469    -259.50   -264.51   0.2509    0.2341
Note: All models are estimated with random (firm) effects.
