                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  SHUNTO, RATIONAL EXPECTATIONS,
                    AND OUTPUT GROWTH IN JAPAN


                       Herschel I. Grossn.n

                         William S. Haraf



                      Working Paper No. 1114)4




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Canridge MA 02138


                            June 1983




Prepared for presentation at the International Seminar on
Macroeconomics, Paris, June 1983, and at the NBER Conference on
Macroeconomics, Canibridge, July 1983. This research was assisted
by a grant from the Joint Committee on Japanese Studies of the
Social Science Research Council and the American Council of Learned
Societies with funds provided by the National Endowment for the
Huranjtjes and the Ford Foundation. Michael Parkin rRde useful
comments on an earlier draft. The research reported here is part
of the NBER's research program in Economic Fluctuations and the
project in Productivity in the World Econony. Any opinions
expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
                                             NBER Working Paper #1144
                                                  June 1983




       Shunto, Rational Expectations, and Output Growth in Japan



                              ABSTRACT



     This paper describes a theoretical and empirical study of
the Japanese macroeconomy that focuses on the role of
predetermined nominal wages in the relation between monetary
policy and aggregate output. The main features of the model are
that nominal wage rates set at Shunto are equal to rational
expectations of the nominal wage rates that would be consistent
with target levels of real output and that firms determine
employment and output by equating marginal productivities to real
wage rates. The essential implication of the model is that the
current deviation of aggregate output from its target level
depends only on innovations in inflation and productivity since
the last Shunto. The equation derived to implement the model
empirically relates current aggregate output growth in a precise
way to past values of output growth and inflation since the last
Shunto and includes an explicit specification of a white noise
error term. The results of econometric analysis of this
restricted model equation are consistent with the hypothesis that
nominal wages predetermined according to Shunto with rational
expectations are important tor the determination of real
aggregates. The empirical analysis, however, also suggests that
the assumptions about monetary policy used to close the model are
not adequate, a result that leads to directions for further
research.




    Herschel Grossman                        William Harat
    Department of Economics                  Council of Economic Advisors
    Brown University                         WashingtOn, D.C. 20500
    Providence, RI 02912
    (401.) 863—2606
     Historical experience and economic data both suggest that
monetary policy has an important effect on the cyclical behavior
of aggregate real variables, such as employment and output.
Identification of the characteristics of market economies that
account for this apparent connection between nominal causes and
real effects presents a difficult challenge to economic
analysis. Keynesian models attribute this linkage of nominal and
real aggregates to the failure of labor markets to clear. This
approach, for reasons discussed in Grossman (1983) , remains the
most popular framework for the analysis of macroeconomic
fluctuations.

     The key assumptions of Keynesian models are that nominal
wage rates are at least partly predetermined and that employment
adjusts to equate marginal productivities to contemporaneous real
wage rates. A standard motivation for these assumptions is the
observation that actual. labor contracts involve multiperiod
setting of future nominal wage rates, with only incomplete, if
any, indexation of nominal wages to prices and other variables,
and allow firms proximately to decide on short-run changes in
employment. The essential argument is that this arrangement
allows monetary policy to influence the decisions of firms about
aggregate employment and aggregate output by causing the price
level to change relative to the predetermined level of nominal
wage rates.

     A seminal paper by Fischer (1977) generates more precise
predictions about the relation between monetary policy and real
aggregates by incorporating into the Keynesian framework two
further assumptions aboutthe nature of wage determination. One
assumption is that the objective of agents who make labor
contracts is to set future nominal wage rates such, that future
employment and output will equal given target levels, usually
described as those levels that would be consistent with "market
clearing". The other assumption is that this process of wage
determination reflects rational expectations. Specifically, the
agents who set nominal wages behave as if they understand the
economy's relevant stochastic structural relations, which, in
this Context, include the processes governing monetary policy.
                              —2—

     These two assumptions imply that the wage setting process
employs all available information to determine the future nominal
wage rates that are likely to be consistent with the target
levels of the real variables. In particular. rational wage—
setting agents take fully into account any aspects of future
monetary policy that they can predict. This behavior implies
that monetary policy can affect real aggregates only if monetary
policy responds to a larger information set than is available to
wage—setting agents. Actual experience, of course, suggests that
the monetary policy process reacts to new information more
frequently than nominal wages are adjusted. In this way a
critical difference in information sets results from a systematic
response of current monetary policy to events that occur after
the wage—setting process has predetermined current nominal wages.
     The main theoretical objection to models in which
predetermined nominal wages play a critical role in determining
real aggregates is that analysis of efficient labor contracts
suggests that employment should adjust to equate marginal
productivities to the marginal values of alternative uses of
time, but not necessarily to contemporaneous real wage rates.
Even if nominal wage rates are predetermined, the actual short—
run employment changes that firms select actually might satisfy
this efficiency criterion. This efficiency argument is
theoretically appealing, especially from the perspective of
neoclassical economic analysis, and, as explained in Hall (l98O)
creates a tension between Keynesian macroeconomic analysis and
the standard neoclassical approach to other economic phenomena.
Nevertheless, the Keyriesian approach has retained its popularity
primarily because efficient employment determination, especially
given the availability of accurate contemporaneous monetary data,
seems inconsistent with the apparent effect of monetary policy on
the cyclical behavior of real aggregates. Grossman (1983) and
Boschen and Grossman (1982) provide extensive discussions of this
point.
                              —3—

     Although Keynesian models that use Fischer's assumptions
about wage setting can generate a number of potentially testable
hypotheses, empirical analysis of them as yet has not gotten far,
mainly because the specification of relevant information sets
requires dating of the formation of the expectations on which the
current level of nominal wages is based. For the United States
and most other countries, this dating is difficult because wage
setting is not synchronized. Specifically, given the prevalent
pattern of overlapping contracts with differing origination dates
and durations, the present nominal wage level in most countries
presumably reflects expectations that were taken at many dates in
the past over horizons of many different lengths and, hence, that
were based on many different information sets. Neither
theoretical nor empirical analysis readily generates hypotheses
about the relevant weighting of this past information.

     Japan in this regard is exceptional because, since 1955,
Japanese wage setting increasingly has conformed to a
synchronized pattern that results from the annual "spring labor
offensive" (Shunto) and the associated process of collective
bargaining. In Shunto, all of the major labor unions and
managements negotiate wage settlements for the next fiscal year,
which begins April first. The outcome of these negotiations is
also influential in determining wage adjustments for members of
smaller unions and for non—unionized and government employees.
Given rational expectations, the critical implication of this
synchronized annual wage setting is that the present nominal wage
level reflects only expectations based on information available
at •the time of the last Shunto. Thus, as suggested by Taniuchi
(1982), the Shunto arrangement presents a unique opportunity to
implement empirically a model based on the work of Fischer and,
thereby, to study the role of predetermined nominal wages in the
relation between monetary policy and macroeconomic fluctuations.
     Although the Shunto arrangement of annual wage setting
appears to fit the story of predetermined nominal wage rates, the
widespread Japanese practice of semi—annual bonus payments, which
                               —4—

apparently average about a quarter of total labor compensation,
complicates the picture. It seems clear that these bonus
payments introduce flexibility into Japanese compensation
arrangements, and one might conjecture that they make actual
compensation sufficiently sensitive to current economic
conditions that decisions made at Shunto are unimportant for
determining real outcomes. At the least, the practice of bonus
payments means that the importance of multiperiod nominal—wage
setting for Japanese macroeconomic fluctuations is not obvious
and, hence, requires empirical substantiation.
     In what follows, Section 1 sets up a model of the
determination of aggregate output in Japan. The main features of
this model are that nominal wage rates set at Shunto are equal to
rational expectations of the nominal wage rates that would be
consistent with clearing of labor markets, and that firms
determine employment and output by equating marginal
productivities to real wage rates. Section 2 closes the model in
a provisional way by deriving a stochastic process that generates
the price level. The key assumption in this section is that the
Bank of Japan attempts to achieve a fixed target inflation
rate. Section 3 derives the implications of the model, on which
the empirical analysis focuses, for the relation between growth
in aggregate output during the current quarter and the pattern of
output growth and inflation since the last Shunto. Section 4
describes the empirical analysis. Section 5 summarizes the
results of this provisional study and outlines a program for
further research.

1.    Wage—Setting and. Aggregate Output
      Considera Shunto that takes place at the end of the fourth
quarter of Japanese (fiscal) year t—l and determines nominal
wages for the four quarters of (fiscal) year t. Following
Fischer,   assume that the wage—setting process conforms to


(1)         Wt,T =EW
                   W t,t,    for   r= 1,2,3,4
 where the index (t,r) denotes quarter T of year t,

        W            is the log of          the   actual nominal wage level in


            T     is the log of the nominal wage level that would be
                 consistent with clearing the labor market in (t,T),
 and ET is an operator that denotes a rational expectation
                 conditional in information available at the end of
                 quarter (t—l,4).
        To analyze the determination of W                           and E
                                                   W t,T , assume
                                                            t,T
 that, both for the representative firm and in aggregate, output
 has the following log—linear relation to employment:

 (2)             Y         =   aN         + 8(4t+t) + S + r
                     t,T            t,T                             ,   0 < cx   <   1,
                                                        t     t,T

where Y         is the log of aggregate output in (t,r),
        a is a parameter restricted such that the marginal
             productivity of labor is positive and diminishing,
        Nt1 is the log of aggregate employment in (t,T),
        8   is the deterministic trend in productivity,
        s    is the deterministic seasonal effect on productivity
              in all quarters T;
and              measures other effects on productivity in                       (t,r)..
The analysis assumes, importantly, that the wage—setting agents
know the entire history through quarter (t—l,4) of all of the
variables in equation (2).

     Disturbances to productivity play an important role in the
model. For maximum generality, assume that, for any quarter i,
ri. follows a moving average process of infinite order,

(3)             n. = c. + h1c.1 +
                                  h2c.2 +

where            is a normally distributed random variable, with zero
                                     —6—

        mean, uncorrelated serially and uncorrelated with other
        random variables
and h1,h2, ... are parameters. The disturbance ri. need not
be stationary and, consequently, the series of h parameters
need not converge. Equation (3) implies that


                                             T 1
(4)          ii
                  t,t
                        —En
                          w t,t
                                =c t.t   +
                                             i—i
                                                   h.
                                                    1 t,t—i



Equation (4) says that the forecast error made at Shunto for
productivity in (t,r) equals a linear combination of the
innovations in productivity during quarters (t-1) through
(t,T)
        The empirical implementation of this model focuses on
aggregate output rather than aggregate employment because
Japanese employment and unemployment data suffer from severe
conceptual problems. For example, the data count as employed
workers who are in a government—financed emp1oyment adjustment
program that pays part of their usual earnings while they wait to
be recalled to work. See Komiya and Yasui (1984) for a fuller
discussion of these issues.
        The essential Keynesian assumption is that firms determine
employment and output by equating marginal productivities with
real wage rates. This assumption, together with the production
function given by equation (2), implies that aggregate output
satisfies


                  = (l_a)'[.a(Pt_    Wt) +           in   + (4t+r) + ST+ flt,Ti

where               is the log of the price level in (t,T).

Equation (5) says that aggregate output depends positively on the
realized price level relative to the predetermined nominal wage
level and on productivity variables.
                                                 —7

     To calculate W*
                   t,T
                         substitute for Y t,t in equation (5)
                                         ,


the target value of output denoted by Y T    that would be
consistent with clearing of labor markets, and solve for the
nominal wage rate. This calculation yields

(6)                 = P       + in i + a[(4t+t) + S + r                    —   (1—cx)Y I
          t,T             t,T                                   t    t,t             t,T

The specification of        is discussed below. To determine the
actual nominal wage rate, apply the rational expectations
operator E to equation (6) and substitute into equation (1),
which gives


(7)      W
         t,r=EW
              w t,r =EP
                      w t,T
                            +lnc
                                             + '[(4t+t) + st+ Efl —                  (l—)Y1]
Equation (7) indicates that the nominal wage level determined at
Shunto for quarter (t,T) equals a linear combination of the
rational expectation of the price level in (t,t), the rational
expectation of productivity in (t,T), and the target for output
in    (t,-r).

       The final step in this part of the analysis is to calculate
actual aggregate output in (t,r) by substituting equation (7)
into equation (5) to get

(8)             Y
                    t,T
                          =     Yt,t +   (l—a)[cz(P
                                                      t,T
                                                            — .E P
                                                               W t,T
                                                                       )   +     — E
                                                                               t,t
                                                                                        n
                                                                                       W t,t

Equation (8) indicates that the difference between actual
aggregate output in (t,T) and its target level,         ,  equals
a linear combination of the forecast errors made at Shurito for
the price level and productivity. Specifically, unanticipated
increases in prices and productivity both tend to raise aggregate
output. Equation (4) gives the forecast error in productivity.
The forecast error in the price level remains to he analyzed.
                                      —8--


2.     The Inflation Process

       Keynes and Fischer assume that the price level adjusts each
period to equate aggregate demand to aggregate output, as given
by equation (5) .      A general specification of the determination of
aggregate demand is


(9)        Y
               t,t
                     =k(M
                        t,T
                            —pt,T)+v t,t
where k is a positive parameter,
        Mt1 is the log of the money stock in (t,T),
and     v represents all other factors influencing
           aggregate demand in (t,r).
For present purposes, the precise specification of the stochastic
process that generates v I is not important because in
equation (13) below only the current innovation in v      turns
                                                     t, I
Out to be consequential for the inflation rate in (t,r). The
critical factor determining the price level is the monetary
policy of the Bank of Japan, which is discussed presently.

     Equating equations (5) and (9) gives as the solution for the
price level,

            =    [a+k(1—a)] 1[(1—a)(kM  +           V.                + aW.
                                                                  )
                                     t,1                t,t                  t,T

                         — a ln a —   f(4t+r)       —
                                                              I       —r
                                                                           t,T
                                                                                 J,

and as a corresponding expression for the inflation rate,

(10)
                 [k(l)]'E1_akMt1+                        Avt1)
                        + atW
                            t,T
                                  —3 —   ts I   —
                                                        Afl           J
                                                              t,T

where E is an operator that denotes the difference between the
     value of a variable in (t,T) and its value in the
     preceding quarter.
                                       —9



      Assume provisionally that the Bank of Japan attempts to
 stabilize inflation at a fixed rate. and that to accomplish this
 objective the Bank revises its policies quarterly using rational
 expectations. In this context, rational expectations means that
 the Bank behaves as it it knows not only the structure of the
economy and the past realizations of all stochastic variables but
also the path of nominal wage rates determined at the preceding
Shunto. Specifically, the Bank sets policy such that

 (11)              Efli Mt,T =   t,T
where        Em is an operator that denotes a rational expectation
                conditional on information available at the end of
                the preceding quarter.
                     is the value of M        that is consistent with
             t,T                        t.T
               EAP
                m t,r =r.
and     rr     is    the Bank's fixed inflation target.
     The use of this model of monetary policy in the empirical
analysis assumes that the basic objective of the Bank was
unchanged over a sample period that includes major changes in the
conduct of monetary policy, including the ending of a fixed yen—
dollar exchange rate and the beginning of announced monetary
targets. This assumption involves no inconsistency. A fixed
policy objective——more generally, policy derived from constant
preferences over outcomes——does not imply an unchanged policy
regime relating policy instruments to predetermined variables.
On the contrary, constant preferences suggest evolution of the
conduct of policy in response to external events.

     The discussion by Susukj (1981) of the evolution of Japanese
monetary policy suggests that the Bank actually has constant
preferences, which, however, involve real variables in addition
to inflation, although the operating targets and conduct of
monetary policy have changed over time. Specifically, Susuki
indicates that since 1975, because of the perceived difficulty of
                                      — 10 —



juggling   multiple operating targets, the Bank has focused on low
inflation both as an objective and as a link to other objectives.

       The strategy underlying equation (11) is to derive
restrictions from theoretical analysis that takes monetary policy
to he a rational process, rather than from merely descriptive
specifications of policy regimes, in order to close the model and
to implement empirically its testable implications. As Cooley,
LeRoy, and Raymon (1982) cogently argue, the idea of rational
expectations seems to dictate treating the preferences of the
Bank as exogenous and the evolution of its policy regime as
endogenous. Both the comments of direct observers like Susuki
and the empirical results discussed below, however, suggest that
a more complex specification of the Bank's preferences and
decision making than that embodied in equation (11) would improve
significantly the ability of the model to fit the data.

     Applying the rational expectations operator, Em, to
equation (10) and using equation (11) gives


(12)           EmPtr=
                             =   [+k(l)]'t(1                )(kM1+ EmvtT)
                                     + ciAW
                                           t,T
                                               —
                                                    S       —    s — mnt,T
                                                                      t
                                                                           E   I




Subtracting equation (12) from equation (10) yields, as the
stochastic process generating the price level,


(13)                         [a+k(l—ci)J


where      u         k(AM    — LMx   ) + Av     —       E       Av
               t,T       t,T     t,t        t,t         m            t,r

Denote U as the unanticipated nominal disturbance.
The analysis assumes that u    is a normally distributed random
variable, with zero mean, uncorrelated serially and uncorrelated
with past values of other random variables. Also, note that,
from equation (3) ,
                                                  — 11 —



            Afl
                   t,i —    E
                                mAflt,T
                                          =   C
                                                  t,T
       Equation
              (13) says that the deviation of inflation from its
target value is a random variable that is a linear combination of
unanticipated shifts in the relation between policy instruments
and the money stock and in other factors influencing aggregate
demand, both captured by u , and the current innovation in
productivity, c       Note that an unanticipated positive nominal
disturbance tends'to increase prices, whereas an unanticipated
positive productivity disturbance tends to decrease prices.
Applying the rational expectations operator E to equation (13)
yields

           E i\P
               w     t,t
                           =     it,

and subtracting from equation (13) gives

(14)
                           EwPtT= 1a+k(l_)J (l)uT_ Et,11.
These equations indicate that the rational expectation of wage—
setting agents at Shunto is that inflation will equal rate it
for the next four quarters, and their forecast error of inflation
is white noise.

     To calculate the forecast error in the price level, which
is critical for the determination of aggregate output, expand
equation (14) to obtain

                                                        1 T1
(15)       P
               t,t
                     — E P
                       W     t,t   = [ct+k(1—c)]           '   l.(l—a)u t,T—1.—   C
                                                                                      t,t—i.1.
Equation (15) indicates that this forecast error equals a sum                                of
the innovations in the intlation rate during quarters (t,l)
through (t.t).

     The final step in obtaining a solution for aggregate output
is to substitute into equation (8) the expression tor the
forecast error in productivity from equation (4) and the
                                   — 12 —



expression for the forecast error in the price level from
equation (15) . This substitution yields



(16)
         t,T=        (l-a){a+k(l—a)]                        t,T-i1

                                    •r—1
                               +           hc       1.
                         t,T        i=l     i t,T—i


     The most noteworthy feature of equation (16) is that the
deviation of aggregate output in (t,t) from its target level
depends only on innovations in inflation and productivity
occurring during quarters (t,1) through (t,r)——that is, since
the last Shunto. Innovations that occurred before the last
Shunto are irrelevant. Moreover, the specification of past
innovations that affects aggregate output differs by quarter.
For example, for t = 1, current innovations are relevant,
whereas, for t = 2, innovations in the current and preceding
quarter are relevant, and so forth. These distinctive properties
of the model follow from incorporating the synchronized setting
ot nominal wages at Shunto and the assumption that the wage
setters torm rational expectations using all information
available at Shunto into the Keynesian. framework. Note that, if
bonus payments actually make nominal wages ettecti-vely determined
only one period in advance, all quarters would be like the first
                -

quarter.

3.     Testable Implications
     The final component needed for empirical implementation of
the model is the specification of the target. level of aggregate
output, Y , that the wage setters at Shunto try to achieve.
In Fischer's formulation, the object of wage setting is to clear
the labor market——that is, to make actual employment equal the
quantity of labor supplied. This reasonable assumption by itself
is not adequate for empirical implementation because the quantity
                                      — 13



 of labor supplied is not directly observable.

      A possible approach, which unfortunately is well beyond the
 scope of the present paper, would be to develop an explicit model
 of labor supply as a function of observable variables. A simpler
 alternative way to obtain an operational specification is to
assume that the Shunto wage—setters aim for output to grow at a
constant rate net of predictable seasonal effects.
                                                    Specifically,

 (17)
              Y— ST = Yt_l4_         S4 + Tg,

where g is the fixed target quarterly growth rate.
The setting of the base for the target as output in quarter
(t—1,4) reflects the timing of Shunto. It bonus payments
actually make nominal wages effectively determined only one
priod in advance, the base would adjust every period.
Given an appropriate story about labor supply, we can regard the
target given by equation (17) as a proxy for clearing of the
labor market. In any event, this specification seems to work
well in the empirical implementation.

     Substituting equation (17) into equation (16) completes the
theoretical specification of the model. Empirical implementa-
tion, however, requires converting the moving average
representation for the level of output relative to the target
level given by equation (16) into a tractable autoregressive
representation relating current output growth to past output
growth and past inflation.
        For   T =   1,   using equation (17) ,   equation   (16) becomes

(18)
              Y,1=g+s1_ s4+ a+k(l_a)i'(auti+kc1).
Thus,         equals the sum of the constant growth target, a
              1
seasonal effect, and a linear combination of unanticipated
current nominal and productivity disturbances.
        For t = 2,using equation (17) and subtracting equa-
tion (18) from equation (16) gives
                                    — 14 —




(19)               g + s2— s1+ i+k(1—a)i'(ut2+ kct2)

                   + (l_)1 (h1-1)   c1.
Thus, AY      equals the sum of the constant growth target, a
            t, r
seasonal effect, the same linear combination of unanticipated
current nominal and productivity disturbances, plus a multiple of
the unanticipated productivity disturbance in (t,1)
        To deal with this lagged disturbance,               note that for
                                                      1'
  = 1     equation (13) becomes

(20)                   +   +k(1_)i'(1_)u,i_ ct11.
Solving equations (18) and (20) simultaneously gives the
following expression for the unanticipated productivity
disturbance in (t,l) in terms of output growth and inflation
in (t,1):

(21)
                     (l_)(AYi_      g —
                                          s1+ s4) —

        Substituting
                  equation (21) into equation (19) and carrying
out analogous procedures for T = 3 and t = 4 gives the
required complete autoregressive representation:

(22)         AY
              t,T
                  =g+s T +HDZ
                           1 1 t,r—1 +HDZ
                                       2 2 t,t—2

                    + H3D3Zt,1_3+ [a+k(l_)J'(ut1+          kct,1),
where       Hi =   h1''
                     —
            H2 = h2      —
                      h1   (h1—1)2,
            H3 =    —    -               +
                 h3   h2   (h2—h1)(h1—1)
                                  — 15 —


              —
           Dl —
                     0   for t=1
                     1   for T = 2,3,4,


           ID
                2=   1
                         for   t=1,2
                         for t=3,4,

                     0   for t = 1,2,3
           D3= 1         for r=4,

and
           z1=             g —   s— (1—)
      Equation (22), which we denote, as "the model equation",
represents aggregate output in (t,r) as the sum of the constant
growth target, a seasonal effect, a linear combination of current
nominal and productivity innovations, and a linear combination,
given by 2ti' of past deviations of output growth from its
target and of inflation from its target during quarters (t,l)
through (t,t—1), weighted by combinations——H1, H2, and H3——of
the coefficients of the moving average process generating the
stochastic productivity disturbance. Note that if bonus payments
actually make nominal wages effectively determined 'only one
period in advance, the Z1 variables would not appear in the
equation and deviations in output growth from its target in all
quarters would be white noise. Notice also that it
h1 = h2 = h3 = 1, a specification that would obtain if the
productivity process were a random walk, the coefficients of
the Z,1 variables would equal zero. In this special case, the
model equation would be indistinguishable from the case in which
nominal wages are determined only one period in advance. In
general, however, the model equation reflects the implications of
the peculiar timing of wage setting associated with Shunto.
     The empirical analysis focuses on three features of the
model equation. Each of these features reflects both the
essential implication of incorporating Shunto and rational
expectations into the Keynesian framework——namely, that
deviations in aggregate output from its target level depend on
                               — 16 —



innovations   in inflation and productivity since the last Shunto——
and the auxiliary assumptions about the targets of monetary
policy and wage setting used to close the model.
     First, the variables in the model equation include past
values of output growth and inflation since the last Shunto.
Specifically, in the first quarter after Shunto, no past values
enter, whereas in the second quarter after Shunto, one set of
past values enter, and so forth. Second, lagged values of output
growth and inflation enter only as deviations from target values
and only in the linear combination given by Z1. Third, given
the growth target, seasonal effects, and the forecast error
ettects captured by past output and past inflation, the only
remaining etfects on current output growth are from current
stochastic innovations. Because there are no data that directly
measure these innovations, regression analysis must treat them as
random errors. The model equation, however, fully describes the
components of this error term and specifies that the error term
is white noise.


4.   Empirical Analysis
     The empirical analysis begins with estimation of the
parameters of the model subject to the restrictions incorporated
in the model equation. The calculation of the estimates uses the
nonlinear least—squares procedure LSO from the computer program
TSP (Hall and Hall, 1980) . The data are from fiscal quarter
(1959,4), which is the first quarter of calendar year 1960 and is
•the earliest date for which consistent data are available, to
fiscal quarter (1982,2). All data are seasonally unadjusted.
The index of industrial production serves as a proxy for
aggregate output. National income accounts data do not seem
suitable because they apparently measure final sales rather than
production and do not include a reliable measure of net inventory
investment. In the results reported below, the measure of the
Bank's inflation target is the mean rate of change in the
consumer price index over the sample period, 1.7% per quarter,
                                   — 17 —



 arid changes in the consumer price index also serve as the measure
 of actual inflation. Results obtained using the index of
 wholesale prices for manufacturing industry products instead at
 the consumer price index are essentially the same. The
 calculations normalize the seasonal effects on productivity by
 setting s1 equal to zero.
      Table 1 gives the results of the estimation of the model
parameters within the specified model equation. The model
equation seems to fit the data well. Most importantly, although
examination of the. residuals indicates some evidence at residual
autocorrelation at four and five lags, the Box—Pierce test for
serial correlation in the residuals strongly indicates that the
data do not reject the hypothesis that the disturbance term is
white noise. As noted above-, this hypothesis is a strong
implication of the model equation, which includes an explicit
specification of the error term.

     In addition, the individual parameter estimates accord with
the theory and seem reasonable. The restriction imposed by the
production function is easily satisfied as the estimated value of
a differs by more than five standard errors from both zero and
unity. The estimated target growth rate for r = 1, given by
g,  is 3.0%. The estimated target growth rates for the other
quarters, given by g +
  = 3, and —1.3% for t = 4.
                            s,are 1.8% for r = 2, 3.7% for
                               The estimated average target
growth rate is 1.8% per quarter.

     The estimated values of the coefficients of the moving
average process generating the stochastic productivity
disturbance——h1, h2, h3——all exceed unity by more than four
standard errors. This result suggests that the productivity
process is not stationary. Importantly, the fact that the
implied coefficients of the        variables are significantly
different from zero is consistent with the hypothesis that
nominal wages set at Shunto are important for real outcomes and
implies that the actual flexibility in compensation associated
with bonus payments is limited.
                                                   — 18 —



     From an historical perspective, it is interesting to
calculate the actual time paths of the nominal innovation and the
productivity innovation implied by the model and the data. Let
          denote the estimated residuals from the model equation.
      T
Equation (22) specifies that


               x
                   t,T
                         =   a       + k(1—a)]1(au t,T + kE t,t ),

and equation (13) specifies that


               t,r               =     Ia + k(1—a)J'I(l—a)ut               T   + et]

Solving these equations gives

               u         =   x         + k(AP           — IT)
                   t,T           t,t              t,r

and                      =   (1—cdx
                                        t,r
                                              —    a(tP t,t     —   It).
                   t,t

Thus, the implied current nominal innovation equals the sum of
the current estimated residuals and the current deviation of
inflation from its mean,- weighted by k. The implied current
productivity innovation equals the difference between the current
estimated residual, weighted by 1—cz, and the current deviation
of intlation from its mean, weighted by a.
          Calculations of these innovations, using the estimated value
of a and a value for k of unity, which seems plausible,
reveal the standard deviation of the nominal innovations to he
almost twice as large as the standard deviation of the
productivity innovation. The correlation coefficient for the
innovations is .35. For each innovation, most of the absolute
values larger than one standard deviation are isolated events or
occur in sequences that sum to approximately zero over a few
quarters. The notable exceptions are large positive nominal
innovations in every quarter of fiscal year 1973 and negative
productivity innovations that are large but of decreasing
magnitude in quarters (1973,4), (1974,1), and (1974,4). These
                                — 19 —



productivity innovations are presumably associated with the first
oil—price shock. but, interesting, no stochastic innovations,
either productivity or nominal, are associated with the second
oil—price shock.

     A key aspect of the model equation is that the effects of
both nominal innovations and productivity innovations persist
only through the current fiscal year. A dramatic example of the
phenomenon occurs between 1974 and 1975. As the apparent result
of the large negative productivity innovations in quarters
(1974,1) and (1974,4), reinforced by nominal disturbances that on
net for the year were also negative output growth was negative
throughout fiscal year 1974, averaging almost seven percent per
quarter less than the target growth rates and reaching a low of
over eleven percent below the target growth rate for quarter
(1974,4). In accord with the absence of inter—annual
persistence, however, output growth recovered dramatically to
exceed the target growth rate by almost two percent fri quarter
(1975,1), aided only by an apparently small positive nominal
innovation in that quarter. and averaged slightly more than the
target growth rate for fiscal year 1975.

     A related, if somewhat less dramatic, example occurs a year
earlier. The largest negative productivity innovation during the
sample period apparently was in quarter (1973,4) . and output
growth was over four percent less than the •target growth rate for
that quarter. despite large positive nominal innovations in every
quarter of fiscal year 1973. Another large negative productivity
innovation apparently occurs in the next quarter- (1974.1),
together with a small negative nominal innovation. Output growth
in quarter (1974,1). however, declines no further relative to the
target growth rate for that quarter, reflecting lhe failure of
the effects of the first negative productivity innovation to
persist into the next fiscal year.

     More generally. the model implies that the variance of the
difference between actual and target output growth, denoted by
V,   increases   with r. Specifically, from the model equation,
                                  — 20 —




       VT =   [a+k(1—a)]2(r22         2k+           +
                                                        (1a)2  i—i
                                                                     H?.



The differences between actual output growth and the estimated
target growth rates, however; have the following variances:


          V1 =   .54,   V2 =   .43,   V3 =   .64, V4 = 1.38.

Given the above formula for V    and the estimated values of the
                              T
H. coefficients, the calculated values for V and V seem
too large relative to the calculated values of' v2 and V3. A
possible explanation for this result is the existence of
significant seasonality in the variance of the productivity
disturbance, from which the model equation abstracts.
     The restricted set of past values of output growth and
inflation that appear in the model equation is apparently highly
correlated with alternative specifications in which all past
values enter in each quarter. Table 2 gives the results of
estimating a regression equation in which current output growth
in all quarters depends on four lagged values of output growth
and inflation and on seasonal dummies. Some of the estimated
coefficients in this equation are statistically significant or
nearly so and the standard error of this regression is only
slightly higher than the standard error of the regression
reported in Table 1 for the model equation.
     If the model equation is true, the regression in Table 2
fits the data almost as well as the model equation only because
the fuller set of past values in Table 2 are good proxies for the
restricted set of past values in the model equation. An
alternative conjecture, however, is that the model equation fits
the data well only because its restricted set of past values are
good proxies for a fuller set of past values, which perhaps is
the true specification.
                              — 2]. —



    To evaluate these alternative explanations, it is necessary
to compare the fit of the regression given in Tables 1 and 2 with
the fit of a regression equation that includes both the
restricted set of past values from the model equation and the
fuller set of past values. Table 3 gives the results of
estimating such an expanded regression equation. The standard
error of this regression is only slightly less than the standard
error of the regression for the model equation. The appropriate
likelihood ratio, however, computed as twice the difference
between the logs of the likelihood functions from the expanded
equation and the model equation, is 16.6, which exceeds the
relevant critical value of x295(8) = 15.5. This result
indicates that the improvement in the fit of the expanded
equation over the model equation is statistically significant.
     The finding that the fuller set of past values adds
statistically significant explanatory power implies that the
model equation involves some misspecification. Notice that in
the expanded regression the estimated value of a, which
multiplies the past values of inflation in the model equation, is
not significantly different from zero and that, among the fuller
set of past values, the added explanatory power seems to come
from past inflation. These observations suggest that the
provisional assumptions underlying the specification of monetary
policy and the inflation process, rather than the basic Keynesian
specification with Shunto and rational expectations, may he
leading the model equation astray.
    A comparison of the estimated expanded equation in Table 3
with the estimated equation in Table    2 is also interesting. In
this case, the appropriate likelihood   ratio is 24.8, and also
exceeds the relevant critical value     of 295() =  ll1.   This
result indicates that the improvement   in fit of the expanded
equation over the equation without the restricted set of past
values from the model equation is also statistically
significant. Thus, it appears that the model equation. although
suffering from some rttisspecification, captures an important
                              — 22 —



aspect of reality. Specifically, the finding that the restricted
set of past values from the model equation adds statistically
significant explanatory power implies that a simple specification
of output growth in which the same set of past values enters in
each quarter with fixed coefficients is not realistic. In other
words, the data support the prediction of the model that
coefficients of a distributed lag equation for output growth for
Japan are not time invariant.

5.   Conclusions and Extensions

     The conclusions that follow from the provisional analysis
reported here are mixed. The positive results are that the
Japanese data seem to he consistent with the hypothesis that the
setting of nominal wages more than one period in advance is
important for the determination of real aggregates, but that,
because of Shunto and rational expectations, only innovations in
inflation and productivity since the last Shunto cause aggregate
output to differ from its target level. Specifically, the
restricted set of past values of output growth and inflation
implied by the model has significant explanatory power and the
estimated residuals from the model equation conform to the white
noise process implied by the model. The estimates of the
structural parameters also accord with the theory.
     The conclusion that the Keynesian framework as extended by
Fischer is relevant for Japan accords with what Taniuchi (1982)
concluded from studying somewhat different implications of the
role of Shunto. Except for the Shunto arrangements, the factors
that determine aggregate output in Japan do not differ in any
obvious ways from other market economies. Thus, both the present
study and Taniuchi's work suggest that Fischer's model is also
relevant in other market economies, for which direct testing of
its implications is more difficult than in Japan.

     The negative finding from the analysis reported here is that
the effect of past values of output growth and inflation on
current output growth seems not to be limited to the restricted
                                — 23 —



   set of past values implied by the model. The results   suggest,
   however, that the auxiliary assumptions about monetary policy
   used to close the model are mainly at fault. In any event, it is
   clear that accounting adequately for the relation between nominal
   and real aggregates in Japan requires more ambitious modelling.
        Further research along these lines will involve additional
   analysis of the wage—setting process, of the factors influencing
  aggregate output, and of monetary policy. One extension is to
  consider other targets for the wage—setting process. Another
  useful set of possibilities involves extension of the
   specification of the production function to include more than one
   input and more than one stochastic process generating the
  observed productivity disturbance. Allowing for additional
  inputs would permit explicit consideration, for example, of the
  effect of historical changes in relative fuel prices. Allowing
  for additional stochastic processes would require more ambitious
tkeoretical analysis, but also would introduce potentially
  relevant inference problems and dynamic considerations into the
  formation of rational expectations.

       The specification of monetary policy seems to be the weakest
  part of the existing model. In this regard, two new directions
  are worth exploring. One possibility is to try to determine the
  process generating monetary policy empirically, in the spirit of
  Barro's work. rather than by deriving restrictions from
  theoretical analysis. The other possibility is to extend the
  analysis of rational monetary policy to include more complex
  goals than merely stabilizing inflation. Both direct observation
  and preliminary examination of data suggest that the Bank of
  Japan worries at least about aggregate output growth and the real
  exchange rate of the yen, in addition to inflation.
                                  — 24 —




                                 Table        1

                      Estimation of Model Equation
                              Estimated                       Standard
Parameter
__________                       Value                         Error
g                                     .03                        .01
a                                     .49                        • 09

h1                                1 .   69                       .14
h2                                2.46                           .30

h3                                2.34                           .31
                                  —.012                         .005
                                      .007                       .006
As3
                                  —   .043                       .007
As4

Log of likelihood function:                  212.4
Standard error of the regression:                 .0215
Residual autocorrelat ions:
        r1    —.04                r5          —.23
        r= .04                                — .02
        r3     .05                r7              • 06
        r4=     .15                           — .03


Box—Pierce Q statistic:            6.7                    X951
                                                          2    — i:.

     The coefficients of the linear combination, zt,j' of past
output growth and past inflation, given in equation (22), are
estimated as follows:


Coefficient                   Estimated Value                Standard
                                                              _______ Error
H1                                 .69                              14
H2                                 .30                              17
H3                               —.33                              .21
                                   — 25



                               Table 2
             Regression of AY on Four Lags of AY and P
                        and on Seasonal Dummies
                              Estimated               Standard
Coefficient of                 Value      -           Error
Constant                            .05                  .01
zY.                                 .19                  .11
  i—i
tY.                                —.05                  .11
  i—2
AY.                                —l3                   .11
                                    .22                  .10
   i—4
DP.                                —.26                  .22
  i—i
DP.                                —.21                  .23
  i— 2
DP.                                —.41                  .23
  i—3
DP.                                —.41                  .25
  i—4
DUMMY    1                          .04                  .01
DUMMY 2                             .02                 .01
DUMMY 3                             .04                  .01


Log of likelihood function:    .
                                           208.3
Standard error of the regression:             .0232
                               — 26 —



                               Table      3

           Estimation of Model Equation Supplemented
          with Four Unrestricted Lags of tY arid tP
                          Estimated             Standard
Parameter                  Value                 Error
G                             .05                  .01
                                   .22                   .27

h1                              1.68                     .19
h2                              2.41                     .40

h3                             2.10                      .43
                               —.002                     .011
                                   .032                  .016
                               —   .006                  .024


Coefficient of
tY.                            —.12                      .13
  i—i
LY.                            —.09                      .11
  i—2
tY.                            —.02                      .11
  i—3
                                   .13                   .10
     1—4
tIP.i—l                        —.23                      .23
                               —.17                      .21
   i—2
AP.                            —.18                      .21
     i—3
                               —.44                      .22


Log of likelihood function:               220.7
Standard error of the regression:             .0206




        The coefficients of Z,j in the model equation are
estimated as follows.


Coefficient                Estimated Value            Standard Error
H1                              .68                        .19
H2                              .26                        .21
H3                             —.49                        .24
                             — 27   —




                           References

J.F. Boschen and H.I. Grossman, "Tests of Equilibrium
     Macroeconomics Using Contemporaneous Monetary Data," Journal
     of Monetary Economics, 8, November 1982.
T.F. Cooley, S.F. LeRoy, and N. Raymon, "Modeling Policy
     Interventions," unpublished, December 1982.
S. Fischer, "Long—term Contracts Rational Expectations and the
     Optimal Money Supply Rule," Journal of Political Economy,
     85, February 1977.
H.I. Grossman, The Natural—Rate Hypothesis, the Rational—
     Expectations Hypothesis, and the Remarkable Survival of Non-
     Market—Clearing Assumptions " in K. Brunner and A. Meltzer-
     eds., Carnegie—Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy,
     Volume 19 (New York: North—Holland, 1983)
B.H. Hall and R.E. Hall, Time Series Processor: Version 3.5.
     User's Manual (Stanford, California: 1980).
R.E. Hall, "Labor Supply and Aggregate Fluctuations," in K.
     Brunner and A. Meltzer, eds., Carnegie—Rochester Conference
     Series on Public Policy, Volume 12 (New York: North—
     Holland, 1980)
R. Komiya and K. Yasui. "Japan's Macroeconomic Performance Since
     the First Oil Crises: Review and Appraisal" in K. Brunner
     and A. Meltzer, eds. , Carnegie—Rochester Conference Series
     on Public Policy, Volume 20 (New York: North—Holland,
     1984).
Y. Susuki, "Monetary Control and Anti—Inflation Policy The
     Japanese Experience Since 1975," Bank of Japan Discussion
     Paper No. 8. September 1981.
M. Taniuchi, "Prior Monetary Expectations and Output
     Determination A Study of the Japanese Economy,"
     unpublished dissertation, Brown University, 1982.
