                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         RACE, INCOME AND COLLEGE IN 25 YEARS:
                        THE CONTINUING LEGACY OF SEGREGATION
                                  AND DISCRIMINATION

                                              Alan Krueger
                                             Jesse Rothstein
                                              Sarah Turner

                                         Working Paper 11445
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w11445


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       June 2005




We would like to thank Bill Bowen for suggesting this research agenda over dinner, Martin Kurzweil and
Nirupama S. Rao for providing tabulations from the Mellon Expanded College & Beyond database. The
UCLA Center on Education Policy and Evaluation, the Russell Sage Foundation, and the Princeton Industrial
Relations Section provided generous research support. We are grateful to Gary Solon and Martin Kurzweil
for excellent comments on an earlier version of this draft. E-mail correspondence can be addressed to Alan
Kreuger (akreuger@princeton.edu), Jesse Rothstein (jrothst@princeton.edu), or Sarah Turner
(sturner@virginia.edu). The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by Alan Krueger, Jesse Rothstein, and Sarah Turner. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Race, Income, and College in 25 Years: The Continuing Legacy of Segregation and
Discrimination
Alan Krueger, Jesse Rothstein, and Sarah Turner
NBER Working Paper No. 11445
June 2005
JEL No. I2, J15, J7

                                            ABSTRACT

The rate at which racial gaps in pre-collegiate academic achievement can plausibly be expected to
erode is a matter of great interest and much uncertainty. In her opinion in Grutter v. Bollinger,
Supreme Court Justice O'Connor took a firm stand: "We expect that 25 years from now, the use of
racial preferences will no longer be necessary . . ." We evaluate the plausibility of Justice O'Connor's
forecast, by projecting the racial composition and SAT distribution of the elite college applicant pool
25 years from now. We focus on two important margins: First, changes in the black-white relative
distribution of income, and second, narrowing of the test score gap between black and white students
within family income groups. Other things equal, progress on each margin can be expected to reduce
the racial gap in qualifications among students pursuing admission to the most selective colleges.
Under plausible assumptions, however, projected economic progress will not yield nearly as much
racial diversity as is currently obtained with race-sensitive admissions. Simulations that assume
additional increases in black students' test scores, beyond those deriving from changes in family
income, yield more optimistic estimates. In this scenario, race-blind rules approach the black
representation among admitted students seen today at moderately selective institutions, but continue
to fall short at the most selective schools. Maintaining a critical mass of African American students
at the most selective institutions would require policies at the elementary and secondary levels or
changes in parenting practices that deliver unprecedented success in narrowing the test score gap in
the next quarter century.

Alan Krueger                      Jesse Rothstein                    Sarah Turner
Woodrow Wilson School             Industrial Relations Section       University of Virginia
Princeton University              A-17-J1 Firestone Library          Ruffner Hall, Room 294B
Princeton, NJ 08544               Princeton University               405 Emmet Street
and NBER                          Princeton, NJ 08544                Charlottesville, VA 22903-2495
akrueger@princeton.edu            and NBER                           and NBER
                                  jrothst@princeton.edu              sturner@virginia.edu
                       Race, Income and College in 25 Years:
              The Continuing Legacy of Segregation and Discrimination



       Even in the absence of continuing bias, the legacies of de jure segregation and

racial discrimination in the United States would contribute to lingering gaps in income

and educational attainment between blacks and whites. These gaps create substantial

challenges for public policy in many arenas. In higher education, much of the debate

focuses on access to highly selective, elite colleges, which are perceived to be important

stepping stones to professional and leadership positions. Because there are comparatively

few black high school graduates with exceptional academic records, the most selective

colleges and universities would not admit many black students using purely academic

admissions rules. Thus, many colleges and universities attempt to offset the gaps in the

credentials of black and white applicants by giving an advantage in admission to black

students over whites with similar academic records.

       In the 50 years since the Supreme Court ruled in its landmark 1954 Brown vs.

Board of Education decision that “separate educational facilities are inherently unequal”

and, a year later, that public schools should be desegregated “with all deliberate speed,”

realized changes in educational and economic outcomes have been slower and more

complicated than might have been hoped. The rate at which racial gaps in pre-collegiate

academic achievement can plausibly be expected to erode going forward is thus a matter

of some uncertainty. In her opinion in the Grutter v. Bollinger case, which held some

forms of affirmative action in college admissions to be constitutional, Justice O’Connor

takes a firm stand on this question: “We expect that 25 years from now, the use of racial




                                                                                     Page 1
preferences will no longer be necessary to further the interest approved today.” Our goal

in this paper is to evaluate the plausibility of Justice O’Connor’s forecast.

       We attempt to project the elite college applicant pool 25 years from now, under

assumptions – which we believe are somewhat optimistic -- about the rate at which

existing racial gaps in economic circumstances and pre-collegiate educational

achievement will likely close in the future. Our analysis focuses on two important

margins: First, changes in the black-white relative distribution of income, and second,

narrowing of the test score gap between black and white students with similar family

incomes. Other things being equal, progress on each margin can be expected to reduce

the racial gap in qualifications among students pursuing admission to the most selective

colleges. We use existing estimates of the speed of regression toward the mean income

across generations to project the future black-white family income gap, and past trends in

test score convergence between black and white students to project the conditional-on-

income test score gap. Combining the two projections with a unique national data set on

SAT test takers, we obtain a predicted future distribution of black test scores relative to

those of whites.

       After projecting the pool of likely applicants, we simulate the effects of

alternative admissions policies -- including the current race-conscious system, race-

neutral SAT-based admissions, and class-based affirmative action -- on the racial

composition of admitted students. We focus exclusively on black and white students

because immigration and immigrant assimilation make projections of Hispanic and Asian

applicant pools substantially more difficult to produce and interpret and because the

representation of African Americans in colleges is, in light of the United States’ distinct




                                                                                        Page 2
historical legacy of racial policies, of unique interest. We also restrict our analysis to

selective institutions, as race-conscious admissions policies are only relevant where

admissions are competitive. We can thus say little about aggregate differences in

collegiate attainment, which primarily reflect differences between black and white high

school students in enrollment and attainment at open access institutions that lack selective

admissions policies.

       The legacy of racial inequality in academic and economic opportunity forms the

background of the admissions debate and of this analysis. The first section of this paper

traces the history of black-white inequality of opportunity and of the racial gap in

outcomes at the elementary and secondary levels. The second section turns to racial

inequality in higher education opportunities and outcomes and to the role of policies such

as affirmative action. In the third section, we address the empirical question of the

expected relative representation of black and white students among the pool of students

likely to be admitted to the most selective colleges and universities.

         Although our forecasted distribution of applicants to selective colleges is

necessarily speculative, we hope that the bases for our speculation are at least clear.

Furthermore, our key variables are connected to the legacy of past discrimination. If

nothing else, our approach provides a starting point for evaluating the plausibility of

Justice O’Connor’s forecast and for considering the impact of various influences on the

credentials of college applicants. In particular, our forecasted distribution is obviously

sensitive to policy changes in the coming decades. Changes in class size, in school

effectiveness, and in income inequality would all have important effects on black

representation among elite college applicants, admissions, and matriculants. We do not




                                                                                          Page 3
take these into account, but rather see our results as a baseline expectation in the absence

of dramatic policy shifts. We focus on admission rates, the outcome most directly

connected to legal rules, and stop short of attempting to predict matriculation.



Section 1. Racial inequality in education and achievement

       The decision in Brown v. Board of Education provided a statutory end to racial

segregation in public schooling, but it did not eliminate the functional segregation of

public schools. Boozer, Krueger, and Wolkon (1992) examine the extent of segregation

experienced by students attending high school between the 1920s and the 1970s. They

find that there was no noticeable decline during the decade after the Brown decision in

the overwhelming proportion of black students who attended all-black schools. Only

after the Civil Rights Act of 1964 did the share of black Americans attending segregated

schools begin a sharp decline.

       Arguably, one legacy of the history of segregation is the substantial gap in

measured academic performance between black and white children. There was an

enormous gap in school funding throughout most of the first half of the 20th Century.

Approximately 80% of blacks grew up in one of the 18 legally segregated states plus the

District of Columbia. In 1915, these 18 jurisdictions had an average pupil-teacher ratio

of 61 in black schools and 38 in white schools. The racial gap in measured school inputs

had narrowed substantially by the time of the Brown decision. In the 1953-54 school

year the average pupil-teacher ratio was 32 in black schools and 28 in white schools. As

documented by Horace Mann Bond (1934), in areas where blacks were relatively more

numerous a greater share of school resources was diverted from the black schools to




                                                                                      Page 4
white schools. Bond (pp. 244-245) wrote emphatically: “Negro schools are financed

from the fragments which fall from the budget made up for white children. Where there

are many Negro children, the available funds are given principally to the small white

minority.”

         It is hard to imagine that such large differences in school resources, as well as

segregation itself, did not affect student achievement (see Krueger and Whitmore, 2002,

and Crain and Mahard, 1983). It is also likely that such learning deficits would persist, at

least in part, from one generation to the next.

         Representative test score data are only available recently. In 1970, the average

black student scored more than one standard deviation below the average white student

on the first National Assessment of Education Progress (NAEP) assessment (see Figure

1). Though the gap has narrowed significantly since then, progress has been slow and

episodic, with essentially no further progress since 1990. Convergence at the 90th

percentile of the black and white distributions, perhaps more relevant for admission to

selective colleges, is not noticeably different from convergence at the mean. After 30

years of de jure integration, the gap stands at about three quarters of a standard deviation

in reading, and even higher in math.

         An obvious partial explanation for the persistence of gaps in academic

performance is the continuing gap in family economic resources between black and white

children. Parental income is unquestionably an important correlate of student test-scores,

though the exact channel through which it influences performance is unclear.1 It thus



         1
           Two possibilities are that income is related to parental education levels, which may have a direct
effect on human capital transmission in the home, and that higher incomes permit access to better schools
and to complements to in-school learning such as books, field trips and extracurricular activities.


                                                                                                      Page 5
seems likely that the black-white test score gap would be substantially narrower if the

black-white family income gap could be reduced.

       The family income gap is clearly related to the differential labor market

experience of black and white workers. Blacks earn substantially less, on average, than

do whites, though the gap has slowly narrowed as black schooling has improved and

discrimination has declined. In 1960, the average black male earned 40% less than the

average white male and in 1980 the average black male earned 25% less. Card and

Krueger’s (1992, 1993) estimates imply that the improvement in the relative quality of

education for succeeding generations of black workers accounted for roughly 20% of the

narrowing of the black-white earnings gap over this period. A reduction in

discrimination in conjunction with normal market forces likely accounts for the bulk of

the remainder (see, e.g., Freeman, 1973; Donohue and Heckman, 1991; and Card and

Krueger, 1993).

       The improved labor market performance for adult black workers has been slow to

translate to improved economic circumstances for black children, as the deterioration in

black family structures has partially offset increases in individual earnings. While the

likelihood of living in a two-parent family has declined for all children, the change has

been larger for black children. In 2002, 35% of black children resided in families with

two parents, down from 59% of black children in 1968; for white children, 74% resided

in families with two parents in 2002, down from 89% in 1968.2 Data from the Current

Population Survey show that the gap in total family income between black and white

children has hardly moved in three decades: The ratio of the median income for black



       2
           http://www.census.gov/population/socdemo/hh-fam/tabCH-3.xls, Tables CH-2 and CH3


                                                                                              Page 6
families with one child to the median income for similar white families was 0.63 in 1967

and 0.62 in 2001.3

         Still, differences in family incomes are not the only factor behind the persistence

of the black-white test score gap, as there remains a sizable racial gap among families

with similar incomes. Focusing largely on young children, Phillips and coauthors find

that only about two-thirds of the black-white gap in scores is explained by even a rich set

of family background measures (Phillips et. al., 1998), leaving one third unaccounted for.

The causal process generating the black-white gap within income groups is difficult to

pin down. One explanation that we consider below is that it could relate to continued

school segregation, and to relatively low quality of schools attended by black students.


Section 2. Black and White Collegiate Access and Outcomes: From Segregation to
Affirmative Action

         A. Collegiate Opportunities before Brown

         With two thirds of the black population living in the South at the conclusion of

World War II, most potential students faced explicitly segregated choices in higher

education, with many of these “separate” alternatives small and underfunded relative to

institutions for whites. Outside the South, opportunities were somewhat better, and

regional differences in collegiate attainment grew further when non-South blacks used

G.I. Bill benefits at higher rates than did blacks in the South.4




         3
           http://www.census.gov/hhes/income/histinc/incfamdet.html, Tables F9A and F9B
         4
           The G.I. Bill (formally, the Serviceman’s Readjustment Act, Public Law 346, 1944), was notably
race-neutral in its statutory terms. Educational benefits were exceedingly generous and extended from a
minimum of one year to four years, depending on length of service and age. Blacks in the South may have
faced difficulties, however, in finding colleges that were open to them where they could use their G.I. Bill
benefits, potentially hindering take-up.


                                                                                                    Page 7
       Early civil rights litigation challenged the status quo in which black and white

students faced demonstrably different collegiate opportunities. A 1938 Supreme Court

ruling (Missouri ex rel. Gaines v. Canada, 305 U.S. 337) found that a Missouri policy

which barred blacks from the state law school and, instead, provided tuition money to

attend a school out-of-state was in violation of the Equal Protection Clause of the

Fourteenth Amendment. In 1949, the Supreme Court ruled in Sweatt v. Painter that the

establishment of a separate law school for blacks would not satisfy the Fourteenth

Amendment. These early cases were clearly important in setting the stage for the

landmark Brown v. Board of Education ruling in 1954.

       It has been well established that Brown failed to produce immediate reductions in

elementary and secondary school segregation (Orfield, 1983; Boozer, Krueger, and

Wolkon, 1992; Clotfelter, 2004). Given this, it is perhaps unsurprising that it also failed

to produce immediate gains in black collegiate enrollment. In fact, several of the most

notable standoffs in the protracted battle for educational integration in the South occurred

in higher education. More than five years after the Brown decision, a violent

confrontation erupted when James Meredith attempted to enroll in the University of

Mississippi, with the backing of a federal court order, and Governor Ross Barnett called

in state troopers to block Meredith’s entry. The next year, in Alabama, Governor George

Wallace made his “stand at the school house door” in an attempt to block two black

students from enrolling in the University of Alabama.

       Racial gaps in collegiate attainment have been stubbornly persistent. The

strongest gains for black students relative to white students have occurred at the margin

of college enrollment, with substantially smaller gains in BA attainment (where gaps




                                                                                      Page 8
actually grew for women). Comparing collegiate outcomes for cohorts born in 1935 to

those born in 1970, the ratio of the share of blacks with some college to whites with some

college increased from .56 to .68 for men and from .75 to .78 for women. At the BA

level, black men made modest gains relative to white men, though among women the

black-white ratio in BA receipt fell from .74 to .51.5 Much of the black relative gain can

be attributed to a “composition” effect, as the black population shifted from the South,

where college participation is low for both races, to the North, where participation rates

are higher.

       B. Affirmative Action Policy in College Admission

       In 1965, President Lyndon Johnson gave a speech at Howard University in which

he called for “… not just equality as a right and a theory, but equality as a fact and

equality as a result.” In the years thereafter, many leading colleges and universities

instituted affirmative action programs “to recruit minority applicants and to take race into

account in the admissions process by accepting qualified black students even if they had

lower grades and test scores than most white students” (Bowen and Bok, 1998, p. 7).

These policies led to substantial increases in the representation of black students at the

highly selective institutions where they were used (Bowen and Bok, 1998). They could

not, however, have had large effects on overall college access, as a precondition for the

use of any “preference” in admission is that admissions are selective in the first place,

and Kane (1998) estimates that no more than 20% of colleges and universities in the

United States operate selective admission policies. Even among selective colleges,

affirmative action in the admission process was a matter of institutional choice, not a



       5
           Authors’ calculations using the 2000 IPUMS 5% sample.


                                                                                         Page 9
national policy.6 Whether institutions considered race at all and in what measure was a

policy determined at the level of individual colleges and universities, and affirmative

action policies were adopted largely out of a sense of institutional mission.

         While the judiciary began, with the Adams decisions in the 1970s, to require

states to take more proactive steps to dismantle the legacy of separate and unequal public

systems of higher education, the institutional practice of affirmative action to close racial

gaps in admissions also came under judicial scrutiny. The 1978 Bakke case concerned a

University of California at Davis policy that set aside a number of places in the medical

school entering class for black students.7 A sharply-divided Supreme Court found this

sort of explicit quota to violate Title VI of the Civil Rights Act, but at the same time

affirmed the more general proposition that admissions officers could “take race into

account” as one factor among many in the admissions decision.8

         Affirmative action policies in higher education came into question again with a

1992 challenge to the admissions process at the University of Texas (UT). A district

court struck down UT’s “two track” admissions system while upholding the broad use of

racial preferences; even this, however, was struck down by the Fifth Circuit Court of

         6
            Selective universities in the South, in general, did not take proactive steps to increase the
representation of black students in their classes in the early 1970s. The underrepresentation of black
students in the South was particularly apparent at public flagship institutions, including the University of
Mississippi, the University of Virginia, and the University of North Carolina. Following litigation in the
1970s [Adams v. Richardson, 1972 and Adams v. Califano, 1977], many states – including Virginia and
North Carolina – made dramatic progress in increasing the representation of black students at their flagship
public institutions. Mississippi, however, continued to lag and in 1992 the Fordice decision held states
which had had segregated systems of higher education responsible for going beyond race-neutrality in their
policies.
          7
            The 1974 DeFunis case foreshadows the divided court seen in the Bakke decision. In DeFunis,
the Court chose not to rule on the question of whether professional schools (in this case the University of
Washington Law School) could give preference in admissions to minority applicants. Instead, the Court
decided that the case was moot as the plaintiff had matriculated to another law school.
          8
            The tie-breaking opinion was written by Justice Lewis Powell, who rejected the idea that
“societal discrimination” was sufficient to justify racial preference as the individuals disadvantaged by such
policies were not responsible for the wrongs suffered by minorities. He instead endorsed the idea that
“diversity” is a compelling state interest that justifies the otherwise suspect consideration of race.


                                                                                                     Page 10
Appeals on appeal, on the grounds that the goal of a diverse student body is “not of

sufficient compelling interest to support the use of race as a factor in admissions.”

(Hopwood v. State of Texas, 78 F.3d 932, 5th Circuit 1996). The Supreme Court, in turn,

refused to hear the case. This left racial preferences illegal in the states governed by the

5th Circuit, but legal elsewhere.

         The next battleground was California. In 1995, the University of California (UC)

Board of Regents voted to end the use of race preferences in admissions. Shortly

thereafter, in November 1996, voters in California passed Proposition 209, outlawing the

use of racial preference in the areas of public employment, public education, and public

contracting.9

         Given mounting questions about the legal status of affirmative action after the

Hopwood case and the mounting national political pressures against affirmative action, it

was inevitable that a legal challenge to a major university’s affirmative action policies

that would make it to the Supreme Court. Two University of Michigan cases,10 initiated

in 1997, were decided by the Supreme Court in 2003. The decisions endorsed as

justifications for affirmative action both the on-campus benefits derived from a racially


         9
             After Hopwood and 209, admission of black students plummeted at the University of Texas at
Austin and at the flagship UC campuses in Berkeley and Los Angeles. The effects were far less dramatic at
other, less competitive campuses in each state. Both California and Texas quickly developed alternative
admission strategies that were facially race-neutral but designed to increase minority representation. In
Texas, public high school students graduating in the top decile of their high school classes were guaranteed
admission to any public university in Texas. In California, high school students graduating in the top 4%
were guaranteed admission to the UC, though not necessarily to its most selective campuses. Called “x-
percent” plans, these alternatives took advantage of substantial segregation by race at the elementary and
secondary levels to increase the representation of minority students, and were accompanied by substantial
outreach efforts directed at high schools that traditionally have sent few students to the UT and UC.
Perhaps not surprisingly (Loury et al, 2003, amicus brief), these plans did not suffice to restore the minority
representation attained under affirmative action, particularly at the top UC campuses.
          10
             The first lawsuit (Gratz v. Bollinger), filed in October of 1997 against the University of
Michigan concerned the undergraduate admissions process. The second (Grutter v. Bollinger), filed in
December of 1997, concerned the law school admission process. The cases were heard en banc at the 6th
Circuit.


                                                                                                      Page 11
diverse educational environment and the societal importance of producing a cadre of

minority leaders and professionals (see Goldstein, 2004, for further analysis). In the

second decision (Grutter v. Bollinger), Justice O’Connor, unwilling to endorse racial

preferences in admissions in perpetuity, made her prediction that the need for such

preferences would disappear within 25 years.

C. Effects of Affirmative Action in College and University Admission

       There is no question that pro-active efforts to recruit and admit students from

underrepresented groups produced sizable gains in the representation of black students at

the most selective colleges and universities. Among the selective institutions studied in

The Shape of the River, the percentage of black students rose from less than 1% in the

1951 entering class to about 5% for the class starting in 1976 (Bowen and Bok, 1998).

Similarly, Blackwell (1987) finds that the share of black students enrolled at Ivy League

universities increased from 2.3 percent in 1967 to 6.3 percent in 1976; shares in other

“prestigious” institutions increased as well from 1.7 percent to 4.8 percent. By

comparison, 2000 Census data on racial disparities in aggregate collegiate attainment in

these two cohorts suggests much smaller changes. Between the 1949 birth cohort

(corresponding to college enrollment in 1967) and the 1958 birth cohort (corresponding

to college enrollment in 1976), the ratio of black male college graduates to white male

college graduates remained unchanged at 0.44 while the ratio of black men to white men

with some college edged up from 0.68 to 0.72. Plainly, the large jumps in black

representation seen at the most selective colleges did not accrue across the spectrum.

Less selective colleges had fewer options for increasing black attendance, and financial

constraints among many less affluent institutions may have limited their capacity to




                                                                                      Page 12
provide aid to use tuition discounts (i.e. financial aid) for this purpose. To a substantial

extent, college admission preferences for black students served to change the distribution

of students among colleges, dramatically increasing representation at relatively selective

colleges, rather than producing a large expansion in the black college-going pool.

        The precise mechanics of institutional admission policies are not widely

understood. As noted earlier, the courts have explicitly prohibited mechanical

approaches to affirmative action in the form of quotas (Bakke) or “points” (Gratz), and

most selective colleges employ ‘holistic’ evaluations in admissions that are not easily

quantified. Still, by examining average admissions probabilities among groups defined

by important determinants, like SAT scores, it is possible to get an idea of the role of race

and of academic qualifications in admissions. Using comprehensive admissions records

from a number of institutions, Bowen, Kurzweil, and Tobin (2005) provide a detailed

examination of the extent to which race (as well as other factors such as legacy or athletic

status) affects the probability of admission, holding SAT scores constant. They have

generously provided us extracts from their data. Confidentiality requirements require that

the data be presented only for groups of institutions, which we define by institutional

selectivity.11

        Admissions profiles are shown in Figure 2, for groups of institutions arranged by

selectivity and control. Broadly, the difference between the likelihood of admission of

black and white applicants with the same SAT score is largest in the broad middle of the



        11
            These data are from the Expanded College and Beyond study assembled by the Andrew W.
Mellon Foundation, and describe the 1995 admissions cycle. We divide the Mellon institutions into public
universities (Pennsylvania State University, UCLA, and the University of Virginia) and three selectivity
groups of private institutions: Groups 1 (Harvard, Princeton, and Yale), 2 (Columbia, the University of
Pennsylvania, Swarthmore, and Williams), and 3 (Barnard, Bowdoin, Middlebury, Oberlin, Pomona, and
Wellesley).


                                                                                                Page 13
pool of applicants. At the very top – SAT scores over 1500 – both black and white

applicants are very likely to gain admission, though at the most selective colleges racial

preferences remain substantial; at the bottom, few students of either race are admitted.

Adding additional “controls” would not alter the basic pattern of differences in admission

by race.

       Without the preferences indicated by Figure 2, there would be many fewer—as

we discuss below, only about one-third to one-half as many—black students admitted to

the Expanded College and Beyond institutions. The policy question at the center of our

empirical analysis is whether there will be enough black students at the highest SAT

scores 25 years from now to yield a critical mass of minority students even under race-

blind criteria. In effect, if the same admissions profiles are applied to black and white

applicants, what will be the representation of black students in the pool of students likely

to receive admission offers?


Section 3. Projections


A.     Methods and Data

       Our approach to projecting the pool of applicants to selective colleges and

universities takes into consideration expected changes in the relative distributions of

black and white family incomes and in the pre-collegiate achievement of black and white

youth over the next quarter century. We begin by projecting the relative distributions of

black and white family income, which are likely to converge somewhat in coming years.

As SATs depend heavily on family income, increases in black families’ relative incomes

will lead to increases in black students’ relative scores. This will, however, almost




                                                                                     Page 14
certainly understate the overall progress in black relative test scores. As noted earlier, the

black-white gap conditional on income is large (Jencks and Phillips, 1998) but mutable.

In one set of estimates, we assume that the conditional (on income) gap will fall at the

same rate over the next 25 years as has the unconditional gap over the last quarter

century. This is almost certainly too optimistic, as the entire gain over the last 25 years

occurred in the first ten years of that period; more recent data indicate growing black-

white gaps. We also present somewhat less optimistic, but still unrealistically so,

estimates based on simulations in which we assume that the school quality gap between

black and white students is equalized.12

         We use college admissions as a metric for assessing the substantive importance of

our projected changes in test score distributions. With estimates of current application

behavior and admissions probabilities by student race and qualifying test score, we

simulate admissions to the four groups of selective colleges in the ECB data, using both

current test score distributions and our simulated distributions and applying both race-

sensitive and race-neutral admission rules. These simulations allow us to assess whether

it is plausible, as Justice O’Connor presumes, that there will be enough high-scoring

blacks in 25 years that race-blind admissions rules will admit as diverse a class as is

admitted using affirmative action today.



         12
            Closing the racial gap in school quality might occur, for example, if perfect racial integration of
the schools could be accomplished. Even in such an implausible scenario, our estimates overstate the
impact on black-white gaps: One channel by which income affects test scores is by purchasing access to
better schools, so by combining income-based progress and integration gains we double-count part of
incomes’ contribution.
         Across-the-board increases in school quality are also possible, but will not have large effects on
black-white gaps unless either the schools attended by black students improve substantially relative to those
attended by whites or a constant quality improvement has larger effects on black students. There is some
evidence supporting the latter (Krueger and Whitmore, 2002), though we judge the prospects for substantial
closing of the black-white gap through this channel as limited.


                                                                                                      Page 15
        We rely on several data sources. For our estimate of the baseline distribution of

college preparedness by race and family income, we use a data set containing

observations on approximately one-third of students from the high school class of 2000

who took the SAT college entrance exam. We use the public-use microdata sample of

the 2000 Census (from IPUMS—Ruggles, et. al., 2004) as our source for current family

income distributions, and as the basis for our projections of future distributions. Our

estimates of the rates of change in black-white test score gaps derive from the NAEP

Long-Term Trend data (NCES, 1999), a time-series of scores on an unchanging test over

the last quarter century. Finally, application and admission outcomes for a set of

selective colleges and universities are calculated from the aforementioned Expanded

College and Beyond data set, which describes the cohort entering college in the fall of

1995; we compute denominators for application rates by comparing these data to data on

1995 SAT-takers.



B. Projections of Test Score Distributions

        Figure 3 displays the distribution of SAT scores for blacks and whites in 2000.

While the distributions are similar in shape, the mean for black students is about 200

points lower than that for white students, resulting in extreme underrepresentation of

black students at the highest scores. The bottom panel of the figure shows the fraction of

students at each SAT score who are black.13 Blacks are substantially underrepresented

(relative to their share of test takers) at every score above the grand mean of 1000. This

underrepresentation is most severe at the rightmost tail: In the 2000 cohort depicted here,


        13
             The sample here and elsewhere consists only of white and black SAT-takers; other races are
excluded.


                                                                                                  Page 16
there were about 250 white students who earned perfect scores of 1600 on the SAT, but

only 2 black students. Similarly, there were over 5,000 whites with scores of 1500 or

above but only 41 blacks. To maintain the current representation of black students at the

most selective schools—where 65% of admitted students have SAT scores above 1400—

under admission policies that do not consider race directly, black academic progress must

substantially reduce the under representation in Figure 3.

        Income convergence

        Among families with children aged 15-17 in the 2000 census, average black

family incomes are about $34,500—nearly half—less than whites, and the median black

family was below the 25th percentile of the white family income distribution.14 This gap

is attributable partly to differences in family structure between races--57% of black

families and 24% of white families containing a 15 to 17-year-old child have only one

parent present—and partly to differences in labor market participation and outcomes.

        Estimates of the intergenerational transmission of incomes indicate that, on

average, somewhere between 40 and 60 percent of the gap between a father’s income and

the mean income will be closed by his son (Mazumder, 2000, is at the low end of this

range; Solon, 1999 is at the high end). Estimates of the correlation of income or wealth

across generations at the family level are within the same range, though perhaps near the

lower end (Chadwick and Solon, 2002; Solon, 2002).15




        14
            We have also estimated our projections using families with one member between the ages of 36
and 50 as the relevant universe, with similar results.
         15
            We do not separately model changes in family structure and in incomes conditional on family
structure, though the estimates cited here for the intergenerational correlation of family incomes reflect
both. To the extent that black family structures converge toward white structures more quickly than would
be expected given current income gaps, we will tend to understate the potential for family income
convergence.


                                                                                                 Page 17
         While it is between-group convergence that is the focus of our analysis, most

current estimates of the intergenerational transmission of income derive from samples of

blacks and whites, assuming no distinction between between-group and within-group

parameters.16 There are several reasons to expect that this might be unreasonable. First,

black incomes did not converge toward those of whites for the first several centuries of

black presence in North America, although the correlation in income between fathers and

sons was undoubtedly well below 1. This suggests that mean regression could go on

within groups even when—for reasons of discrimination or for other reasons—there is

little or no convergence within groups. Second, the rate of within-group convergence

may well be different for blacks than for whites. (Mazumder, 2000, finds little indication

of differences, but he has low power against reasonable alternatives.) Hertz

(forthcoming) argues that persistent poverty among very low income black families drags

down estimates of intergenerational mean reversion, suggesting that pooled estimates

may overstate between-group convergence. Finally, even if we accept the accuracy of

current estimates for between-group convergence, there is no guarantee that the rate of

intergenerational transmission of income in the future will be the same as it was in the

past. For example, an increase (or decrease) in the returns to skills could cause the speed

of intergenerational transmission to increase (or decrease).17

         Nonetheless, one piece of evidence does suggest that we would not have gone too

far astray had we used a 0.40 to 0.60 coefficient of intergenerational mobility to project



         16
            It is mildly reassuring that Borjas (1992) finds an intergenerational elasticity of around 0.60
when he allows for the effects of “ethnic group capital,” although it is unclear whether the same elasticity
should be applied for our purposes.
         17
            The rise in inequality over the last quarter century likely caused black-white convergence to be
lower than it would otherwise have been: Increases in black relative skills were offset by the deteriorating
wages of low- and mid-skill workers.


                                                                                                    Page 18
the black-white income gap in the past. Consider the following: In 1969, the average

30- to 39-year-old black male worker — who had attended separate and unequal schools

and entered the labor force before the Civil Rights Act of 1964 barred discrimination —

earned 37 percent less than the average white worker. Based on the coefficient of

intergenerational transmission of earnings alone, this gap would have been expected to

close to 15 to 22 percent for the next generation. The actual earnings gap for men in their

30's in 1999 — roughly one generation beyond the same age range in 1969— was 19

percent, well within the range of the forecast. This accurate forecast may just be a

coincidence, but at least it was not wildly off (Krueger, 2003). Applying it to another

generation, the black-white earnings gap would be projected to close to 6 to 13 percent

when members of the third generation reach their 30's, around a quarter century from

now.

       For our projections, we take the middle of the consensus range, and assume that

the gap in incomes between white and black families will be half as large in the next

generation as it is today. For the reasons discussed above, we suspect that this is more

likely to overstate than to understate the rate of convergence. It certainly overstates

recent experience: As noted earlier, substantial changes in black family structures have

kept the family income gap larger than the decline in individual earnings gaps would

have implied. As continued relative deterioration of black family structures is unlikely,

however, the 50% per generation figure seems a reasonable estimate for the rate of

change of the unconditional black-white income gap going forward.

       Figure 4 displays histograms of black and white family incomes in 2000 from the

decennial Census. As noted earlier, the actual black-white gap in mean log incomes was




                                                                                       Page 19
nearly 0.77 (corresponding to a gap of 57%, or $13,500, at the mean) in that year, so the

above assumptions imply that it will shrink by about 0.38 log points over the next quarter

century. Our projections of the future black income distribution (relative to whites), then,

are obtained by inflating the income of each black family in the 2000 data by 32%

(=ln(1+0.38)-1). The resulting distribution is indicated by the dotted line on the figure.18

With this projection, the fraction of black families with incomes between $80,000 and

$100,000 will increase by 69% (from 4.7% to 8.0%), while the fraction with incomes

between $25,000 and $30,000 will fall by 83% (from 7.6% to 6.3%).19 These changes

provide re-weighting factors that can be used to estimate the effect of economic progress

on black test score distributions.

        Our SAT sample records students’ self-reports of their family income in 13

categories, so we compute re-weighting factors from the census data for each of these

categories. To illustrate: Recall that we project that the number of black families with

incomes between $80,000 and $100,000 will rise by 69% over the next quarter century

In our counterfactual SAT distribution, then, we count each black SAT taker with a

family income in this range 1.69 times. This has the expected result that re-weighted

black average scores are higher (by about 19 points) than were unadjusted averages, as

increases in the fraction of blacks coming from high-income families produce upward

shifts in the SAT distribution. It also implies a small (about 0.7%) increase in the black

        18
             Census demographic projections indicate that the population of 17-year-old blacks will grow by
14.9% between 2000 and 2025, while the corresponding white population will shrink by 8.4% (from
http://www.census.gov/ipc/www/usinterimproj/). This demographic growth, not incorporated in Figure 4,
can be expected to expand the number of blacks (and shrink the number of whites) at each income level.
We do not include this in our projections, as expansions of black population shares arguably have
commensurate effects on the “equal representation” goalposts.
          19
             Of course, real income growth will raise both black and white incomes over the next quarter
century. This should be expected to alter the figures on the x-axis of Figure 5, but absent changes in
inequality should not change the shape of the distribution. Our approach implicitly assumes that it is
relative income --not its absolute level -- that determines relative SAT scores.


                                                                                                   Page 20
SAT-taking rate, as SAT-taking rates are higher among higher-income families. The

projected test score distribution is shown as the “income counterfactual” series in Figure

5.20

         Test Score Convergence

         Our first set of estimates assume zero convergence of test scores conditional on

family income, which might be thought of as a reasonable lower bound for test score

prospects for the next quarter century. An upper bound is provided by assuming that

black-white gaps close as much within income groups in the next 25 years as did

unconditional gaps over the last 25 years. Referring back to Figure 1, in the long run

there has been some narrowing in the gap between black and white test scores among 17

year old students. Regression lines fit to the age-17 NAEP black-white difference at the

90th percentile—this is likely most informative about the SAT-taking population—

indicate that blacks have gained 0.44% of a standard deviation per year relative to whites

on the math exam, and 1.59% of a S.D. annually on the reading exam.

         The verbal and math components of the SAT exam have standard deviations of

approximately 100 points each, so the NAEP trend, if it continues at the same rate, would

imply that the black-white gap in SAT scores should close by just over 50 points over the

next quarter century. To incorporate this trend into our analysis, we simply add this

many points to each black SAT score in the 2000 data. The dashed line in Figure 5

shows the resulting histogram in the income-reweighted data.




         20
            One disconnect between our simulation and the educational process is worth noting. Although
the reasons why family income affects student performance on the SAT are unclear, it is quite likely that
the entire stream of family income over a child’s time at home is relevant, not just income in the year he or
she takes the SAT. Unfortunately, we lack data on family income in earlier years.


                                                                                                     Page 21
         This almost certainly overestimates the extent of black score growth over the next

quarter century. As Figure 1 indicates, essentially all of the progress over the last twenty

five years in NAEP scores occurred in the 1980s, with growth of the racial gap during the

1990s. It would take substantial optimism to assume that future progress will occur at the

rate seen over the full NAEP period rather than the much slower rate seen recently,

particularly as we are assuming that this progress will be in addition to that generated by

income convergence, where the NAEP estimates do not condition on family incomes.

         Equalizing school quality

         An alternative approach to projecting the distribution of black scores is to imagine

specific interventions into the educational process. One particularly ambitious—and, it

must be admitted, wholly politically implausible—intervention might be to fully integrate

schools. The average black SAT-taker attends a high school where 52% of (black and

white) SAT-takers are black, while black students are only 8% of SAT-takers at the

average white SAT-taker’s school (Card and Rothstein, 2004). Schools are not just

separate, but also unequal: Anecdotally, black students attend substantially lower-quality

schools, on average, than do whites, and our data confirm this impression.

         It is unlikely that interventions in the educational process can have larger effects

on black-white test score gaps than to close this school quality gap. Thus, projections

that assume the quality gap will close provide an alternative optimistic view of the

prospects for conditional-on-income progress.21




         21
            Of course, to the extent that black families will make use of rising incomes to buy their way
into higher-quality schools (either by paying tuition at private schools or by purchasing homes near good
public schools), this strategy also double-counts the effects of income growth.


                                                                                                   Page 22
         We construct a crude estimate of school quality as the fixed effect in a regression

of SAT scores on a rich vector of student background characteristics.22 Estimated this

way, the student-level standard deviation of school quality is 69 SAT points, and the

median black SAT-taker attends a school whose quality is 32 points lower than that of the

median white SAT-taker’s school. To implement the “integration” approach, we match

corresponding percentiles of the black, white, and overall school quality distributions,

and re-assign the overall quality distribution to both blacks and whites. That is, we

assume that those blacks who currently attend the best schools attended by black students

will, in the integrated counterfactual, attend the best schools overall, and the same for

whites. Our re-assignment has the effect of closing the black-white gap in mean scores

(in the income-reweighted data) by 30 points, the gap in median scores by 34, and the gap

at the 90th percentile by 24.23

         Figure 6 shows the fraction of students at each score who are black in each of the

counterfactual simulations (presented in Figure 5): Income growth only, income growth

plus NAEP convergence, and income growth plus integration. By construction, the first

simulation has the smallest effect, increasing the number of high-scoring (1400 or above)

blacks by about 54% over its current low level. The integration scenario is next,

producing (in combination with income convergence) a 109% increase in high-scoring

blacks. The most optimistic scenario is the one using NAEP trends, in which the number

of high-scoring blacks increases by 225%. Even under this counterfactual, however, the



         22
            The regression includes full interactions of individual gender, race, and 13 family income
dummies and of race with 100 (10 mother’s by 10 father’s) parental education dummies. Our approach
ascribes both peer effects and any other school-level components of test score variation to school quality
(Rothstein, 2004). In particular, we will overstate the importance of schools if there are any important
unobserved aspects of individual background.
         23
            These numbers are similar, but not identical, when the original SAT-taker weights are used.


                                                                                                    Page 23
proportion of blacks scoring above 1400 will be about one quarter of the corresponding

proportion of whites, with more extreme underrepresentation at higher scores.


C. Admissions Projections

         Our interest is in how the projected changes in the relative distribution of the

academic achievement (measured by test scores) of black and white students will alter the

relative representation of black and white students among those admitted to selective

colleges and universities under race-blind admission policies. To address this, we must

convert SAT distributions to admissions rates. The observed admissions decisions of

colleges and universities provide admission profiles, by SAT, for composite institutions

of varying selectivity. We focus on four composite profiles of admissions outcomes

defined as: Most selective private (Selective 1: Harvard, Princeton, and Yale), highly

selective private (Selective 2: Columbia, the University of Pennsylvania, Swarthmore,

and Williams), moderately selective private (Selective 3: Barnard, Bowdoin, Middlebury,

Oberlin, Pomona, and Wellesley) and selective public (UCLA, University of Virginia and

Pennsylvania State).24 We model expected admission to each of these “composite”

schools, rather than to the individual institutions.

         To calculate expected admissions under each of our simulations, we simply

multiply:

         Expected admissionsr =Σj(Number of test takersjr x

                                             Application Ratejr x

                                             Admission Ratejr)



         24
           Several other schools in the Mellon database (the University of Illinois, Smith, and Macalester)
are excluded from our analysis because large fractions of their applicants do not submit SAT scores.


                                                                                                   Page 24
for each race (r) and SAT level (j). Under the current regime both application rates and

admission rates differ by race. Under a race-neutral policy, blacks and whites with the

same test scores would face the same probability of admission, conditional on

application. We implement this by assigning the admission profile observed for whites to

blacks, in effect assuming that both black and white students will face the admission

probabilities indicated by the solid line in Figure 2.25 We also consider alternative

policies that provide admissions advantages to students from the lowest income families

(what some have called “class-based affirmative action”).

         It is important to emphasize that our calculations are inherently static, as we do

not explicitly model the changes in individual application behavior and college

admissions policies that a shift to race-neutral admissions would entail. Most

importantly, a large shift in admissions probabilities would likely lead to responses in

black students’ decisions about where to apply. At each SAT score, black students

currently are substantially more likely than are whites to apply to the most selective

institutions (see Figure 7, using the institutional data). This disparity is smaller at less

selective institutions, where it largely disappears at the highest SAT scores.

         One scenario that we think is unlikely is one of substantial increases in the rate at

which high-scoring black students apply to elite colleges: As Figure 7 indicates,

application rates among these students are already quite high. Indeed, using the SAT

data, we calculate that well over half of blacks with SATs above 1500 send their scores—




         25
            If application behavior is unchanged, the elimination of racial preferences will reduce the total
number of admittees. As the share of students admitted under affirmative action is small, this effect is as
well. Nevertheless, to the extent that colleges lower the race-blind admissions standards to compensate, we
will very slightly overestimate the effect of affirmative action on black admissions shares.


                                                                                                    Page 25
a proxy for application—to Harvard alone.26 This does not speak well for the prospects

for increasing minority representation through better outreach to potential applicants, and

we therefore focus on changes in the number of high-scoring blacks as the primary

potential source of black-white convergence in the number of qualified applicants.

         A plausible explanation for the existing racial differences in application rates is

that black students respond to the admissions advantages they face at selective colleges

and universities. If this is indeed the explanation, one might expect application rates to

converge as admissions probabilities do. One piece of evidence that weighs against this

expectation, however, is that at least in the short-run the elimination of race-conscious

admission policies in Texas and California appears not to have altered the pattern of

applications of high-achieving black students (Card and Krueger, forthcoming). In any

event, in addition to estimates based on current race-specific application rates, we also

consider a scenario in which black application rates come to resemble those of whites.

         Table 1 presents simulations based on the assumption that black application

behavior remains as it is today. The first row shows the actual representation of black

students among those admitted at the four institutional composites in 2000.27 We define

representation as blacks divided by blacks plus whites. This omits students of other

races, so leads to higher estimates. Thus, where we calculate that 16.1% of black and

white admissions at S1 institutions are of blacks, a more inclusive calculation would




         26
             Card and Krueger (forthcoming) found substantial similarity between patterns seen in actual
applications and those obtained by examining score reports.
          27
             Note that our analysis focuses on the pool of students admitted to composite institution types,
not the actual representation of students in the entering cohort. There are presently substantial differences
between black and white students in matriculation, which we expect would change with policy shifts such
as the elimination of race-conscious admissions. We believe the most judicious strategy is to avoid
projections of enrollment which necessarily rely on parameters that are difficult to project.


                                                                                                     Page 26
indicate that only 10.4% of all admissions at these schools are of blacks (and 54.5% are

of whites).

         The second row of the table shows the black share of admissions under the “race

neutral” counterfactual, in which the observed white admission profile is applied to both

blacks and whites. With current test score distributions, this would reduce the

representation of black students by more than two-thirds, from 17.1% to 5.1%, at the

most selective private institutions (S1). Projected declines in the representation of black

students are by no means limited to the most selective institutions, and are estimated at

55% for public institutions, 58% for the highly selective private institutions and 46% for

the moderately selective private institutions.28 These are the gaps which black relative

academic progress must close in order to realize Justice O’Connor’s prediction that race

preferences will no longer be necessary to accomplish what affirmative action is needed

to accomplish today.

         Row 3 of Table 1 applies the same race-neutral admissions rule to the first

counterfactual SAT distribution, assuming income convergence but no additional

progress in test scores. This produces small gains in the representation of black students

relative to what would be seen today with the same admissions rules. For each

institutional composite, we show the share of the gap between current black

representation and that which would be seen with race neutral admissions today that our

projected income-driven convergence would close. Only about one fifth of this gap is

closed at the public, most selective and highly selective composite institutions. Gains are

slightly larger at the moderately selective private institutions, closing 25.4 percent of the


         28
          These figures amount to estimates of the current effects of affirmative action policies on black
admissions shares.


                                                                                                   Page 27
gap. It appears that reasonable income convergence will not, on its own, allow for the

abolition of affirmative action without severely impacting black representation at elite

colleges.

       When we allow for additional progress via reductions in the black-white test score

gap conditional on family income, however, we obtain considerable expansions of black

admissions shares. These shares are shown rows (4) and (5) of Table 1, without and with

expected income convergence. For public and less-selective institutions, narrowing of

the test score gap combined with income convergence would go a considerable distance

toward reproducing today’s levels of diversity, if it can be assumed that application

behavior does not change. This is less true at the most selective private institutions,

where the black share would remain substantially lower than is observed today.

       In the last two rows of the table, estimates of the representation of black students

relative to white students under the alternative counterfactual of school integration (or of

equalization in school quality) are presented. As one might infer from Figures 5 and 6,

these projections are between the estimates with income convergence along and those

under the assumed level of test score convergence, closing about 30% of the gap created

by the shift to race neutral policies. Given the extent of progress that the school

integration scenario entails, the extent to which it is surpassed by the test score

convergence scenario underscores the optimism inherent in the latter.

       Table 2 presents an identical analysis under the assumption that black application

rates come to resemble those seen today among whites with similar SAT scores. Black

shares are lower in each simulation in these tables, but the effects of income and test

score convergence are similar. The evidence from Table 2 indicates that any declines in




                                                                                      Page 28
application rates of high scoring black students would exacerbate the drop in black

representation produced by moving to a race-neutral admission policy.29

D. Alternative Admissions Rules

         Racial minorities are not the only distressingly underrepresented group in elite

colleges. Students from middle- and lower-class backgrounds, regardless of race, are

also unlikely to have the SAT scores needed for admission under current admissions

rules. Some observers (e.g. Kahlenberg, 1996) have proposed that elite colleges

implement “class based affirmative action” (hereafter “CBAA”), giving preferences to

low-income students akin to those now given to racial minorities. As blacks (and

Hispanics) tend to have lower incomes than whites, some have even suggested that

income-sensitive policies could be a means of admitting more black students without the

legally suspect consideration of race per se. It is not clear, however, whether the race-

income correlation is strong enough to make family income a useful proxy for race. If it

is not, CBAA will be a blunt tool for achieving racial diversity. What is more, it can only

become blunter in the future, as ongoing narrowing of black-white income gaps will

make black students even less identifiable in the income distribution and further worsen

income’s efficacy as a proxy for race.

         To illustrate the potential effects of class-based affirmative action both today and

in the future, we apply this sort of admissions rule to our simulated SAT distributions.

21% of SAT-takers report family incomes of $35,000 or less, roughly comparable to the

15% who are black. We thus model a CBAA admissions rule as giving the same

         29
            Holding application rates constant as admissions policy changes, black application rates give a
much larger change in the representation of blacks with the move to race-blind admissions at the most
selective schools (from a share of 0.171 to 0.051) than do white application rates, which lead to a projected
change in share from 0.057 to 0.016. To the extent that any change in application rates is a consequence of
the policy shift, however, the best comparison is of row 1 in Table 1 to rows 2 through 8 of Table 2.


                                                                                                    Page 29
admissions advantage to students with family incomes below this level as is today given

to black students. The results are illustrated in Table 3.30 Consideration of family

income does, indeed, increase the representation of black students. However, because

black students are only moderately overrepresented among the additional students

admitted under income-based preferences, and because the students brought in under

these preferences comprise only a small share of the baseline class, the effect on total

black representation is relatively modest. Under our baseline assumption, with no

convergence in income or test scores, the black share rises from 5.1% to 7.0% at the most

selective private institutions and from 5.3% to 7.2% at public institutions.

        When we turn to the simulation with income convergence, black

overrepresentation among low-income SAT-takers shrinks, as does the effect of CBAA

on black admissions shares. This is partially offset when we add to the simulation test

score convergence, which produces substantial increases in the number of low-income

blacks with mid-range scores, where preferences are strong. The share of black students

among the additional students admitted under an income-based policy rises to nearly

22.1% at the most selective universities, 26.9% at schools in the next selectivity band,

25% at moderately selective schools and 22.6% at public universities. But the CBAA

beneficiary pool remains small and the majority of this pool remains white, so we see

relatively modest changes in the representation of black students.




        30
            More low-income students than black students have SATs in the middle of the distribution,
where preferences have the largest effects (Figure 2). As a result, a shift from race- to income-based
admissions would, if the size of the preference is held constant, lead to more total admissions. To the
extent that colleges respond to this by tightening admissions standards across the board (the alternative
would be to expand the admissions pool, by as much as one quarter), black admissions shares will be lower
than those shown in Table 3, as more black than white admittees are marginal admits.


                                                                                                 Page 30
Section 4. Conclusions

       Affirmative action is a feature of admissions rules at the nation’s most selective

colleges today, but it may not be in the future. The legacies of separate and unequal

schooling and of labor market discrimination are reflected in the academic preparation of

the current generation of black students. In an equal opportunity society, the effects of

past discrimination on current generations will eventually asymptote to zero, though there

is substantial uncertainty about the rate at which this might be expected to occur. In

Grutter, Justice O’Connor suggests that affirmative action in admissions can only be

considered constitutional as a temporary policy, and she forecasts it will not be necessary

25 years hence.

       To provide a quantitative assessment of Justice O’Connor’s speculation, we

consider the racial composition of today’s admitted students as a baseline, and ask

whether foreseeable progress in black economic and educational success can plausibly be

expected to lead race-blind admissions rules to reproduce today’s race-conscious results

in a quarter century.

       We are most confident in predicting that economic progress will not be sufficient

to yield as much diversity as is obtained by today’s race-sensitive admissions policies.

Under plausible assumptions about changes in the income distribution of black families

in the next 25 years, the representation of black students at selective colleges under race-

blind admissions will be only 42% of the status quo. Put another way, black economic

gains over the next quarter century can be expected to provide only about 17% of the

incremental representation that is provided by affirmative action today.




                                                                                      Page 31
       This conclusion is not much changed if the future admissions policy is assumed to

incorporate “class-based” affirmative action, in which students from families with low

incomes are given preferences analogous to those given to racial minorities today. The

correlation between race and family income, while strong, is not strong enough to permit

the latter to function as a useful proxy for race in the pursuit of diversity. Moreover, the

value of income as a proxy for race can only decline with increases in black incomes.

       Similarly, we judge it unlikely that universities will be able to compensate for the

abolition of race-based preferences through increased outreach toward and recruitment of

minority students. Our exercise suggests that there will simply be too few high-scoring

black students, and that they already apply to the most selective colleges at rates far

exceeding those of white students with similar scores.

       We do find a glimmer of hope, however, in our projections that incorporate

increases in black test scores beyond those deriving from changes in family income. Our

most optimistic simulations assume that, conditional on income, black students’ scores

relative to white students’ will rise at the same rate over the next quarter century as a

linear trend fit to past patterns. In this case, and if black student application behavior is

assumed stable, we find that race-blind rules may approach the black representation

achieved by affirmative action. This projection is undoubtedly upward biased, however,

as the last 25 years saw two distinct regimes, with rapidly closing black-white gaps in the

first period and deterioration in black relative performance since 1990. To extrapolate a

linear trend a full quarter century into the future is to assume a dramatic turnaround from

recent patterns, and sustained growth over a longer period than has been seen before.




                                                                                       Page 32
       As an indication of the degree of difficulty of achieving this projection, we

consider the effects of a wholly implausible intervention producing the complete

integration of the nation’s secondary schools. This, we estimate, would produce only a

small fraction of the test score gains that would be needed to make Justice O’Connor’s

prediction a reality. Clearly, substantial progress in increasing black students’ pre-

collegiate performance is critical to any hope of eliminating the need for affirmative

action within the next generation. Absent such progress, the elimination of racial

preferences in admissions, today or twenty five years from now, will lead to substantial

declines in black representation at the nation’s most selective colleges and universities.

Our simulations, crude as they are, lead us to agree with Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg’s

concurring opinion in Grutter, “From today’s vantage point, one may hope, but not

firmly forecast, that over the next generation’s span, progress toward nondiscrimination

and genuinely equal opportunity will make it safe to sunset affirmative action.”




                                                                                       Page 33
References

Blackwell, James. 1987. Mainstreaming Outsiders: The Production of Black
Professionals. 2d edition. Dix Hills, NY: General Hall.

Boozer, Michael, Alan B. Krueger, and Shari Wolkon. 1992. “Race and School Quality
Since Brown v. Board of Education” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity.
Microeconomics, Vol. 1992, pp. 269-338

Bond, Horace Mann. 1934. The Education of the Negro in the American Social Order.
New York: Prentice Hall.

Borjas, George. 1992. "Ethnic Capital and Intergenerational Mobility," The Quarterly
Journal of Economics, vol. 107, no. 1, February, pp. 123-150.

Bowen, William, and Derek Bok. 1998. The Shape of the River: Long Term
Consequences of Considering Race in College and University Admission. Princeton
University Press.

Bowen, William, Martin Kurzweil, and Eugene Tobin. 2005. Equity and Excellence in
Higher Education (draft)

Card, David, and Alan Krueger. 1992. “School Quality and Black-White Relative
Earnings: A Direct Assessment” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 107, No. 1.
(Feb.), pp. 151-200.

Card, David, and Alan Krueger. 1993. “Trends in Black-White Earnings Revisited.”
American Economic Review, Vol. 83, No. 2, Papers and Proceedings of the Hundred and
Fifth Annual Meeting of the American Economic Association. (May), pp. 85-91.

Card, David, and Alan Krueger. Forthcoming. “Would the Elimination of Affirmative
Action Affect Highly Qualified Minority Applicants? Evidence from California and
Texas.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review.

Card, David, and Jesse Rothstein. 2004. “Racial Segregation and the Black-White Test
Score Gap.” Unpublished manuscript.

Chadwick, Laura, and Solon, Gary. 2002. “Intergenerational Income Mobility among
Daughters.” American Economic Review, Vol. 92, No. 1. (March), pp. 335-44.

Clotfelter, Charles. 2004. After Brown: The Rise and Retreat of School Desegregation.
Princeton.

Crain, Robert, and Rita Mahard. 1983. “The Effect of Research Methodology on
Desegregation-Achievement Studies: A Meta-Analysis.” The American Journal of
Sociology, Vol. 88, No. 5. (March), pp. 839-854.



                                                                                Page 34
Donohue, John, and James J. Heckman. 1991. “Continuous versus Episodic Change: The
Impact of Civil Rights Policy on the Economic Status of Blacks.” Journal of Economic
Literature, 29, pp. 1603-1643.

Drewry, Henry, and Humphrey Doermann. 2001. Stand and Prosper: Private Black
Colleges and Their Students. Princeton University Press.

Freeman, Richard. 1973. “Changes in the Labor Market for Black Americans,”
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 20, pp. 67-120.

Goldstein, Joel. 2004. “Beyond Bakke: Grutter-Gratz and the Promise of Brown.” Saint
Louis Law Journal, v. 48, n. 899.

Hertz, Tom. Forthcoming. “Rags, Riches and Race: The Intergenerational Economic
Mobility of Black and White Families in the United States.” In S. Bowles, H. Gintis and
M. Osborne, eds., Unequal Chances: Family Background and Economic Success.
Princeton, NJ: Russell Sage Foundation and Princeton University Press.

Jencks, Christopher, and Phillips, Meredith, eds. 1998. The Black-White Test Score Gap.
Washington, D.C.: The Brookings Institution.

Kahlenberg, Richard D. 1996. The Remedy : Class, Race, and Affirmative Action. Basic
Books.

Kane, Thomas J. 1998. “Misconceptions in the Debate over Affirmative Action in
College Admissions.” In Gary Orfield and Edward Miller, eds., Chilling Admissions:
The Affirmative Action Crisis and the Search for Alternatives. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
Education Publishing Group.

Krueger, Alan. 2003. “The Supreme Court finds the ‘mushball middle’ on affirmative
action” New York Times (July 23).

Krueger, Alan, and Diane Whitmore. 2002. “Would Smaller Classes Help Close the
Black-White Achievement Gap?” In John Chubb and Tom Loveless, eds., Bridging the
Achievement Gap. Washington, DC: Brookings Institute Press.

Loury, Glenn et al. 2003. Amicus brief in Grutter v. Bollinger and Gratz v. Bollinger.
http://www.piperrudnick.com/db30/cgi-bin/pubs/UofMAmicusBrief.pdf

Mazumder, Bhashkar. 2000. “Earnings Mobility in the US: a New Look at
Intergenerational Mobility”, mimeo.

National Center for Education Statistics (NCES). 1999. “Results Over Time--NAEP
1999 Long-Term Trend Summary Data Tables,”
http://nces.ed.gov/nationsreportcard/tables/Ltt1999/



                                                                                  Page 35
Orfield, Gary. 1983. “Public School Desegregation in the United States, 1968-1980,”
Washington, D.C.: Joint Center for Political Studies.

Phillips, Meredith, Jeanne Brooks-Gunn, Greg Duncan, Pamela Klebanov, and Jonathan
Crane. 1998. “Family Background, Parenting Practices, and the Black-White Test Score
Gap,” in Christopher Jencks and Meredith Phillips, eds., The Black-White Test Score
Gap. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press.

Ruggles, Steven, Matthew Sobek, Trent Alexander, Catherine A. Fitch, Ronald Goeken,
Patricia Kelly Hall, Miriam King, and Chad Ronnander. 2004. Integrated Public Use
Microdata Series: Version 3.0 [Machine-readable database]. Minneapolis, MN:
Minnesota Population Center [producer and distributor], www.ipums.org.

Rothstein, Jesse. 2004. “Good Principals or Good Peers? Parental Valuation of School
Characteristics, Tiebout Equilibrium, and the Incentive Effects of Competition Among
Jurisdictions.” Working Paper #10666. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic
Research.

Solon, Gary. 1999. "Intergenerational Mobility in the Labor Market," in Handbook of
Labor Economics, vol. 3A, 1761-1800.

Solon, Gary. 2002. “Cross-Country Differences in Intergenerational Earnings Mobility.”
Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 16, No. 3 (Summer), pp. 59-66.




                                                                                Page 36
Figure 1: Trends in Black-White gaps in Student Achievement, NAEP Test, Age 17

                            1.4



                            1.2



                             1
 Standard Deviation Units




                            0.8



                            0.6

                                                             Math, Difference in means
                            0.4                              Math , Difference in 90th percentile
                                                             Reading, Difference in means
                                                             Reading, Difference in 90th percentile
                            0.2



                             0
                             1968   1973   1978   1983     1988           1993              1998
                                                    Year




Source: NCES, 1999.




                                                                                                      Page 37
Figure 2: Admission rates by type of institution and race
                         1                                                                                                                1

                        0.9     Public Universities                                                                                     0.9
                                                                                                                                                       Selective 1 Universities
                        0.8                                                                                                             0.8

                        0.7                                                                                                             0.7
Admits / Applications




                                                                                                                Admits / Applications
                        0.6                                                                                                             0.6

                        0.5                                                                                                             0.5

                        0.4                                                                                                             0.4
                                                                                                                                                           Admission Rate, White
                        0.3                                                                                                             0.3                Admission Rate, Black
                                                                                Admission Rate, White
                        0.2                                                                                                             0.2
                                                                                Admission Rate, Black
                        0.1                                                                                                             0.1

                         0                                                                                                                0
                          800      900         1000   1100     1200      1300     1400       1500        1600                              800       900        1000        1100        1200      1300      1400       1500       1600
                                                         SAT Bin Beginning
                                                                                                                                                                                  SAT Bin Beginning



                         1                                                                                                               1

                        0.9      Selective 2                                                                                            0.9
                                                                                                                                                 Selective 3
                        0.8                                                                                                             0.8

                        0.7                                                                                                             0.7
Admits / Applications




                                                                                                                Admits / Applications
                        0.6                                                                                                             0.6

                        0.5                                                                                                             0.5

                        0.4                                                                                                             0.4

                        0.3
                                                                                                                                        0.3

                        0.2                                                                                                                                                                               Admission Rate, White
                                                                                 Admission Rate, White                                  0.2
                        0.1                                                      Admission Rate, Black                                                                                                    Admission Rate, Black
                                                                                                                                        0.1
                         0
                                                                                                                                         0
                          800      900         1000   1100     1200      1300     1400       1500        1600
                                                                                                                                          800        900        1000        1100        1200      1300      1400       1500       1600
                                                         SAT Bin Beginning
                                                                                                                                                                                  SAT Bin Beginning




Source: Authors’ calculations from Expanded College and Beyond.




                                                                                                                                                                                                         Page 38
Figure 3: Distribution of SAT scores, black and white test takers

Panel A
                            0.12

                                                                                      Whites
                                                                                      Blacks
                            0.10
 Fraction SAT Test Takers




                            0.08



                            0.06



                            0.04



                            0.02



                            0.00
                                400   600   800     1000           1200             1400               1600
                                                  SAT Score

Panel B:
                            0.8


                            0.7


                            0.6


                            0.5
          Share Black




                            0.4


                            0.3                               Overall black share of black and white
                                                              test takers (14.3%)

                            0.2


                            0.1


                              0
                               400    600   800     1000          1200             1400                1600
                                                  SAT Score



Source: Authors’ calculations from Test Takers Database, 2000 cohort.




                                                                                                              Page 39
Figure 4: Black and white family income distributions, 2000 Census

                      0.12



                      0.10

                                                                      White actual
                                                                      Black actual
                      0.08
                                                                      Black counterfactual
 Relative Frequency




                      0.06



                      0.04



                      0.02



                      0.00
                             $0   $50,000   $100,000        $150,000            $200,000     $250,000
                                             Family Income Category


Source: Authors’ calculations from 2000 Decennial Census Public Use Microdata
Sample (Ruggles et al., 2004).




                                                                                                    Page 40
Figure 5: Predicted effects of income growth on the distribution of test scores of blacks
                                        0.12
                                                                             Baseline

                                                                             Income counterfactual
                                        0.10
                                                                             Income + NAEP Progress
 Fraction of Current Black SAT Takers




                                                                             Counterfactual
                                                                             Income + Integration Counterfactual
                                        0.08



                                        0.06



                                        0.04



                                        0.02



                                        0.00
                                               400   600   800     1000       1200             1400            1600
                                                                 SAT Score




                                                                                                                   Page 41
Figure 6: Black share of (Black and White) SAT-takers, by SAT Score

                                  0.16


                                  0.14


                                  0.12     Black share of test takers at baseline
 # Blacks / (# Black + # White)




                                                                                      Baseline

                                   0.1                                                Income Convergence Counterfactual

                                                                                      Income convergence + NAEP convergence
                                  0.08                                                counterfactual
                                                                                      Income convergence + integration
                                                                                      counterfactual
                                  0.06


                                  0.04


                                  0.02


                                    0
                                    1000    1100               1200                 1300           1400            1500
                                                                      SAT Bin Beginning




                                                                                                                              Page 42
Figure 7: Application rates by type of institution
                              0.25                                                                                                                    1.20
                                        Application Rate, White
                                                                                              PUBLIC                                                                                                      Selective 1
                                        Application Rate, Black
                                                                                                                                                      1.00
                              0.20      Predicted Application Rate, White
                                                                                                                                                                 Application Rate, White
                                        Predicted Application Rate, Black
                                                                                                                                                                 Application Rate, Black




                                                                                                                         Applications / Test Takers
 Applications / Test Takers




                                                                                                                                                      0.80       Predicted Application Rate, White
                              0.15
                                                                                                                                                                 Predicted Application Rate, Black

                                                                                                                                                      0.60


                              0.10

                                                                                                                                                      0.40



                              0.05
                                                                                                                                                      0.20




                              0.00                                                                                                                    0.00
                                  800   900          1000         1100       1200      1300         1400   1500   1600                                    800   900        1000            1100       1200         1300   1400   1500   1600
                                                                            SAT Bin                                                                                                                  SAT Bin



                              0.35                                                                                                                    0.30
                                                                                      Selective 2
                                        Application Rate, White
                                                                                                                                                                               Application Rate, White
                              0.30      Application Rate, Black
                                                                                                                                                      0.25                     Application Rate, Black
                                        Predicted Application Rate, White
                                        Predicted Application Rate, Black                                                                                                      Predicted Application Rate, White
                              0.25
                                                                                                                                                                               Predicted Application Rate, Black
 Applications / Test Takers




                                                                                                                         Applications / Test Takers
                                                                                                                                                      0.20

                              0.20

                                                                                                                                                      0.15

                              0.15


                                                                                                                                                      0.10
                              0.10



                              0.05                                                                                                                    0.05



                              0.00                                                                                                                    0.00
                                  800   900          1000         1100       1200      1300         1400   1500   1600                                    800   900        1000            1100       1200         1300   1400   1500   1600
                                                                            SAT Bin                                                                                                                  SAT Bin




Source: Authors’ calculations from Expanded College and Beyond.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Page 43
Table 1: Expected share of black students relative to white students, alternative income and test score distributions, maintaining
current black application patterns
                                                                       Public (P)             Most                 Highly               Moderately
                                                                                          Selective (S1)        Selective (S2)         Selective (S3)
                                                                     B/     Sh of Gap    B/      Sh of Gap     B/      Sh of Gap      B/      Sh of Gap
                                                                    B+W      Closed     B+W        Closed     B+W       Closed       B+W       Closed
Status quo admissions rates (with race preferences)
Observed income distribution                                        0.118               0.171                 0.142                  0.094

Projected race neutral admissions (using current white admissions
rates)
Observed income distribution                                        0.053       0.000   0.051         0.000   0.060        0.000     0.051       0.000

Counterfactual income distribution for families with children       0.064       0.169   0.069         0.153   0.078        0.214     0.062        0.254

Observed income distribution, NAEP progress                         0.075       0.336   0.089         0.316   0.094        0.410     0.072       0.504
Counterfactual income distribution, NAEP progress                   0.088       0.545   0.118         0.557   0.117        0.700     0.087       0.835

School quality convergence                                          0.061       0.125   0.064         0.110   0.072        0.146     0.059       0.182
Counterfactual income distribution, school quality convergence      0.073       0.308   0.086         0.293   0.092        0.386     0.071       0.463




                                                                                                                                     Page 44
 Table 2: Expected share of black students relative to white students, alternative income and test score distributions, assuming blacks
adopt current white application patterns
                                                                       Public (P)              Most                 Highly              Moderately
                                                                                           Selective (S1)        Selective (S2)       Selective (S3)
                                                                     B/     Sh. of Gap    B/      Sh. of Gap    B/     Sh. of Gap    B/     Sh. of Gap
                                                                    B+W      Closed      B+W        Closed     B+W       Closed     B+W       Closed
Status quo admissions rates (with race preferences)
Observed income distribution (current application rates)            0.118                0.171                 0.142                0.094
Observed income distribution (white application rates)              0.083                0.057                 0.048                0.047

Projected race neutral admissions (using current white admissions
rates)
Observed income distribution                                        0.038       0.000    0.016         0.000   0.021        0.000   0.028        0.000

Counterfactual income distribution for families with children       0.047       0.112    0.023         0.046   0.029        0.067   0.037        0.132

Observed income distribution, NAEP progress                         0.056       0.222    0.033         0.106   0.038        0.137   0.045        0.255
Counterfactual income distribution, NAEP progress                   0.068       0.366    0.046         0.194   0.051        0.246   0.057        0.446

School quality convergence                                          0.045       0.081    0.022         0.036   0.027        0.047   0.034        0.090
Counterfactual income distribution, school quality convergence      0.055       0.205    0.031         0.095   0.037        0.128   0.044        0.242
Note: Share of gap closed is computed relative to simulations using current race-specific application rates (row 1).




                                                                                                                                    Page 45
Table 3: Projections of admission pool with income-based affirmative action
                                                  Income           Inc. + Test Score
                              Baseline        Convergence            Convergence
                          # of               # of                  # of
                         Admits % Black     Admits % Black        Admits % Black
Selective 1
No preferences              3,426   5.1%      3,494     6.9%       3,686      11.8%
Income preferences (< $35k)
  Additional Admits           773   15.3%       752    13.0%         840      22.1%
  Total Admits              4,199    7.0%     4,246     8.0%       4,526      13.7%

Selective 2
No preferences              5,266   6.0%      5,366     7.8%       5,609      11.7%
Income preferences (< $35k)
  Additional Admits           686   21.2%       660    18.0%         740      26.9%
  Total Admits              5,952    7.7%     6,026     8.9%       6,349      13.5%

Selective 3
No preferences              5,764   5.1%      5,831     6.2%       5,991       8.7%
Income preferences (< $35k)
  Additional Admits           438   20.9%       421    17.7%         462      25.0%
  Total Admits              6,201    6.2%     6,252     6.9%       6,453       9.8%

Public
No preferences            14,817    5.3%     14,992     6.4%      15,395       8.8%
Income preferences (< $35k)
  Additional Admits         2,091   20.5%     2,009    17.2%       2,149      22.6%
  Total Admits            16,908     7.2%    17,001     7.7%      17,544      10.5%

Note: Simulations assume status quo application behavior.




                                                                                  Page 46
