                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      MULTIFREQUENCY NEWS AND STOCK RETURNS

                                           Laurent E. Calvet
                                            Adlai J. Fisher

                                         Working Paper 11441
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w11441


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       June 2005




Calvet: Department of Finance and Economics, HEC School of Managament, 78351 Jouy-en-Josas Cedex,
France, and NBER, calvet@hec.fr. Fisher: Sauder School of Business, University of British Columbia, 2053
Main Hall, Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z2, adlaifisher@sauder.ubc.ca. We received helpful comments from
Andrew Abel, John Campbell, John Geanakoplos, Bruno Solnik, Robert Stambaugh, Amir Yaron, Jessica
Wachter, and seminar participants at CREST, Paris I Panthéon-Sorbonne, and the Wharton School. We are
very appreciative of financial support provided for this project by the HEC Foundation, the UBC Bureau of
Asset Management, and the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

©2005 by Laurent E. Calvet and Adlai J. Fisher. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
Multifrequency News and Stock Returns
Laurent E. Calvet and Adlai J. Fisher
NBER Working Paper No. 11441
June 2005
JEL No. G12, C22

                                            ABSTRACT

Recent research documents that aggregate stock prices are driven by shocks with persistence levels

ranging from daily intervals to several decades. Building on these insights, we introduce a

parsimonious equilibrium model in which regime-shifts of heterogeneous durations affect the

volatility of dividend news. We estimate tightly parameterized specifications with up to 256 discrete

states on daily U.S. equity returns. The multifrequency equilibrium has significantly higher

likelihood than the classic Campbell and Hentschel (1992) specification, while generating volatility

feedback effects 6 to 12 times larger. We show in an extension that Bayesian learning about

stochastic volatility is faster for bad states than good states, providing a novel source of endogenous

skewness that complements the "uncertainty" channel considered in previous literature (e.g.,

Veronesi, 1999). Furthermore, signal precision induces a tradeoff between skewness and kurtosis,

and economies with intermediate investor information best match the data.

Laurent E. Calvet
Department of Finance and Economics
HEC School of Management
78351 Jouy-en-Josas Cedex
France
and NBER
calvet@hec.fr

Adlai J. Fisher
Sauder School of Business
University of British Columbia
2053 Main Mall
Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z2
Canada
adlai.fisher@sauder.ubc.ca
1. Introduction

The recent asset pricing literature suggests that stock prices are driven by shocks with
very heterogeneous degrees of persistence. For example, market returns are predictable
at a range of business-cycle horizons; some variables provide best forecasts over intervals
of twelve months or less while others increase in power out to five years and more. 1
Complementary studies emphasize even more persistent sources of variations in returns,
including technological innovation (e.g., Greenwood and Jovanovic, 1999), exogenous
demographic changes (e.g., Abel, 2003), and low frequency movements in consumption
or dividend growth (Bansal and Yaron, 2004). 2
    At the other end of the spectrum, high-frequency returns permit a large number
of observations and thus potentially more precise econometric inference. Researchers
have correspondingly related daily and intraday price movements to weather news (Roll,
1984), macroeconomic announcements (Andersen, Bollerslev, Diebold, and Vega, 2004),
internet bulletin boards (Antweiler and Frank, 2004), analyst reports 3 and corporate
announcements.4 The existing literature thus documents persistence levels in stock
market news ranging from daily intervals to several decades.
    Our research builds on this evidence by developing an equilibrium framework with
news shocks at many different frequencies. Why has the existing literature not addressed
this agenda? We offer two explanations.
    First, it might seem plausible that some financial questions are best addressed in
isolation at a single horizon. Following this logic, equity premium studies largely focus
on annual data, while market efficiency research mainly uses higher frequencies. Re-
cent evidence suggests, however, that fluctuations at different frequencies can interact.
Lochstoer (2004) thus shows that a slowly-evolving generational state variable controls
business-cycle variation in risk premia. Similarly, Andersen, Bollerslev, Diebold, and
Vega (2004) provide evidence that the high-frequency impact of macroeconomic news
depends on the state of the business cycle.
    A second, and more pragmatic, impediment to multifrequency research is that com-
plexity grows quickly with the number of components. Recent contributions (e.g.,
Bansal and Yaron, 2004; Lochstoer, 2004) demonstrate not only the empirical advantage
of using two persistence levels, but also that formal estimation becomes more difficult
and high-dimensional calibration more necessary with a more complex setup.
   1
      See, for example, Lettau and Ludvigson (2001).
   2
      Endogenous mechanisms for extremely persistent fluctuations include habit formation (Campbell
and Cochrane, 1999), durable consumption goods (Yogo, 2004a), and the dynamics of capital accumu-
lation with adjustment costs (Jermann, 1998).
    3
      See, e.g., Womack (1996).
    4
      An extensive literature studies stock price reactions to corporate announcements including quarterly
earnings, dividend policy, securities issuances and changes of control. See, e.g., MacKinlay (1997).



                                                    1
    Our paper proposes a new direction to address these problems by developing a parsi-
monious equilibrium framework based on recent advances in multifrequency economet-
rics. An Epstein-Zin consumer receives an exogenous consumption stream, and prices
a flow of correlated dividends with regime-switching in the mean and volatility of their
growth rates.5 The model thus follows the recent trend to model dividends and con-
sumption as correlated but not identical processes (e.g., Campbell and Cochrane, 1999).
Exact solutions for equilibrium prices, return dynamics, and filtered beliefs are avail-
able. Unlike previous Lucas tree economies considered in the literature (e.g., Bansal
and Yaron, 2004; Lettau, Ludvigson, and Wachter, 2004), our setup implies that higher
volatility reduces prices for any level of the elasticity of intertemporal substitution.
    We specify news arrivals with a Markov-switching multifractal (MSM), a stochas-
tic volatility model characterized by a small number of parameters but an arbitrarily
large number of frequencies (Calvet and Fisher, 2001, 2002, 2004; Calvet, Fisher, and
Thompson, 2004). Under this specification, news volatility is hit by exogenous shocks
with highly heterogeneous durations, which range from one day to more than a decade
in empirical applications. Earlier work shows that MSM captures the outliers, volatility
persistence and power variation6 of financial series, while permitting maximum likeli-
hood estimation and analytical multi-step forecasting. MSM compares favorably with
standard volatility models such as GARCH(1, 1) both in- and out-of-sample (Calvet and
Fisher, 2004). It is now natural to embed it into an equilibrium framework.
    The multifrequency equilibrium model inherits the appealing properties of MSM.
It is tightly parameterized and permits structural estimation by maximum likelihood.
We estimate our specification on an index 7 of US equities over the period 1926-2004.
Versions of the model with six to eight volatility frequencies provide significant improve-
ments in likelihood relative to lower dimensional specifications. The model also improves
on earlier specifications of single frequency news arrivals (Campbell and Hentschel, 1992,
hereafter “CH”), even though our approach uses fewer parameters.
    Our model generates volatility feedback, the property that upward revisions to an-
ticipated future volatility tend to decrease current returns. Consistent with a multifre-
quency perspective, previous researchers have studied this topic at a range of different
   5
     Following Hamilton (1989, 1990), researchers have used regime-switching to help explain financial
phenomena including stock market volatility, return predictability, the relation between conditional risk
and return, the term structure of interest rates, and the recent growth of the stock market. Contributions
include Abel (1994, 1999), Bansal and Zhou (2002), Cecchetti, Lam and Mark (1990), David (1997),
Kandel and Stambaugh (1990), Lettau, Ludvigson and Wachter (2004), Turner, Startz and Nelson
(1989), Veronesi (1999, 2000, 2004), Wachter (2004), and Whitelaw (2000).
   6
     Power variation relates to the behavior at small time scales of sums of powers of absolute values of
returns. See Calvet and Fisher (2002), Barndorff-Nielsen and Shephard (2003) and Andersen, Bollerslev,
and Diebold (2003).
   7
     We splice the Schwert (1990a) and value-weighted CRSP indices, as in CH.



                                                    2
horizons. For example, French, Schwert, and Stambaugh (1987, hereafter “FSS”), CH,
and Wu (2001) assess feedback effects in daily, weekly, and monthly data, while Pindyck
(1984), Poterba and Summers (1985), Bansal and Yaron (2004), and Lettau, Ludvig-
son and Wachter (2004) emphasize volatility movements at the business cycle range
and beyond.8 A multifrequency approach might therefore prove useful in this context.
Intuition suggests that high-frequency volatility shocks help to capture the dynamics
of typical day-to-day variations, while lower-frequency movements generate the strong
feedback required to fit the most extreme daily returns. Volatility feedback models are
thus a natural setting where the interaction of various frequencies seems intuitively
important. The paper can be viewed in this sense as a first step towards bringing
together branches of the lower-frequency macro-finance and higher-frequency financial
econometrics literature.
     The multifrequency equilibrium generates substantially larger feedback effects than
previous research. For instance, CH find that feedback amplifies the volatility of divi-
dend news by only about 2%; they attribute this result to the property of GARCH-type
specifications that the volatility of volatility can only be large if volatility itself is high.
In our stochastic volatility MSM specification for dividend news, feedback rises with
the number of components and the likelihood function, increasing to between 12% and
24% for the preferred specifications with six to eight components. The multifrequency
equilibrium model thus generates an unconditional feedback that is 6 to 12 times larger
than in previous literature.9
     A substantial level of endogenous skewness is difficult to obtain in our full-information
equilibrium with symmetric dividends. Earlier volatility feedback studies attempt to ad-
dress this by introducing predictive asymmetry (CH) or skewness (Wu, 2001) directly
into the econometric specification of dividends. Our work instead investigates whether
higher return moments can be modeled through the endogenous equilibrium implications
of imperfect investor information and learning. We thus generalize our setup to allow
that the investor observes noisy signals of the volatility components and then makes
Bayesian inferences about the latent volatility state. The separation of dividends from
consumption implies that the price:dividend ratio is linear in investor beliefs, making
the model tractable.
     Our learning model generates two main sets of results. First, signal precision has
little effect on the unconditional mean and variance of stock returns. To explain this,
   8
      Investigation of volatility feedback in a general equilibrium setting was pioneered by Barsky (1989)
in a two-period setting and Abel (1988) in the dynamic case. French, Schwert and Stambaugh (1987) and
Campbell and Hentschel (1992) use GARCH-type processes to show that ex-post returns are negatively
affected by positive innovations in volatility. Bekaert and Wu (2000) provide further support for this
hypothesis.
    9
      Based on the paramater estimates presented in Wu (2001), unconditional volatility feedback is 3.5%
for his model estimated on monthly data, and is negative for his model estimated on weekly data.


                                                    3
we show that the price:dividend ratio (P:D) in the learning model is the conditional
expectation of its full-information counterpart. This implies the same mean and lower
variance, which is the analogue in our setup of the variance bounds discussed by LeRoy
and Porter (1981) and Shiller (1981). In our model, however, the reduction in variance
is negligible because large movements of the P:D ratio are induced by shifts in the
most persistent volatility components. Learning about these rare changes is therefore a
transitory phenomenon that has limited impact on stock return variance, and we verify
this logic numerically. The sizeable volatility feedback implied by our full-information
specification is thus robust to changes in information quality.
    Our second learning result is that changes in the most persistent components have
strong effects on the higher moments of returns. In particular, varying the precision
of the volatility signal generates a sizeable tradeoff between endogenous skewness and
kurtosis. When investors have perfect information, volatility shocks are incorporated
fully and immediately into price, regardless of the direction of change. By contrast,
when the volatility component signals are poor, investors rely on dividend news to make
inferences about the volatility state. They still learn quickly about volatility increases,
because a single extreme fluctuation is highly improbable with low volatility. Learning
about reduced volatility must be slow, however, because dividend news observations near
the mean are a relatively likely outcome regardless of the true volatility state. Thus,
bad news about volatility incorporates quickly into price, while good news trickles out
slowly.10 This asymmetry creates the observed tradeoff between endogenous skewness
and kurtosis as information quality changes.
    The linearity of the P:D ratio distinguishes our framework from previous research
that builds on the convexity of the price function with respect to beliefs (e.g., Brennan
and Xia, 2001; David, 1997; Lettau, Ludvigson and Wachter, 2004; Veronesi, 1999,
2000). Convexity leads to skewness because price is more sensitive to bad news in
good times than it is to good news in bad times. The origin of convexity in these
models is that signals about the latent state jointly influence investor beliefs about
cash flows and investor beliefs about the stochastic discount factor. This comovement
creates an “uncertainty” price discount, which is most pronounced when beliefs are
intermediate and therefore most variable. By contrast, investors in our framework learn
only about cash flows. The endogenous skewness mechanism identified in our paper
thus complements the “uncertainty” channel considered in previous learning studies.
    Our work also complements earlier research by Veronesi (2000) on how information
quality affects stock returns. Whereas Veronesi considers a latent dividend drift, we
investigate learning about volatility and show that signal precision then has powerful
  10
    A statistical interpretation is that odds ratios tend to be larger in the tails of competing distributions
than in the bells. This implies that learning about volatility increases should be faster than learning
about volatility decreases.



                                                      4
effects in a multifrequency environment. Further, our study directly demonstrates that
structural models of investor learning are empirically relevant to higher-frequency daily
stock returns, which is an advance to this literature. 11
    Finally, we emphasize the considerable challenge of using a five parameter economic
equilibrium to explain more than 20, 000 observations of daily stock returns over a time
span exceeding eight decades. The model must account for high-frequency regularities
such as thick tails, volatility persistence, skewness, and feedback. It must also be flexible
enough to account for market conditions that change considerably over such a long time
span (Schwert, 1989). Moreover, our approach is structural in the sense that economic
theory places strong restrictions on what would otherwise be degrees of freedom in a
purely statistical setup. Our exogenous dividend news process is conditionally Gaussian,
has constant mean, and is both conditionally and unconditionally symmetric. Thus,
endogenous equilibrium effects must play a significant role in explaining stock returns.
    Section 2 presents the asset pricing model and the equilibrium solution for a general
Markov structure. Section 3 specializes to a volatility feedback setup and develops
intuition on a loglinearized version of the model. In Section 4, empirical results are
provided for economies with full information. Learning economies are investigated in
Section 5. All proofs are in the Appendix.

2. An Asset Pricing Model with Regime-Switching Dividends

This section develops a discrete-time equilibrium model with regime-shifts in the mean
and volatility of dividend growth. The model resolves a well-known difficulty in the
volatility feedback literature. In a Lucas (1978) tree economy, an increase in consump-
tion volatility affects the pricing kernel and thus reduces the aggregate market price
only under special choices of relative risk aversion (e.g., Abel, 1989; Whitelaw, 2000) or
the elasticity of intertemporal substitution (Bansal and Yaron, 2004; Lettau, Ludvig-
son, and Wachter, 2004). In our model, dividend news volatility has no impact on the
pricing kernel and thus generates a negative relation between volatility and prices for
all preference parameters.
  11
     Contributions to the literature on learning in financial markets include Detemple (1986), Dothan
and Feldman (1986), Gennotte (1986), Timmermann (1993, 1996), David (1997), Veronesi (1999, 2002),
Brennan and Xia (2001), and Lettau, Ludvigson and Wachter (2004). Empirical implementation tends
to focus on calibration at lower frequencies. For example, Veronesi (2004) calibrates to yearly returns
and considers horizons ranging from twenty to two hundred years. Lettau, Ludvigson and Wachter
(2003) similarly consider highly persistent shocks with durations of about a decade. David (1997) and
Brennan and Xia (2001) calibrate at a monthly frequency. Guidolin and Timmermann (2003) develop
estimation and forecasting for a model of learning about the drift on a binomial lattice, and apply this
to pricing options at a weekly frequency. At a monthly frequency, Turner, Startz, and Nelson (1989)
and Kim, Morley, and Nelson (2004), consider learning about volatility in a two-state specification with
feedback effects, where the signals that drive investor learning are not specified.


                                                   5
2.1. Preferences, Consumption and Dividends

We consider an exchange economy defined on the regular grid t = 0, 1, 2, ..., ∞. As in
Epstein and Zin (1989) and Weil (1989), the representative agent has isoelastic recursive
utility
                                     1−α
                                                           θ
                                                            1−α
                                                   1−α 1θ
                      Ut = (1 − δ)Ct   θ
                                          + δ[Et (Ut+1 )]       ,

where α is the coefficient of relative risk aversion, ψ is the elasticity of intertemporal
substitution (EIS), and θ = (1 − α)/(1 − ψ −1 ). When α = ψ −1 , the specification reduces
to expected utility. While the Epstein-Zin-Weil preferences facilitate comparison with
earlier studies, most of our results hold with standard expected utility.
    The agent receives an exogenous consumption stream {C t }. The log-consumption
ct = ln Ct follows a random walk with constant drift and volatility:

                                        ct − ct−1 = gc + σ c εc,t ,                              (2.1)

where the shocks {εc,t } are IID N (0, 1). This standard specification is consistent with
the empirical evidence that consumption growth is approximately IID in postwar US
consumption data (e.g., Campbell, 2003). 12
    The volatility feedback literature suggests that aggregate stock prices decrease with
the volatility of dividend news. When the stock market is a claim on aggregate consump-
tion, this negative relation arises in equilibrium only for specific values of the preference
parameters. For instance, under expected utility α = 1/ψ, the price:dividend ratio de-
clines with volatility only if risk aversion is less than one (Barsky, 1989; Abel, 1988). 13
For arbitrary Epstein-Zin preferences, volatility reduces prices only if the EIS is strictly
larger than 1 and relative risk aversion differs from unity: ψ > 1 and α 6= 1 (Bansal and
Yaron, 2004; Lettau, Ludvigson and Wachter, 2004). 14 The empirical validity of the
  12
     Bansal and Yaron (2004) argue that consumption growth contains a small but highly persistent
component. This is reasonable but in the raw consumption data difficult to distinguish from the iid
case, which is still the predominant assumption in the asset pricing literature. Future work might
consider incorporating into our framework the type of consumption growth suggested by Bansal and
Yaron.
  13
     The price:dividend ratio is then Qt ≡ Pt /Ct = Et +∞        n           1−α
                                                         P
                                                           n=1 δ (Ct+n /Ct )     , or equivalently
                     +∞
                             (      " „      «−α        #      "„       «−α #    „       «)
                     X     n            Ct+n       Ct+n            Ct+n            Ct+n
              Qt =       δ     Covt              ;        + Et                Et             .
                     n=1
                                         Ct         Ct              Ct               Ct

When future consumption becomes riskier, the ratio is affected by two opposite effects. First, the
covariances become more negative and reduce the price:dividend ratio Qt , as desired. Second, the
                                                                                       ˆ             ˜
precautionary motive increases the expected marginal utility of future consumption Et (Ct+n /Ct )−α ,
which lowers interest rates and tends to increase Qt . We eliminate the second effect by disentangling
volatility shocks to the stock market from aggregate
                                            h        consumption.     i
  14
       The Euler equation is then Qθt = δ θ Et (Ct+1 /Ct )1−α (1 + Qt+1 )θ . When consumption growth is


                                                    6
EIS restriction has not been resolved. Attanasio and Weber (1993), Vissing-Jørgensen
(2002), and Bansal and Yaron (2004) report estimates of ψ larger than 1, while Camp-
bell and Mankiw (1989), Campbell (2003), and Yogo (2004b) find ψ to be small and in
many cases statistically indistinguishable from zero.
    We resolve these difficulties by: 1) separating dividends from consumption, and 2)
permitting that shocks to dividend volatility do not simultaneously impact consumption.
Specifically, the log-dividend dt = ln Dt follows a random walk with state-dependent
drift and volatility:

                                                     σ 2d (Mt )
                          dt − dt−1 = µd (Mt ) −                + σ d (Mt )εd,t ,
                                                           2
where εd,t is IID N (0, 1) and correlated with εc,t , the drift µd and volatility σ d are
deterministic functions of the state variable M t , and the Itô term σ 2d (Mt )/2 guarantees
that expected dividend growth E[Dt /Dt−1 |Mt ] = eµd (Mt ) is controlled only by µd (Mt ).
We assume that the state variable Mt is a first-order Markov process, and leave the
exact specification of the drift and volatility fully general in the rest of Section 2.
    The model thus separates stock returns from aggregate consumption growth and the
stochastic discount factor. This assumption, which is common in finance, is consistent
with a variety of empirical facts.15 First, the correlation between consumption and the
stock market is generally small. In US data, the correlation between real consumption
growth and real dividend growth is 0.05 at a quarterly frequency, and 0.25 at a 4-year
horizon (Campbell, 2003). Second, aggregate consumption is smooth and not notice-
ably heteroskedastic. In contrast, the volatility of stock returns substantially fluctuates
through time. Third, the disconnect between d t and ct is possible because corporate
profits only account for only a small proportion of national income. For instance, in US
data corporate profits and personal consumption respectively account for approximately
10% and 70% of national income over the period 1929-2002. Consumption and dividend
shocks should thus be correlated, but not identical.

2.2. Asset Pricing under Complete Information

The information available to the investor is a key variable of the model. To develop
intuition, we begin by considering that the agent directly observes the true state of
the economy Mt . This will be the case if agents observe the macroeconomic quantities
determining the state or obtain Mt by engaging into fundamental research. The investor
information set It = {(Cs , Ds , Ms ); s ≤ t} thus characterizes full information economies.
                                                                                     ˜¯1/θ
IID, the price dividend ratio is constant and satisfies Q/(1+Q) = δ E (Ct+1 /Ct )1−α
                                                                   ˘ ˆ
                                                                                           . It decreases
with volatility if (1 − α)/θ > 0 or equivalently ψ > 1 and α 6= 1.
  15
     See for instance Campbell (1996) or Campbell and Cochrane (1999).



                                                   7
    The stochastic discount factor satisfies
                                                                −α
                                                  0       Ct+1
                                    SDFt+1 = δ                         ,                         (2.2)
                                                           Ct
                                      1
where δ 0 = δ{E[(Ct+1 /Ct )1−α ]} θ −1 . This expression is proportional to the stochastic
discount factor obtained under expected utility (θ = 1), suggesting that the elasticity
of intertemporal substitution affects the interest rate but not the price of risk.
    We now turn to equilibrium pricing. The interest rate is constant through time and
satisfies the familiar relationship: r f = − ln Et (SDFt+1 ) = − ln δ 0 + αgc − (ασ c )2 /2. The
equilibrium stock price is proportional to the current dividend: P t = Q(Mt )Dt . The
Markov state thus controls the P:D ratio. The gross return on the stock
                                      Dt+1 + Pt+1   Dt+1 1 + Q(Mt+1 )
                        1 + Rt+1 ≡                =                                              (2.3)
                                          Pt         Dt     Q(Mt )
satisfies the pricing condition E [(1 + R t+1 )SDFt+1 |It ] = 1, or equivalently
                          "                                     #
                              Ct+1 −α Dt+1 1 + Q(Mt+1 )
                                    
                        0
                       δE                                      It = 1.
                               Ct         Dt     Q(Mt )
The price:dividend ratio therefore solves the fixed-point equation
                           n                                                 o
               Q(Mt ) = Et [1 + Q(Mt+1 )]eµd (Mt+1 )−rf −αρc,d σc σ d (Mt+1 ) ,                  (2.4)

where ρc,d = Cov(εc,t , εd,t ) > 0 denotes the constant correlation between the Gaussian
noises in consumption and dividends.
    When the volatility process {σ d (Mt )} is persistent, a large standard deviation of
dividend growth at a given date t implies a low contemporaneous price:dividend ratio
Q(Mt ) = Et +∞        n     µd (Mt+h )−rf −αρc,d σ c σ d (Mt+h )
             P
                n=1 [Πh=1 e                                      ]. High volatility thus feeds into low
asset prices for any choices of the relative risk aversion α and the EIS ψ.
    By (2.3), the log excess return rt+1 ≡ ln(1 + Rt+1 ) − rf is determined by the
price:dividend ratio and the realization of the dividend growth:
                  1 + Q(Mt+1 )                    σ 2 (Mt+1 )
      rt+1 = ln                + µd (Mt+1 ) − rf − d          + σ d (Mt+1 )εd,t+1 .              (2.5)
                     Q(Mt )                            2
Equations (2.4) and (2.5) are the building blocks of the empirical work.
    In empirical applications, we conveniently assume that the Markov state M t takes
a finite number of values {m1 , ..., md }. Fixed-point condition (2.4) implies that the
equilibrium P:D ratio can be easily computed numerically for every possible state
Q(m1 ), ..., Q(md ). Econometric inference is also straightforward. While the investor ob-
serves the true volatility state Mt , the econometrician has a smaller information set
It0 ⊆ It . Specifically, we assume that the econometrician only observes excess returns:
It0 ≡ {rs }ts=1 . We show in the Appendix that the likelihood function L(r 1 , ..., rT ) is then
available in closed-form.

                                                  8
3. Volatility Feedback with Multifrequency Shocks

A large body of research documents that corporate profits and dividends are hit by
shocks with heterogeneous persistence. Classic asset pricing papers (e.g., CH) nonethe-
less assume an autoregressive specification in which volatility shocks decline at a single
frequency. In standard setups, multifrequency shocks would of course require a large
number of parameters. Recent econometrics literature (Calvet and Fisher, 2001, 2002,
2004) develops Markov-switching multifractal (MSM) processes as a tractable solution
to this problem. We now adopt this specification for dividend news.

3.1. A Multifrequency Specification for Dividend News

We assume that the volatility state M t follows an MSM process, as is now explained.
The Markov state is a row vector

                               Mt = (M1,t ; M2,t ; ...; Mk,t ) ∈ Rk̄+ ,

where the scalars M1,t , M2,t , ..., Mk,t are volatility components with heterogeneous dura-
tions. Persistence is highest for the first component, and progressively diminishes with
the component index k. MSM thus contains a finite number of volatility components,
each of which corresponds to a different frequency.
    Dividends have a constant growth rate

                                           µd (Mt ) ≡ gd ,

and a stochastic volatility equal to the renormalized product

                               σ d (Mt ) ≡ σ̄ d (M1,t M2,t ...Mk,t )1/2 .                      (3.1)

We assume that σ̄ d is a positive constant and that each random multiplier M k,t has an
unconditional mean equal to unity: EM k,t = 1.
   The volatility state vector is easily constructed through time. 16 Let Mt denote the
Markov state at date t. For each k ∈ {1, .., k̄}, the next period multiplier Mk,t+1 is
drawn from a fixed distribution M with probability γ k , and is otherwise equal to its
current value: Mk,t+1 = Mk,t . The construction can be summarized as:

             Mk,t+1 drawn from distribution M                with probability γ k
             Mk,t+1 = Mk,t                                   with probability 1 − γ k .

The switching events and new draws from M are independent across k and t. The volatil-
ity components Mk,t differ in their transition probabilities but not in their marginal
  16
    This innovation, introduced in Calvet and Fisher (2001), distinguishes our construction from pre-
vious multifractal processes that are generated by recursive operations on the entire sample path.


                                                   9
distribution. Each component Mk,t therefore follows a Markov process that is identical
except for time scale. These features greatly contribute to the parsimony of the model.
     MSM can accommodate any distribution M with positive support and unit mean. In
this paper, we choose for parsimony a binomial taking values m 0 ∈ [1; 2] and 2 − m0 ∈
[0; 1] with equal probability. We tightly parameterize the transition probabilities by
assuming
                                γ k = 1 − (1 − γ k̄ )(b ) .
                                                       k−k̄
                                                                                  (3.2)
Calvet and Fisher (2001) introduce this specification through the discretization of a
Poisson arrival process, and subsequent work demonstrates its empirical validity (Calvet
and Fisher, 2004; Calvet, Fisher, and Thompson, 2004). Condition (3.2) implies that the
transition probabilities grow approximately geometrically: γ k ∼ γ k̄ bk−k̄ . The parameter
γ k̄ thus controls the persistence of the highest frequency component, while b determines
the spacing between component frequencies.
      The specification (3.1) is appealing to model the high variability and strong per-
sistence of financial volatility. Low-frequency multipliers deliver persistent and discrete
switches, consistent with evidence of apparent non-stationarity in return variance (e.g.,
Schwert, 1989; Pagan and Schwert, 1990). 17 Persistent changes also have a strong
impact on the P:D ratio and thus generate large feedback effects in stock returns. High-
frequency multipliers give additional outliers through their direct effect on the tails of
the dividend news process. Further, multiplicative interaction implies that subperiods
of low volatility can be observed in highly volatile periods. Conversely, total volatility
can quickly switch from an extreme to a normal level, as has been observed in equity
data (e.g., Schwert, 1990b). We expect that these features of MSM will help to fit US
stock returns over a long time span as well as to generate substantial volatility feedback.
      The equilibrium excess return

                          1 + Q(Mt+1 )            σ 2 (Mt+1 )
              rt+1 = ln                + gd − rf − d          + σ d (Mt+1 )εd,t+1                (3.3)
                             Q(Mt )                    2

is fully specified by the MSM volatility dynamics and fixed-point condition (2.4). Volatil-
ity feedback manifest itself in the return equation through the term ln 1+Q(M       t+1 )
                                                                                Q(Mt ) . Let
σ c,d = σ c σ̄ d ρc,d . By Euler condition (2.4), the price-dividend ratio is determined by
six coefficients: gd − rf , ασ c,d and the MSM volatility parameters (m 0 , γ k̄ , b, σ̄ d ). As
is standard in the literature (e.g. Campbell and Shiller, 1988), we calibrate the mean
price:dividend ratio to its empirical value. This constraint guarantees that volatility
feedback estimates do not arise from a counterfactually high share of dividends in stock
  17
    Although our model is strictly stationary, even very long-samples would be difficult to distinguish
from a non-stationary process due to low-frequency switches. We view this as a convenient framework
to model the low-frequency uncertainty that is present in financial data.



                                                  10
returns. Specifically, consider

                                                Q(Mt )             Pt
                               ln ρ ≡ E ln               = E ln          .                              (3.4)
                                              1 + Q(Mt )        Pt + D t

A unique ασ c,d ensures that the price-dividend ratio matches the empirical value of ρ
for any choice of the other five parameters. 18
    The return dynamics are thus specified by

                                  ψ ≡ (m0 , γ k̄ , b, σ̄ d , gd − rf ) ∈ R5 ,

where m0 denotes the high level of a volatility component, γ k̄ is the transition probability
of the least persistent component, b quantifies the growth rates of frequencies, and g d −rf
and σ̄ d quantify the mean and standard deviations of dividend news.

3.2. Loglinear Approximation

We now develop intuition for the multifrequency equilibrium by loglinearizing the pricing
equation. Specifically, assume that the price-dividend ratio is loglinear in the volatility
components:
                                             k̄
                                             X
                            ln Q(Mt ) ≈ q̄ −    qk (Mk,t − 1).                       (3.5)
                                                       k=1

Equilibrium fixed-point condition (2.4) implies that 19
                                           ασ c,d   1 − γk
                                       qk =                   ,                                         (3.6)
                                            2 1 − (1 − γ k )ρ
                                   q̄ 
                                     e
                               ln           ≡ ln ρ = gd − rf − ασ c,d .                                 (3.7)
                                   1 + eq̄
We observe that each coefficient qk increases with the probability 1 − γ k of the corre-
sponding component remaining in the current state. The price:dividend ratio is thus
a persistence-weighted sum of the volatility components. High frequency components
have negligible effects on the P:D ratio: q k → 0 when γ k → 1. On the other hand for
very persistent components, the coefficient q k is large since ρ is empirically close to one
at the usual frequencies.
    By (3.3) and (3.7), the unconditional expected return satisfies Er t = ασ c,d , as in
the consumption CAPM. Volatility innovations thus have no impact the unconditional
                                                                       √             √
  18
     The price:dividend ratio Q(Mt ) = Et +∞         n(gd −rf )−ασc,d [ g(Mt+1 )+...+ g(Mt+n )]
                                           P
                                             n=1 e                                              monotonically
decreases from +∞ to 0 as ασ c,d increases from −∞ to +∞. Thus for every (m0 , γ k̄ , b, σ̄d , gd − rf ) and
ρ < 1, equation (3.4) has a unique solution ασ c,d .
  19
     We show in the Appendix that the approximate solution holds for all choices of γ 1 , ..., γ k̄ , and thus
does not hinge on restrictions (3.2).


                                                     11
equity premium. Realized returns are of course affected by multifrequency shocks and
satisfy

                            k̄
                            X
          rt+1 ≈ ασ c,d +         qk [(Mk,t − 1) − ρ(Mk,t+1 − 1)] + σ d (Mt+1 )εd,t+1 .    (3.8)
                            k=1

The regimes generate large clustered outliers, as in equity data. We now investigate
how they affect the conditional and unexpected components of returns.
   Given investor information It = {(Cs , Ds , Ms ); s ≤ t}, the conditional return is the
persistence-weighted sum of volatility components:
                                                                  
                                            k̄
                                          1 X
                    Et rt+1 ≈ ασ c,d 1 +      (1 − γ k )(Mk,t − 1) .               (3.9)
                                          2
                                                 k=1

Multipliers with high durations command a high expected return. We note that the
formula contrasts with the relationships obtained in traditional volatility models, where
the conditional return is typically a function of current volatility (e.g. Merton, 1980;
CH). As in Cecchetti, Lam, and Mark (1990), the volatility components generate mean
reversion in returns: Et rt+n ≈ ασ c,d [1 + k̄k=1 (1 − γ k )n (Mk,t − 1)/2] → ασ c,d as n → ∞.
                                           P

Note, however, that convergence may be non-monotonic. For instance if M 1,t > 1 and
Mk̄,t < 1, volatility is expected to increase in the short run and decrease in the long
run, implying similar movements in conditional returns.
    The return innovation ut+1 = rt+1 − Et rt+1 satisfies

                             k̄
                             X
                 ut+1 ≈ −ρ         qk (Mk,t+1 − Et Mk,t+1 ) + σ d (Mt+1 )εd,t+1 .         (3.10)
                             k=1

An unexpected increase in a volatility component reduces the price: dividend ratio and
the return on the stock. Similarly, the return innovation is positive when the volatility
component is smaller than expected. As previously, the effect of an innovation on a
multiplier depends on its frequency. This mechanism implies that volatility and returns
are negatively correlated, which generates skewness in the distribution of returns.
    The model permits us to revisit the “no news is good news” effect discussed in CH.
Consider component k and assume that no news has arrived between date t and date t+1:
Mk,t+1 = Mk,t . If the component is initially low (M k,t < 1), volatility remains at a low
level and no news is then good news for the stock market: −ρq k (Mk,t+1 −Et Mk,t+1 ) > 0.
On the other hand if volatility is initially high, no arrival is bad news for stock returns.
Thus, the absence of an arrival can be either bad news or good news for the stock market
depending on the volatility state.



                                                12
    Investor anticipation tends to make returns more volatile than dividend news. The
stock market amplification of exogenous shocks is quantified by the unconditional volatil-
ity feedback
                                                         k̄
                   V ar(rt+1 )        V ar(M ) X 2
                                  ≈1+           qk [2ργ k + (1 − ρ)2 ] > 1,                       (3.11)
                 V ar(dt+1 − dt )        σ̄ 2d
                                                        k=1
which increases with the duration and size of the volatility components. The relation
between feedback and volatility persistence is thus consistent with previous literature
(e.g., Poterba and Summers, 1985; Bansal and Yaron, 2004), and extends to a multifre-
quency setting.
    CH attribute their low estimates of volatility feedback to the fact that in GARCH-
type processes, the volatility of volatility increases very rapidly (as a fourth power) of
the volatility level. By contrast, our model with k̄ = 1 implies
                     V art (σ 2t+1 ) = σ̄ 4d γ 1 [V ar(M ) + (1 − γ 1 )(M1,t − 1)2 ].
The volatility of volatility is therefore a non-monotonic, U-shaped function of the volatil-
ity level. When k̄ > 1, it is straightforward to approximate V ar t (σ 2t+1 ) by a sum of
U-shaped functions of the multipliers. This weaker relation between the level and con-
ditional variance of volatility suggests that our model may yield larger estimates of the
feedback effect.

4. Empirical Results with Fully Informed Investors

We now investigate the performance of the multifrequency equilibrium model on a long
sample of excess US equity returns. The test is challenging for several reasons. To
begin with, we use daily data spanning a long period of nearly eight decades. Thus, the
model must be able to account for regularities that are important at high frequencies,
such as thick tails, volatility persistence, skewness, and feedback effects. Additionally,
a good model should be flexible enough to account for market conditions that vary
widely across different periods in such a long time span, but also avoid overfitting. Our
parsimonious multifrequency specification seems like a good candidate for this task.
    Explaining the data is even more challenging because we use an equilibrium model
rather than a purely econometric specification. Our approach is thus structural in the
sense that economic theory places strong restrictions on what would otherwise be de-
grees of freedom in a purely statistical setup. Finally, our exogenous dividend news
process is conditionally Gaussian, has constant mean, and is both conditionally and un-
conditionally symmetric.20 Thus, endogenous equilibrium effects must play a significant
  20
    Our discussion of symmetry neglects the Itô adjustment term, which is negligible for all practical
purposes. In empirical specifications, the contribution of this term to daily returns never exceeds a few
basis points, while daily standard deviation is of the order of 1%.


                                                   13
role in explaining daily stock returns.

4.1. Excess Return Data

We estimate the multifrequency equilibrium model on daily excess returns of a US eq-
uity index from January 1926 to December 2003. As in CH, the index is constructed by
combining the Schwert (1990a) daily index from 1926-1963 with CRSP value-weighted
returns from 1963 onwards, and subtracting a daily risk-free rate imputed from 30-day
Treasury bills. The entire 1926-2003 period contains 20,765 observations (“Full Sam-
ple”). We also report results for the period beginning in 1952, as is common in previous
literature (e.g., Campbell, 1991; CH) because it corresponds to a change in interest
rate regime with the Fed-Treasury Accord. This sample contains 13,109 observations
(“Postwar Sample”).21
    Figure 1 shows the data, demonstrating the thick tails, low-frequency cycles, and
negative skewness that are widely recognized characteristics of aggregate stock returns.
To further indicate how conditions change across different periods in the long span of
the data, Table 1 shows moments of the excess return series for four evenly spaced
subsamples of each sample. These vary substantially, consistent with the findings of
Schwert (1989) and Pagan and Schwert (1990). The data thus contain complex high-
frequency variations as well as substantial movements at low-frequencies, presenting a
significant challenge to a parsimonious, stationary, and tractable equilibrium model of
returns.

4.2. Maximum Likelihood Estimation and Volatility Feedback

We use maximum likelihood (ML) to estimate the full-information equilibrium model.
This is an achievement in itself. Typically, once one ventures outside the class of GARCH
models to a stochastic volatility setting, exact maximum likelihood estimation becomes
difficult. We preserve this convenient and asymptotically efficient estimation method
because stochastic volatility in our setting is generated by pure regime-switching. Our
multifrequency approach allows us to use this technique effectively at daily intervals,
whereas extensive previous work with regime-switching over the last fifteen years has
been limited to longer horizons. Preserving ML estimation also deserves notice because
our returns process is the endogenous outcome of an economic equilibrium. Observed
returns are thus a highly complex, nonlinear, and dynamic function of the underlying
exogenous state variables.
     Table 2 presents our estimation results with the number of volatility components k̄
  21
    An earlier version of the paper carried out the same empirical procedures on the CRSP data only,
and found results very similar to the postwar results reported here.




                                                14
varying from 1 to 8 across the columns. 22 The first column (k̄ = 1) thus corresponds to a
standard regime-switching model with only two possible volatility states. The two-state
case is a mainstay of the existing regime-switching literature, and the focus of a recent
volatility feedback study by Kim, Morley, and Nelson (2004).
    Examining the value of the likelihood function as k̄ increases, we see clearly the ben-
efits of a multifrequency specification. In going from one to two volatility components,
the log likelihood increases by over 750 points in the full sample, and over 330 points in
the post-war sample. Since this requires adding only one additional parameter (from
four to five), the increase in likelihood is large by any standard model selection crite-
rion.23 Increasing the number of frequencies from two to three raises the log likelihood
by an additional 245 points in the full sample, and 167 points in the postwar sample, but
does not increase the number of parameters since components are identical except for
a tightly-parameterized vector of time-scales. Substantial increases continue, without
adding additional parameters, until the likelihood flattens in the range of k̄ = 6 to k̄ = 8
volatility components for both samples.
    The parameter estimates in Table 2 also deliver sensible intuition. The multiplier m 0
decreases monotonically with the number of components. As k̄ grows, each multiplier
needs to do less work in explaining aggregate volatility fluctuations, and reducing m 0 is
the way the model achieves this. The unconditional volatility of dividends varies with
no apparent pattern across k̄, consistent with the fact that long-run volatility is not easy
to identify even in large samples. Dividend growth g d − r is positive and approximately
constant at about 5 basis points per day. We explore this result further in later discus-
sions. Finally, the switching probability γ k̄ of the highest frequency component is fairly
stable across specifications, and b, which controls frequency spacing, drops initially and
stabilizes at a value of about 2 for specification with k̄ = 6 and larger. These results
imply that the highest frequency volatility shocks have durations of approximately 15 to
30 days. Further, adding volatility components at first tightens intrafrequency spacing
when the number of components is small, but eventually serves more to extend the low
frequency range of variations.
    Table 2 also reports statistics of the first four moments for each specification. Un-
conditional volatility is variable but in most cases comparable to the data, and excess
kurtosis is captured well when k̄ is large. However, the model appears to overestimate
the equity premium and does not sufficiently capture negative skewness. To fully un-
derstand these difficulties, which we later overcome by introducing investor learning, we
  22
     The computation of the likelihood function uses the exact closed-form expressions of the
price:dividend ratios Q(m1 )...Q(md ). See the Appendix for further details.
  23
     For example, using the Akaike Information Criterion (AIC) or the Bayesian Information Criterion
(BIC) the necessary increase in likelihood to justify one additional parameter would be less than five
points for either sample size.



                                                 15
will compare our equilibrium model with the seminal work of Campbell and Hentschel
(1992).
    Before beginning this process, we examine the unconditional volatility feedback
                                       V ar(rt+1 )
                                                     ,
                                    V ar(dt+1 − dt )
which is presented in the final line of Table 2. Feedback increases as components are
added, and for the best performing models with k̄ ≥ 6, it contributes between 5 − 17%
of total variance in the full sample, and 23 − 24% in postwar data. These numbers are
6 to 12 times larger than reported by CH for each period, and we now confirm that this
large difference continues to hold in our longer samples.

4.3. Comparison with CH

The Campbell and Hentschel (1992) specification, which we describe in detail in the
Appendix, provides a good comparison for our approach. First, CH also use endoge-
nous feedback to generate restrictions on excess stock returns. They assume QGARCH
dividend news and a linear pricing rule for volatility, which can be approximately rec-
onciled with an equilibrium setup comparable to ours. Second, CH similarly address
feedback effects in daily data over a very long sample, which is ambitious since depar-
tures from normality are most pronounced at shorter intervals, and changing economic
conditions are more important over longer time spans (Schwert, 1989; Pagan and Schw-
ert, 1990). More recent studies (e.g., Wu, 2001) often focus on lower frequency data
over shorter time spans. Third, like CH we restrict dividend news to be symmetric
and conditionally normal, which requires endogenous feedback to play a critical role in
matching higher moments. By contrast, Wu (2001) allows correlation between dividend
news growth and volatility, permitting exogenously skewed dividend news. Fourth, both
CH and our model are relatively parsimonious, requiring only seven and five parameters
respectively. Finally, both our model and CH permit convenient ML estimation, which
further facilitates comparison.
    Table 3 reports ML estimation results for the CH model on both samples. Panel A
gives parameter estimates, which are comparable to those found in the original CH study.
Using the formula given in the Appendix, we can calculate the magnitude of volatility
feedback. As in the original study, feedback contributes between 1-2% of unconditional
variance, and is thus small relative to our multifrequency equilibrium model.
    Panel B compares in-sample fit of the CH model to our multifrequency specification
with k̄ = 8 volatility components. Although our equilibrium model has two fewer pa-
rameters, its likelihood is over one hundred points larger. We adjust for the number of
parameters by calculating the Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC) statistic for each
specification, and assess significance using the Vuong (1989) test and a HAC-adjusted

                                           16
version proposed in Calvet and Fisher (2004). These show that the difference in like-
lihood is highly significant in both samples. Moreover, all multifrequency equilibrium
models with three or more volatility components have higher likelihood than the CH
specification.
    This confirms that the full-information multifrequency equilibrium generates large
feedback effects and performs well in-sample relative to an important benchmark. We
now investigate the multifrequency model in greater detail.

4.4. Conditional Inference

In the full-information framework, investors directly observe the volatility state M t , but
as empiricists we must make inferences based only on excess returns I t0 ≡ {rs ; s ≤ t}.
The Appendix discusses how to calculate filtered beliefs

                                        Π̂jt ≡ P Mt = mj It0
                                                                  


as well as the smoothed probabilities

                                        Ψ̂jt ≡ P Mt = mj IT0 ,
                                                            


for j ∈ {1, ..., 2k̄ }. The filtered beliefs are most useful for an empiricist wanting to use
the model for forecasting, while the smoothed beliefs allow the most informative ex post
analysis of the data.
    Figure 2 displays marginal probabilities for components of both types of beliefs when
                                                               M (k)
                                                                     ≡ P Mk,t = m0 It0 and
                                                                                        
k̄ = 8. Specifically, for each k ∈ {1, .., 8} the amounts Π̂t
   M (k)
         ≡ P Mk,t = m0 IT0 give marginal probabilities that volatility component k is
                                
Ψ̂t
in a high state.24
    Filtered beliefs on the left side of the figure show sensible patterns. For the lowest
frequency k = 1, beliefs drop over time from 0.5 to a value close to zero until the 1987
crash, and then jump immediately to almost 1.0. The most likely explanation of the
very large price drop is an increase in low-frequency volatility. By contrast, when a
smaller but still substantial drop in price of about −8% occurs just after 1955, the
lowest frequency k = 1 moves little, but the second lowest frequency k = 2 jumps
upwards substantially. When a similar size price drop occurs in the early 1960’s, beliefs
about the second volatility component are already high, so it cannot absorb the shock.
Filtered beliefs about components k = 3 and higher thus increase. In general, the cycles
in marginal beliefs have shorter durations as k increases, consistent with intuition. For
low values of k, the conditional distribution of the volatility state spends considerable
time at the extreme values of zero and one. By contrast, at high frequencies beliefs move
 24
      A complete depiction is not possible since the full belief vectors each contain 256 elements.



                                                    17
up and down rapidly, but rarely reach their boundaries. Conditioning on all returns as
in the smoothed beliefs on the right hand of the figure leads to more refined inference.
The smoothed marginal probabilities move less frequently but in larger increments, and
spend more time near the boundaries of zero and one.
     In the first two panels of Figure 3, we use the filtered beliefs to compute the one-
step-ahead conditional mean and variance of returns. As implied by our feedback spec-
ification, these are positively correlated, showing small peaks in the early 1970’s with
higher levels in 1987 and around 2000. The asset-pricing literature emphasizes that the
market discount rate exhibits small and persistent variations through time. Feedback
models focus on cyclical variations in dividend news volatility as a possible source of
these fluctuations.25 While our multifrequency specification of volatility is appealing
because it permits multiple sources of volatility fluctuations in accord with economic
intuition, one might worry that this would lead to a conditional mean that is “too vari-
able” or “too jumpy.” Figure 3 shows that this is in fact not the case. The conditional
discount rate moves slowly because it is dominated by the most persistent volatility
component, as predicted by the loglinear solution in Section 3.
     The last panel of Figure 3 shows the conditional feedback V ar t (rt+1 ) − V art (dt+1 ),
which moves positively with dividend volatility, but not to the same degree as in CH. In
fact, conditional feedback is relatively stable, and the ratio of its maximum to minimum
value is less than two. Regressing the log of conditional feedback on the log of conditional
news volatility V art (dt+1 ), we find a coefficient of 0.223 with a standard error of 0.001
and an R2 of 73.6%. This contrasts with CH where the regression coefficient would be
equal to two and the R2 equal to one, and confirms that feedback in our model is a
dampened rather than magnified version of conditional variance.

4.5. Return Decomposition

We now decompose U.S. equity returns into a conditional expectation, feedback inno-
vation, and dividend news. This provides a convenient ex post quantification of the
impacts of volatility feedback in the sample.
    The fully informed investor observes in period t + 1 the excess return r t+1 given by
(3.3). At time t + 1 or later, the investor can thus implement the decomposition

        rt+1 = E (rt+1 |Mt ) + [E (rt+1 |Mt , Mt+1 ) − E (rt+1 |Mt )] + σ d (Mt+1 )εd,t+1 .

This separates the realized return into: 1) its expected value at time t; 2) the innovation
due to the volatility feedback; and 3) the multifrequency dividend news.
  25
    Other explanations include investor heterogeneity (e.g., Constantinides and Duffie, 1996; Dumas,
1989), habit-formation (Abel, 1990; Constantinides, 1990; Campbell and Cochrane, 1999), prospect
theory (Benartzi and Thaler, 1995), or irrational expectations (Barberis, Shleifer and Vishny, 1998).
See Campbell (2003) for a recent review of this literature.


                                                 18
   Even after the entire sample is observed, the empiricist has a smaller information set
IT0
  ⊂ IT than the investor, and thus derives an analogous but less precise decomposition.
Specifically, the relation rt+1 = E rt+1 |IT0 implies
                                             

                                                         
                    rt+1 = EΨ̂(t) rt+1 + EΨ̂(t+1) − EΨ̂(t) rt+1 + êd,t+1 ,         (4.1)

where
                                 êd,t+1 ≡ E[σ d (Mt+1 )εd,t+1 |IT0 ]                         (4.2)
is the ex post estimate of realized dividend news. By the law of iterated expectations,
êd,t+1 has mean zero.
     We implement the ex post decomposition in Figure 4. The top panel (4A) illustrates
the excess return series {rt }, and the remaining panels show consecutively the three
smoothed terms of (4.1): conditional return, volatility feedback, and dividend news. We
examine these successively.
     The smoothed conditional return in Panel 4B shows small persistent variations, very
much like the ex ante conditional return in Figure 3. Thus, allowing for more precise
inference about the time t volatility state does not greatly influence expected returns.
     By contrast, the smoothed feedback in Panel 4C differs sharply from the modest-
sized and fairly stable ex ante feedback in Figure 3. In particular, smoothed feedback
appears in strong, intermittent bursts. On most days it is small, but its occurrences co-
incide with the most substantial variations in the series, and on these days it contributes
a large portion of realized returns. These features are consistent with the intuition of
the model that low-frequency volatility changes are infrequent but have a large price
impact when they occur.
     To understand the large difference between ex ante and ex post feedback estimates,
recall that changes in the individual volatility states are unpredictable. Thus, even given
precise information about the state M t , the empiricist has limited ability to forecast
feedback. When an exogenous change in a low-frequency component does occur, it
appears immediately in the t + 1 return because investors have full information. The
return rt+1 is thus very informative to the empiricist about changes in low-frequency
volatility, and smoothed beliefs therefore give considerably greater refinement in the
estimation of feedback effects. In particular, our ex post analysis attributes over half of
the 1987 crash to volatility feedback.
     Finally, in Panel 4D, the residual ê d,t+1 is the filtered version of a symmetric MSM
process. We calculate its sample moments, and find a variance of 0.693, skewness co-
efficient −0.121, and kurtosis 8.39. 26 Relative to the actual return data, the residual
variance is 13% smaller, skewness is 89% smaller, and leptokurtosis is 78% smaller. The
  26
    These are not necessarily unbiased estimates. For example, applying Jensen’s inequality to (4.2)
shows that the variance of êd,t+1 is a lower bound for the variance of dividend news.


                                                 19
filtered residual thus has a much lower skewness and kurtosis than the equity returns.
These findings suggest that endogenous volatility feedback plays an important role in
explaining the higher moments of returns in our sample.

4.6. Overidentifying Tests of the Full-Information Equilibrium

The previous section shows that, given observed stock returns, feedback plays an impor-
tant role in matching higher sample moments. A different, but useful question is, how
likely is the model to generate moments similar to the data? Since we have already used
the exact likelihood to estimate the model, we can design overidentifying tests around
this question.
     For the sake of comparison, we conduct the tests for both the multifrequency and
CH specifications. For each process, we simulate 1, 000 paths of the same length as the
data and calculate statistics of the first four moments for each path. We also report the
fraction of paths for which the simulated statistic exceeds the corresponding empirical
moment. Note that this is a challenging test, since both models rely on endogenous
economic mechanisms to fit higher moments of the data.
     Table 4 shows the results. Both models accurately capture the second moment,
which falls well within the five percent simulated confidence bands for each sample
period. Both models also overestimate the mean equity premium. Although CH is
somewhat closer to the data, the mean return is significant at the five percent level in
all cases. Likewise, the models have trouble capturing the negative skewness of the data,
but CH is somewhat closer and the data falls within its five percent confidence band
in the full sample. Finally, the multifrequency model captures well the high kurtosis of
stock returns, while CH does not.
     To understand these results, we first note the link between difficulty matching the
first and third moments that has been established in the literature. FSS and CH discuss
that failing to sufficiently capture negative skewness in a conditionally heteroskedastic
sample tends to produce overestimates of the mean. 27 Accurately capturing the skew-
ness of the data thus appears important.
     In generating endogenous skewness, an important difference between CH and the
multifrequency equilibrium arises from predictive asymmetry in the dividend news pro-
cess. Predictive asymmetry is the property that negative innovations generate higher fu-
ture volatility than positive innovations of same magnitude. When exogenous dividend
  27
    Consider a very negative observed return. If the innovation process is negatively skewed, then the
observation may be accounted for without inferring a high volatility. On the other hand, if negative
skewness is underestimated, then one must infer a correspondingly larger volatility. In estimating the
mean of a heteroskedastic sample, less weight is given to observations with high volatility. Thus, when
negative skewness is underestimated, a calculation of the population mean gives less weight to negative
observations, more weight to positive observations, and the inferred population mean tends to be larger.



                                                  20
news has this feature, volatility feedback is immediately asymmetric, giving stronger
negative skewness in returns. Early drafts of CH (e.g., Campbell and Hentschel, 1991)
show that standard GARCH processes provide only a modest level of endogenous
skewness. Incorporating predictive asymmetry in dividend news through the QGARCH
specification helps to give stronger negative skewness, explaining the results in Table 4.
    Our MSM specification for dividend growth has no predictive asymmetry. One
possibility would be to modify the dividend growth process to accommodate this feature,
following the path of CH. While reasonable, this would be more an econometric solution
than the outcome of an endogenous economic mechanism. In the next Section, we
leave our symmetric dividend process unchanged, and instead show that learning about
stochastic volatility can be a powerful and economically appealing method of generating
endogenous skewness.28

5. Learning About Volatility and Endogenous Skewness

This section shows that learning about stochastic volatility provides a substantial source
of endogenous skewness not previously identified in the literature. We assume that
Bayesian investors receive imperfect signals about the state of the economy, which is
a reasonable reduced-form if fundamental research is costly. The quality of the signal
controls a tradeoff between endogenous skewness and kurtosis: as information quality
deteriorates, kurtosis falls and returns become more negatively skewed. Although ML
estimation is no longer feasible, we find through simulation that (i) the size of the
volatility feedback effect is not highly sensitive to the learning environment, and (ii)
intermediate information levels best capture higher moment of stock returns.

5.1. Investor Information and Stock Returns

Investors observe every period consumption, dividends, and noisy observations of the
volatility components:
                                   δ t = M t + σ δ zt ,                        (5.1)
where σ δ ≥ 0 is a scalar, and zt ∈ Rk̄ is an IID vector of independent standard normals.
This specification nests the full information case (σ δ = 0). The information set It =
{(Ct0 , Dt0 , δ t0 ); t0 ≤ t} generates a conditional probability distribution Π t over the state
space {m1 , ..., md }. We show in the Appendix that beliefs can be computed recursively.
    The price:dividend ratio is a function of the investor beliefs: P t /Dt = Q(Πt ). The
stochastic discount factor depends only on consumption and is thus the same as in the
  28
    Note that it would be difficult to incorporate learning in the CH model since volatility is a deter-
ministic function of past observations in GARCH-type settings. Learning is, however, a natural path to
pursue in our multifrequency latent state variable environment.



                                                  21
full information economy. In equilibrium, the stock price satisfies
                         "                                 #
                            Ct+1 −α Dt+1 1 + Q(Πt+1 )
                                 
                       0
                      δE                                  It = 1,
                             Ct        Dt      Q(Πt )

and by forward iteration
                                         "   ∞                      −α           #
                                             X                Ct+i          Dt+i
                            Q(Πt ) = E             δ 0i                          It .                (5.2)
                                                               Ct            Dt
                                             i=1

The P:D ratio is the conditional expectation of exogenous variables driven by the first-
order Markov state Mt . We infer that P:D is linear in the current belief 29
                                                                     d
                                                                           Q(mj )Πjt ,
                                                                     X
                             Q(Πt ) = E [ Q(Mt )| It ] =                                             (5.3)
                                                                     j=1

where Q(mj ) is the price:dividend ratio computed under full information. The setup is
thus highly tractable, as it implies that prices are a (linear) belief-weighted average of
state-prices from the full information model.
    The excess return is determined by the volatility state and investor belief:

                   1 + Q(Πt+1 )                    σ 2 (Mt+1 )
       rt+1 = ln                + µd (Mt+1 ) − rf − d          + σ d (Mt+1 )εd,t+1 .                 (5.4)
                      Q(Πt )                            2

When a new state occurs, investor learning implies that the market adjusts more grad-
ually and thus generates less extreme returns than in the full information economy.
Simulating the return process with learning is now straightforward, as discussed in the
Appendix.
     The equilibrium impact of signal variability σ δ is conveniently analyzed from (5.3)
for fixed values of the other parameters (m 0 , γ k̄ , b, σ̄ d , gd − rf ). The P:D ratio is the
filtered version of its full information counterpart, which implies equality of the means:
EQ(Πt ) = EQ(Mt ). This result suggests that information quality has essentially no effect
on the equity premium. The variance satisfies the orthogonality condition: V ar[Q(M t )] =
V ar [Q(Πt )]+E{[Q(Πt )−Q(Mt )]2 }. Note that this equation is the analogue in our setup
of the variance bounds considered by Leroy and Porter (1981) and Shiller (1981). In our
framework, we expect the difference in variances to be small: The loglinear approxi-
mation of Section 3.2 shows that the variance of P:D is dominated by changes in the
most persistent components. Since learning about these changes is a rare and transitory
phenomenon, the difference Q(Πt ) − Q(Mt ) is likely to be modest most of the time. This
  29
    In a representative agent economy with Epstein-Zin-Weil utility, the P:D ratio is linear in beliefs if:
(1) dividend growth is driven by a Markov state; and (2) consumption growth is a separate IID process.



                                                          22
suggests that the variances of P:D and returns are relatively insensitive to information
quality, and we confirm this logic numerically in the next Section.
    The linearity property (5.3) distinguishes our work from earlier research in which
the stock price is a convex function of beliefs (e.g. Brennan and Xia, 2001; David, 1997;
Lettau, Ludvigson and Wachter, 2004; Veronesi, 1999, 2000). Convexity induces skew-
ness because price is more sensitive to bad news in good times than it is to good news
in bad times. This “uncertainty” channel originates from signals that are informative
about both future dividend news and future marginal rates of substitution. We will
show that even in the absence of such a dual role, learning about stochastic volatility
can be a powerful source of endogenous skewness.
    The equilibrium effect of information quality is investigated by Veronesi (2000), who
examines learning about mean dividend growth. His setup, like ours, involves a station-
ary equilibrium with discrete latent states and rational Bayesian investors. Our agenda
of investigating learning about volatility is clearly complementary to his. 30 Other differ-
ences include: 1) Veronesi uses an analytically convenient continuous-time setup with
a single persistence level, while we develop a tractable multifrequency specification in
discrete-time, and 2) Veronesi uses a Lucas tree economy with power utility, while we
separate dividends from consumption to obtain linear pricing with Epstein-Zin pref-
erences. The tree structure in Veronesi (2000) implies that many of his results have
analogues in the volatility feedback literature. For instance, an increase in the expected
growth rate, like a decrease in volatility, can lead to a decline in prices. Our focus on
cash flow news allows us to abstract away from these issues and develop a multifrequency
learning model that can be applied to daily stock returns.

5.2. Learning Model Results

Despite the simplicity of the pricing and updating rules, econometric inference is compu-
tationally expensive in our imperfect information equilibrium. To see this, note that the
state of a learning economy consists of the volatility vector M t+1 and the investor belief
Πt+1 . Since the econometrician observes only excess returns, evaluating the likelihood of
the data would require integrating over the conditional distribution of the state (Π t , Mt ).
When k̄ = 8, this would entail estimating a distribution defined on R 256 ×{m1 , ..., m256 }
and the curse of dimensionality would set in.
    We instead use a simulation-based approach to investigate the learning model.
We focus on the specification with k̄ = 8 frequencies, and a base set of parameters
  30
    In concluding his study, Veronesi anticipates an extension along the lines we pursue: “There are
other types of information that are certainly relevant and that are also worth investigating. These may
include information about future volatilities [...] for example. The effect of information quality on these
variables may have different implications on stock returns than the one discussed here.” We verify this
prediction.


                                                    23
(m0 , σ d , gd − r, γ k̄ , b) that appear reasonable given the empirical results in Section 4. In
particular, we set m0 = 1.34 and σ d = 0.78 close to their values estimated from the post-
war data in the full information model. We reduce g d − r to the value 0.015, or about
3.75% annually. This approximately matches the empirically observed growth rate of
dividends, and also gives simulated returns that better fit the mean equity premium.
Finally, we set the frequency parameters to γ k̄ = 0.05 and b = 2.5. These are comparable
to the values from the full information estimation, but permit somewhat more contri-
bution from low frequencies. Intuitively, when investors gradually infer changes to the
volatility state, the model can accommodate lower frequency shocks without implying
implausibly large price changes. This choice of specification permits a lowest frequency
shock of about once every forty years, which is about half the length of the sample.
    To evaluate the impact of information quality, we consider a set of signal volatilities
σ δ ∈ {0, .1, ..., 1, 1.25, ...2, 3, 4, 5, 10, 15, 20}. For each value, we simulate a single long
sample of excess returns, and calculate the first four moments of returns as well as
the feedback, using the same set of random draws. We discuss all results, and report
a subset in Table 5. The mean return is equal to 2.54 basis points per day across all
simulations, which is close to the mean equity premium in both our sample periods. The
fact that mean returns appear approximately constant with the learning environment
is not surprising, since the average price:dividend ratio is independent of the signal
precision. The standard deviation is likewise nearly invariant to information quality,
and takes a value of about 0.82 for each simulation, close to the empirical value in
the post-war period. Because the second moment is not sensitive to signal precision,
feedback is also nearly constant across the different simulations, and takes a value of
about 12.5%. Thus, the degree of volatility feedback is robust across different learning
environments.
    We do, however, find large and systematic differences in the degree of skewness and
kurtosis across learning environments. Skewness is close to zero at about −0.02 when
σ δ = 0, falling to −.26 when σ δ = 0.5, to −0.71 when σ δ = 2, and to −1.14 when
σ δ = 20. Returns thus become more negatively skewed as investor information becomes
less precise. Kurtosis takes its highest value of about 47 when investor information is
perfect. With a value of σ δ = 0.5 kurtosis drops to 13.8 and when σ δ = 2 kurtosis falls to
8.23. We thus infer a tradeoff between skewness and kurtosis. With perfect information
kurtosis is large but skewness is close to zero. As the quality of investor information
deteriorates, returns become more negatively skewed and kurtosis falls as well. Values
in the range σ δ ∈ [0.4, 1.0] seem most consistent with the high kurtosis and substantial
negative skewness observed in the data. The tradeoff between skewness and kurtosis
across all values of σ δ is depicted in Figure 5.
    To understand these results, consider the role played by dividend growth in the
investor updating process. When information is perfect, dividend growth plays no role in


                                               24
determining investor beliefs about the volatility state. Regardless of whether volatility
state variables increase, decrease, or stay the same, investors find out immediately
and fully incorporate into price the impact of any changes. The speed of learning is
independent of the direction of the volatility change, and returns are approximately
symmetric. Kurtosis is high and skewness close to zero.
    At the other extreme, when σ δ is arbitrarily large the corresponding signals are
not useful, and investors rely on dividend news to infer the latent state. If volatility
increases, investors may get a single extreme observation that is implausible under
their existing beliefs. In this case beliefs quickly revise upward. On the other hand, a
volatility decrease (good news) can only be revealed slowly. This is because investors
learn about low volatility by observing dividend growth close to its mean, but this
is a relatively likely outcome regardless of the volatility level. Thus, bad news about
increased volatility can be incorporated into price quickly, while good news about low
volatility trickles out slowly. This asymmetry explains why skewness increases and
kurtosis falls as information quality about the volatility state deteriorates.
    To further illustrate the effect of information quality, Figure 6 displays four simula-
tions with length T = 20, 000 of the learning economy with different signal precisions.
Consecutively from top to bottom, σ δ = 0 corresponds to full information, σ δ = 0.6 and
σ δ = 1.0 give two reasonable intermediate values, and σ δ = 20 corresponds to nearly
uninformative signals. All simulations use identical sets of random draws to facilitate
comparison, and we clearly see the anticipated effects. With perfect information, large
and symmetric feedback gives substantial outliers of both signs. As information quality
decreases, gradual learning causes feedback to be spread out across multiple days, and
fewer extreme returns occur. The attenuation is noticeably stronger for positive returns,
and skewness thus becomes more pronounced with σ δ . When σ δ = 20, this effect is so
extreme that no large positive returns occur in the simulation. The intermediate cases
where σ δ = 0.6 and σ δ = 1.0 appear most consistent with daily stock returns.

6. Conclusion

This paper develops a tractable asset-pricing framework for economies with multifre-
quency shocks to dividend news. We focus on a news specification with constant
mean, multifrequency stochastic volatility, and a conditionally Gaussian noise. The five-
parameter equilibrium model accounts for skewness, thick tails, time-varying volatility
and feedback in over eighty years of daily stock returns.
    Two endogenous mechanisms play a critical role in matching equity data. First,
volatility feedback contributes between 12 and 24% of return variance, or 6 to 12 times
the amount in previous literature (e.g., Campbell and Hentschel, 1992). Feedback from
persistent components helps to capture extreme returns, while higher-frequency varia-


                                            25
tions match day-to-day volatility movements. Second, investor learning generates sub-
stantial endogenous skewness. Building on Veronesi (2000), we consider investor signals
about the volatility state, and show that information quality creates a tradeoff between
skewness and kurtosis. Intermediate information environments best match the data.
    The paper illustrates that our multifrequency approach helps to connect low-frequency
macro-finance and learning literature with higher frequency financial econometrics.
Convergence of these areas follows from bringing multifrequency shocks into pure regime-
switching economies, which traditionally offer three major advantages: 1) asset pricing is
straightforward in a Markov chain setup; 2) the econometrics of regime-switching, based
on a simple filtering theory, is well-understood; and 3) learning is easily incorporated
by using similar filtering techniques. The multifrequency approach thus expands the
practical range of equilibrium regime-switching economies from a few states to several
hundred, and from lower frequencies to daily returns.
    We anticipate that the multifrequency approach can be extended in a number of
useful directions. First, our Epstein-Zin setup is tractable when the latent Markov
regimes affect drifts as well as volatilities. This invites future investigations on the
equilibrium effect of learning about drifts in a multifrequency environment. Intuition
suggests that learning about the drift should strengthen both our empirical findings
and the results produced by Veronesi (1999, 2000), Brennan and Xia (2001) and others
in a unifrequency environment. Second, recent econometric developments permit the
effective and parsimonious specification of multifrequency comovement across assets
or factors (Calvet, Fisher, and Thompson, 2004). This advance permits for instance
the joint modelling of consumption and dividends, as in Bansal and Yaron (2004), or
more generally paves the way for novel specifications of multifrequency covariation in
stochastic discount factors and asset payoffs. Extensions along these lines are left as
open areas for future research.




                                           26
7. Appendix A. Economies with Regime-Switching Drift and Volatility

7.1. Stochastic Discount Factor

As shown by Epstein and Zin (1989), a utility-maximizing agent with budget constraint
Wt+1 = (Wt − Ct )(1 + Rt+1 ) has stochastic discount factor
                                  "       1 #θ           1−θ
                                      Ct+1 − ψ         1
                       SDFt+1    = δ                             ,
                                       Ct          1 + Rt+1

where Rt+1 is the simple net return on the optimal portfolio.
   In our setup, the representative agent can be viewed as holding a long-lived claim on
the aggregate consumption stream {C t }∞ t=0 . The tree has price Pc,t = pc Ct , and yields
the return 1 + Rc,t+1 = (1 + 1/pc )Ct+1 /Ct . The stochastic discount factor is thus
                                                                    −θ/ψ−1+θ
                                      θ             θ−1       Ct+1
                     SDFt+1 = δ (1 + 1/pc )
                                                               Ct
                                                                    −α
                                      θ             θ−1       Ct+1
                                 = δ (1 + 1/pc )                           .
                                                               Ct

The condition Et [SDFt+1 (1+Rc,t+1 )] = 1 implies that δ θ (1+1/pc )θ E[(Ct+1 /Ct )1−α ] = 1
or equivalently
                                                              1
                        1 + 1/pc = δ −1 {E[(Ct+1 /Ct )1−α ]}− θ .
We conclude that equation (2.2) holds.

7.2. Numerical Pricing

The process Mt is a Markov-chain with transition matrix A = (a ij )1≤i,j≤d , where aij =
P(Mt+1 = mj |Mt = mi ) for all i, j. Consider the row vector ι = (1, ..., 1) ∈ R d , the
equilibrium column vector
                             q = [Q(m1 ), ..., Q(md )]0 ,
                                                                           j         j
and the matrix B = (bij )1≤i,j≤d with components bij = eµd (m )−rf −αρc,d σ c σ d (m ) ai,j . The
pricing condition (2.4) can be rewritten as q = B(ι 0 + q), or equivalently

                                      q = (I − B)−1 Bι0 .                                  (7.1)

In empirical work, we use this expression to compute numerically the equilibrium
price:dividend ratio corresponding to a given set of parameters.




                                               27
7.3. Bayesian Updating and Closed-Form Likelihood

We derive the filtered beliefs (Π̂jt )1≤j≤d and the corresponding likelihood. The derivation
follows Hamilton (1989, 1990), but due to feedback the conditional density of observables
at t + 1 depends on both t and t + 1 latent states.

Proposition 1. The econometrician’s conditional probabilities are computed recursively
using Bayes’ rule:
                                             Π̂t [A ∗ F (rt+1 )]
                                  Π̂t+1 =                         0
                                                                    ,               (7.2)
                                            Π̂t [A ∗ F (rt+1 )] ι
where ∗ denotes element-by-element multiplication, and F (r) is the matrix with ele-
ments Fi,j (r) ≡ frt+1 (r|Mt = mi , Mt+1 = mj ). The log-likelihood of the return process
satisfies
                                            XT     n                      o
                     ln L (r1 , ..., rT ) =      ln Π̂t−1 [A ∗ F (rt )] ι0 .        (7.3)
                                                    t=1


Proof. The conditional probability Π̂jt+1 = P Mt+1 = mj It0 , rt+1 satisfies
                                                                  

               Π̂jt+1 ∝ frt+1 rt+1 |Mt+1 = mj , It0 P Mt+1 = mj It0 .
                                                                   

We recognize that frt+1 rt+1 |Mt+1 = mj , It0 can be rewritten as
                                             

        d
        X
              frt+1 rt+1 |Mt+1 = mj , Mt = mi P Mt = mi Mt+1 = mj , It0
                                                                       

        i=1
         d
                                               P Mt+1 = mj Mt = mi P Mt = mi It0
                                                                                 
        X
                                         j              i
   =          frt+1 rt+1 |Mt+1   = m , Mt = m                                       .
                                                         P Mt+1 = mj It0
                                                                         
        i=1

The updated probability can now be written as
                                 d
                      Π̂jt+1 ∝
                                 X
                                       frt+1 rt+1 |Mt+1 = mj , Mt = mi Π̂it aij ,
                                                                      

                                 i=1

which implies (7.2).
   We now compute the log-likelihood function ln L (r 1 , ..., rT ) = Tt=1 ln f (rt |r1 , ..., rt−1 ).
                                                                     P

Bayes’ rule implies
                            d X
                            X d
f (rt |r1 , ..., rt−1 ) =              P(Mt−1 = mi , Mt = mj |r1 , ..., rt−1 )f (rt |Mt−1 = mi , Mt = mj )
                            i=1 j=1
                            d X
                            X d
                      =                Π̂it−1 aij f ij (rt ) ,
                            i=1 j=1

and therefore f (rt |r1 , ..., rt−1 ) = Π̂t−1 [A ∗ F (rt )]ι0 .    

                                                            28
8. Appendix B: Loglinear Approximation

By (2.4), the price:dividend ratio satisfies
                                                 n                        √           o
             ln Q(Mt ) = gd − rf − ασ c,d + ln Et [1 + Q(Mt+1 )]e−ασ c,d [ g(Mt+1 )−1] .

We assume that σ c,d is close to 0 and that the marginal distribution M is concentrated
around 1, and look for a linear approximate solution to this fixed-point equation. The
conditional expectation
                      n         Pk̄                          √            o
                   Et [1 + eq̄− k=1 qk (Mk,t+1 −1) ]e−ασc,d [ g(Mt+1 )−1]          (8.1)
                                                           ασ
is approximately Et [1 + eq̄ − eq̄ qk (Mk,t+1 − 1)] 1 − 2c,d (Mk,t+1 − 1) , or
                                 P                           P         

                               X  eq̄          ασ c,d
                                                                     
                      q̄
                (1 + e )Et 1 −              qk +          (Mk,t+1 − 1) .
                                    1 + eq̄       2
                 eq̄
Since ρ =       and Et (Mk,t+1 − 1) = (1 − γ k )(Mk,t − 1), we infer that (8.1) is approx-
                1+eq̄      h                                            i
                                                       ασ 
imately equal to (1 + eq̄ ) 1 − k̄k=1 (1 − γ k ) ρqk + 2c,d (Mk,t − 1) . The linearized
                                P

version of the Euler equation is thus
       k̄                                                        k̄
       X                                                         X                     ασ c,d 
q̄ −         qk (Mk,t − 1) ≈ gd − rf − ασ c,d + ln(1 + eq̄ ) −         (1 − γ k ) ρqk +          (Mk,t − 1).
                                                                                         2
       k=1                                                       k=1

We infer that equations (3.7) − (3.6) hold.
    We next derive the log-linearized return on the stock. Linearize ln[1 + Q(M t+1 )] ≈
           Pk̄
ln[1 + eq̄− k=1 qk (Mk,t+1 −1) ] around the unconditional mean (1, 1, ..., 1) :
                                                                     k̄
                                                               eq̄ X
                        ln[1 + Q(Mt+1 )] ≈ ln(1 + eq̄ ) −               qk (Mk,t+1 − 1).
                                                             1 + eq̄
                                                                    k=1

Combining this result with (3.5), we infer
                                                   k̄
                      1 + Q(Mt+1 )            X
                   ln              ≈ − ln ρ −   qk [ρ(Mk,t+1 − 1) − (Mk,t − 1)],
                         Q(Mt )
                                                  k=1

and conclude that (3.8) holds.
    We then easily derive the conditional moments of the loglinear return process. The
conditional return is given by Et rt+1 ≈ ασ c,d + k̄k=1 qk [1 − ρ(1 − γ k )](Mk,t − 1), which
                                                 P

is equivalent to (3.9). The return innovation r t+1 − Et rt+1 is then easily computed.
    By (3.8), the unconditional variance of returns satisfies V ar(r t+1 ) ≈ σ̄ 2d + k̄k=1 qk2
                                                                                     P

V ar[(Mk,t −1)−ρ(Mk,t+1 −1)]. We note that E[(Mk,t+1 −1)(Mk,t −1)] = (1−γ k )V ar(M )
and conclude that (3.11) holds.

                                                        29
9. Appendix C: Full-Information Volatility Feedback Economy

9.1. Smoothed Beliefs

Proposition 2. The econometrician’s smoothed belief satisfies the backward recursion
                                  d        j
                                              "                 #
                                        Ψ̂       f ij (r     )
                                                         t+1
                                     aij jt+1
                                 X
                     Ψ̂it = Π̂it                                ,              (9.1)
                                 j=1    Π̂t+1 frt+1 rt+1 |It0

i ∈ {1, .., d}, and the final condition Ψ̂T = Π̂T .
                                                                      Pd
Proof. Since Mt is first-order Markov, we know that Ψ̂it =                       Mt+1 = mj IT0
                                                                                                 
                                                                         j=1 P
P Mt = mi Mt+1 = mj , IT0 can be written as
                           

                                d
                                      Ψ̂jt+1 P Mt = mi Mt+1 = mj , It+1
                                X
                       Ψ̂it =                                       0
                                                                        
                                                                          .
                                j=1
                                                                                       j
By Bayes’rule, P Mt = mi Mt+1 = mj , It+1     0   = P Mt = mi , Mt+1 = mj It+1   0
                                                
                                                                                         /Π̂t+1 ,
and thus
                            d
                           X   Ψ̂jt+1
                    Ψ̂it =            P Mt = mi , Mt+1 = mj It+1
                                                              0
                                                                  
                                 j
                                                                    .
                           j=1 Π̂t+1

   The conditional probability P Mt = mi , Mt+1 = mj It+1  0
                                                               
                                                                 is by Bayes’ rule equal
to
   frt+1 rt+1 |Mt+1 = mj , Mt = mi P(Mt = mi , Mt+1 = mj |It0 )       f ij (rt+1 ) Π̂it aij
                                      
                                                                   =                      .
                            frt+1 rt+1 |It0                           frt+1 rt+1 |It0
                                            

We infer that
                                                 Π̂it aij f ij (rt+1 )
                     P Mt = mi , Mt+1 = mj It+1
                                            0
                                                 =                   ,                    (9.2)
                                                   frt+1 rt+1 |It0
and conclude that (9.1) holds.            

    This smoothing rule slightly differs from the one derived by Kim (1994) for tradi-
tional Hamilton models, in which the signal observed by the econometrician depends on
the current state Mt+1 but not on the past state Mt . To illustrate this point, note that
our model implies

       Π̂jt+1 = P Mt+1 = mj It0 , rt+1
                                          

              = P Mt+1 = mj It0 frt+1 rt+1 |It0 , Mt+1 = mj /frt+1 rt+1 |It0 .
                                                                              

The smoothed probability thus satisfies
                      d                 j
                                                  "                               #
                                     Ψ̂                      f ij (r     )
                                        t+1                          t+1
                      X
            Ψ̂it = Π̂it     aij
                                P Mt+1 = mj It0     frt+1 rt+1 |It0 , Mt+1 = mj
                                                                               
                        j=1


                                                  30
If the past state Mt has no effect on the density of rt+1 , the term in square brackets
equals one and the smoothed belief then reduces to the Hamilton-Kim formulation. The
expressions are otherwise different.

9.2. Ex Post Decomposition

We condition the return equation (3.3) with respect to the econometrician’s information
set IT0 :
                                  1 + Q(Mt+1 ) σ d (Mt+1 )2 0
                                                                
           rt+1 = gd − rf + E ln                −              IT + êd,t+1 .
                                      Q(Mt )            2
The definition of smoothed beliefs implies

 rt+1 = gd − rf + EΨ̂(t+1) ln[1 + Q(Mt+1 )] − σ d (Mt+1 )2 /2 − EΨ̂(t) ln Q(Mt ) + êd,t+1
                                                             


Since EΨ̂(t) rt = gd − rf + EΨ̂(t) ln[1 + Q(Mt+1 )] − σ d (Mt+1 )2 /2 − ln Q(Mt ) , we con-
                                                                                 

clude that (4.1) holds.

10. Appendix D: The Campbell-Hentschel Model

The CH specification is based on a dividend news that follows a QGARCH(1,2) process
(Engle, 1990; Sentana, 1995). Excess returns follow

                   rt+1 = µ + γσ 2t + (1 + 2λb)η d,t+1 − λ η 2d,t+1 − σ 2t ,
                                                                          
                                                                                        (10.1)

where the dividend news η d,t+1 are N 0, σ 2t , and
                                             

                                            2                      2
                 σ 2t = $ + α1 η d,t − b         + α2 η d,t−1 − b        + βσ 2t−1 ,
                              γρ (α1 + ρα2 )
                   λ =                          .
                           1 − ρ (α1 + ρα2 + β)

The parameter ρ is calibrated to the empirical P:D ratio, and the seven parameters
(µ, γ, $, α1 , α2 , b, β) are estimated by maximum likelihood.
     The conditional return Et rt+1 = µ + γσ 2t increases in conditional volatility and γ,
which is related to risk aversion. Feedback appears itself in (10.1) through a quadratic
term in dividend news, λ(2bη d,t+1 +σ 2t −η 2d,t+1 ). After an extreme innovation η d,t+1 , the
investor knows that volatility will increase, and price drops. The location parameter b
differentiates QGARCH from traditional GARCH. When b > 0, negative dividend news
η d,t have a higher impact on volatility than positive news of the same size. Feedback is
calculated by (1 + 2λb)2 + 2λ2 σ 2t .




                                              31
11. Appendix E: Learning Economies

Consider the volatility state and investor belief (M t , Πt ) at the end of period t. The
state of the economy in the following period is computed in three steps:

  1. Latent state of nature. We draw the volatility state M t+1 given Mt . We also
     sample k̄ + 2 independent standard normals (z 1,t+1 ; ...; zk̄,t+1 ; εd,t+1 ; η c,t+1 ). The
                                                             q
     Gaussian consumption noise is εc,t+1 = ρc,d εd,t+1 + 1 − ρ2c,d η c,t+1 . We then
     compute the consumption, dividend and signal in period t + 1. The empirical
     evidence mentioned in Section 2 of the paper suggests to choose a relatively low
     value for ρc,d . We use ρc,d = 0.20 in our simulations.

  2. Investor belief. The investor observes (δ t+1 , ct+1 −ct , dt+1 −dt ). She then computes
     her new probability distribution Π t+1 over volatility states with Bayes’ rule :
                                                                           d
                   Πjt+1 ∝ f (δ t+1 , ct+1 − ct , dt+1 − dt |Mt+1 = mj )
                                                                           X
                                                                                 ai,j Πit ,   (11.1)
                                                                           i=1

     for all j ∈ {1, ..., d}.

  3. Stock Return. We can then compute the corresponding excess return using (5.4).




                                              32
References

 [1] Abel, Andrew (1988), Stock Prices Under Time-Varying Dividend Risk: An Exact Solution
     in an Infinite Horizon General Equilibrium Model, Journal of Monetary Economics 22, 375-
     395.

 [2] Abel, Andrew (1990), Asset Prices Under Habit Formation and Catching Up with the
     Joneses, American Economic Review 80, 38-42.

 [3] Abel, Andrew (1999), Risk Premia and Term Premia in General Equilibrium, Journal of
     Monetary Economics 43, 3-33.

 [4] Abel, Andrew (2003), The Effects of a Baby Boom on Stock Prices and Capital Accumu-
     lation in the Presence of Social Security, Econometrica 71, 551-578.

 [5] Andersen, Torben, Tim Bollerslev, and Francis Diebold (2003), Some Like it Smooth, and
     Some Like it Rough: Untangling Continuous and Jump Components in Measuring, Mod-
     eling, and Forecasting Asset Return Volatility, Working paper, University of Pennsylvania.

 [6] Andersen, Torben, Tim Bollerslev, Francis Diebold and Clara Vega (2004), Real-Time
     Price Discovery in Stock, Bond and Foreign Exchange Markets, Working paper, University
     of Pennsylvania.

 [7] Antweiler, Werner, and Murray Frank (2004), Is All That Talk Just Noise? The Information
     Content of Internet Stock Message Boards, Journal of Finance 59, 1259-1295.

 [8] Attanasio, Orazio, and Guglielmo Weber (1993), Consumption Growth, The Interest Rate,
     and Aggregation, Review of Economic Studies. 60, 631-649.

 [9] Bansal, Ravi, and Amir Yaron (2004), Risks for the Long Run: A Potential Resolution of
     Asset Pricing Puzzles, Journal of Finance 49, 1481-1509.

[10] Bansal, Ravi, and Hao Zhou (2002), Term Structure of Interest Rates with Regime Shifts,
     Journal of Finance 57, 1997-2043.

[11] Barberis, Nicholas, Shleifer, Andrei and Robert Vishny (1998), A Model of Investor Senti-
     ment, Journal of Financial Economics 49, 307-343.

[12] Barndorff-Nielsen, Ole, and Neil Shephard (2003), Realised Power Variation and Stochastic
     Volatility Models, Bernoulli 9, 1109-1111.

[13] Barsky, Robert (1989), Why Don’t the Prices of Stocks and Bonds Move Together?, Amer-
     ican Economic Review 79, 1132-1145.




                                              33
[14] Bekaert, Geert, and Guojun Wu (2000), Asymmetric Volatility and Risk in Equity Markets,
     Review of Financial Studies 13:1, 1-42.

[15] Benartzi, Shlomo and Richard Thaler (1995), Myopic Risk Aversion and the Equity Pre-
     mium Puzzle, Quarterly Journal of Economics 110, 73-92.

[16] Brennan, Michael, and Xia, Yihong (2001), Stock Price Volatility and the Equity Premium,
     Journal of Monetary Economics 47, 249-283.

[17] Calvet, Laurent E., and Adlai J. Fisher (2001), Forecasting Multifractal Volatility, Journal
     of Econometrics 105, 27-58.

[18] Calvet, Laurent E., and Adlai J. Fisher (2002), Multifractality in Asset Returns: Theory
     and Evidence, Review of Economics and Statistics 84, 381-406.

[19] Calvet, Laurent E., and Adlai J. Fisher (2004), How to Forecast Long-Run Volatil-
     ity: Regime-Switching and the Estimation of Multifractal Processes, Journal of Financial
     Econometrics 2, 49-83.

[20] Calvet, Laurent E., Adlai J. Fisher, and Samuel B. Thompson (2004), Volatility Comove-
     ment: A Multifrequency Approach, forthcoming, Journal of Econometrics.

[21] Campbell, John Y. (1991), A Variance Decomposition for Stock Returns, Economic Journal
     101, 157-179.

[22] Campbell (1996), Understanding Risk and Return, Journal of Political Economy 104, 298-
     345.

[23] Campbell, John Y. (2003), Consumption-Based Asset Pricing, in G. Constantinides and
     M. Harris eds., Handbook of the Economics of Finance, Amsterdam: North-Holland.

[24] Campbell, John Y., and John Cochrane (1999), By Force of Habit: A Consumption-Based
     Explanation of Aggregate Stock Market Behavior, Journal of Political Economy 107, 205-
     251.

[25] Campbell, John Y., and Ludger Hentschel (1991), No News is Good News: An Asymmetric
     Model of Changing Volatility in Stock Returns, NBER Working Paper #3742.

[26] Campbell, John Y., and Ludger Hentschel (1992), No News is Good News: An Asymmetric
     Model of Changing Volatility in Stock Returns, Journal of Financial Economics 31, 281-318.

[27] Campbell, John Y., and N. Gregory Mankiw (1989), Consumption, Income and Interest
     Rates: Reinterpreting the Time Series Evidence, in NBER Macroeconomics Annual: 1989,
     O. Blanchard and S. Fischer eds., pp. 185-216. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.


                                               34
[28] Campbell, John Y., and Robert Shiller (1988), The Dividend-Price Ratio and Expectations
     of Future Dividends and Discount Factors, Review of Financial Studies 1, 195-228.

[29] Cecchetti, Stephen, Pok-Sang Lam and Nelson Mark (1990), Mean Reversion in Equilib-
     rium Asset Prices, American Economic Review 80, 398-418.

[30] Constantinides, George (1990), Habit Formation: A Resolution of the Equity Premium
     Puzzle, Journal of Political Economy 98, 519-543.

[31] Constantinides, George and Darrell Duffie (1996), Asset Pricing with Heterogeneous Con-
     sumers, Journal of Political Economy 104, 219-240.

[32] David, Alexander (1997), Fluctuating Confidence in Stock Markets: Implications for Re-
     turns and Volatility, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 32, 427-462.

[33] Detemple, Jérôme B. (1986), Asset Pricing in a Production Economy with Incomplete
     Information, Journal of Finance 41, 383-391.

[34] Dothan, Michael U., and David Feldman (1986), Equilibrium Interest Rates and Multi-
     period Bonds in a Partially Observable Economy, Journal of Finance 41, 369-382.

[35] Dumas, Bernard (1989), Two-Person Dynamic Equilibrium in the Capital Market, Review
     of Financial Studies 2, 157-188.

[36] Engle, Robert (1990), Discussion: Stock Market Volatility and the Crash of ’87, Review of
     Financial Studies 3, 103-106.

[37] Epstein, Larry, and Stanley Zin (1989), Substitution, Risk Aversion and the Temporal
     Behavior of Consumption and Asset Returns: A Theoretical Framework, Econometrica 57,
     937-968.

[38] French, Kenneth, G. William Schwert, and Robert F. Stambaugh (1987), Expected Stock
     Returns and Volatility, Journal of Financial Economics 19, 3-29.

[39] Gennotte, Gérard (1986), Optimal Portfolio Choice under Incomplete Information, Journal
     of Finance 41, 733-749.

[40] Greenwood, Jeremy, and Boyan Jovanovic (1999), The Information-Technology Revolution
     and the Stock Market, American Economic Review 89, 116-122.

[41] Guidolin, Massimo, and Timmermann, Allan (2003), Option Prices Under Bayesian Learn-
     ing: Implied Volatility Dynamics and Predictive Densities, Journal of Economic Dynamics
     and Control 27, 717-769.




                                              35
[42] Hamilton, James (1989), A New Approach to the Economic Analysis of Nonstationary
     Time Series and the Business Cycle, Econometrica 57, 357-84.

[43] Hamilton, James (1990), Analysis of Time Series Subject to Change in Regime, Journal of
     Econometrics 45, 39-70.

[44] Jermann, Urban (1998), Asset Pricing in Production Economies, Journal of Monetary
     Economics 4, 257-275.

[45] Kandel, Shmuel, and Robert F. Stambaugh (1990), Expectations and Volatility of Con-
     sumption and Asset Returns, Review of Financial Studies 3, 207-232.

[46] Kim, Chang-Jin (1994), Dynamic Linear Models with Markov-Switching, Journal of Econo-
     metrics 60, 1-22.

[47] Kim, Chang-Jin, James Morley and Charles Nelson (2004), Is There a Positive Relationship
     Between Stock Market Volatility and the Equity Premium?, Journal of Money, Credit and
     Banking 36, 339-360.

[48] Lettau, Martin, and Sidney Ludvigson (2001), Consumption, Aggregate Wealth, and Ex-
     pected Stock Returns, Journal of Finance 56, 815-849.

[49] Lettau, Martin, Sidney Ludvigson, and Jessica Wachter (2004), The Declining Equity Pre-
     mium: What Role Does Macroeconomic Risk Play?, Working Paper, New York University.

[50] LeRoy, Stephen, and Richard Porter (1981), The Present-Value Relation: Tests Based on
     Implied Variance Bounds, Econometrica 49, 555-574.

[51] Lochstoer, Lars (2004), Expected Returns and the Business Cycle: Heterogeneous Agents
     and Heterogeneous Goods, Working Paper, UC Berkeley.

[52] Lucas, Robert (1978), Asset Prices in an Exchange Economy, Econometrica 46, 1429-1445.

[53] MacKinlay, A. Craig (1997), Event Studies in Economics and Finance, Journal of Economic
     Literature 35, 13-39.

[54] Merton, Robert C. (1980), On Estimating the Expected Return on the Market: An Ex-
     planatory Analysis, Journal of Financial Economics 8, 323-361.

[55] Pagan, Adrian, and G. William Schwert (1990), Alternative Models for Conditional Stock
     Volatility, Journal of Econometrics 45, 267-290.

[56] Pindyck, Robert (1984), Risk, Inflation, and the Stock Market, American Economic Review
     74, 334-351.



                                              36
[57] Poterba, James, and Lawrence Summers (1985), The Persistence of Volatility and Stock
     Market Fluctuations, American Economic Review 75, 1142-1151.

[58] Roll, Richard (1984), Orange Juice and the Weather, American Economic Review 74, 861-
     880.

[59] Schwert, G. William (1989), Why Does Stock Market Volatility Change Over Time?, Jour-
     nal of Finance 44, 1115-1153.

[60] Schwert, G. William (1990a), Indexes of United States Stock Prices from 1802 to 1987,
     Journal of Business 63, 399-426.

[61] Schwert, G. William (1990b), Stock Volatility and the Crash of ’87, Review of Financial
     Studies 3, 77-102.

[62] Sentana, Enrique (1995), Quadratic ARCH Models, Review of Economic Studies 62, 639-
     661.

[63] Shiller, Robert (1981), Do Stock Prices Move Too Much to be Justified by Subsequent
     Changes in Dividends?, American Economic Review 71, 421-436.

[64] Timmermann, Allan (1993), How Learning in Financial Markets Generates Excess Volatil-
     ity and Predictability of Stock Returns, Quarterly Journal of Economics 108, 1135-1145.

[65] Timmermann, Allan (1996), Excess Volatilility and Predictability of Stock Prices in Au-
     toregressive Dividend Models with Learning, Review of Economic Studies 63, 523-557.

[66] Turner, Christopher, Richard Startz, and Charles Nelson (1989), A Markov Model of Het-
     eroskedasticity, Risk and Learning in the Stock Market, Journal of Financial Economics
     25, 3-22.

[67] Veronesi, Pietro (1999), Stock Market Overreaction to Bad News in Good Times: A Ra-
     tional Expectations Equilibrium Model, Review of Financial Studies 12, 975-1007.

[68] Veronesi, Pietro (2000), How Does Information Quality Effect Stock Returns?, Journal of
     Finance 55, 807-837.

[69] Veronesi, Pietro (2004), The Peso Problem Hypothesis and Stock Market Returns, Journal
     of Economic Dynamics and Control 28, 707-725.

[70] Vissing-Jørgensen, Annette (2002), Limited Asset Market Participation and the Elasticity
     of Intertemporal Substitution, Journal of Political Economy 110, 825-853.

[71] Vuong, Quang (1989), Likelihood Ratio Tests for Model Selection and Non-Nested Hy-
     potheses, Econometrica 57, 307-333.

                                             37
[72] Wachter, Jessica (2004), A Consumption-Based Model of the Term-Structure of Interest
    Rates, Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.

[73] Weil, Philippe (1989), The Equity Premium Puzzle and the Risk-Free Rate Puzzle, Journal
    of Monetary Economics 24, 401-421.

[74] Whitelaw, Robert (2000), Stock Market Risk and Return: An Equilibrium Approach,
    Review of Financial Studies 13, 521-547.

[75] Womack, Kent (1996), Do Brokerage Analysts’ Recommendations Have Investment Value?
    Journal of Finance 51, 137-167.

[76] Wu, Guojun (2001), The Determinants of Asymmetric Volatility, Review of Financial Stud-
    ies 14, 837-859.

[77] Yogo, Motohiro (2004a), A Consumption-Based Explanation of Expected Stock Returns,
    Journal of Finance, forthcoming.

[78] Yogo, Motohiro (2004b), Estimating the Elasticity of Intertemporal Substitution When
    Instruments Are Weak, Review of Economics and Statistics 86, 797-810.




                                               38
              TABLE 1. – Excess Return Moments
                                           Sample                         By Subperiod
                                           Moment                 1         2      3                  4

                       A. Full Sample: 1926-2003
    mean                      0.022      0.010 0.043                                   0.013       0.024
    standard deviation        1.104      1.643 0.755                                   0.773       1.003
    skewness                  -0.30       0.09   0.96                                   0.07       -1.55
    kurtosis                  20.54      11.48 11.36                                    5.79       32.24

                                      B. Postwar: 1952-2003
    mean                                  0.023      0.044 -0.004                      0.021       0.030
    standard deviation                    0.858      0.666 0.766                       0.932       1.023
    skewness                               -1.05      -0.70 0.13                       -2.83       -0.21
    kurtosis                              26.51      13.34  5.76                       59.84        7.18

    Notes: This table reports statistics of the first four moments of daily excess returns. The statistics are
reported for our entire sample and for four evenly spaced subsamples. There is considerable variability in
all four moments across subsamples.
         TABLE 2. – Regime-Switching Model with Full Information
                   k̄ = 1       2           3          4          5          6          7           8

                                        A. Full Sample: 1926-2003

  m̂0              1.812        1.656      1.584      1.509      1.456      1.412       1.387      1.381
                  (0.006)     (0.006)    (0.007)    (0.008)    (0.007)    (0.009)     (0.007)    (0.009)
  σ̂               1.477        1.402      1.397      1.412      1.390      1.350       1.218      1.042
                  (0.029)     (0.025)    (0.025)    (0.048)    (0.037)    (0.037)     (0.032)    (0.059)
  gˆd − r          0.044        0.047      0.057      0.055      0.058      0.057       0.056      0.052
                  (0.004)     (0.005)    (0.004)    (0.004)    (0.004)    (0.004)     (0.004)    (0.004)
  γˆk̄             0.030        0.065      0.083      0.065      0.062      0.068       0.037      0.065
                  (0.010)     (0.008)    (0.009)    (0.009)    (0.017)    (0.013)     (0.008)    (0.015)
  b̂                 -           8.24       5.12       3.13       2.43       2.12        1.45       1.87
                               (1.19)   ( 0.416)   ( 0.254)   ( 0.248)   ( 0.142)    ( 0.074)   ( 0.074)
  ln L           69146.92    69905.72   70241.25   70363.96   70416.87   70444.32    70463.67   70451.98
  E[rt ]           0.049        0.052      0.063      0.061      0.064      0.063       0.064      0.062
  V ar[rt ]1/2     1.482        1.416      1.432      1.453      1.437      1.396       1.249      1.129
  Skew[rt ]       -0.040       -0.054     -0.070     -0.070     -0.072     -0.069      -0.077     -0.072
  Kurt[rt ]         4.95         6.09       7.76       8.38       8.78       8.64        7.75      18.65
  feedback         1.008       1.020      1.051      1.059      1.069      1.070       1.051       1.170

                                          B. Postwar: 1952-2003

  m̂0              1.711        1.584      1.519      1.440      1.434      1.380       1.372      1.334
                  (0.009)     (0.008)    (0.010)    (0.009)    (0.011)    (0.010)     (0.006)    (0.005)
  σ̂               1.050        1.005      1.040      0.944      1.022      0.943       0.801      0.779
                  (0.020)     (0.021)    (0.022)    (0.021)    (0.037)    (0.028)     (0.022)    (0.031)
  gˆd − r          0.043        0.051      0.052      0.052      0.048      0.049       0.047      0.048
                  (0.004)     (0.004)    (0.004)    (0.006)    (0.005)    (0.006)     (0.006)    (0.006)
  γˆk̄             0.026        0.057      0.039      0.038      0.060      0.059       0.053      0.077
                  (0.007)     (0.008)    (0.005)    (0.005)    (0.009)    (0.013)     (0.009)    (0.015)
  b̂                 -          5.530      2.662      2.114      2.830      2.234       2.094      1.997
                               (1.06)   ( 0.268)   ( 0.133)   ( 0.199)   ( 0.153)    ( 0.095)   ( 0.091)
  ln L           45675.21    46008.95   46175.35   46218.80   46251.37   46263.60    46268.18   46268.07
  E[rt ]           0.051        0.060      0.060      0.061      0.056      0.058       0.057      0.058
  V ar[rt ]1/2     1.055        1.017      1.060      0.969      1.088      0.999       0.895      0.864
  Skew[rt ]       -0.032       -0.048     -0.056     -0.055     -0.055     -0.054      -0.054     -0.051
  Kurt[rt ]         4.49         5.37       6.17       6.26      17.80      12.49       36.62      31.35
  feedback         1.010       1.024      1.041      1.056      1.133      1.122       1.247       1.230
   Notes: This table shows parameter estimates for the full-information regime-switching model for a number
of volatility components ranging from one to eight.
                           TABLE 3. – Comparison with CH
                         A. Campbell-Hentschel Model Parameter Estimates
                     ω × 107     α1         α2         β       b × 103              µ × 104         γ

   Full Sample         1.87        0.140        -0.073     0.925         3.05         3.60         0.14
                      (0.78)       (0.01)       (0.01)    (0.004)       (0.18)       (0.53)       (0.03)

   Postwar             0.53        0.145        -0.088     0.934         3.04         3.47         0.47
                      (0.74)       (0.01)       (0.01)    (0.005)       (0.20)       (0.57)       (0.09)

                                      B. Likelihood Comparison
                                                                                      BIC p-value
                                                                                    vs. Multifractal
                                              No. of                                Vuong     HAC
                                            Parameters      ln L       BIC          (1989)     Adj

  Full Sample        Multifractal               5        70451.98     -6.7833
                     QGARCH                     7        69920.65     -6.7311       < 0.001    < 0.001

  Postwar            Multifractal               5        46268.07     -7.0554
                     QGARCH                     7        46057.26     -7.0218       < 0.001    < 0.001

    Notes: Panel A shows parameter estimates from the CH volatility feedback model. Panel B gives a
comparison of the in-sample fit versus the multifrequency regime-switching specification. The Bayesian
Information Criterion is given by BIC = T −1 (−2 ln L + N P ln T ). The last two columns in Panel B give
p-values from a test that the QGARCH dividend specification dominates the multifractal specification by
the BIC criterion. The first value uses the Vuong (1989) methodology, and the second value adjusts the
test for heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation. A low p-value indicates that the CH specification would be
rejected in favor of the multifrequency model.
                   TABLE 4. – Moment Comparison
                                   Standard
                 Mean              Deviation    Skewness                Kurtosis
                                      A. Full Sample

                                           Data
                 0.022               1.10         -0.30                   20.54
                           Full-Information Regime-Switching
                  0.062             1.129       -0.072                    18.65
                  (0.01)            (0.13)       (0.11)                   (3.12)
                 [0.000]           [0.407]      [0.034]                  [0.676]
                             Campbell-Hentschel QGARCH
                  0.038              1.04         -0.19                    7.78
                  (0.01)            (0.09)       (0.23)                   (7.45)
                 [0.021]           [0.823]      [0.114]                  [0.973]

                                          B. Postwar

                                           Data
                 0.023              0.858         -1.05                   26.51
                           Full-Information Regime-Switching
                  0.058             0.858       -0.060                    32.73
                  (0.01)            (0.09)       (0.30)                  (12.80)
                 [0.000]           [0.490]      [0.001]                  [0.359]
                             Campbell-Hentschel QGARCH
                  0.038             0.827       -0.253                     5.64
                  (0.01)            (0.06)       (0.17)                   (3.08)
                 [0.022]           [0.761]      [0.007]                  [0.996]
   Notes: This table shows a moment-based comparison of the full information regime-switching
feedback model against the CH QGARCH specification. For each model, we simulate a path the
same length as the data 1,000 times. We calculate the first four moment statistics for each sample.
The first line for each model gives the mean moments, and in parentheses in the second line the
standard deviation across simulations. In brackets we report the simulated p-value of the data,
which is the percentage of times the corresponding moment of the data exceeds the simulated
moment of the model. We observe that the regime-switching model does not capture well the first
and third moments, while the QGARCH model does not capture well the first, third, and fourth
moments.
     TABLE 5. – Moments of the Learning Model
                                            Signal Standard Deviation σδ
                              0            0.2      0.5      1        1.5                             2

    E[rt ]                 0.0254        0.0254         0.0254        0.0254        0.0254         0.0254
    V ar[rt ]1/2           0.8183        0.8184         0.8170        0.8178        0.8185         0.8189
    Skew[rt ]             -0.0250       -0.0742        -0.2573       -0.5063       -0.6301        -0.7116
    Kurt[rt ]              47.40          29.61          13.78         9.54          8.61           8.23
    feedback              1.1263        1.1266          1.1230       1.1250         1.1269        1.1281
    Notes: This table shows the effect of learning on different moments of the data. The parameters m 0 =
1.34, σd = 0.78, gd − r = 0.15, γk = 0.05, and b = 2.5 are held constant across all simulations. Each column
of the table reports simulation results for different values of the signal standard deviation σ d . When σδ = 0,
information is perfect, and as σd becomes larger the signal precision weakens. For each specification, we
simulate a single long series of T = 3 ∗ 106 returns using the same set of random draws, and report moments
of the simulated data. Mean, variance, and feedback are nearly constant across simulations. Skewness
becomes more negative and kurtosis falls as signal precision becomes weaker.
 20

 10

  0

−10

−20
       1930             ‘40            ‘50          ‘60          ‘70          ‘80          ‘90         2000



Figure 1: Daily Excess Returns. This figure shows daily excess returns from 1926 to 2003. The market
return series splices the Schwert (1990a) data from 1926-1963 with the CRSP value weighted index from 1963-2003.
The risk free rate is proxied by the return on 30 day U.S. Treasury bills.
          Filtered Probability, Πt(Mk=m0)                                 Smoothed Probability, Ψt(Mk=m0)
k=1
k=2
k=3
k=4
k=5
k=6
k=7




                                                                   1
k=8




                                                                0.5
                                                                   0
                                                                         1960       ‘70      ‘80      ‘90     2000


Figure 2: Volatility Component Conditional Beliefs. This figure shows ex ante and ex post conditional
beliefs for the values of each volatility component in the full information regime-switching specification with k̄ = 8
components. The filtered probabilities Πt are in the left-hand column, and the smoothed probabilites Ψt are in the
right-hand column. Volatility components progress from low (k = 1) to high (k = 8) frequency from top to bottom
of the figure.
                                                      Conditional Mean, E (r       )
                                                                           t t+1
                         0.1


                       0.08


                       0.06
              *10−2




                       0.04


                       0.02


                              0




                                                  Conditional Volatility, Var(r        )
                                                                             t t+1
                              8



                              6
                      *10−4




                              4



                              2



                              0




                                         Ex Ante Absolute Feedback: Var(r         ) − Var (d     )
                                                                           t t+1           t   t+1
                         0.2



                       0.15
              *10−4




                         0.1



                       0.05



                              0
                                  1960         1970                 1980                       1990   2000



Figure 3: Ex Ante Conditional Mean, Volatility, and Feedback. This figure shows conditional moments
of excess returns under the full information regime switching specification with k̄ = 8 volatility components. Con-
ditioning information is the ex ante information set of returns up to and including date t. The three panels show
consecutively the conditional mean and variance of returns, and the ex ante absolute feedback.
                                                     Realized Return
 20

 10

  0

−10

−20

                                                 Smoothed Mean Return
0.2



0.1



  0

                                                  Smoothed Feedback
 20

 10

  0

−10

−20

                                                   Smoothed Residual
 20

 10

  0

−10

−20
                   1960                    ‘70                   ‘80                   ‘90                 2000


Figure 4: Ex Post Return Decomposition. This figure shows an ex post decomposition of realized returns using
the full information regime-switching feedback model. The decomposition uses the smoothed beliefs Ψ t obtained by
using the conditioning information set of all returns. The first panel shows actual returns. The second panel shows
the mean return at time t + 1 conditional on the beliefs Ψt . The third panel shows the estimated amount of returns
due to volatility feedback at time t + 1 conditional on all of the data. The final panel is the residual, or the realized
return less the second and third panels.
               50


                          σ =0
               45           δ




               40


               35
Kurtosis (+)




               30


               25


               20

                                        σδ = 0.5
               15
                                                                                           σδ = 20
               10


                5
                    0                      0.5                                   1                                    1.5
                                                        Skewness (−)


Figure 5: Learning Model Skewness and Kurtosis. This figure shows skewness and kurtosis for different
information environments in the simulated learning model. The parameters m0 = 1.34, σd = 0.78, gd − rf = 0.15,
γk̄ = 0.05, and b = 2.5 are held constant across all simulations. Each simulation is then based on a different value
of the signal standard deviation σδ ∈ 0, 0.1, .., 1, 1.25, .., 2, 3, 4, 5, 10, 15, 20. When σδ = 0, information is perfect,
and as σδ becomes larger the signal precision weakens. For each specification, we simulate a single long series of
T = 3 ∗ 106 returns using the same set of random draws. Each marked point on the plot represents a different
simulation, progressing from σδ = 0 in the top left to σδ = 20 in the bottom right.
                                                Perfect Information (σ =0)
                                                                      δ




                                             Intermediate Information (σδ=0.6)




                                             Intermediate Information (σ =1.0)
                                                                          δ




                                                 Poor Information (σδ=20)
                             20

                             10
                Returns(%)




                              0

                        −10

                        −20
                                  0    0.5                  1                    1.5                  2
                                                                                                   4
                                                                                               x 10



Figure 6: Simulations of the Learning Economy. This figure shows learning economy simulations with length
T = 20, 000. All simulations are based on the same set of base parameters m0 = 1.34, σd = 0.78, gd − rf = 0.15,
γk̄ = 0.05, and b = 2.5, and the same random draws for dividends, signal noises, and multipliers. Signal variability,
σδ , is the only item that changes across simulations. The top panel corresponds to full-information. The middle two
panels show intermediate learning environments, and in the final panel information quality is poor. We observe that
noise in the investor signals attenuates extreme feedback realizations, but attenuation is stronger for positive than
negative realizations. This generates increasing skewness as information quality falls.
