                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     MEXICAN IMMIGRATION AND SELF-SELECTION:
                    NEW EVIDENCE FROM THE 2000 MEXICAN CENSUS

                                            Pablo Ibarraran
                                            Darren Lubotsky

                                          Working Paper 11456
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w11456


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       June 2005




We are grateful to Cordelia Reimers, our discussant, for her useful feedback. We also thank seminar
participants at Columbia University, the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, Indiana University, the NBER,
the University of Illinois, the University of Kentucky, and Gadi Barlevy, Ilana Redstone Akresh, Richard
Akresh, Todd Elder, Kevin Hallock, Roger Koenker, and Craig Olson for their helpful comments and
suggestions. We are naturally responsible for any remaining errors. The views expressed herein are those
of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by Pablo Ibarraran and Darren Lubotsky. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Mexican Immigration and Self-Selection: New Evidence from the 2000 Mexican Census
Pablo Ibarraran and Darren Lubotsky
NBER Working Paper No. 11456
June 2005
JEL No. J6, F2

                                           ABSTRACT




We use data from the 2000 Mexican Census to examine how the education and socioeconomic status

of Mexican immigrants to the United States compares to that of non-migrants in Mexico. Our

primary conclusion is that migrants tend to be less educated than non-migrants. This finding is

consistent with the idea that the return to education is higher in Mexico than in the United States,

and thus the wage gain to migrating is proportionately smaller for high-educated Mexicans than it

is for lower-educated Mexicans. We also find that the degree of negative selection of migrants is

stronger in Mexican counties that have a higher return to education.

Pablo Ibarraran
Office of Evaluation and Oversight
Inter-American Development Bank
1300 New York Avenue NW
Washington, DC 20577
STOP B-0750
pibarraran@iadb.org


Darren Lubotsky
Department of Economics
and Institute of Labor and Industrial Relations
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
504 E Armory Avenue
Champaign, IL 61820
lubotsky@uiuc.edu
I. Introduction

        We use data from the 2000 Mexican and United States Censuses to examine how the

educational attainment of Mexican migrants to the United States compares to the educational

attainment of those who remain in Mexico. We present a version of the standard economic model

of migration that predicts lower-educated Mexicans have a greater incentive to migrate to the

United States than higher-educated Mexicans. Moreover, we expect there to be substantial

variation in the degree of migrant selectivity throughout Mexico: Areas within Mexico that have

high returns to education will tend to attract more highly educated Mexicans and provide a

greater incentive for low-educated Mexicans to move to the United States. By contrast, lower-

educated Mexicans will tend to remain in those areas within Mexico that have a relatively lower

return to education. Migration from these areas will tend to be more balanced between higher and

lower-educated Mexicans, or may even favor high educated Mexicans.

        Alternative theories of migration posit that wage differences between countries may not

be important determinants of the magnitude and skill-composition of migratory flows. Instead,

factors such as migration costs, community social capital, migration networks, and access to

credit markets may be more important. Some of these theories predict that Mexican migrants will

be positively selected; that is, they will be more skilled than non-migrants. Our primary goal is to

accurately assess whether migrants are in fact positively or negatively selected as a first step in

determining the relative importance of wage differences, returns to human capital, and other

influences on Mexico-U.S. migration patterns.

        Knowing whether Mexicans tend to come from the bottom or the top of the Mexican skill

distribution has important implications for a number of research and policy questions. Perhaps

most importantly, migration may have profound effects on the Mexican labor force and, though

remittances, on the economic well-being of families in Mexico. In one view, if migration

responds to differences in the return to skills between countries and migrants are largely


                                                  1
composed of less-skilled Mexicans, then migration will tend to reduce the relative scarcity of

high-skilled labor in Mexico and reduce earnings disparities between high and low-skilled

workers. Inequality across Mexican families will be further reduced by remittance income from

abroad. Moreover, if economic development and rising educational attainment in Mexico is

accompanied by a reduction in the return to skills, then over time there may be a reduction in the

size of migrant flows from Mexico to the United States and an increase in the skill composition of

future Mexican migrants. On the other hand, if household wealth or access to credit markets are

important pre-conditions for migration, migrants will tend to be drawn from the upper half of the

Mexican skill distribution and economic development may lead to increased migration and

increased inequality within Mexico.1

        U.S. immigration policy is routinely criticized for encouraging too many low-skilled

immigrants and too few high skilled immigrants. A better understanding of the determinants of

the stock of migrants to the U.S. is critical for evaluating the likely effects of alternative policies.

For example, the fear that increased welfare generosity or increases in the U.S. minimum wage

will encourage low-skilled migration is more realistic if low-skilled Mexicans indeed do respond

to earnings differences between Mexico and the United States. On the other hand, English

language programs and other policies that may increase the returns to skills may be more likely to

increase migration among higher skilled Mexicans.

        Finally, studies of immigrants’ performance in the U.S. labor market typically compare

immigrants’ earnings to that of native-born workers.2 While this comparison is certainly

interesting and important, it does not tell us the extent to which the well-being of immigrants

improved as a result of their migration. A better understanding of the socioeconomic status of

Mexican migrants and their families back in Mexico will help us to put the immigrant labor

market experience in the U.S. in a wider perspective.

1
  McKenzie and Rapoport (2004) find that migration tends to reduce inequality within rural Mexican
communities.
2
  For example, Trejo (1997) studies the earnings of Mexicans in the U.S. labor market.


                                                   2
         Our main finding is that low-skilled Mexicans are more likely than higher skilled

Mexicans to migrate to the United States. Moreover, consistent with the predictions of the

theoretical model, the degree of negative selection among migrants is larger in counties within the

Mexican states where migrants typically originate that have higher returns to education. We also

find that Mexican immigrants in the 2000 U.S. Census are older and significantly better skilled

than migrants in the 2000 Mexican Census. Though part of this discrepancy is likely caused by

the particular sampling procedure of the Mexican Census, part is also likely caused by an

undercount of young, largely illegal Mexican immigrants and over-reporting of education in the

U.S. Census.

         The paper proceeds as follows: in the next section we discuss the standard theoretical

framework to analyze migration and selection, and we review the literature on education and self-

selection of Mexican migrants. In Section III we describe the 2000 Mexican Census and compare

its coverage of migrants with that in the 2000 U.S. Census. Section IV compares the level of

education among migrants and non-migrants. Section V investigates the relationship between the

degree of migrant selection and local returns to education. Finally, Section VI concludes.



II. Theory and existing evidence

         We begin with a standard migration model in which Mexicans compare their potential

earnings in Mexico with their potential earnings in the United States net of moving costs.3 Let the

log earnings of individual i who lives in Mexican county c be given by

                                         log(wic ) = α c + β c S i                                      (1a)




3
 This is a single- index model of skill, similar to that in Chiquiar and Hanson (2005). Borjas (1987, 1991,
and 1999) presents a two-index model which allows the rank ordering of workers by skill to be different
across countries. All of these models ignore the possibility of back-and-forth migration between Mexican
and the United States.


                                                     3
where Si is the level of schooling completed by the individual, βc is the return to schooling in

county c, and αc captures the level of earnings in county c. If the individual were to move to the

United States, his log earnings would be determined by

                                        log(wiu ) = α u + β u S i                                     (1b)

where βu is the return to education faced by Mexican immigrants in the United States. Our

formulation of the model assumes there is variation at the county level in the average level of

earnings and the returns to schooling within Mexico, but there is a single rate of return in the

United States. We assume these rates of return are exogenously given.

        A person migrates to the United States if the wage gain plus any non-pecuniary gains

outweigh the costs of migration. Denote by Cic the migration costs net of any non-pecuniary gains

for person i moving from county c to the United States. The person migrates if log(wiu- Cic) ≈

log(wiu) - πic > log(wic), where πic = Cic / wic is the time-equivalent net costs of migration. The

wage gain to individual i were he to move to the United States from county c is given by

                                 Gic = (α u + β u S i ) − (α c + β cu S i )

                                     = (α u − α c ) + S i ( β u − β c )                               (2)

The migration decision can therefore be expressed as a comparison of the wage gain Gic to the

time-equivalent net migration costs πic. The person migrates if Gic > π ic , which is equivalent to

                                (α u − α c − π ic ) + S i ( β u − β c ) > 0                            (3)

        Equation 3 highlights two predictions about the selectivity of Mexican migrants to the

United States. First, the wage gain to migrating, Gic, will either rise or fall with additional

education, depending on whether the return to education is higher in the United States or in

Mexico, which implies that migrants will be drawn from either the upper tail or the lower tail of

the distribution of education. When the return to education is higher in Mexico than in the U.S.,




                                                     4
( β u − β c ) < 0 , and the wage gain from migrating to the United States is larger for low-educated

Mexicans than it is for higher educated Mexicans.

        The second prediction is that among low-educated Mexicans for whom the wage gain to

migrating is positive, the wage gain is larger in Mexican counties with relatively larger returns to

schooling. That is, Mexican migrants will tend to be negatively selected from all counties in

Mexico that have a rate of return to schooling higher than that in the United States, but the

selection will be stronger in counties with relatively higher rates of return.

        The predictions about migrant selectivity are driven by wage differences between Mexico

and the United States that result from differences in the return to skill across countries. These

predictions may not hold if time-equivalent migration costs tend to be lower for high skilled

Mexicans, as suggested by Chiquiar and Hanson (2005). For example, fixed costs of migrating

will translate into a smaller time-equivalent cost for high-wage migrants than for low-wage

migrants. There may also be higher borrowing cost among low-income Mexican families than

among high-income families. The presence of these factors may lead migrants to be positively

selected even if the wage gain is relatively larger for low-skilled Mexicans. But there are also

reasons to believe migration costs may be higher for better skilled workers. For example, high

skilled workers may require legalized status to practice their profession in the United States, or

they require an extended stay in the United States to acquire U.S. or firm-specific skills. In any

event, little is known about the source or magnitude of migration costs.

        Though the model captures the essential idea behind wage differences as a driving force

behind migration incentives, it contains a number of simplifications that may influence the

interpretation of our results. Perhaps most importantly, the rate of return to education in a

Mexican county is not necessarily exogenous to the migration process, as we have assumed.

Instead, it is likely to be jointly determined with the skill composition of migrants moving from

the county to the United States, and with the skill composition of internal migration within




                                                  5
Mexico. The model also ignores aspects of skills besides education. Finally, recent work stresses

the importance of networks and social capital in the migration process.4 One can view these

institutions as either influencing the net costs of migration, Cic, the level of earnings in the United

States, αu, or the return to education in the United States, βu, for some migrants more than others.

Our paper does not address the role of these factors in influencing migrant selectivity.

        Though the literature on Mexican immigration is vast, there is very little that focuses on

the selectivity of migration. Chiquiar and Hanson (2005) compare Mexicans in the 1990 and 2000

U.S. Censuses to non-migrant Mexicans in the 1990 and 2000 Mexican Censuses. They conclude

that migrants, if they were to return to Mexico, would tend to fall in the middle or upper part of

the Mexican wage distribution, which suggests that factors other than wage differences play an

important role in shaping Mexican migration. In a similar type of analysis, Cuecuecha (2003)

compares Mexicans in the 1994 United States Current Population Survey with Mexicans in the

1994 Encuesta Nacional de Ingreso y Gasto de los Hogares, an income and consumption survey,

and also concludes that positive selection takes place within Mexico.

        Prior to the release of the 2000 Mexican Census, which we will describe in more detail

below, a primary source of data on both Mexican residents and migrants to the United States is

the Mexican Migration Project. Orrenius and Zavodny (2004) use this data to examine how

various factors influence the selectivity of migrants over time. Among their findings are that

improvements in U.S and Mexican economic conditions lead to increased negative selection of

migrants, but stricter border enforcement, coupled with deteriorating conditions within Mexico,

lead to increased positive selection. Their descriptive statistics suggest that overall migrants come

from the middle of the distribution of education.

        In the remainder of the paper we use data from the 2000 Mexican Census and the 2000

U.S. Census to compare the educational attainment of migrants and non-migrants. In doing so, we


4
 For example, see Durand, Massey, and Zenteno (2001); de Janvry, Sadoulet, and Winters (2001); Massey
and Singer (1998); and Munshi (2003).


                                                    6
also attempt to shed light on how coverage of Mexican immigrants differs across the two data

sources.



III. Description of the Mexican Census data and its coverage of Mexican migrants

           With the right data, comparing the skills of migrants to non-migrants in Mexico is

straightforward: The ideal dataset would contain information on all Mexicans at a point in time,

indicators for which Mexicans moved to the United States during some subsequent time period,

and a set of exogenous measures of each individual’s skill and the return to skill in their local

area. Since this ideal dataset does not exist, past researchers have relied on the alternative data

sources described in Section II. We take a new approach and use the 2000 Mexican Census to

compare the characteristics of Mexican migrants and non-migrants. In doing so we lay out the

potential problems and biases associated with the both censuses.

           The Mexican Census was conducted in February 2000 by the Instituto Nacional de

Estadística Geografía e Informática (INEGI), the Mexican statistical agency. Household heads

were asked to list all current members of the household and to also list any current or past

household member who had lived abroad during the preceding five years. A relatively large

amount of economic and demographic information is collected about current household members.

A much more limited amount of information is collected on the migrants, including their age,

gender, Mexican state of origin, month and year of most recent departure, destination country,

and current country of residence. About 16 percent of migrants had returned to Mexico and the

Census records the month and year of their return.5 The data consist of a 10 percent sample of the

Mexican population. Household weights are provided to adjust for non-response. There are

2,312,035 households in the sample, consisting of 10,099,182 total persons who live in Mexico.

5
 Thus, a household member could be listed as both a current household member and as an international
migrant if he or she had moved abroad during the past five years and had returned to the same household in
Mexico. Unfortunately, the data does not directly link return migrants with current household members, or
even identify if return migrants currently live in the household. At best, one could match return migrants
with current household members by age and gender.


                                                    7
        Although the Mexican Census allows us to shed light on some of the limitations of other

data sources, the data also have important limitations relative to our ideal dataset: first, we do not

have key socioeconomic information about the migrants themselves. In particular, we do not

know their educational attainment or labor market success in Mexico prior to moving to the

United States. We also do not know migrants’ relationship to the household members in Mexico.

Second, we do not have any information about households in which all members moved to the

United States. We return to this sampling issue below.

        The major advantages of these data compared to the sample of Mexican migrants in the

U.S. Census are, first, that we can compare migrants and non-migrants using the same data source

and thus avoid complications stemming from comparing educational attainment measured in the

U.S. Census with attainment measured from a different question in the Mexican Census. Second,

we can link migrants to their original place of residence in Mexico. This allows us to examine the

influence of the local return to education on the decision to migrate among Mexicans from

different points in the skill distribution. Third, there is widespread concern that the U.S. Census

undercounts Mexican immigrants, and the undercount is likely to be most severe among illegal

migrants and the least skilled migrants (Bean et al 1998 and Bean et al 2001). Costanzo et al

(2001) suggest that the undercount rate appears to be smaller in the 2000 U.S. Census than it was

in the 1990 Census. Clearly, neither the Mexican nor U.S. Censuses provide a fully representative

sample of all recent Mexican migrants and they probably provide samples with different sources

of bias compared to the universe of all Mexican migrants.

        Non-response to Census questions in both data sources also poses a problem for

comparing the migrant populations. The U.S. Census Bureau allocates responses for missing

values in most cases by imputing a valid response from another respondent in the data. The

characteristics used to match “donor” responses to the missing values depend on the particular

variable being allocated, but typical characteristics are age, gender, and race. It does not appear

that migration status is used in the allocation procedure, so imputed values for migrants could be


                                                  8
coming from American-born respondents.6 Of all people recorded in the U.S. Census as being

born in Mexico, approximately 13.4 percent have allocated data for their country of birth; 23.5

percent have an allocated year of arrival to the U.S., 18.9 percent have allocated education; and

9.9 percent have an allocated age. The Mexican Census does not allocate data for missing values

and 2.3 percent of migrants are missing a value for their age. As we note below, in some cases

our conclusions depend on how we handle missing values in both Censuses.

        In addition to the sources of discrepancy identified above between the U.S. and Mexican

Census counts, and between the Censuses and the universe of all Mexican migrants in the U.S.,

there are several other sources of discrepancy in coverage: First, it is possible for a migrant to be

counted more than once in the Mexican Census. The survey asks heads if any household member

over the past five years had moved to the U.S. A migrant who was a member of multiple

households during the past five years (e.g. his parents’ and wife’s households) could be in the

Mexican data multiple times. Second, the U.S. Census was taken on April 1st, two months after

the Mexican Census. Migrants who moved in February or March of 2000 may be in the U.S.

Census but not show up as migrants in the Mexican Census. If the migration flows during these

two months is equal to average flow between 1995 and 2000, this discrepancy will lead to an

increase in the U.S. Census count of about 1/30th, or 3 1/3 percent, over five years, relative to the

Mexican Census count. This source of discrepancy could of course be larger if migration to the

United States was larger than average during February and March of 2000. Third, a back-and-

forth migrant could be listed as both someone in the Mexican Census who returned to Mexico and

also in the U.S. Census as a current household member. Without knowing the size of this group, it

is not clear whether the focus should be on all migrants identified in the Mexican Census or only

those who are reported not to have returned to Mexico. Although this distinction is important for



6
 Hirsch and Schumacher (2004) discuss biases that result from using allocated data in wage regressions.
Crease, Ramirez, and Spencer (2001) discuss the quality of the country of birth and Hispanic ethnicity
variables in the 2000 Census.


                                                    9
assessing the overall level of coverage in the Mexican Census, it turns out not to be important for

our conclusions regarding migrant selectivity.

        To shed light on the relative coverage of recent Mexican immigrants enumerated in the

2000 U.S. and Mexican Censuses, we begin in Table 1 and Figures 1 and 2 with a comparison of

estimated population counts of Mexican migrants in the Mexican and U.S. Censuses. Panel A of

Table 1 shows estimates of the migrant population taken from the Mexican Census. There are

137,910 male migrants aged 16 or older and 38,538 female migrants. The average age of the

migrants is about 27 years old for both genders. Using the household weights provided by the

Mexican Census, these observations correspond to population estimates of 1,111,895 males and

342,795 females. About 15 percent of Mexican migrants are reported to have returned to Mexico

by February 2000. Excluding these individuals leaves 115,760 male migrants aged 16 or older

and 33,516 females, corresponding to population estimates of 925,587 males and 296,011

females. These population estimates include migrants with missing values for age.

        In panel B we show analogous estimates of the Mexican immigrant population in the

United States from the 5% sample of the 2000 United States Public Use Microdata Sample. This

sample includes all people who report that they came to the U.S. between 1995 and April 2000, or

reported that they lived in Mexico in April 1995. There are 62,408 males and 41,403 females in

the data. Using the person weights provided in the census, these sample counts correspond to

population estimates of 1,324,762 and 880,594. The average male is 28 years old and the average

female is 30 years old. Thus, the total male and female migrant populations in the Mexican

Census are about 84 and 39 percent of the size of the populations in the U.S. Census. Excluding

return migrants, the populations in the Mexican Census are 70 and 34 percent of the size of the

populations in the U.S. Census. These tabulations include respondents in the U.S. Census with

allocated data for country of birth, year of migration, age, or education.

        The right-side of Panel B presents population estimates from the U.S. Census that

exclude migrants who report themselves as married with spouse present. Since Mexican married


                                                 10
couples in the United States seem most likely to have migrated as a whole household, they are

most likely to be missing from the migrant population in the Mexican Census. The population

estimates for the remaining migrants in the U.S. Census are 1,033,060 men and 459,051 women.

Excluding return migrants, the population estimates from the Mexican Census correspond to 90

and 64 percent of these population estimates.

        These aggregate population comparisons hide important differences in coverage between

the Mexican and U.S. Censuses across age groups. Figure 1 is a plot of the population estimate

from the Mexican Census against the estimate from the U.S. Census for men in two-year age

groups from 16 to 50, five-year age groups from 50 to 70, and men over 70. Figure 2 is the

analogous plot for women.7 The dashed 45 degree line represents an equal population estimate in

the two data sources. The solid line shows the average coverage rate of 90%.8 These comparisons

are summarized in Table 2. These tabulations exclude respondents in the U.S. Census with

allocated age data and also exclude respondents in the Mexican Census with missing age data.

        Figure 1 and Table 2 show that young migrant men are actually undersampled in the U.S.

Census, in contrast to the pattern for older migrants. There are 36 percent more migrant men aged

16 to 19 in the Mexican Census than in the U.S. Census. Men aged 20 to 31 are underrepresented

in the Mexican Census by 77 percent relative to the U.S. Census. In fact, the two data sets

disagree over which age group comprises the largest segment of the Mexican migrant population:

According to the U.S. Census it is those aged 20 to 21, with those aged 22 to 23 a close second.

But according to the Mexican Census the largest group is those 18 to 19. Men aged 32 and older

are also underrepresented in the Mexican Census and the degree of under-representation tends to

rise with age. The undercount of 16 to 19 year old Mexican migrants in the U.S. Census is likely

7
  The population estimates of children under age 16 are smaller in the Mexican Census than in the U.S.
Census, almost certainly because most children move only when the whole household moves and because
of births to Mexicans that occur while in the United States. We thus exclude children from our population
comparisons.
8
  This average coverage rate of 90% in Figure 1 and 40% in Figure 2 are higher than the coverage rates of
84% and 39% reported in Table 1 because the data in Table 1 include respondents with missing or allocated
age data, while the data underlying Figures 1 and 2 do not.


                                                   11
caused by the fact they are more likely than older migrants to be in the U.S. illegally and less

likely to have set up permanent roots in the United States. For example, we examined the

likelihood of being in the U.S. illegally using data from the migration module of the 2002

National Employment Survey and find that about 86 percent of migrants aged 16 to 19 are in the

U.S. illegally, compared to 78 percent among migrants aged 20 to 54.9

          Although the coverage rate for women as a whole is lower than that of men, Figure 2

shows younger women have higher than average coverage compared to older migrants. The lower

average coverage rate among women is probably a result of a large number of women only

migrating as part of a whole household, and thus not being enumerated at all in the Mexican

Census.

          The relative undersample of young migrants in the U.S. Census is likely to lead users of

that data to overstate the age and skill level of Mexican migrants. To gauge the magnitude of

these differences, the right-hand column in Table 2 shows how high school graduation rates of

Mexican immigrants in the U.S. Census vary by age. The overall high school graduation rate of

Mexicans in the U.S. Census is 24.5 percent, but is only 15.0 percent among migrants aged 16 to

19. When we reweight the Mexican immigrants in the U.S. Census to have the same distribution

across the five age categories as migrants in the Mexican Census, the high school graduation rate

falls by one percentage points to 23.5 percent. In an unreported tabulations we also find that the

average annual wage of employed Mexican migrants in the U.S. Census falls by about eight

percent when we reweight migrants in different age groups.

          To summarize, migrants in the Mexican Census make up a fairly representative sample of

the large group of men who migrate to the United States, and for this reason we focus most of the

remainder of our analysis on men’s migration decisions. Both the United States and Mexican

Censuses understate the size of the Mexican migration flow, but they have different

9
 Like the Mexican Census the National Employment Survey asks household members in Mexico whether
any other members have recently moved to the United States. Migrants’ legal status is reported by the
household respondent in Mexico.


                                                  12
shortcomings. The U.S. Census tends to have a greater undersample of migrants aged 16 to 19,

who make up about a quarter of all migrants and tend to be less educated than older migrants. The

Mexican Census is less well-equipped to provide data on entire households that move to the

United States, a group that may be more educated than the typical Mexican migrant. Below we

discuss how the relative skills of these unenumerated migrants may impact our conclusions about

migrant selectivity. Finally, the last column of Table 2 shows the migration rate of different age

groups in Mexico. Since the migration rate is below one percent for Mexicans aged 55 and older,

and such migrants make up only two percent of all migrants, we focus the remainder of our

analysis on migrants aged 16 to 54.



IV. Differences in educational attainment between migrants and non-migrants

        A direct comparison of the educational attainment of migrants and non-migrants in the

Mexican Census is not possible because education was not recorded for the migrants. We instead

pursue several alternative strategies: first, we compare educational attainment of non-migrants in

the Mexican Census to migrants in the 2000 U.S. Census. We next turn to two comparisons of

educational attainment using only the Mexican Census: First, we compare the educational

attainment of non-migrant Mexicans who live in household that had a migrant to the education of

non-migrants that live in households without any migrants. Second, we use other information

available in the Mexican Census to develop a predicted level of education for both migrants and

non-migrants in Mexico.

        Most Mexicans have 6, 9, 12, 16, or 17 years of education, corresponding to finishing

primary school, secondary school, high school, and college. The Mexican Census has a degree-

based question and individual degrees (such as primary and secondary) are converted by INEGI

into a variable measuring the number of years of schooling. Table 3 shows the distribution of

education among non-migrant men sampled in the Mexican Census and migrant men sampled in

the U.S. Census. Column 1 shows that 44.8 percent of Mexican men aged 16 to 54 have eight or


                                                13
fewer years of schooling; 21.9 percent have nine years of schooling; and 25.4 percent have a high

school degree or more education. The next four columns show the distribution of education by

age and indicate that younger generations are more likely to get a secondary or high school

degree than are people aged 35 or older.

        The right side of Table 3 shows the distribution of educational attainment among recent

Mexican immigrant men in the 2000 U.S. Census. We restrict our sample in this table to those

without allocated place of birth, year of arrival, age, or education; this excludes 30 percent of

those who would otherwise appear in this table. The U.S. Census also has a grade and degree-

based question but naturally the categories are different than in the Mexican Census. 45.4 percent

of Mexican migrant men report they have completed eighth grade or fewer years of schooling;

13.6 percent report to have completed ninth grade; 16.4 percent report they completed 10th

through 12th grade and do not have a high school degree; and 32.6 percent have a high school

degree or more education.10

        These tabulations indicate that Mexican migrants in the U.S. Census come from the

upper-middle of the Mexican educational distribution, which echoes the findings of Chiquiar and

Hanson (2005). 45 percent of both the U.S. and Mexico samples have between zero and eight

years of education. Non-migrant Mexicans are more likely than Mexicans in the U.S. Census to

have nine years of education (a secondary school degree), while migrants are more likely to have

between 10 years of education and a high school degree. Interestingly, non-migrants are more

likely than migrants to have 13 or more years of education. In unreported tabulations we also find

that non-migrants are more likely than migrants to have a college degree or more education.

        Attempting to credibly compare educational attainment in the U.S. and Mexican

Censuses raises several important concerns. First, migrants in the U.S. Census may tend to over-

report their education, possibly due to a mistranslation or misunderstanding of the grade and

10
  Unlike the Mexican Census, the United States Census has a category for someone who completed 12
years of schooling but does not have a high school degree. 7.8 percent of Mexican migrants are in this
category, which is nearly half the number of people who report to have a high school degree.


                                                    14
degree choices in the U.S. Census.11 We do not have a method to directly test for a reporting bias

among Mexican immigrants in the U.S. Census, but a suggestive piece of evidence that Mexican

immigrants in the U.S. may overstate their educational attainment (or understate their age) is that

9.0 percent of 16 and 17 year old Mexicans claim to have a high school degree or more education,

compared to 3.6 percent of American-born 16 and 17 year olds. In both countries a person would

typically be in their third and final years of high school at ages 16 and 17.

         A second potential problem is that the migrants in the U.S. Census are a nonrandom

subsample of all migrants. We have already detailed in the previous section differences in the age

distribution of migrants in the two Censuses that indicate the U.S. Census undercounts younger

migrants. A related worry is that the U.S. Census significantly undercounts illegal and low-skilled

migrants of all ages. Finally, 30 percent of the migrants in the U.S. Census did not give valid

responses to key variables, such as place of birth, year of migration, age, and education. The

Census Bureau provides imputed values for all missing data and the values imputed for migrants’

education tend to be higher than the average actual reported values. For example, the fraction of

Mexican migrants with a high school degree or more education rises from 24.6 percent to 27.1

when individuals with allocated data are included. This increase may result from the Census

Bureau using higher educated native-born American respondents to impute education to Mexican

immigrants. Thus researchers are faced with a choice of using imputed values that are potentially

too large or dropping individuals with imputed values and using a sample with an unknown

selection bias.

         To alleviate some of the difficulties in comparing Mexicans in two different national

censuses, with different sampling schemes and different questions, we next turn to an analysis of

educational attainment using only the Mexican Census. We begin in Table 4 with a comparison of


11
  For example, a high school degree in Mexico is sometimes referred to as a bachillerato, while a
bachelor’s degree in the United States signifies college completion. Mexicans filling out the U.S. Census
may also indicate they have a high school degree when they in fact have a secondary school degree in
Mexico, which requires nine years of schooling.


                                                    15
the educational attainment of the highest educated non-migrant in households that contain at least

one migrant to the highest educated member of non-migrant households. Migrants themselves are

not included in this tabulation because we do not observe their level of education. Higher

education among non-migrant family members is associated with higher family income and is

likely associated with higher education among migrant members of the same family. If migrants’

family members tend to be better educated than non-migrant Mexicans, one might have more

confidence in the evidence of positive selection of migrants themselves presented above. But the

tabulations in left-hand columns of Table 4 do not bear this out: Members of migrant families are

more likely than non-migrant families to have nine years of education or less, while non-migrant

families are more likely to have 12 or more years of education. Non-migrant families have, on

average, about 0.8 years more schooling than migrant families.

        Although these tabulations suggest migrants come from less educated households in

Mexico, there are two important problems. First, migrants tend to be men aged 16 to 35, a group

that tends to have high educational attainment within Mexico. Thus, migrant households are

likely to be missing their “high education” member, while non-migrant households contain him.

This would lead us to understate the education of migrant households. Second, if children tend to

be the highest educated member of migrant households, while adults tend to be the highest

educated member of non-migrant households, then the maximal education in the household may

be a poor barometer of the overall economic well-being of the household.

        One simple way to address these concerns is to compare the highest educated woman

across households. Since about 75 percent of migrants are men, measurement of household

educational attainment of women in Mexico is much less affected by the absence of migrants.

The right-hand columns in Table 4 compare the educational attainment of the highest educated

woman in non-migrant households, in migrant households, and in migrant households where all

migrants are men. The highest educated woman in 55 percent of migrant families has eight or

fewer years of education, while only 47 percent of non-migrant families fall in that range.


                                                16
Women in non-migrant families are more likely than their counterparts in migrant families to

have 12 or more years of education. These conclusions are not altered when we restrict the

sample of migrant households to just those with male migrants. In unreported tabulations we also

find similar conclusions when we restrict attention to women aged 16 to 35, so the higher

educational attainment among non-migrant families is not driven by higher education solely

among children. In sum, our comparison of educational attainment among non-migrants in

Mexico indicates that migrants tend to come from households with lower educated members.

        Our final and preferred method to examine the relative educational attainment of

migrants and non-migrants is to generate a predicted level of education for each migrant and non-

migrant Mexican based on their household characteristics and location. We then compare the

predicted education of migrants to the predicted education of non-migrants.

        To predict education we regress the number of years of schooling of individual i, gender

j, in county c (Sijc) on indicator variables for age (dajc), six indicator variables for individuals’

town size, indicator variables for the number of children in the household aged zero to eight

(Kid1jc), indicators for the number of children 9 to 16 years old (Kid2jc), indicators for the number

of men aged 17 to 35 (Man1jc), indicators for the number of men aged 36 and older (Man2jc),

indicators for the number of women aged 17 to 35 (Woman1jc), and indicators for the number of

women aged 36 and older (Woman2jc). Formally, we run the following regression separately by

gender and county, using all people aged twelve and over who are not migrants and who do not

live in a migrant household:

               S ijc = δ 1 + d ajc + d tjc + δ 2 Kid 1 jc + δ 3 Kid 2 jc + δ 4 Man1 jc + δ 5 Man2 jc
                                                                                                        (4)
                     + δ 6Woman1 jc + δ 7Woman2 jc + ε ijc

where the δs are the regression coefficients and εijc is the error term. The age variables include

single year indicators for ages twelve to thirty, indicators for three-year groups from thirty-one to

seventy, an indicator for people in their seventies, and indicator for people over eighty. The town-




                                                       17
size indicators correspond to towns with less than 2500 people; 2500 to 14,999; 15,000 to 19,999;

20,000 to 49,999; 50,000 to 99,999; 100,000 to 499,999 and a half-million or more people. The

indicator variables for the number of children, adult men, and adult women include indicators that

the household contains one, two, three, or more than three of each type of person. Again, these

regressions are estimated separately by gender and by county, which allows the intercept and the

relationship between education and the independent variables to vary by gender and county.

        Next, we use the coefficient estimates to compute the predicted education for all sample

members, including non-migrants who live in migrant households and migrants themselves. This

predicted education can be interpreted as an index of educational attainment or socio-economic

status more generally. The regression in equation 4 and the prediction are based only on

individuals’ county, household-level characteristics, plus age and gender, because these are the

only variables available for the migrants with which to generate a predicted education. Note also

that equation 4 is only estimated on non-migrants who live in non-migrant households because

the educational attainment of the non-migrant family members of migrants may be impacted by

remittances from migrants living abroad (see Hanson and Woodruff 2003).

        Another way to view this procedure is that we are assigning to migrants the average

educational attainment of non-migrants who live in towns of the same size in their county, who

are the same age, and have a similar family structure. If there are systematic differences between

migrants and non-migrants in these narrow cells, we may over- or under-predict migrant

education. For example, the theory in Section 2 predicted that migrants will tend to be less

educated than non-migrants from across Mexico as a whole. If this prediction holds even within

narrow geography, age, and family structure cells, then we are likely overstating the education of

migrants. Similarly, if migrants were more likely to work when young and thus attended fewer

class sessions, then we are again likely to be overstating the relative skills of migrants. Although

we cannot directly test the identifying assumption underlying this procedure that there no




                                                 18
unobserved differences between migrants and non-migrants within the narrow geography, age,

and family structure cells, we provide suggestive evidence below that it may be reasonable.12

        Table 5 compares the distribution of actual and predicted education. Column 1 shows the

distribution of actual years of education among men aged 16 to 54 who are not migrants and also

do not live in a migrant household. Column 3 shows the distribution of predicted education for

this group. Not surprisingly, there is less variation in the distribution of predicted education than

in the distribution of actual education (the standard deviation of predicted education is about 54

percent of the standard deviation of actual education; the means are equal by construction).

Columns 2 and 4 show the distribution of actual and predicted education for non-migrants who

live in households that also have migrants. These individuals were not included in estimation of

the education regression. It is interesting to note that the average predicted education is about

0.57 years less than the average actual education, which implies that unmeasured determinants of

schooling exert a positive, though very small, effect on this group. We take this as suggestive

evidence that the identifying assumption underlying our method of comparing predicted

education is be reasonable.

        Column 5 displays the distribution of migrants’ predicted education. On average, the

predicted education of migrants is 0.63 years less than the predicted education of non-migrants

who live in non-migrant households. If the small magnitude of the discrepancy between actual

and predicted education among non-migrants who live with migrants is any guide, the actual

education of migrants is likely to also be less than the actual education of non-migrants.13 The

bottom panel of Table 5 shows the 25th, median, and 75th percentiles of the distributions of actual

and predicted education. The lower predicted education of migrants we see at the mean is also


12
   One might also be concerned that since migrants are more likely to come from rural areas, they may also
attend lower-quality schools. Thus simply comparing completed years of schooling may understate the
relative skills of migrants.
13
   Note that another way we could test the assumption underlying our use of predicted education is to
construction predicted education for Mexican migrants in the U.S. Census. Unfortunately we cannot do this
because we do not have their Mexican household or geographic information.


                                                   19
evident throughout the distribution. The predicted education of the median migrant would put him

at the 36th percentile in the distribution of predicted education among non-migrants.

        The three panels of Table 6 show differences in predicted education by age, region of

Mexico, and by town size. One might worry that our finding of lower predicted education among

migrants may be driven by differences in the average age of migrants and non-migrants. The

tabulations in Panel A of Table 6 shows evidence of negative selection within four age groups,

and the degree of negative selection actually increases with age. Interestingly, there is more

negative selection among migrants within age groups than there is among migrants of all ages.

Because overall educational attainment is considerably lower among those aged 46 to 54, and

very few of them are migrants, including them in an aggregate analysis reduces the overall gap in

education between migrants and non-migrants.

        Two-thirds of Mexican migrant men aged 16 to 54 originate in one of fourteen states in

Central Mexico, and the migration rate in this region is 7.4%. Interestingly, the nationwide gap in

predicted education is entirely driven by the difference in this region. Predicted education is

approximately equal among migrants and non-migrants in the other three regions, Mexico City

and the state of Mexico, the seven northern boarder states, and eight southern states.

        Finally, Panel C shows differences by town size. 42.5% of migrants come from towns

with populations less than 2500, but the remaining 57.5% of migrants are fairly equally

distributed among towns with populations of 2500 and larger. The migration rate is 7.8% among

all towns with a population of less than 2500 and the rate tends to fall as town size increases. At

the same time, average education of migrants and non-migrants tend to rise with town size.

Interestingly, among people who live in towns of the same size, migrants are more educated than

non-migrants. This may reflect a process in which better-educated individuals tend to migrate

from smaller towns in Mexico to both larger cities and to the United States, and only the least

educated people remain in small towns.




                                                 20
        The results in this section show Mexican migrants enumerated in the 2000 Mexican

Census come from less educated households than non-migrants and also have characteristics

associated with being less educated, consistent with the predictions of our theoretical model. This

evidence of negative selection is at odds with results from the U.S. Census. However, an

important limitation of the Mexican Census is that it does not contain migrants whose whole

household moved to the United States. Naturally, the degree to which our results would be

affected if we were able to include this group depends on the size of the missing group and on the

degree of positive or negative selection among them. Clearly, our general conclusion about

negative selection will not change if the educational attainment of non-sampled migrants is

similar to the educational attainment of sampled migrants, or fraction of migrants not sampled is

very small. Our tabulations in Table 1 indicate that the estimated population of Mexican

immigrants in the Mexican Census is about 84 percent of the size of the estimated population in

the U.S. Census, corresponding to a 16 percent undercount. To the extent that the U.S. Census

undercounts migrants as well, the size of the undercount in the Mexican Census may be larger

than indicated by the numbers above. Since the migrants missing from the Mexican Census are

those whose whole household moved to the United States, another way to approximate the

magnitude of the undercount is to note that there are about 292,000 Mexican men in the U.S.

Census who are classified as married with their spouse present in the household. If each of these

men were missing from missing from the Mexican Census, it would correspond to a 26 percent

undercount of men.

        Table 7 investigates the degree to which our results would be impacted by positive

selection among migrants not in the Mexican Census. The left-hand column shows alternative

rates of undercount among Mexican migrants, ranging from zero percent (i.e. a full random

sample of Mexican migrants) to 50 percent (i.e. the Mexican Census contains a random sample of

50 percent of the Mexican migrant population and contains none of the other 50 percent). The

next columns of the table correspond to alternative assumptions about the degree of positive or


                                                21
negative selection among this group. The first column assumes that 100 percent of the missing

migrants would have predicted education above 8.8 years, which is the median predicted

education among non-migrant Mexicans. This is an unrealistically large degree of positive

selection, but it gives a lower bound on how large the undercount would have to be to overturn

our results. The remaining columns correspond to 75 percent, 50 percent, 35 percent, and 25

percent of the missing migrants having predicted education above 8.8 years. The column

corresponding to 35 percent is significant because it is the same degree of negative selection that

we estimate for migrants who are enumerated in the Mexican Census. The entries in the table

give the fraction of all Mexican migrants (among both the sampled and missing groups) who

would have predicted education above 8.8 years. Hence, a number larger than 50 percent

indicates overall positive selection of migrants.14

         The results indicate the undercount would have to be greater than 23 percent of the

Mexican migrant population to overturn the degree of negative selection that we found among

sampled Mexican migrants, and at this level the predicted education of all non-sampled migrants

would have to be greater than the median predicted education of non-migrant men. However, this

degree of positive selection is certainly unrealistic. If only 75 percent of non-sampled migrants

had predicted education above the median, then the undercount would have to be nearly 40

percent. Finally, if there was no selection among non-sampled migrants relative to non-migrants –

which still corresponds to non-sampled migrants being significantly better educated than sampled

migrants – then there would still be significant negative selection among all Mexican migrants.

         We conclude from these tabulations that although negative selection among sampled

migrants may overstate the overall degree of negative selection, the undercount rate would have

to be very large and there would have to be a significantly large degree of positive selection

among non-sampled migrants for there to in fact be positive selection among Mexican migrants

14
  Specifically, the entries in the table are computed as (1-α)*34.9% + α*β, where α is the fraction of
Mexican migrants not represented in the Mexican Census and β is the fraction of that group that has
predicted education above 8.8 years.


                                                     22
as a whole. It seems likely that the small degree of positive selection found by comparing

migrants in the U.S. Census with non-migrants in the Mexican Census is driven by a combination

of an undersample of young and lower-skilled migrants and over-reporting of education by

Mexican migrants. But clearly more research is needed to definitively reconcile these two data

sources.



V. The returns to schooling and migrant self-selection

           In this section we test the prediction that the degree of selection will be larger in regions

within Mexico that have relatively higher returns to schooling. Recall that in our earlier model the

wage gain from migrating to the United States for a person with schooling level Si who lives in

Mexican county c is given by

                                  Gic = (α u − α c ) + S i ( β u − β c )                              (5)

where βu is the return to schooling in the United States and βc is the return to schooling in

Mexican county c. A person migrates if the wage gain plus any non-pecuniary gains outweigh the

costs of migration. Formally, define the indicator variable Mic to equal one if person i migrates to

the U.S. and zero otherwise. Then M ic = 1 if Gic > π ic , where πic are time-equivalent migration

costs net of any non-pecuniary gains. Alternatively, M ic = 1 if

                                  (α u − α c − π ic ) + S i ( β u − β c ) > 0                         (6)

Lacking data on migration costs, we approximate the term (α u − α c − π ic ) as a function of

indicators for individuals’ age and either county or state of residence, and model the migration

probability as

                         Pr( M ic = 1) = Agei + d c + S i λ1 + βˆ c λ 2 + βˆ c S i λ3 + ν ic          (7)




                                                       23
where Agei is a full set of indicators for each age from 16 to 54 and dc is either a set of state or

county indicators. 15 As before, Si is years of completed schooling. βˆc is an estimate of the

returns to schooling in county c, described below.

         Our main parameter of interest is λ3, the coefficient on the interaction between an

individual migrant’s education and the return to education in his county. If β u − β c < 0 , then

according to equation 5, schooling should have a negative influence on the wage gain to

migrating, and this effect should be more negative in areas with higher returns to schooling. That

is, we expect λ3 to be negative.

         We estimate the county-level returns to schooling, βˆc , by estimating a regression of the

log monthly wage on years of completed schooling and a quartic in age among men aged 18 to

54. We run this model separately by county and weight each observation by the Census

population weight. One clear problem is that our estimated return to education at the county level

may be influenced by the relative skill levels of past migrants. If lower educated Mexicans tend to

leave a county, the return to education in the county should fall. If this is an important feature of

the data, it would tend to bias our regression results towards finding a positive effect of the

interaction between migrants’ predicted education and their local return to schooling. More

generally it will lead our OLS estimates to understate the negative interaction between schooling

and the local return to education. Lacking any credible instruments for the local return to

schooling, we proceed with our OLS models.

         Our estimates of the return to schooling may also be influenced by the lack of earnings

data for workers in the informal sector. It is common in Mexico for workers not to receive a

monetary wage, especially workers in rural areas and those working in a family business.

Typically these workers have low levels of schooling and low earnings. The exclusion of these

15
  The main effect of county rate of return to schooling, λ2, is not identified when county fixed effects are
included in the model, but the interaction effect λ3 is identified. Both the main and interaction effects are
identified when the county fixed effects are replaced with state fixed effect.


                                                      24
workers from our sample will likely lead us to understate the return to education in general, but

may also impact the relative returns to education across areas.

         We estimate equation 7 separately by region using a linear probability model.16 The

results are shown in Table 8 and are generally consistent with our theoretical predictions. We

estimate the model without any geographic fixed effects (model 1), with state fixed effects

(model 2), and with county fixed effects (model 3). In Central and Southern Mexico, the origin of

nearly 80 percent of migrants, the interaction between individuals’ predicted education and their

county return to education has a negative and statistically significant effect on the probability of

migrating to the United States. The predictions are not supported by the results from Northern

Mexico or from Mexico City and the state of Mexico. The parameter estimate for the interaction

effect is positive and, in the latter group, statistically significant.

         To gauge the magnitude of our regression results, in Table 9 we show predicted

migration probabilities derived from our regressions. These rates refer to 25 year old Mexicans,

and show how migration differs between those with six and ten years of predicted education,

living in Mexican counties with returns to education of either 0.06 or 0.10. In Central Mexico

these levels of predicted education correspond to approximately the 30th and 85th percentiles and

the returns to education correspond to approximately the 30th and 90th percentiles. At the top of

this table we show the migration rate in each region, the fraction of migrants that originate in each

region, and the average rate of return to education in each region. Counties in Central Mexico

with a rate of return to education of 0.6 would tend to have a migration rate of 11.9% among

Mexicans with six years of education, based on our results from model 1. The migration rate falls

by 3.2 percentage points to 8.7% among those with 10 years of education who live in the same

area. By contrast, the difference in migration rates is 5.0 percentage points in areas with a return




16
   Linear probability models were considerably quicker to estimate, particularly when we included county
fixed effects. We find essentially similar results using probit models.


                                                    25
to education of 0.10. In this scenario, migration rates are 11.3% and 6.3% for the low and high

educated Mexicans.

        In Central Mexico, the gap in migration rates between low and high educated Mexicans is

significant even in areas with low returns to education, but the gap considerably larger in areas

that have relatively high returns to education. We view this evidence as indicating strong support

for the idea that local variation in the wage gap between the United States and counties

throughout this part of Mexico generates economically significant variation in the incentives for

different types of Mexicans to migrate to the United States.

        In southern Mexico, which accounts for 15.1 percent of migration, migrants in areas with

returns to education of 0.06 are slightly positively selected. The predicted migration rate is 4.8%

among those with six years of predicted education and 5.4% among those with 10 years of

predicted education. However, migration becomes negatively selected as the rate of return to

education rises. In areas with a return of 0.10, we predict a migration of 3.3% among low-

educated Mexicans and 2.8% among higher-educated Mexicans. Echoing our regression results in

Table 8, higher returns to education in the Northern boarder states or in Mexico City and state do

not generate an increase in the magnitude of negative selection.



VI. Conclusions

        We use the 2000 Mexican Census to examine the educational attainment of Mexican

migrants to the United States and their families. Our primary conclusion is that migrants tend to

be less educated than non-migrants. This is consistent with the idea that the greater return to skills

in Mexico provides an incentive for better-skilled Mexicans to remain in Mexico and for lower-

skilled Mexicans to migrate to the United States. We also find that the degree of negative

selection is magnified in Mexican counties that have relatively higher returns to skills. Finally, we

find that Mexican migrants in the 2000 United States Census are better educated than migrants in

the Mexican Census. Although part of this discrepancy may be caused by an undercount of


                                                 26
Mexican migrants whose whole household moved to the United States and were therefore not

sampled in the Mexican Census, part may also be due to an undercount of younger, illegal, and

low-skilled Mexicans in the U.S. Census.



VII. References


Bean, Frank D., Rodolfo Corona, Rodolfo, Tuirán, and Karen A. Woodrow-Lafield, 1998, “The
Quantification of Migration between Mexico and the United States,” in Migration Between
Mexico and the United States: Bi-National Study, Mexican Ministry of Foreign Affairs & U.S.
Commission on Immigration Reform.

Bean, Frank D., Rodolfo Corona, Rodolfo, Tuirán, Karen A. Woodrow-Lafield, and Jennifer van
Hook, 2001, “Circular, Invisible, and Ambiguous Migrants: Components of Difference in
Estimates of the Number of Unauthorized Mexican Migrants in the United States,” Demography,
Vol. 38, No. 3 (August), pp. 411-422.

Borjas, George, 1987, “Self-Selection and the Earnings of Immigrants,” American Economic
Review, Vol. 77, No. 4 (September), pp. 531-553.

Borjas, George, 1991, “Immigration and Self-Selection,” in Immigration, Trade, and the Labor
Market, John M. Abowd and Richard B. Freeman (eds.), Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Borjas, George, 1999, “The Economic Analysis of Immigration,” in Orley C. Ashenfelter and
David Card (eds.), Handbook of Labor Economics, Volume 3A, Amsterdam: North-Holland.

Chiquiar, Daniel and Gordon Hanson, 2005, “International Migration, Self-Selection, and the
Distribution of Wages: Evidence from Mexico and the United States,” Journal of Political
Economy, Vol. 113, No. 2 (April), pp. 239-281.

Corona, Rodolfo and Rodolfo Tuirán, 2001, “Fuentes Mexicanas para el Estudio de la Migración
México-Estados Unidos” in Rodolfo Tuirán, Migración México-EEUU Continuidad y Cambio,
México: CONAPO

Costanzo, Joe, Cynthia Davis, Caribert Irazi, Daniel Goodkind, and Roberto Ramirez, 2001,
“Evaluating Components of International Migration: The Residual Foreign Born,” Population
Division, U.S. Bureau of the Census, Working Paper Series No. 61 (December).

Crease, Arthur, Roberto Ramirez, and Gregory Spencer, 2001, “Evaluating Components of
International Migration: Quality of Foreign-Born and Hispanic Population Data,” United States
Census Bureau, Population Division Working Paper #65 (December).

Cuecuecha, Alfredo, 2003, “The Educational Characteristics of the Immigrants from Mexico to
the U.S.,” Working paper.




                                              27
de Janvry, Alain, Elisabeth Sadoulet, and Paul Winters, 2001, “Family and Community Networks
in Mexico-U.S. Migration.” Journal of Human Resources, Volume 36, number 1 (Winter), pp.
159-184

Durand, Jorge, Douglas Massey, and Rene Zenteno, 2001, “Mexican Immigration to the United
States: Continuities and Changes”, Latin American Research Review, Volume 36, Number 1, pp.
107-127.

Hanson, Gordon and Christopher Woodruff, 2003, “Emigration and Educational Attainment in
Mexico,” Working paper (April).

Hirsch, Barry T. and Edward J. Schumacher, 2004, Match Bias in Wage Gap Estimates Due to
Earnings Imputation,” Journal of Labor Economics, Volume 22, No. 3 (July), pp. 689-722.

Massey, Douglas and Audrey Singer, 1998, “The Social Process of Undocumented Border
Crossing Among Mexican Migrants”, International Migration Review, Volume 32, pp. 561-592.

McKenzie, David and Hillel Rapoport, 2004, “Network Effects and the Dynamics of Migration
and Inequality: Theory and Evidence from Mexico,” BREAD Working Paper No. 063 (April).

Munshi, Kaivan, 2003, “Networks in the Modern Economy: Mexican Migrants in the U.S. Labor
Market,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Volume 118, number 2, pp. 549-597.

Orrenius, Pia and Madeline Zavodny, 2004, “Self Selection Among Undocumented Immigrants
from Mexico”, Journal of Development Economics, Forthcoming.

Trejo, Stephen, 1997, “Why Do Mexican Americans Earn Low Wages?” Journal of Political
Economy, vol. 105, No. 6, pp. 1235-1268.




                                             28
                              Table 1: Estimates of the Mexican Immigrant Population in the U.S.

                                          Panel A: Migrant Population Estimates from 2000 Mexican Census

                                  All migrants age 16 and older                      All migrants age 16 and older,
                                                                                   excluding migrants that returned to
                                                                                                Mexico
                                  All          Male       Female                     All         Male         Female

Number of observations          176,448       137,910      38,538                  149,276       115,760       33,516
Population estimate            1,454,690     1,111,895    342,795                 1,221,598      925,587      296,011
                                 (3328)        (3220)      (2174)                   (3054)        (2018)       (2944)
Fraction of U.S. population
estimate                        66.0%          83.9%      38.9%                     55.4%        69.9%         33.6%

Percent female                    23.6                                               24.2
                                  (0.1)                                              (0.2)
Age                               26.7          26.6        27.0                     26.0          26.0         26.2
                                 (0.03)        (0.04)      (0.08)                   (0.04)        (0.04)       (0.08)

                                            Panel B: Migrant Population Estimates from 2000 U.S. Census

                                  All migrants age 16 and older                      All migrants age 16 and older,
                                                                                  excluding those married with spouse
                                                                                                present
                                  All          Male       Female                     All         Male        Female

Number of observations          103,812        62,409      41,403                   70,752        49,048      21,704
Population estimate            2,205,356     1,324,762    880,594                 1,492,111     1,033,060     459,051
                                 (3776)        (4500)      (4060)                   (3149)        (3722)       (3077)

Percent female                    40.0                                               30.8
                                  (0.2)                                              (0.2)
Age                               28.7          27.8        30.0                     27.2          26.4         29.1
                                 (0.04)        (0.05)      (0.07)                   (0.05)        (0.05)       (0.10)

Notes: Population estimates are computed as the sum of the population weights in the respective surveys. Standard errors
of estimates in parentheses. U.S. Census sample includes people who report that came to the U.S. between 1995 and
April 2000, or repor




                                                         29
            Table 2: Differences in Coverage of Male Mexican Migrants in the U.S. and Mexican Censuses


                                                                                                   HS
                                                                                                             Migration
                  Population estimate       Age distribution of migrants   Mexican Census       graduation
                                                                                                               rate
                                                                           population as a         rate
                                                                            percentage of
                              Mexican                           Mexican     U.S. Census            U.S.       Mexican
Data source     U.S. Census                  U.S. Census
                              Census                            Census       population           Census      Census


Age group
16 to 19          206,095     280,036           17.0%           25.8%           135.9%            15.0%         7.2%
20 to 31          705,201     543,085           58.3%           50.0%           77.0%             27.3%         5.7%
32 to 54          267,378     241,715           22.1%           22.2%           90.4%             26.0%         2.2%
55 to 65          19,602      15,878            1.6%            1.5%            81.0%             10.0%         0.7%
Over 65           11,606       5,773            1.0%            0.5%            49.7%             9.2%          0.3%

Age 16 and
                 1,209,882 1,086,487            100%             100%           89.8%             24.5%         3.7%
older

HS graduation rate using age distribution from Mexican Census                                     23.5%


Note: Samples exclude individuals with missing or allocated age data. The first two columns give population estimates
computed as the sum of population weights in each census. The sixth column gives the high school graduation rate
tabulated from the U.S. Census, excluding individuals with allocated education data. The migration rate is calculated as
the estimated population of male migrants divided by the estimated population of non-migrants in the relevant age group.
Both figures are computed from the Mexican Census.




                                                           30
                                 Table 3: Educational Attainment of Mexican-born Men in Mexico and the United States

                     Distribution among Non-migrant Mexicans in the 2000 Mexican          Distribution among Mexican Migrants in the 2000 U.S. Census
Years of
completed                                      Age group                                                            Age group
education             16 to 54      16 to 17    18 to 25    26 to 35        36 to 54       16 to 54     16 to 17     18 to 25     26 to 35     36 to 54

0 to 4                 17.6%         8.5%        11.2%        13.8%          28.5%          12.6%         7.5%         10.5%        12.3%        23.0%
5 to 8                 27.2          32.6        25.5         26.0           28.5           32.8          32.2         33.3         31.0         35.3
9                      21.9          29.9        26.2         24.4           14.1           13.6          21.5         15.2         12.0          7.9
10 to 12 without
                        7.8          26.3        10.0          5.9            3.0            16.4         29.9         17.7         14.4         10.0
degree
12 with degree          10.8          2.8        13.9         13.3            8.0            16.2          8.3         17.8         17.6         10.7
13 or more              14.6          0.0        13.1         16.6           17.8            8.4           0.7         5.5          12.7         13.2

Unweighted
                     2,406,595      210,044     693,078     686,496         816,977         42,372       2,813        20,946       12,638        5,975
sample size:

Fraction of sample    100.0%         8.3%       28.8%        28.8%          34.1%          100.0%         6.2%        49.6%        30.1%        14.1%


Note: All estimates and the distribution of each sample across age categories use appropriate population weights. Mexican migrants in the U.S. Census are
defined as those who reported that they migrated between 1995 and 2000 or who reported living in Mexico in April 1995. Mexicans with allocated data for
country of birth, year of arrival in the U.S., age, or education are excluded from the sample. The category of 10 to 12 years without a high school degree
includes people in the Mexican Census who have 10 or 11 years of education and people in the U.S. Census who report completing 10th, 11th, or 12th grade
but did not receive a high school diploma.




                                                                       31
   Table 4: Comparison of educational attainment between migrant and non-migrant households

                        Highest educated non-migrant           Highest educated female non-migrant in
                                in household                                 household


                                                                                             Households
Actual years of          Non-migrant       Migrant           Non-migrant        Migrant
                                                                                            with only male
education                households       households         households        households
                                                                                               migrants



0 to 4                      10.7 %          10.5 %             18.5 %           19.6 %         19.7 %
5 to 8                       23.1            31.9               28.2             35.1           37.5
9                            21.9            24.1               20.0             20.5           21.0
10 to 11                      7.8             8.0                6.7              6.3            6.1
12                           14.8            11.7               12.8              9.6            8.8
13 or more                   21.8            13.9               13.9              9.0            7.0

Average                       9.7             8.9                8.3              7.6            7.4

25th percentile                6               6                   6               6              6
Median                         9               9                   9               8              7
75th percentile               12              12                  12               9              9

Number of households      2,148,425        137,667            2,014,849         133,025        96,699

Note: A migrant household is a household that contains at least one migrant.




                                                     32
                            Table 5: Comparison of Actual and Predicted Education

                         (1)            (2)                                 (3)           (4)         (5)

                                                                                      Non-migrant
                     Men in non- Non-migrant                            Men in non-
Actual years of                                       Predicted years                   men in      Migrant
                      migrant    men in migrant                          migrant
education                                              of education                     migrant      men
                     households   households                            households
                                                                                      households


0 to 4                 17.3%          23.3%          4.5 and under         6.9%         14.2%        7.4%
5 to 8                  27.0           31.5          4.5 to 8.5            35.6          48.1        52.0
9                       21.9           20.9          8.5 to 9.5            18.4          14.8        14.7
10 to 11                 7.9           6.9           9.5 to 11.5           33.0          19.4        20.7
12                      11.0            8.1          11.5 to 12.5           4.6          2.5          3.7
13 or more              14.9           9.3           13.5 and up            1.5          1.0          1.5

Mean                     8.5            7.5                                 8.5           7.4         7.9

25th percentile           6              5                                  7.1           5.7         6.3
Median                    9              7                                  8.9           7.7         7.9
75th percentile          12              9                                 10.2           9.4         9.6

Sample size           2,276,862      129,733                             2,276,862      129,733     134,743

Notes: Data include men aged 16 to 54 in the 2000 Mexican Census.




                                                       33
 Table 6: Differences in Predicted Education Between Migrants and Non-migrants by Age, Region,
                                          and Town Size


                                 Panel A: Differences by age
                                                                    Average      Average
                                                   Fraction of      predicted   predicted
Age group            Sample size Migration rate                                             Difference
                                                   all migrants   education of education of
                                                                  non-migrants   migrants
16 to 25               994,644          6.6%         58.0%           8.68           8.00         0.68
26 to 35               736,353          3.9%         25.9%           8.93           8.23         0.69
36 to 45               549,077          2.2%         10.9%           8.34           7.06         1.27
46 to 54               321,493          1.2%         0.0%            6.74           5.48         1.26

Total                 2,601,567         4.2%         100.0%          8.43           7.87         0.56

Notes: Sample includes men aged 16 to 54. The sample size is unweighted; all other estimates use the
population weights. Predicted education is defined in the text.

                               Panel B: Differences by region of origin
                                                                 Average     Average
                     Sample size
                                                 Fraction of     predicted  predicted
        Region      of men age 16 Migration rate                                        Difference
                                                 all migrants education of education of
                        to 54
                                                              non-migrants   migrants
Central Mexico         982,906        7.4%          63.5%          7.98       7.46         0.52
Southern states        702,075        3.0%          15.1%          7.35       7.50        -0.14
Northern border
                       405,462          2.1%            9.3%         9.05           9.02         0.03
states
Mexico City and
                       511,081          2.2%         12.1%           9.60           9.59         0.01
state

All states            2,601,567         4.2%         100.0%          8.43           7.87         0.56

Notes: Sample includes men aged 16 to 54. The sample size is unweighted; all other estimates use the
population weights. Predicted education is defined in the text. Central Mexico includes the states of
Aguascalientes, Colima, Durango, Guanajuato, Hidalgo, Jalisco, Michoacán de Ocampo, Morelos, Nayarit,
Puebla, Querétaro de Arteaga, San Luis Potosí, Sinaloa, and Tlaxcala. The northern border states include
Baja California, Baja California Sur, Coahuila de Zaragoza, Chihuahua, Nuevo León Sonoora, and
Tamaulipas. The Southern States include Campeche, Chiapas, Guerrero, Oaxaca, Quintana Roo, Tabasco,
Veracruz-Llave, and Yucatán.




                                                   34
                                           Table 6 continued
                             Panel C: Differences by town size
                                                                   Average      Average
                                                Fraction of        predicted   predicted
Town size            Sample size Migration rate                                            Difference
                                                all migrants     education of education of
                                                                 non-migrants   migrants
Less than 2500         991,256         7.8%          42.5%           5.70           6.30         -0.60
2500 to 14,999         446,337         5.9%          18.0%           7.41           7.73         -0.32
15,000 to 99,999       278,658         4.2%          13.6%           8.53           8.63         -0.10
100,000 to 499,999     400,862         2.1%          11.2%           9.81           10.06        -0.25
500,000 or more        484,454         2.2%          14.7%           9.89           10.19        -0.30

Total                 2,601,567        4.2%          100.0%          8.43           7.87         0.56

Notes: Sample includes men aged 16 to 54. The sample size is unweighted; all other estimates use the
population weights. Predicted education is defined in the text.




                                                   35
Table 7: Estimates of how the Undercount in the Mexican Census Influences Conclusions
                              about Migrant Self-Selection



                            Fraction of missing migrants with predicted education above the
   Fraction of                           median among non-migrant Mexicans
Mexican migrants
missing from 2000
 Mexican Census             100%           75%           50%            35%           25%

                          Fraction of all Mexican migrants with predicted education above the
                                             median Mexican non-migrant


       0%                   34.9 %        34.9 %        34.9 %         34.9 %        34.9 %
         5                   38.2          36.9          35.7           34.9          34.4
        10                   41.4          38.9          36.4           34.9          33.9
        15                   44.7          40.9          37.2           34.9          33.4
        20                   48.0          43.0          38.0           34.9          33.0
        23                   49.9          44.2          38.4           34.9          32.7
        25                   51.2          45.0          38.7           34.9          32.5
        30                   54.5          47.0          39.5           34.9          32.0
        40                   61.0          51.0          41.0           34.9          31.0
        50                   67.5          55.0          42.5           34.9          30.0

Note: The entries in the left column are alternative measures of the fraction of male Mexican
migrants who are not enumerated in the 2000 Mexican Census. The columns to the right give
the fraction of all male Mexican migrants with predicted education above 8.8 years, which is
the median predicted education among non-migrant males, based on alternative assumptions
about the predicted education of the missing migrants.




                                              36
                                                        Table 8: Regression Estimates of Migration Propensity by Region


                                     Central Mexico                          Southern states                   Northern border states                 Mexico City and state


                             (1)          (2)           (3)          (1)           (2)           (3)         (1)         (2)        (3)            (1)          (2)        (3)
County rate of return to
                           0.484**      0.331*          --          0.046        -0.006                    -0.100      -0.260        --         -0.657*** -0.643***           --
schooling
                           (0.231)      (0.200)                    (0.067)      (0.064)                    (0.246)    (0.254)                    (0.252)     (0.247)

Years of predicted
                           -0.001        0.001    0.005***        0.006***       0.002*       0.006***     -0.003      -0.003      0.000         -0.005*     -0.005*      0.001
education
                           (0.002)      (0.002)       (0.002)      (0.001)      (0.001)        (0.001)     (0.002)    (0.002)     (0.002)        (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.002)

Rate of return * years of
                          -0.109*** -0.110*** -0.076***           -0.070*** -0.033*** -0.053***            0.012       0.021      0.049**        0.054**     0.059**     0.036**
predicted education
                            (0.029)  (0.025)   (0.025)             (0.013)      (0.011)        (0.010)     (0.023)    (0.026)     (0.022)        (0.024)     (0.023)     (0.016)

Age indicators               Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes            Yes         Yes         Yes
State indicators             No           Yes          No            No           Yes           No          No          Yes         No             No          Yes         No
County indicators            No           No           Yes           No           No            Yes         No          No          Yes            No          No          Yes

Sample size                982,906      982,906       982,906      691,429      691,429        691,429    405,462     405,462     405,462        511,081     511,081     511,081
R-squared                   0.029        0.038         0.078        0.015        0.025          0.063      0.005       0.007       0.027          0.006       0.006       0.023

Note: Each column is a separate regression, as described in the text. Standard errors in parentheses are adjusted for clustering at the county level. All models use population
weights. Sample includes all Mexican men aged 16 to 54. Regions are given in the note to Panel B in Table 6. Asterisks indicate significance at the *** 1%, ** 5%, and * 10%
level.




                                                                                         37
Table 9: Predicted Migration Propensities by Region, Predicted Education, and Return to Education


                                                                    Northern border
                    Central Mexico           Southern states                              Mexico City and state
                                                                         states


Migration rate             7.4%                     3.0%                   2.1%                    2.2%
Fraction of total
                           63.5%                    15.1%                  9.3%                    12.1%
migrants
Average return
                           0.074                    0.087                  0.084                   0.100
to education

                                                       Model Specification
                     (1)           (2)        (1)        (2)        (1)            (2)       (1)           (2)

State indicators     No            Yes        No            Yes      No            Yes       No            Yes

                                     Predicted migration rate with return to education = 0.06
Predicted
education:
    6 years         11.9%      11.7%         4.8%           4.6%    3.6%           3.6%     4.2%           0.6%
    10 years         8.7%      9.3%          5.4%           4.7%    2.9%           3.1%     3.5%           1.8%

                                     Predicted migration rate with return to education = 0.10
Predicted
education:
    6 years         11.3%      10.4%         3.3%           3.8%    3.5%           3.0%     3.1%           1.5%
    10 years         6.3%      6.2%          2.8%           3.3%    3.0%           2.9%     3.3%           3.3%

Note: The predicted migration rates are calculated from the parameter estimates in Table 8 for a 25 year old
person.




                                                       38
                                                      Figure 1: Comparison of Male Population Counts in 2000 Mexican and U.S. Censuses by Age


                                        180,000


                                        160,000
                                                                                                                                     18-19

                                        140,000
                                                                                                                                                      20-21
                                                                                               16-17
                                        120,000                                                                                                      22-23


                                        100,000                                                                                      24-25


                                         80,000
                                                                                                                     26-27

                                                                                                       28-29
                                         60,000
                                                                                          30-31
                                                                              32-33




Population estimate in Mexican Census
                                         40,000                              34-35
                                                                                                                                 Age group
                                                                     36-37
                                                                                                                                 45 degree line
                                         20,000
                                                                                                                                 90% average coverage rate


                                             0
                                                  0     20,000     40,000       60,000       80,000        100,000     120,000       140,000      160,000     180,000
                                                                                      Population estimate in U.S. Census



                                                                                                  39
                                                      Figure 2: Comparison of Female Population Counts in 2000 Mexican and U.S. Censuses by Age


                                        100,000


                                         90,000
                                                                 Age group
                                                                 45 degree line
                                         80,000
                                                                 40% average coverage rate

                                         70,000


                                         60,000


                                         50,000                                                                                          18-19
                                                                                                                                                          20-21

                                         40,000                                                                                                                     22-23

                                                                                                                                                            24-25
                                                                                                           16-17
                                         30,000




Population estimate in Mexican Census
                                                                                                                                                 26-27
                                         20,000
                                                                                                                                28-29
                                                                                                                   30-31
                                         10,000                                                    32-33
                                                                                           34-35
                                                                                  36-37

                                             0
                                                  0     10,000     20,000         30,000      40,000         50,000        60,000       70,000   80,000   90,000    100,000
                                                                                           Population estimate in U.S. Census



                                                                                                            40
