NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INVESTMENT PATTERNS AND FINANCIAL LEVERAGE

Michael S. Long

Ileen B. Malitz

Working

Paper No. 11145

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge MA 02138

June 1983

This paper was prepared as part of the National Bureau of Economic
Research program in Financial Markets and Monetary Economics and
project in the Changing Roles of Debt and Equity in Financing U.S.
Capital Forntion, which was financed by a grant from the American
Council of Life Insurance. It was presented at the NBER Conference
on Corporate Capital Structures in the United States, Palm Beach,
Florida, January 6 and 7, 1983. Any opinions expressed are those
of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research or the Federal Home Loan Bank Board.

NBER Working Paper #1145
June 1983

Investment Patterns and Financial Leverage

ABSTRACT

This study Investigates the influence of the type of Investment

opportunities facing a firm on its choice of capital structure. It Is
shown that the more discretionary Investment opportunities a firm faces,

the lower its financial leverage. Inclusion of other possible
determinants of capital structure, such as availability of internal

funds, tax effects and risk, while significant, do not affect the

importance of discretionary investment. The evidence supports (1) the
existence of a moral bazzard problem which inversely relates risky debt

and discretionary investment choice, and (2) a desire by most firms to
use sources of internal funds prior to entering the capital market.

Michael S. Long
Federal Home Loan Bank Board

Ileen B. Malitz
Georgetown University

Washington, D.C. 20552

Washington, DC 20057

1. Introduction
The effect of capital structure on firm value has been a subject of

controversy over the years. Most early work, such as Modigliani and Miller
(1q58), showed that when capital markets are

perfect

and investment policy is

capital structure is irrelevant to firm value. Later studies
ficed,

IModigliani and Miller (1963), Baxter (1967)] introduced corporate taxes

and/or bankruptcy costs in an effort to explain capital structure. The
tax/bankruptcy arguments have been extended by Miller (1976) who showed that
with

personal taxes

and Masulis

there Is no corporate

advantage to leverage, and De Angelo

(1980) who hypothesized that the extent of non—debt tax shields

determines a firm's optimal capital structure. Recently there has been a
movement away from the traditional tax-bankruptcy cost argument toward a
consideration of agency costs as the major determinant of financial

leverage. Jensen and Meckling (1976) showed that with risky debt outstanding,
a firm's investment policy is not fixed. Myers (1977) first recognized the
underinvestment problem by noting that shareholders of'

will invest only

investment

firms

with risky debt

when (or up to the point where) the expected return on

is at least as great as the promised payment to bondholders. When

the expected return is less than the promised payment, shareholders fail to
exercise the investment option (or invest less than the optimal amount) which

reduces firm value. It is this decline in firm value which limits the amount
of debt a given firm can issue.

Myers correctly identifies investment opportunities, including, for
example, the maintenance of equipment, as leading to potential underinvest—

ment. He notes that owners, by devising complex debt contracts, can reduce

2

the effect of potential underinvestment and induce bondholders to pay a higher

price for debt. But debt contracts can be effective only when the firm's
Investment opportunity set is observable.
In this study we show that because intangible, firm—specific, and there—
unobservable growth opportunities reduce the effectiveness of bond
sore

covenants, the only way in which owners of firms with a high proportion of
intangible investment opportunities can control the agency costs of debt Is by

limiting the amount of risky debt outstanding. Conversely, this imp1ie that
if a firm's investment opportunities consist primarily of tangible assets,
such as capital equipment, they can always support a greater level of debt.
The same arguments apply to the asset substitution problem [Black and

Scholes (1973), Smith and Warner (1979)]. While riskier (more capital
intensive) equipment can always be purchased, such investments are

observable. With intangible investments, it is a relatively easy matter for
owners to increase firm risk without bondholders being aware of the shift for
many years.
(R&D)

most

For example, a firm

on projects with a low

can concentrate its research and development

probability of extremely high returns. Since

firms closely guard information concerning R&D projects, this type of

risk shifting is difficult for outsiders to detect.
our major conclusion is that it

Thus

opportunities

is

the type of investment

facing the firm which determines financial leverage. The

empirical evidence supports this conclusion.
Our analysis of the effect on investment type on corporate

proceeds

leverage

as follows. In Section 2 we develop a model showing the cause and

effect of underlnvestment and asset substitution. We then analyze the
differing effects which investments in tangible or intangible assets have on

—3—

firm

value and present our hypothesis. Section 3

describes our sample and the

variables used to characterize investment alternatives, and

presents

our em-

pirical results. Included are tests incorporating additional variables suggested by other researchers. Finally, we present and discuss the implications
our findings in Section Z.

2.

Investment Choice and Financial Leverage: Theory
In this section we analyze the underinvestment and -asset substituttpn

problems as they relate to the type of investment opportunities facing a

firm. We show that because investments in tangible assets, such as capital
equipment, can be observed, firms with a high proportion of tangible investment opportunities can always support more debt than firms facing intangible,

or firm specific opportunities. It is these difficult to observe firm—
specific investments which provide true economic growth and at the same time
reduce financial leverage.

We examine investment related agency problems by considering a firm which
operates for three periods, t=O, 1, 2, in an economy characterized by state
cøntingent claims which promise to pay $1.00 in period t, if and only if state

S occurs. Capital markets are perfect so that there are no taxes or
transactions costs. However, there are agency costs related to risky debt.
It is assumed that some debt is advantageous because of offsetting agency
costs of equity, and that these costs have been minimized so that managers act

on behalf of owners. The firm starts out at t=0 with initial equity
capitalization, an Initial asset base, and a set of investment opportunities

which can be exercised at t=1. The investments which are accepted will
provide earnings at t:2 which depend both on the state of nature and the level
of investment. At the end of' t=2, the value of the Investments is zero, i.e.,

they are fully depreciated. The following notation is used throughout the
paper.

-

=

Amount Invested In period 1.
Value at t=0 of a claim for $1.00 to be delivered in period t,

(Se)

1ff'

state

St occurs, t= 1, 2; S

0

Expected (or implied) value at t=1 of a claim for $1.00 to b.e

q1(S2)

delivered in period 2, 1ff state S2 occurs and

q1(52)

q0(S2)/q0(S1).

The unlevered firm's investment problem at t=1.

Z
=

The levered firm's investment problem at t=1.

V

= Value of the unlevered firm.

V'

Value of the levered firm.

Ve

=

Value of equity when there Is no risky debt.
Value of equity when there is risky

Ve'

debt.

P

=

Promised payment to bondholders at t=2.

Vd

=

Value of the firm's debt at t=0.

B

=

Price

paid for the firm's debt at t=0.

Sd2

=

State

below which operating default occurs at t=2.

State below which financial default occurs at t=2.

Sb2
R(C1, S2) =

Dollar

return on investment at t=2, where

aR(C1,

S2)/C1

>

0,

2R(C1, S2)/C12 < 0.

It is assumed that the firm derives some level of expected earnings at

t:1 from the initial asset base. However, for simplicity, we assume that
there is no probability of operating default at t=1 so that these expected
earnings, which are the same for an unlevered or levered firm, are ignored in
the analyses which follows.

—5—

The

Underinvestinent Problem

Consider first the choice of the level of investment for the unlevered
firm.

At t=1,

owners will maximize their wealth.

=

+

1

5

R(C1, S2) q1(S2)dS2

of course equals the net present value of the investment to the fir at
t=1. The first order condition for equation (1) leads to the classic
This

microeconomic

result: Invest to the point,

return on investment

(2)

1

—1 +

C1, where the expected marginal

equals its marginal cost.

Sd2 IR(C1', S2)/C1] q1 (S2) dS2

This is equivalent to investing in all projects with a NPV

0

0. The value of

the firm equals the owners wealth in the firm, and is optimal at this point.

(3)

V =

Ve : _C1 1

q0(S1)ds1

+

o

Sd2 R(C1', S2) q0(S2)dS2

Now assume that instead of remaining all equity funded at t=0, owners issue

debt which promises to pay an amount P at t=2. The debt is pure discount so
that the amount paid, B, reflects anticipated payment at t=2. Owners use
these proceeds to repurchase equity at t:O, and fund C1 by issuing new equity

at t=1. At t=2, owners default on debt if the return is less than the
promised payment, R(C1,
t:1, when

maximizing their

< P, which occurs in all states S2 <

S.

Thus at

wealth, owners recognize that they receive a return

—6—
MaX

(4)

Z'

=

—C1

+

Sb2 (R(C1, S2) — P) q1(S2) dS2

Equation (J4) leads to a first order condition, and thus a level of investment

C!1, which does

not maximize

Z'/C1 =

(5)

—1

+

1

firm value.

[R(C'1, S2)/C1] q1(S2) 2
-

a

The second term in equation (5) is less than the corresponding term in
equation (2) since Sb2 > Sd2.

Because owners only receive payoffs after they

have paid bondholders, they invest less than the optimal amount, C' <

C'.

The

value of equity Is then the present value of the shareholders' portion of firm
value.

(6)

Ve' = —C'. J q0(S1)dS1 +

5b2

[R(C'1 ,

S)

—P1 q0(S2) dS2

Since the proceeds from the sale of debt are distributed to owners, their

wealth depends on the price paid for debt. This in turn depends on the
ability of potential bondholders to accurately assess owners' Investment

decisions, which requires knowledge of the firm's investment opportunity set.
Suppose first that potential bondholders do not anticipate

underinvestment i.e., they assume C'1 =

C'1.

Then the price they are willing

to pay reflects the investments they assume the firm will undertake.

(7)

B p .r

'Sb2'

q0 (S2)d32

+

f

S *
JJ R(C'1,S2)q0(S2)dS2

—7—
Because they assume C'1 is invested they also assume that the default state,

S*b2 is lower than its actual state, Sb2. This results in a wealth loss equal
to the price paid for the bonds less the true value of debt (B—Vd).
-

This

-

loss is shown graphically on figure 1.

[Insert

Figure ii

Bondholders priced debt as If they would receive the present value of area
OABCSN.

However debt is actually worth the present value of area OA'B'CSN.

The bondholders overpaid (and transfered to owners) an amount equal to the

present value of the shaded area, AA'BB'. The effect on owners wealth depends
on whether the gain from bondholders exceeds the decline in the value of

equity (area BB'DD'). If owners could underinvest without bondholders
anticipating their actions, they would increase their wealth.

But in a rational capital market, bondholders will attempt to anticipate

underlnvestment. If the firm's investment opportunities are tangible in
nature, potential bondholders are able to estimate the Investment opportunity

set and thus fully anticipate the lower level of investment. They will then
Vd.

pay the true value of debt so that B

(8)

Vd

'

o 'Sb2

q0(S2) dS2 +

f

S

R(C'1,

S2)q0

2

The value of debt is equal to the present value of the promised payment In
states of no default plus the present value of the firm in states of default

on debt. In this case, when B is distributed to owners, the value of the
levered firm is less than that of the unlevered firm.

-8—

(9)

V' =

—C'1

J

q0(S1) dS1 +

j0

f R(C', S2) q0(S2) dS2

As long as bondholders accurately anticipate uriderinvestment, owners bear a

los in firm value which increases with the amount promised to bondholders.
Tlen it is to the owner's advantage to provide monitoring of investment

decisions. Whether monitoring of investment decisions is provided by
bondholders (through debt covenants) or by the capital market itself (implicit
monitoring), much of the negative effect of risky debt can be eliminated

Low

growth firms with tangible, generalized investment opportunities, such as
plant and equipment can support more debt because of the ability of potential
bondholders to estimate under investment and to observe and monitor investment
decisions.

But suppose that the firm's investment opportunities are intangible
and/or firm specific in nature so that potential bondholders are unable to
estimate either the firm's investment opportunities, or the extent of

underinvestment. Then they normally will assume the worst possible case,
which in the limit is zero Investment. While owners could promise higher
payments to bondholders in order to induce them to purchase debt, Myers has

shown that increasing P is not effective. Because firm value declines as the
promised payment increases, beyond some point, called the firm's debt
capacity, increasing P reduces rather than increases the value of debt.

Further, if bondholders are unable to estimate underinvestment, they are also

unable to observe or monitor the firm's investment policy. Thus the
effectiveness of either bond covenants or implicit capital market monitoring

is reduced. Since the market cannot effectively monitor investment decisions,
it instead limits the amount of debt. Because high growth firms cannot be
effectively monitored, they will have lower financial leverage.

—9—
Asset Substitution
Consider the investment decision as it concerns the risk of the assets

purchased. It is well known that increasing firm risk may decrease bondholder

walth while increasing owners wealth. We examine this problem by assuming
that the firm faces a second set of investments at t=1, C"1 with a return

function at t=2 of R"(C1", S2). To highlight the asset substitution problem,
we assume that Cr11

C'1 so that owners maximize their wealth at the same

level of investment. The new set of investments is riskier, implying that

5b2 < Sb2", Sd2 < Sd2" and

f

R(C'1,S)

q1(52) dS2

>f2" R"

(C'1,S2) q1 (S2) dS2

5b2" R" (C'1,S2) q1 (S2) dS2

5b2 R(C'1 S2) q1(S2) dS2

These patterns of returns are shown graphically on figure 2.

[Insert Figure

The

second

21

set of investments results in a higher probability of operating

default as well as a higher probability of financial default. Figure 2 shows
that the expected marginal return on the original investment over states
S2

Sb2 (area Sb2ACSN) is equal to the expected marginal return on the

riskier investment over states S2

5b2" (area Sb2" B'C'SN). This leads to

identical first order conditions for owners' wealth maximization and thus to

the same level of investment. Figure 2 also shows that the expected marginal
return on

the

original investment over states 2 Sd2 (area Sd2 ACSN) exceeds

— 10 —

the

expected

marginal return on

the riskier investment over states S2 >

(area Sd2 BC SN). Thus, given the above assumptions, the first order conditions to maximize firm value shows that the less risky investment is prefer1

able.

The value of equity with the original investment is given by equation
(6). The value of'

equity,

Ve", with the riskier investment depends on the

returns to owners in states S2 >

(10)

Ve"

—C'1 f

Sb2".

q0 (S1) dS1 +

-

0

Sb2,, R"''

—F] q0 (S2) dS2

If the riskier investment is chosen, the value of equity changes as follows.

(11)

Ve" —Ve'

S2,, [R"(C'1, S2)
—

0

— R'
(C'1,

q0 (S2) dS2

P] q0 (S2) dS2
Sb2 [R'(C'1, S2) —

The first term in (11) is the difference in value of the two investments in

states of no default on debt and is positive by assumption. The second term
is negative, since owners do not default on debt in states S2 >

Sb2 if they

choose the original investment. The value of equity may increase if the
riskier investment is chosen. Whether or not it does, depends on the promised
payment to bondholders.
As with underinvestinent, if'

bondholders

did not anticipate investment

substitution, they would assume that the original investment would be chosen
and would be willing to pay,

(12)

B P j

S

Sb2 q0 (S2) 2 +

O

b2

S

R(C'1, S2) q0 (S2) 2

— 11 —

But the actual value of debt, given the riskier investment, is

Vd P 0

(13)

Sb2,, q0

2) 2

+ '0

E"(C,1, S2) q0

'3

2

price paid for debt exceeds its actual value. This is shown graphically
on figure 3.

[Insert

Figure 3]

The price paid by bondholders is the present value (PV) of area 0ABCS- The
true value of debt is the PV of area OB'CSN. The overpayment (wealth loss) is

the PV of area OABB'. This amount is transferred to owners. In addition
owners gain the difference between the PV's of area DEF and area BB'D.
Finally firm value declines by the difference between shareholders' gain and
bondholders' loss (PV of areas DEF - OAD).

Thus owners may gain even when

firm value declines.

But again, in a rational market the amount paid for debt equals its true

expected

value; B =

owners.

If bondholders have reason to suspect that

Vd, so that

potential loss in firm value is borne by
owners will

move towards

riskier investments, the price of debt will be discounted in the capital
market. In the extreme, investors may anticipate losses so great that additional debt will not be purchased at any promised payment.

Again, it is intangible investment which leads to the problem. When a
firm invests in capital equipment, it is relatively simple to estimate the
owner's incentives to substitute riskier investments and to observe their
contribution to firm risk. This means that it is more likely that bondholders

can accurately anticipate asset substitution.2 But when a firm faces many

firm—specific
owners

investment opportunities, it is a relatively simple matter for

to increase firm risk over time. Because of the intangible nature of

12

these investments, market participants often have difficulty estimating their

risk and return. Further, since the ultimate effect of increasing the risk of
intangible Investments may not be known for several years, It is almost Impos-

tble

for bondholders or the capital market to monitor such Inyestments. For

tiese reasons, we hypothesize that firms with a high proportion of value due
to Intangible investment opportunities can support less debt than those whose
value depends on tangible assets.

3. Empirical Results
We test our hypothesis that a firm's choice of capital depends on the
type of Investment opportunities it faces by examining the cross—sectional
behavior of firms during the period 1978-1980.

Our primary source of data is the COMPUSTAT Annual Industrial File. All
manufacturing firms (SIC four digit classification 2000 through 3999) which
contained a full set of data for 1978—1980 were considered as our Initial sam-

ple.3 Additional data were obtained from the CRSP Daily Return Tape. This
limited our sample to firms listed on either the New York (NYSE) or American

Stock Exchange (AMEX). Our final sample consists of 55 firms of which 139
are In the S & P 500, 216 are non—S & P 500 NYSE firms and 190 are listed on

the AMEX. We require two sets of variables: those measuring financial leverage and those measuring the type of investment opportunities.

Measuring financial leverage is relatively straightforward. Our previous
analysis suggests that firms will choose a capital structure which reflects

the type of investment opportunities they face. However, it is well known
that firms do not instantaneously adjust their financing mix to reflect

changes in underlying characteristics. Rather, the issue or retirement of
debt occurs at fixed points in time as the firm adjusts to its target debt

— 13 —

ratio.

Thus, the average stock of debt outstanding during any

period

of time

should provide a better indication of a firm's target capital structure than

changes in the level of debt. In addition, since our
tité

effect

of long term investments on the firm's

hypothesis

financing

centers on

decisions, we wish

t consider only long-term, funded debt. We thus measure financial leverage
as the book value of all long—term, funded debt.5

When considering the effect of investment type on fnanc1al leverage, we
must devise measures which capture the realization that firms

raise

capital

prior to funding investments. This implies that our investment measures
should be current flows rather than stocks.6 In addition, we must recognize
that, as Myers pointed out, all investments are discretionary in nature and

thus may lead to agency problems. But we hypothesize that It is only firm—
specific, intangible investment opportunities which reduce the firm's debt

capacity and thus their financial leverage. Because all investments provide
some growth in the firm's assets, we need variables which distinguish between
growth due merely to expansion (NPV =

0) and true economic growth (NPV > 0).

True economic growth results from a firm's ability to select investments which

create a unique product or process. Two such investments for which there are
readily available data are research and development (R & D) and advertising.

To capture the flow of funds into alternative Investments, we use the firm's
reported R & D and advertising expenditures as our proxies for firm—specific,

intangible
ure

Investments, and the

firm's

reported

capital expenditures to meas-

expansionary or tangible investments.

All of the above variables, financial leverage, H

& D,

advertising and

capital expenditures, are measured using accounting data. Because there is a
large

variation in the size of firms, a direct comparison of these variables

— 114

is

—

impossible. To standardize our measures, we use a size related denominator

and compute ratios. Since we are primarily interested in how firms

have

raised capital to fund their mix of Investments, we seek a standardizing vanable which reflects invested capital. We define Invested capital as the book
of long-term debt and equity. We then modify this measure by recogniz-

vlues
ing that there are several categories of capital, such as R & D and advertising, which, because of the difficulty In measuring future benefits, are cur-

rently required by GAAP to be expensed. The expensing, rather than the api—
talIzation, of these items is in contrast to the treatment of tangible assets,

which are capitalized initially and then depreciated. Since the items which
are expensed are precisely those which we hypothesize can support little debt,

we adjust our denominator by adding capitalized advertising and R & D. We
assume a five—year life for R & D, a three—year life for advertising and

straight—line amortization. Because the use of capitalized B & D and advertising reduces the financial leverage variable for firms with higher such

expenditures, there is a potential bias in our results. For this reason, we
examine alternative standardizing variables: total assets and invested capital (without capitalized H & D and advertising). To control for any unusual
conditions which might affect a variable at any point in time, we average our
ratios over a three—year period from 1978 through 1980.
We also wish to consider the effect of' the firm's asset (operating) risk

on capital structure decisions. The traditional finance literature assumes
that operating and financial risk are offsetting decisions, so that firms with

greater operating risk will have lower financial leverage. By including a
measure of operating risk, we are better able to Isolate the effects of in-

vestment choice on financial leverage. We are interested In the firm's sys—

15

tematic risk, or beta, which is assumed to capture all of its business or

asset risk. We first compute the firm's equity beta, using the geometric
average of 20 daily returns to approximate one month.7 We then unlever the
b'ta as suggested by Hamada (1972) and Rubenstein (1973) usingthe market
%lue of equity and the book value of debt as a percent of total value to
weight equity and debt respectively. Because we assume debt is riskiess, our

measure

underestimates systematic risk for high leverage, firms.8 We include

the unlevered beta as an independent variable in all tests using individual
firm

data.

In addition, to completely neutralize a firm's underlying business risk,
we also form

beta.

equal beta portfolios by first determining the median unlevered

We then list all firms in decreasing order of financial leverage, and

place them into one of' two groups: those with unlevered betas above the

median and those with unlevered betas below the median. Next we place the
first four firms in each group into an 8 firm portfolio. We weight the portfolio so that its unlevered beta is equal to the median beta. We continue the
process until all firms are assigned to a portfolio. This process, which
creates

68 equal beta portfolios, each with a different degree of financial

leverage, greatly reduces the random variation in our predictor variables.
This

reduction in variation can

be

seen on Table 1.

[Insert Table 1]
Table 1 shows that for each variable,, the standard

deviation is lower

when portfolio data are used. However, because the use of

in a loss
portfolios

are

of data, all results are reported

portfolios results

for both individual firms and

of firms. Our basic models of the predictors of'

presented below.

financial

leverage

16

(114)

Leverage = B0 + B1 (Advertising) + B2 CR & D)
+

(45)

B3 (Capital Expenditures)

Leverage = C0 + C1 (Advertising) + C2 (R & D)
+

C3

(Capital Expenditures) +

C14

(Unlevered Beta)

Equation (114) is the model used to test data for the 68 portfolios while

equation (15) is used to test data for the 5145 firms. Both models are tested

using ordinary least squares regression. Table 2 presents the results of
tests of equation (114) using the three alternative denominators discussed

above, while Table 3 presents the results using firm data.
[Insert Tables 2 and 3]

Table 2 shows that, depending on the denominator used, between 35% and
141% of the variation in debt is explained by investment type. In each case,

the signs are as predicted. The results using invested capital plus capitalized R & P. and advertising and those using totals assets are quite similar.

The results using only invested capital also are similar, except that the

significance of the advertising variable declines. Because the results are
similar, and because we feel that it is appropriate to capitalize rather than
expense R & D and advertising, all future tests will use variables standardized by invested capital plus capitalized R & D and advertising.

Table 3 shows that for individual firms, systematic risk and investment

type explain 21% of the variation in debt. Not surprisingly, the most significant variable Is systematic asset risk, with riskier firms having lower

financial leverage.9 All variables measuring investment type have the

predicted sign and are statistically significant. Firms with discretionary

17

investment opportunities have lower financial leverage than those facing tangible investments

We now wish to determine whether or not the above results indicate a true

ral hazard problem. It is possible that our results reflect spurious corre—
tion of our proxies for investment type with other, more important determinants of financial leverage. We investigate this possibility by examining the
effect of variables suggested by other researchers on the power of the
-A.

model. These determinants include non—interest related tax shields, firm
specific (unsystematic) risk, and the availability of internal funds.11 In
addition, we examine whether or not agency problems affect short-term borrow-

ing decisions. Because several of our variables exhibit multicollinearity, we
examine the correlation matrices for both firms and portfolios, before
presenting our results.
[Insert Tables 14 and 51

Tables 14 and 5 show that there is a high degree of multicollinearity
between capital exp&iditures and investment related tax shields, which might

affect either the sign or interpretation of the tax variable. However, it is
interesting to note that the tax shield is positively related to long-term
debt.

In addition, a comparison of tables II and 5 shows that when we neutralize

risk, advertising and B & D are positively correlated with operating cash

flows. These correlations are not present in individual firm data. Thus when
we consider the effect of operating cash flow on the power of the moral hazard
model, we might expect different results for the two sets of data. Table 14
also shows that while systematic and unsystematic risk are positively

correlated, their effect on debt is opposite. With these relationships in

18

mind, we now examine each variable separately, and determine its effect on the
moral hazard model.

We first examine the effect of investment related tax shields on the

pwer of our model. Expanding on Miller (1977), DeAngelo and Masulis (1980)
first suggested that a firm's financial leverage depends on the availability
of investment—related tax shields, such as depreciation and investment tax
credits. They show that when such tax shields are available, corporate. capi—
tal

structure is relevant to individual firms. They argue that the presence

of non—debt tax shields affects the extent to which corporations can gain from
the substitution of debt for equity. Since higher financial leverage increases the probability that non—debt tax shields will be lost, they hypothesize that firms with lower tax shields will employ more debt in their capital

structure. This implies that firms investing heavily in capital equipment,
which generates large tax shields, should have less debt. We have already
observed that the relationship between capital expenditures and financial

leverage is positive. However, we wish to directly test the effect of tax
shields. We compute the depreciation tax shield as depreciation expense times
the corporate marginal tax rate plus the change in deferred taxes. The total
investment—related tax shield is the sum of the depreciation tax shield and
the investment tax credit.12
[Insert Table 6]

Table 6 presents the results of including the investment related tax

shield in our model. We see that because of multicollinearity, the coefficients are negative but insignificant. The coeffiecents of our moral hazard
variables remain as predicted and all are significant. Thus while we cannot
exclude the possiblity of' tax effect, we can conclude that the moral hazard
problem remains and is important in determining financial leverage.

19

We next turn to the question of whether or not a firm's total risk in-

fluences its financial leverage. Agency theory contends that the higher the
variance of the firm's returns, the less the underinvestment problem. Because
lrwestments

te expense

which reduce

firm

risk

provide a capital gain to bondholders at

of shareholders, owners are likely to forego such investments.

Conversely, because they hold claim to the upper portion of a firm's distribu-

tion of return, shareholders are more likely invest in high variance projcts.
Thus, all other factors equal, high variance firms will lower agency costs of

debt due to underinvestment and thus higher financial leverage.13 If, however, we consider the possibility that bankruptcy costs matter, higher vari-

ance firms would have less debt. Thus, if total risk has a positive effect
on leverage, we assume

that

the moral hazard problem outweighs the increased

of bankruptcy, and vice versa if' the effect is negative. If both
problems are important, then they should offset each other and the effect of
probability

total risk on financial leverage should be neutralized.
We measure total risk as the unsystematic, firm specific, residual variance

of the firm's stock returns, standardized by the market variance.15
[Insert Table 7]

Table 7 shows

unsystematic
We note

that when using data for individual firms or portfolios,

risk has a significantly positive effect on financial leverage.

that with firm

data,

the effect of unlevered beta on

financial lever-

age is negative. To attempt to determine the overall affect of risk, we also
used the firm's total variance of stock returns, unlevered to remove the

effect of debt. Our results showed that total risk also is significantly
positively correlated with financial leverage. This indicates that control of
underinvestment exerts a greater influence on debt capacity than does the in-

20

creased probability of bankruptcy. While
costs

we

cannot conclude that bankruptcy

are irrelevant, we can state that inclusion of risk measures does not

the ability of the

affect

moral hazard variables

to explain financial lever—

We next examine the possibility that the size of a firm's operating cash
flows

determines financial leverage. There are two possible explanations why

cash flows might influence corporate borrowing.

First, as Donaldson (1961) noted, managers may prefer to minimize their

costs and constraints by using internally generated funds. This is consistant
with Miller's (1977) argument that with personal taxes and no transactions

costs firms are Indifferent to capital structure. If we then introduce transactions costs, we would expect that firms will choose the form of financing

which is least expensive. Therefore, firms with adequate internal funds will
provide most of their capital requirements internally, while less liquid firms
will be forced to resort to outside funding.

However, it is also possible that a firm's cash flows are a proxy for the

type of investment opportunities they face. In the absence of positive net
present valued investments, we would expect that if risk were held constant,

all firms would have the same before tax operating cash flows. Any observed
variation in cash flows can be attributed to variation in economic growth.

True economic growth results from a firm's ability to select investments which

create unique products or processes. When investment opportunities are firm—
specific or intangible, they are more likely to generate positive net present

values and thus higher cash flows. Thus it is possible that the size of a
firm's cash flows is a proxy for firm-specific investment opportunities
instead of growth opportunities.

21

We measure operating cash flows as earnings before interest, depreciation

and taxes. If either explanation is correct, we expect cash flow to have a
negative relationship with financial leverage.
[Insert Table 8]

Table 8 indicates that operating cash flow is indeed negatively related

to financial leverage. In the model using firm data, inclusion of cash flow
does not affect the explanatory power of the moral hazard variables. However,
since firms with higher systematic risk should have higher profitability, we
consider these results inconclusive.

When we examine the effect of cash flow when risk is neutralized, we see
that the importance of both advertising and R & D is reduced below statistical

significance. This is due to the previously noted high positive correlation

the variables. There are three possible explanations for this
phenomenon. First, because our portfolios are ordered by financial leverage,
among

it

is possible

ly, have

that low leverage firms have high cash flows, and independent-

high advertising and R & D expenditures. In this case, because cash

flows exert a stronger influence on leverage, the importance of advertising

and B & D is reduced, but the variables do not proxy for each other. A second
possiblity is that advertising and B & D create high cash flows and therefore
proxy for the availability of internal funds. Finally, it is possible that
cash flows are a proxy for all firm—specific investment opportunities,
including advertising and B & D.

While we cannot empirically distinguish

explanations,

among the alternative

it appears likely that the first is correct and the variables

are independent determinants of'

leverage.

Because capital expenditures is not

strongly correlated with cash flows, it is still statistically significant.

22

Capital expenditues also measures the extent of moral hazard problems and its
inclusion in the model (after the influence of cash flows has

been

considered)

increases the explained variation in financial leverage by 25%. Thus while we
cinnot explain the relationship between advertising, R & D and-cash flows, we
conclude that the moral hazard problem is important.

Finally, we look at whether or not our basic model can explain a firm's

use of short-term sources of funds. If short—term borrowing is used in order
to resolve agency problems, advertising and R & D should exert a positive ef-

fect. But if firms turn to short—term borrowing solely to finance cyclical,
short—term requirements, while choosing to finance longer term requirements by
issuing long—term, funded debt, the effect of our variables on the level of

short—term debt should be negligible. Table 9 shows the results of our basic
model using short—term debt as our dependent variable.
[Insert Table 9]

Table 9 shows that when we use firm data, advertising and capital
expenditures have a positive effect on short—term borrowing while H & D has a

negative effect. Our results with portfolio data are similar, except that
B & D does not enter the equation. In both cases, our explained variation is
extremely small. It appears as if firms make short-term borrowing decisions
independent of long-term investment requirements and do not attempt to resolve
agency problems by the substitution of short-term for long-term debt.

23

1L Conclusions and Implications
We have shown

that

the moral hazard problem, which affects a firm's

investment decisions, is a major determinant of corporate leverage. Specific—
a'ly, we developed a model in which a firm's

financial

leverage depends on

tether it invests in tangible, capital assets or in intangible, firm—specific
assets. We tested our model using both a large sample of'

68 eight—firm
were

individual

firms and

portfolios formed to neutralize systematic operating risk. We

able to explain 21% of' the

variation for individual firms

and

141% of the

variation when risk was held constant.
We then examined the robustness of our model by including various variables

which other researchers have suggested may influence financial leverage.

Our intent was not to prove or disprove alternative theories but rather to

determine the power of the moral hazard model. We found that including investment related tax shields or firm

specific

risk did not affect our results.

When we included a variable measuring before tax operating cash flow, we found

that two of our variables, advertising and H & D, did lose power. While we
were unable to determine precisely the relationship among the variables, we

did find evidence that they are independent measures. It appears that while
the availability of internal funds may be the most important determinant of
whether or not a firm

seeks

external sources of funds, the moral hazard

problem can still explain the choice of debt or equity.

We conclude that a major factor which influences corporate leverage deci—
sions is the type of investments a firm

undertakes.

Given that a firm must

seek an outside source of funds, its choice between debt or equity will depend

in part on the magnitude of potential agency costs of debt. Because of these
costs, corporations which invest heavily in intangibles, such as H & D and

2Z1

advertising

have a tighter capital market imposed debt capacity than those

investing in tangible assets. Our

findings

provide direct empirical evidence

that the moral hazard problem is important, and that investment and financing
decisions are

I

not

independent.

Long and Malitz

Notes

1 The first order conditions for the two Investments are as follows.

S2
—1 +

f

[R(C'1, S2)/3C'11 q1(S2) dS2

0

(A)

[3R"(C'1, S2)/C'11 q1 (S2) dS2

0

(B)

Since the second term ifl equation (A) exceeds that of equation (B), when.the

level of investment is constant the less risky investment is optimal for the

firm. It can be shown (see Myers) that when the level of investment varies,
the less risky investment may lead to greater underinvestment, I.e., area
Sd2 AA' Sb2 may be greater than Sd2" BB' Sb2" on figure 2.

2 For example if alternative capital equipment with different contributions to operating risk is available, this Is likely to be known and the ef-

fect of the riskier Investment on debt values can be anticipated. Or, if the
shift in risk Is accomplished by replacing existing equipment, It Is likely
that the price paid for the equipment will approximate its true value. Then
all bondholders need be concerned about is that the expected NPV of the new
equipment is non—negative.

3 When there were missing data, the values were collected from 's
Industrial Manual.

Myers has shown that because short term debt is retired prior to investment choice It does not affect owner's investment decisions. We examine this
proposition later in this paper.

5We investigate the possibility that since agency problems can be circumvented either by issuing convertible debt [Jensen and Meckling, (1976)], or

26

by leasing the inclusion of these items in our measure of debt may bias our

results. However, when we remove convertible debt and leases from our measure
of financial leverage, we achieve identical results for both the portfolios

ad individual firms.

6

—

The use of investment stocks would seriously bias our results. The

stock of' debt reflects the current level of debt. The stock of investments
reflects all previous investment decisions, many of which were made prior to

issuing any of' the long term debt which is currently outstanding. The .ow of
funds into alternative investments adequately reflects the use to which the
funds raised from the sale of debt were put.

7 Betas are determined using 60 "months" of data where possible. Where
60 months are not available less are used except that at least 36 "months" are
required.
If' debt is not riskless, our estimate underestimates the asset beta by

a factor equal to the firm's leverage ratio times its true debt beta. If we
assume that debt of higher leverage firms has greater systematic risk, this
underestimation is magnified.

This relationship is due in part to the negative bias in our computation of unlevered beta for high leverage firms.
10 It was suggested that our results might be due to a few firms which

have extremely high advertising or R & D expenditures. To test this, we
eliminated firms in the pharmaceutical industry, which have high H & D expenses, and those in the cosmetics industry, which have above average adver-

tising outlays. Our results did not significantly change.
We also examined the possibility, suggested by Dasgupta and Stiglitz
(1980), that a firm's competitive environment determines both whether or not

27

intangible

undertaken,

investments are

and its financial leverage. According

to their model one would expect that firms in medium concentration industries

weuld have greater expenditures in H & D and advertising. Sinee these firms

.so face greater demand uncertainty, they can support less debt. We tested
the proposition that financial leverage is determined by a firm's competitive
environment by considering a model which incorporates industry concentration.
We define industry concentration in two ways.

First,

we compute the percent—

age of industry output produced by the four largest firms in each fourdigit
SIC. We also compute a second measure, designed to reach a maximum at 50%
concentration (100* Concentration —

Concentration2).

We found that neither

measure is correlated with either the type of investment or with financial
leverage, and

thus

had

no effect on the power of our model.

12 There are two methods used in accounting for investment tax credits.

The flow through method reports the entire tax benefit in the year of pur.chase, so that our measure is taken directly from each firm's income state--

ment. The deferral methods capitalized the benefit and

amortizes

it over five

years. For these firms we use the income statement value plus balance sheet
changes in investment tax

credit

accounts.

13 We recognize the potential agency costs involved in the substitution

of the same quantity of risky

projects

for those with less risk and

greater

value. However, if more positive valued projects are undertaken, then firm
value will show a net increase. In most cases, the underinvestment problem
dominates the asset substitution problem.

quite small and
increase less than proportionally with the size of the firm. For example see
Studies of actual bankruptcy costs find that they are

Warner (1977)

and

Ang, Chau, and McConnell

(1982).

28

15 There is a slight negative bias in our measure. We compute unsystem-

atic risk as the total variance of stock returns, standardized by the market

variance less the square of the stock beta. It can be shown

that

all other

ting equal, the change in unsystematic risk with respect to the debt—equity
rat1o is slightly negative.

I.

Long and Maiitz

References

Ang, J., J. Chua, and J. McConnell. 1982. The administrative costs of

bankruptcy. Journal of Finance 37: 219-226.

Baxter, N. 1967.
Finance 22:

Leverage, risk or ruin and the cost of capital.

Journal

of

395—4O3.

Black, F. and M. Scholes. 1973. Pricing of options and corporate
liabilities.

Dasgupta, P. and

Journal of Political Economy 81: 637-659.

J.

4

Stiglitz. 1980. Uncertainty, industrial structure and

the speed of R & D. The Bell Journal of Economics 11: 1—28.
DeAngelo, H. and R. Masulis. 1980. Optimal capital structure under corporate
and personal taxation. Journal of Financial Economics 8: 3—28.
Donaldson, G.

1961. Corporate Debt Capacity. Boston: Graduate School of

Business Research Harvard University.
Hamada, R.

1972. The effects of the firm's capital structure on the

systematic risk of common stocks. Journal of Finance 27: 135I452.

Hite, G. and A. Jiviland. 1977. Some evidence on the determinants of capital
structure. Unpublished paper, The Ohio State University.

Jensen, M. and V. Meckling. 1976. Theory of the firm: Managerial behavior,
agency costs, and ownership structure. Journal of Financial Economics

3: 305—360.
Long, M. 1981. Discretionary investments as a predictior of leverage.
Working paper, University of British Columbia.

Malitz, I. 1982a. Determining the optimal set of bond covenants. Working
paper, Georgetown University.

Malitz, I. 1982b. The optimal set of bond covenants: A theoretical and
empirical investigation. Ph.D dissertation, University of Maryland.

30

Miller, M. 1977. Debt and taxes. Journal of Finance 32: 261—275.
Modigliani, F. and M. Miller. 1958. The cost of capital, corporate finance,

and the theory of Investment. American Economic Review 53: 33413.

MiglianI, F. and M. Miller. 1963. Corporate income tax and-the cost of
capital: A correction. American Economic Review 53: l33_13.
Myers, S. 1977. Determinants of corporate borrowing. Journal of Financial
Economics 5: V47—175.
Rubinstien, M. 1973. A mean—variance synthesis of corporate financial

theory. Journal of Finance 28: 167—181.
Smith, C. and J. Warner. 1979. On financial contracting: An analysis of
bond covenants. Journal of Financial Economics 7: 117—161.

U.S. Bureau of the Census. 1977. Census of Manufacturers 1977. Government
Printing Office.

Warner, J. 1977. Bankruptcy costs: Some evidence. Journal of' Finance 32:
337..3147.

Williamson, S. 1981. The moral hazard theory of corporate financial
structure: An empirical test. Ph.D. dissertation, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology.

Table 1
Sunnnary

5145

Vriable
-

Mean

Statistics
Firms
Standard
Deviation

68 portfolios

Mean

Standard
Deviation

Advertising

.0253

.0382

.01402

.0303

Capital Expenditure

.09614

.0523

.12140

.02601

R & D

.02141

.0269

.0366

.0217

Unlevered Beta

.9229

.146149

N/A

N/A

Long—term Debt

.2506

.11470

.2560

.1339

Table 2
Advertising, Research and Development and Capital Expenditure
as Determinants of Financial Leverage for 68 Portfolios
Denominator

________
Vriabl e

Constant

Advertising

R&D

Invested Capita
Invested
_________
Capital
________

Capitalized

Adjusted R2

Total
______

107

.107

—1.211
(1.88)

—1 .3114

—1.1416

(2 .80)

(2 •

—2.1497

—2.182
(3.22)

—2.370
(2.23)

(2.36)

Capital Expenditure

R & D

Assets
and Advertising _______
•

b614

20)

2.6147

2.269

2.820

('4.33)

(14.39)

(14.60)

.35

Absolute value of t—ratios in parentheses.

.141

39

Table 3

Advertising,

Research and Development, Capital Expenditures and

Unlevered Beta as Determinants of Financial Leverage for 515 Firms

V&iable
Cnstant

Coefficient

t Statistic
(absolute value)

• 325

(C0)

Advertising (C1)

— .522

3.143

R & D (C2)

—.867

387

.520

14.68

—.098

7. 514

Capital Expenditure (C3)
Unlevered Beta (Ca)

Adjusted R2

.21

Table LI

Correlation Matrix
5LI5 Firms

Adv
1.000

CE
—.25LI

R & D

LTD

CF

Risk-

Tax

—.018 —.011

—.172

.03U

—.239

.052

—.176

.0011

.068

.368

—.116

.671

.039

.i98

1.000

.368

—.091

.023

—.022

—.115

—.270

1.000

•2i1

.238

—.007 —253

—355

1.000

—.096

.2l2

—.082

—.244

1.000

—.105

.1111

.133

1.000

—.013

.123

1.000

.280

Advertisig
Capital Expenditures

STD

R & D Beta

1.000

Unlevered Beta
Operating Cash Flow
Unsystematic Risk

Tax Shield
Short Term Debt
1.000

Long Term Debt

Standard error of correlation coefficents

.0113

Table 5
Correlation Matrix
68

Adv

Advertsing
Capital Expenditures
R & D
Operating Cash Flow

1.000

CE

Portfolios
R & D CF

Risk

Tax

STD

LTD

—.096

.1416

.501

—.215

—.1417

.081

—.487

1.000

.270

.158

.0140

.562

.166

.373

1.000

.505

—.121

—.165

.08.

—.359

1,000

—.268

—.176

—.125

.6L42

1.000

—.005

.239

.3145

i.ooo

.033

.378

i.ooo

.319

Unsystematic Risk

Tax Shield
Short Term Debt

Long Term Debt

Standard error of correlation coefficients = .121

i.ooo

Table 6
The Effect of Investment Related
Tax Shields on Financial Leverage

Firms

onstant
Advertising

B & D

Capital Expenditure

Tax Shield

Unlevered Beta

Portfolios

.332

.137

_.5142

_1.1136

(3.55)

(2.89)

—.870
(3.88)

—2.316
(3.30)

.6514

2.580

(14.146)

(3.914)

—.571

—1.858

(1.140)

(.78)

—.099

N/A

(7 .62)

Adjusted B2

.21

Absolute value of t—statistic in parentheses.

.41

Table 7

The Effect of Firm Specific Risk
on Financial Leverage

Firms
_____

kknstant
Advertising

R&D
Capital

Portfolios

.299

• 03

—.523

—1.119

(3.58)

(2. k')

—.756

—2 •

(3. 24)

(3.50)
Expenditures

Firm Specific Risk
Unlevered Beta

Adjusted R2

110

2.227

.617

(5.72)

(LI

. 18)

.005

.010

(6.72)

(2.50)
N/A

-.121
(9.32)

• 16

.27

Absolute value of t—statistics in

parentheses.

Table 8

The Effect of Operating Cash Flow on Financial Leverage

Constant

1vertising

Firms

Portfolios

.1t18

.Z71

_.61114

—.297
(.76)

(.52)
Capital Expenditures

R & D

Operating Cash Flow

Unlevered

Beta

(7.72)

2.608
(6.I9)

—1.235
(5.79)

—.991
(1.79)

—.629

—1.733

(8.914)

(6.67)

.851

—.069

N/A

(5.149)

Adjusted H2

.31

Absolute value of t—statistics in parentheses.

.65

Table 9

The Effect of Moral Hazard
of Short Term Borrowing
Firms

Portfolios

Gnstant

.118

.0140

Advertising

.205

.218

(1.56)

(.80)

Capital Expenditures

R&D
Unlevered Beta

.163

-

.1457

(1.69)

(1.143)

—.099

Did not enter

(.51)

(.00)

-.063

N/A

(5.57)

Adjusted

R2

.06

Absolute value of t—statistios in parentheses.

.01

VALUE
PRICE PAID BY BONDHOLDERS I

D

C

A

A'

STATE
0

Sb2

S*b2

Figure 1

The Effect of Unanticipated Underinvestment on
Bondholder's Wealth

Sn

VALUE

o Sd2 Sd2"

Sb2 5b2"

Sn

Figure 2

Expected Marginal Returns on Investment

with Asset Substitution

_VAL U E

F
P

A

Figure 3

The Effect of Unanticipated
As set Substitution on
Bondholder' s Wealth

