                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        INVESTMENT-BASED UNDERPERFORMANCE
                        FOLLOWING SEASONED EQUITY OFFERINGS

                                           Evgeny Lyandres
                                               Le Sun
                                              Lu Zhang

                                         Working Paper 11459
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w11459


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       June 2005




Lyandres: Room 240-MS 531, 6100 Main Street, Houston, TX 77005, tel: (713) 348-4708, fax: (713) 348-
6296, and email: lyandres@rice.edu. Sun: 500 Wilson Blvd, Rochester, NY 14627, tel: (585) 275-4318, and
email: lesun@simon.rochester.edu. Zhang: Carol Simon Hall 3-160B, 500 Wilson Blvd, Simon School of
Business, University of Rochester, Rochester, NY 14627, tel (585) 273-1140, and email:
zhanglu@simon.rochester.edu. We thank Espen Eckbo and Jeff Wurgler for helpful comments and we thank
Sagit Harel and Haukur Skúlason for excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of
the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by Evgeny Lyandres, Le Sun, and Lu Zhang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
Investment-Based Underperformance Following Seasoned Equity Offerings
Evgeny Lyandres, Le Sun, Lu Zhang
NBER Working Paper No. 11459
June 2005, Revised February 2006
JEL No. E22, E44, G12, G14, G24, G31, G32

                                          ABSTRACT



Adding a return factor based on capital investment into standard, calendar-time factor regressions

makes underperformance following seasoned equity offerings largely insignificant and reduces its

magnitude by 37-46%. The reason is that issuers invest more than nonissuers matched on size and

book-to-market. Moreover, the low-minus-high investment-to-asset factor earns a significant

average return of 0.37% per month. Our evidence suggests that the underperformance results from

the negative investment-expected return relation, as predicted by Carlson, Fisher, and Giammarino

(2005).

Evgeny Lyandres
Jones School of Management
Rice University
Room 240-MS 531, 6100 Main Street
Houston, TX 77005
lyandres@rice.edu

Le Sun
Simon School
University of Rochester
Carol Simon Hall 4-328
Rochester, NY 14627
lesun@simon.rochester.edu

Lu Zhang
Simon School
University of Rochester
Carol Simon Hall 4-328
Rochester, NY 14627
and NBER
zhanglu@simon.rochester.edu
1     Introduction

We study long-term underperformance following seasoned equity offerings (SEOs). Our

central finding is that adding a return factor based on capital investment into the CAPM

and the Fama and French (1993) three-factor model makes the underperformance largely

insignificant and reduces its magnitude by around 40%.

    Two forces drive this result. First, equity issuers invest much more than matching non-

issuers with similar size and book-to-market. In the year preceding the SEOs, the median

investment-to-asset ratio of issuers is on average 0.090 from 1970 to 2003. In contrast, this

ratio is 0.054 for matching nonissuers, about 40% lower. Similar dispersion in investment-to-

asset ratios persists for two years and does not disappear until about five years after equity

issuance. Second, capital investment is negatively related to future average returns. We con-

struct a zero-cost portfolio by buying stocks with the lowest 30% investment-to-asset ratios

and selling stocks with the highest 30% investment-to-asset ratios. This portfolio, which

we call the investment factor, earns an average return of 0.37% per month with a highly

significant t-statistic of 4.35, controlling for size and book-to-market.

    Our evidence lends support to the predictions of Carlson, Fisher, and Giammarino (2005)

and Zhang (2005). In their real options model, Carlson et al. argue that firms have expansion

options and assets in place prior to equity issuance. This composition is levered and risky.

If capital investment is financed by equity, then risk must decrease because investment in

effect extinguishes the risky growth options. Using a different but equivalent argument from

the Q-theory, Zhang derives the negative relation between investment and future average re-

turns. Intuitively, investment increases with the net present value (NPV) of future cash flows

generated by one additional unit of capital (e.g., Brealey, Myers, and Allen (2006, chapter
6)). Controlling for expected cash flows, the NPV decreases with the cost of capital, giving

rise to the negative relation between investment and the cost of capital, or expected return.

Further, firms’ balance-sheet constraint implies that the sources of funds must add up to the

uses of funds, suggesting that issuers must invest more than nonissuers. The SEO underper-

formance then follows from the negative relation between investment and expected returns.

   We also examine two related hypotheses. First, the overinvestment hypothesis (e.g.,

Richardson and Sloan (2003)) suggests that the SEO underperformance is driven by the neg-

ative investment-return relation that arises from investors underreacting to overinvestment

of empire-building managers (see also Titman, Wei, and Xie (2004)). Second, Eckbo, Ma-

sulis, and Norli (2000) show that a six-factor model can explain the SEO underperformance

in their sample. Eckbo et al. argue that issuing equity lowers financial leverage for issuers,

thus reducing their loadings on risk factors and expected returns relative to nonissuers.

   Our evidence is inconsistent with the overinvestment hypothesis. We document that the

negative investment-return relation is even stronger among firms with stronger shareholder

rights, which should be less vulnerable to overinvestment by empire-building managers, than

that among firms with weaker shareholder rights. Moreover, issuers have on average lower

governance and entrenchment indexes, suggesting stronger shareholder rights and less vulner-

ability to overinvestment than matching nonissuers. We measure the strength of shareholder

rights using the corporate governance index of Gompers, Ishii, and Metrick (2003) and the

entrenchment index of Bebchuk, Cohen, and Ferrell (2005).

   Our evidence is also inconsistent with the leverage-based explanation of SEO underper-

formance on three dimensions. First, the Eckbo-Masulis-Norli (2000) six-factor model fails

to reduce the underperformance to insignificant levels in our sample that consists of more



                                              2
than 8,000 SEOs.1 Second, the cross-sectional relation between leverage and future returns

is ambiguous. Using cross-sectional regressions, we show that market leverage correlates

with future returns positively, but book leverage correlates with future returns negatively,

a pattern also documented in Fama and French (1992).2 Third and most importantly, even

after equity issuance, issuers have market and book leverage ratios higher than matching

nonissuers. From 1970 to 2003, the median market leverage of issuers at the fiscal yearend

following the issuance is 0.22, slightly higher than that of matching nonissuers, 0.19. The

median book leverage of issuers is 0.36, about 42% higher than that of nonissuers, 0.21. Fur-

ther evidence from 60-month post-event window shows that, although issuing equity lowers

issuers’ leverage ratios in the first two years, they remain significantly higher than those of

nonissuers throughout the post-event window.

       Brav, Geczy, and Gompers (2000) document that SEO firms are concentrated among

small-growth firms, and suggest that their underperformance reflects a more pervasive re-

turn pattern captured by the Fama-French (1993) size and book-to-market factors. Brav and

Gompers (1997) make a similar argument in the context of IPOs. Our evidence lends sup-

port to their argument because both equity issuers and small-growth firms invest more than

other firms. We suggest that capital investment is the common link between these two types

of firms, and is likely to be the more fundamental driving force of their underperformance.

       Our paper bridges the literatures on the new issues puzzle and on the investment-return

relation. Loughran and Ritter (1995) and Spiess and Affleck-Graves (1995) first document

that SEO firms underperform nonissuers with similar characteristics during three to five years
   1
      Eberhart and Siddique (2002) also report that the Eckbo-Masulis-Norli model cannot make the under-
performance insignificant in their sample of 189 SEOs issued by 140 industrial firms from 1980 to 1992.
    2
      Fama and French (1992) argue that, because the slope on book leverage and the slope on market leverage
are opposite in sign but relatively close in magnitudes, it is the difference between market and book leverage,
i.e., book-to-market, that helps explain average returns.



                                                      3
after the issuance. Kang, Kim, and Stulz (1999) document similar underperformance follow-

ing seasoned equity and convertible bond issuance among Japanese firms. Cochrane (1991)

documents the negative relation between investment and future average returns in the time

series. Titman, Wei, and Xie (2004) find a similar association in the cross section. Li, Vassa-

lou, and Xing (2004) use sectoral investment growth rates to price the cross-section of returns,

including the small-growth portfolio. Anderson and Garcia-Feijóo (2005) find that invest-

ment growth conditions subsequent classification of firms to size and book-to-market port-

folios. Xing (2005) shows that firms with low investment growth or low investment-to-asset

ratios have significantly higher expected returns, and that a return factor based on investment

contains similar information as HML and explains the value effect empirically as well as HML.

   To our knowledge, the only other paper that also connects the aforementioned two liter-

atures is Richardson and Sloan (2003), who show that the external financing-return relation

is strongest when the proceeds are invested in non-cash assets. Our work complements theirs

because both papers argue that capital investment is likely to be an important driving force

of the SEO underperformance. But our paper differs from theirs in several important ways.

First, we use factor regressions, while Richardson and Sloan use panel regressions. Second,

our investment-related evidence is much more detailed. More importantly, Richardson and

Sloan interpret the negative investment-return relation as investors underreacting to over-

investment and aggressive accounting. We argue, on the other hand, that the evidence is

consistent with optimal investment based on recent theoretical work of Carlson, Fisher, and

Giammarino (2005) and Zhang (2005). We try to distinguish between the two competing

hypotheses and find evidence inconsistent with the overinvestment hypothesis.

   Our paper is also related to Schultz (2003), who argues that event studies are likely

to result in negative ex-post abnormal performance, even though there is no ex-ante un-

                                               4
derperformance.3 Weighing each period equally as in calendar-time regressions solves this

problem. Our investment hypothesis focuses on ex-ante underperformance and thus applies

to calendar-time evidence.

        Section 2 develops the investment hypothesis of the SEO underperformance. Section 3

describes our data. Section 4 reports our empirical results. Section 5 concludes.


2         Hypothesis Development

The investment hypothesis of SEO underperformance argues that the underperformance

arises from the negative association between capital investment and expected returns. This

hypothesis can be split into two parts. First, the association between capital investment and

expected returns should be negative. Second, if investment is financed by issuing new equity,

then issuers should have lower expected returns than nonissuers.

        Intuitively, a firm’s investment increases with the value of positive-NPV projects. The

NPVs of new projects are inversely related to their costs of capital or expected returns,

ceteris paribus. If the costs of capital are high, then the NPVs are low, giving rise to a

low investment-to-asset ratio for the firm. If the costs of capital are low, then the NPVs are

high, giving rise to a high investment-to-asset ratio. Figure 1 illustrates the negative relation

between investment and expected returns.

        The negative investment-return relation is the central prediction in recent theoretical

literature on investment-based asset pricing. Two different approaches have been used to

develop this relation. The first approach is based on real options theory. In Berk, Green, and
    3
    If early in a sample period, SEOs underperform, there will be few SEOs in the future because investors
would be less interested in them. The average performance will be weighted more towards the early SEOs
that underperformed. If early SEOs outperform, there will be more SEOs in the future. The early positive
abnormal performance will be weighted less in the average performance. Viswanathan and Wei (2005) show
that nonstationarity in the number of event process is necessary to generate a large negative bias emphasized
by Schultz (2003).

                                                     5
Naik (1999), firms invest more when they have many low-risk projects. Investment thus low-

ers risk and expected returns. In Carlson, Fisher, and Giammarino (2004, 2005), expansion

options are riskier than assets in place. Investment extinguishes the riskier expansion options,

transforming them into less risky assets in place, and reduces risk and expected returns.

   The second approach is based on the Q-theory. Cochrane (1991, 1996) first derives the

negative investment-return relation from the Q-theory. In his model, firms invest more when

their marginal q is high, where the marginal q is the net present value of future cash flows

generated from one additional unit of capital. Given expected cash flows, high marginal q is

associated with lower costs of capital. The basic mechanisms driving the investment-return

relation in the real options and the Q-theory models are similar because the two approaches

are mathematically equivalent (e.g., Abel, Dixit, Eberly, and Pindyck (1996)).

   Figure 1 also shows that equity issuers are associated with the right end of the curve,

where expected returns are low, and nonissuers are associated with the left end of the curve,

where expected returns are high. Intuitively, the balance-sheet constraint requires that the

uses of funds must equal the sources of funds. Equity issuers thus tend to be firms with high

investment-to-asset ratios, and vice versa. Based on this observation, Carlson, Fisher, and

Giammarino (2005) and Zhang (2005) argue that SEO firms must invest more and should

earn lower expected returns than matching nonissuers ex-ante.

   Although we test the investment hypothesis in the context of SEOs, the investment-return

relation in principle also applies to other external financing anomalies. These anomalies in-

clude the underperformance following initial public offerings (e.g., Ritter (1991)), debt offer-

ings (e.g., Spiess and Affleck-Graves (1999)), private placements of equity (e.g., Hertzel, Lem-

mon, Linck, and Rees (2002)), and loan announcements (e.g., Billett, Flannery, and Garfinkel

(2005)), as well as overperformance following dividend initiations (e.g., Michaely, Thaler, and

                                               6
Womack (1995)), tender offers (e.g., Lakonishok and Vermaelen (1990)), and open market

share repurchase (e.g., Ikenberry, Lakonishok, and Vermaelen (1995)). Zhang (2005) argues

that these anomalies are all potentially driven by optimal investment. Intuitively, from the

balance-sheet constraint, firms raising capital should invest more and earn lower expected

returns, and firms distributing capital should invest less and earn higher expected returns.


3         Data

We obtain our sample of SEO firms from Thomson Financial’s SDC database and monthly

returns from the Center for Research in Security Prices (CRSP). The sample period is from

1970 to 2003. The monthly returns of the Fama and French (1993) factors, the returns of

the momentum factor, and the risk-free rate are from Kenneth French’s website. We obtain

accounting information from the Compustat Annual Industrial Files.

        Our sample selection criteria largely follow previous studies. To be included, a SEO

must be performed by a U.S. firm, which must have returns on CRSP at some point during

the five-year period after its offering. We exclude unit offerings and secondary offerings in

which new shares are not issued. We also exclude SEOs of firms that trade on exchanges

other than NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ. Similar to Brav, Geczy, and Gompers (2000) and

Eckbo, Masulis, and Norli (2000), but different from Loughran and Ritter (1995), we include

SEOs of utilities in our sample. Exclusion of utilities from the sample does not change our

results materially because the proportion of utilities is relatively small, about 13%. Follow-

ing Loughran and Ritter, we define utilities as firms with SIC codes ranging between 4,910

and 4,949. The results are also robust to the exclusion of mixed offerings from the sample. 4

        Table 1 reports the number of SEOs for each year in the sample, the number of SEOs
    4
     A mixed offering is a combination of a primary offering, in which new shares are issued, and a secondary
offering, in which shares change ownership but no new equity is issued.

                                                     7
matched with CRSP using CUSIPs and historical CUSIPs, the numbers of equity issues for

NYSE/AMEX/NASDAQ firms, the number of primary and mixed offerings, and the number

of offerings by non-utilities and non-financial firms. From the last row of Table 1, our sample

includes 11,092 SEOs with 8,126 SEOs having stock price data. Because of the long sample

period of 34 years, our sample seems to be the largest in the literature. For comparison,

Eckbo, Masulis, and Norli’s (2000) sample includes 4,766 SEOs, Loughran and Ritter’s (1995)

contains 3,702 SEOs, and Brav, Geczy, and Gompers’s (2000) includes 4,622 SEOs.

   The second column of Table 1 contains the number of SEOs for each year in the sample,

and the fourth column shows the number of SEOs obtained by matching SDC and CRSP

firms based on their CUSIP numbers. Comparing these two columns reveals that matching

by both current and historical CUSIPs increases the number of SEOs by more than 28%.

This increase is especially pronounced during the earlier years in the sample, in which it

often exceeds 60%. The sample of SEOs is heavily tilted towards NYSE firms in the 1970’s,

but NASDAQ firms dominate the latter part of the sample.

   Panel A of Figure 2 presents the frequency distribution of equity issuers across quintiles

of size and book-to-market. To generate this result, we merge CRSP returns (matched with

SDC data) from July of year t to June of year t+1 with Compustat accounting data at fiscal

yearend in calendar year t−1. We measure the market size as the share price at the end of

June times shares outstanding. Book equity is the stockholder’s equity (item 216), minus

preferred stock, plus balance sheet deferred taxes and investment tax credit (item 35) if

available, minus post-retirement benefit asset (item 330) if available. If stockholder’s equity

is missing, we use common equity (item 60) plus preferred stock par value (item 130). If

these variables are missing, we use book assets (item 6) less liabilities (item 181). Preferred

stock is defined as preferred stock liquidating value (item 10), or preferred stock redemption

                                              8
value (item 56), or preferred stock par value (item 130) in that order of availability. To

compute the book-to-market ratio, we use December closing price times number of shares

outstanding. The quintile breakpoints are from Kenneth French’s website.

    Consistent with Brav, Geczy, and Gompers (2000), we find that issuers tend to be small-

growth firms. Firms in the smallest size quintile and the lowest book-to-market quintile issue

seasoned equity about six times more frequently than firms in the largest size and the highest

book-to-market quintiles. Panel B of Figure 2 reports the median new equity-to-asset ratio

among issuers by size and book-to-market quintiles. We measure this ratio as the market

value of new equity from SDC divided by the book assets at the fiscal yearend preceding

a SEO. The distribution of the median new equity-to-asset across size and book-to-market

quintiles is similar to the frequency distribution reported in Panel A. Small-growth firms issue

equity not only more frequently, they also issue much more as a percentage of their asset

value. For example, the median new equity-to-asset of issuers that belong to the small-growth

portfolio is about 55 times higher than that of issuers that belong to the big-value portfolio.


4     Empirical Results

Section 4.1 documents SEO underperformance in our sample. Section 4.2 constructs a com-

mon factor of returns based on capital investment. Section 4.3 presents our central finding

that investment drives the SEO underperformance. To understand the underlying intuition,

Section 4.4 examines the investment behavior of issuers relative to that of nonissuers. Section

4.5 tests two alternative explanations of SEO underperformance.




                                               9
4.1       Documenting SEO Underperformance

We measure SEO underperformance as Jensen’s alphas from factor regressions. We use fac-

tor regressions because recent literature has discussed in depth the difficulties in obtaining

unbiased inferences using cumulative abnormal returns and buy-and-hold returns.5 The fac-

tor models we use include the CAPM, the Fama and French (1993) three-factor model, as

in Ritter (2003). The dependent variable in the factor regressions is the portfolio return of

SEO firms in excess of the one-month Treasury bill rate. The SEO portfolio consists of all

the firms that have issued seasoned equity in the past 36 months. For robustness, we also

use an alternative period of 60 months.

       Panel A of Table 2 reports factor regressions using portfolios of firms with prior 36-

month SEOs. It shows that the alpha from the CAPM regression of the equally-weighted

SEO portfolio is −0.28% per month with a marginally significant t-statistic of −1.91. The

alpha of the value-weighted SEO portfolio in the CAPM regression is −0.36% per month with

a significant t-statistic of −3.56. The results from the Fama-French model are similar. The

alpha of the equally-weighted SEO portfolio in the Fama-French model is −0.29% per month

with a significant t-statistic of −2.89, and the alpha of the value-weighted portfolio is −0.28%

with a significant t-statistic of −2.92. Brav, Geczy, and Gompers (2000) do not report the

CAPM regressions, but our alphas from the Fama-French model are similar to theirs.

       The literature has also defined the SEO portfolios as consisting of firms that have issued

seasoned equity in the prior 60 months. Panel B of Table 2 reports the factor regressions

using this definition of SEO portfolios. Comparing Panels A and B shows that the magni-

tudes of the SEO underperformance are somewhat lower using prior 60-month SEOs. But
   5
    Barber and Lyon (1997), Kothari and Warner (1997), Fama (1998), Mitchell and Stafford (2000), among
others, discuss the difficulty of computing unbiased significance levels using buy-and-hold returns. Schultz
(2003) and Butler, Grullon, and Weston (2005) discuss the difficulty with cumulative abnormal returns.


                                                    10
the alphas of the equally-weighted and value-weighted SEO portfolios from the Fama-French

model and the alpha of the value-weighted SEO portfolio from the CAPM regression are all

significant. And their magnitudes, ranging from −0.21% to −0.25% per month or −2.5% to

−3% per annum, are economically meaningful.

   Perhaps surprisingly, Table 2 shows that the equally-weighted underperformance is lower

in magnitude than the value-weighted underperformance using the CAPM. And their mag-

nitudes are similar using the Fama-French three-factor model. This pattern differs from that

found in previous studies, as summarized by Ritter (2003, Table 3), i.e., equally-weighted

underperformance is larger in magnitude than value-weighted underperformance.

   This difference can be reconciled by two observations. First, all the studies cited in Ritter

only measure the underperformance with the Fama-French model. Second, when we restrict

our sample period to that comparable to previous studies, we largely replicate previous find-

ings. Specifically, using our sample of SEOs from 1975 to 1996 and prior 60-month SEO port-

folios, we find that the equally-weighted alpha from the Fama-French model to be −0.32%

per month (t-statistic = −4.26). And the value-weighted alpha is almost halved, −0.15%

(t-statistic = −1.80). For comparison, using the same sample period and definition of SEO

portfolios, Brav, Geczy, and Gompers (2000) report an equally-weighted alpha of −0.37%

per month (t-statistic = −4.81) and a value-weighted alpha of −0.14% (t-statistic = −1.36).

   Eckbo, Masulis, and Norli (2000, EMN) show that the SEO underperformance from their

six-factor model is insignificant. These factors include (i) RM, the excess return on the CRSP

value-weighted market index; (ii) 4RPC, a factor mimicking portfolio for the percent change

in the real per capita consumption of nondurable goods; (iii) BAA−AAA, a factor mimicking

portfolio for the difference in the monthly yield changes on bonds rated BAA and AAA by

Moody’s; (iv) UI, a factor mimicking portfolio for unanticipated inflation generated from

                                              11
a model of expected inflation involving a regression of return on 30-day Treasury bills less

inflation onto 12 of its lagged values and a constant; (v) 20y−1y, the return difference between

Treasury bonds with 20 years to maturity and Treasury bonds with one year to maturity;

and (vi) TBILLspr, the return difference between 90-day and 30-day Treasury bills.

       Table 3 replicates their analysis using our sample. The sample period is from January

1970 to December 2002 because the data of the EMN factors from Øyvind Norli end at

December 2002. The table shows that the EMN result is largely specific to their sample. In

our sample with more than 8,000 SEOs, the EMN model performs worse than the CAPM

and the Fama-French (1993) three-factor model in explaining the SEO underperformance.

Specifically, when we regress equally-weighted excess returns of prior 36-month SEO port-

folio onto the EMN factors, we obtain an alpha of −0.52% with a significant t-statistic of

−3.22. And its value-weighted counterpart is −0.36% (t-statistic = −3.38). The evidence

suggests that there is room to explore other factors underlying the SEO underperformance. 6


4.2       Constructing the Investment Factor

As a direct test of the investment hypothesis outlined in Section 2, we augment traditional

factor models with a common factor based on capital investment. This factor is the zero-cost

portfolio from buying stocks with the lowest 30% investment-to-asset ratios and selling stocks

with the highest 30% investment-to-asset ratios, controlling for size and book-to-market.

       Specifically, we construct the investment factor from a 3 × 3 × 3 sort on size, book-to-

market, and investment-to-asset ratio. We measure investment-to-asset as the annual change

in gross property, plant and equipment (Compustat item 7) divided by the lagged book value
   6
     In untabulated results, we find that the underperformance of SEO firms is insignificant in the Carhart
(1997) four-factor regressions, a finding also documented in Brav, Geczy, and Gompers (2000). Similar
to Brav et al., we do not interpret this evidence as suggesting no SEO underperformance. The reason is
that both the economic forces driving momentum profits and their connections to long-term performance
following equity issuance are unclear. In short, we are reluctant to use one anomaly to explain another.

                                                    12
of assets (item 6). In June of each year, we sort stocks in ascending order independently on

size, book-to-market, and investment-to-asset into three groups, the top 30%, the medium

40%, and the bottom 30%. By taking intersections of these nine portfolios, we classify all

firms into 27 portfolios. The investment factor, denoted INV, is defined as the average returns

of the low-investment portfolios minus the average returns of the high-investment portfolios.

Formally, let pijk , where i, j, k = 1, 2, 3, denote the value-weighted portfolio returns of firms

in the ith group of size, the j th group of book-to-market, and the k th group of investment-to-
                                                               P3       P3                   P3     P3
asset. And we define the investment factor as (1/9)               i=1    j=1   pij1 −(1/9)    i=1    j=1   pij3 .

       In the sample from January 1970 to December 2003, the average return of the investment

factor is 0.37% per month, or 4.4% per annum, with a heteroscedasticity-consistent t-statistic

of 4.35. This average return of the investment factor is both economically and statistically

significant. For comparison, in the same sample period, the average market excess return is

0.47% per month, or 5.69% per annum (t-statistic = 2.00), and the average return of HML

is 0.49% per month, or 5.83% per annum (t-statistic = 2.65).

       More importantly, standard factor models cannot capture much of the average return or

variation of the investment factor. Table 4 regresses the investment factor onto the market

excess return, the Fama-French (1993) three factors, and the EMN six factors. From the

first row of Table 4, the investment factor has significantly positive alphas of 0.40%, 0.27%,

and 0.28% per month in the CAPM, Fama-French, and the EMN models, respectively. All

the alphas are highly significant. Moreover, the goodness-of-fit coefficients are generally low,

ranging from 1.09% in the CAPM to 12.44% in the Fama-French model. Using the EMN

six-factor model yields a goodness-of-fit coefficient of only 8.87%.7 The evidence suggests

that the investment factor captures sources of cross-sectional variation of stock returns that
   7
    Regressing the investment factor onto the Carhart (1997) four factors yields an alpha of 0.18% (t-statistic
= 2.21) and a goodness-of-fit coefficient of 16.87%.

                                                      13
are largely independent of those captured by standard factor models.

   Table 4 also shows that the slope of the investment factor on HML, 0.20, is the highest

among all the slopes, and is highly significant. In untabulated results, we find that the un-

conditional correlation of the investment factor with HML is 0.33, much higher than those

with other factors (−0.12 with MKT and −0.05 with SMB). This evidence suggests an im-

portant link between the investment factor and the value factor, consistent with the evidence

in Anderson and Garcia-Feijóo (2005) and Xing (2005).

   Following Fama and French (1993), we interpret the investment factor as a common fac-

tor in the cross-section of returns. While Fama and French interpret their size and value

factors as risk factors motivated from ICAPM or APT, we do not take a stance on risk in-

terpretation of our investment factor. Two arguments support the risk interpretation. First,

none of the theoretical papers (e.g., Cochrane (1991) and Berk, Green, and Naik (1999), see

Section 2) that we use to motivate the construction of the investment factor assumes any

form of behavioral bias. Second, unlike size and book-to-market, investment-to-asset does

not directly involve market valuation, and is thus less likely to be affected by mispricing.

   However, behavioral stochastic discount factors (e.g., Barberis, Huang, and Santos (2001))

are also consistent with the predictions of the partial equilibrium models discussed in Section

2. Investor sentiment can in principle affect investment policy through shareholder discount

rates (e.g., Polk and Sapienza (2005)). Moreover, it is possible that characteristics-based and

covariance-based explanations of the expected-return variations are not mutually exclusive.

Under certain conditions, there exists a one-to-one mapping between covariances and char-

acteristics, suggesting that they can both serve as sufficient statistics for expected returns

(e.g., Zhang (2005)). Consequently, our empirical goal is to search for a parsimonious factor

specification motivated by economic theory, behavioral or rational, a specification that can

                                              14
be used to quantitatively explain asset pricing anomalies.


4.3    Testing the Investment Hypothesis

Table 5 reports our central finding. Adding the investment factor into standard factor re-

gressions makes SEO underperformance largely insignificant and reduces its magnitude by

around 40%. From Panel A, the equally-weighted alpha of prior 36-month SEOs from the

CAPM decreases by 46% in magnitude from −0.28% to −0.15% per month. Its t-statistic

drops from −1.91 to −0.94. The equally-weighted alpha from the Fama-French (1993) model

decreases in magnitude from −0.29% to −0.17% per month, a reduction of 43% with the

t-statistic dropping from −2.89 to −1.62. We obtain similar results using the value-weighted,

prior 36-month SEOs. The alpha from the CAPM decreases from −0.36% without the in-

vestment factor to −0.20% per month with the investment factor, a reduction of 45% in

magnitude, with the t-statistic dropping from −3.56 to −2.12, albeit still being significant.

The value-weighted alpha from the Fama-French model drops from −0.28% to −0.18%, a

reduction of 37% in magnitude. The t-statistic drops from −2.92 to −1.91.

   Panel A of Table 5 also shows that the loadings of the SEO portfolios on the investment

factor are negative and significant in all specifications. The magnitudes of these loadings,

ranging from −0.32 to −0.47, are economically meaningful. Given the average return of

0.37% per month for the investment factor, these loadings can explain from 0.12% to 0.17%

per month, or 1.4% to 2% per annum of the SEO underperformance.

   Panel B of Table 5 reports similar results using prior 60-month SEO portfolios. Once we

augment the factor models with the investment factor, the magnitudes of the SEO underper-

formance decrease by 36% to 45% in the CAPM and the Fama-French factor regressions. All

the alphas become insignificant. Moreover, the loadings of SEO portfolios on the investment


                                             15
factor are universally negative and, except for one case, highly significant. The magnitudes

of the loadings range from −0.12 to −0.32, and can explain from 0.05% to 0.12% per month

or 0.6% to 1.4% per annum of the SEO underperformance.

Issuer-Purged Factor Regressions

Loughran and Ritter (2000) argue that the Fama-French (1993) model as implemented tra-

ditionally has low statistical power for detecting SEO underperformance. The reason is that

these factor returns are constructed using in part the returns of the issuers being tested for

underperformance. Loughran and Ritter purge the size and value factors from issuing firms’

returns because the two factors are empirically motivated, and are not necessarily priced

risk factors in equilibrium. The market factor does not need to be purged because there are

many theoretical reasons to believe that it is a priced risk factor.

   To quantify the effects of purging, we perform issuer-purged Fama-French factor regres-

sions with and without the investment factor. The data of the purged size and value factors

are from Jay Ritter’s website. Loughran and Ritter (2000) construct these factors after

deleting all firms that have publicly issued equity during the prior five years. We use the

same purging procedure to construct our purged investment factor. Because we purge out

prior 60-month SEOs, the sample used in purged factor regressions starts at January 1975.

   Purging issuers does not affect the basic properties of the investment factor. The average

return of the purged investment factor, denoted pINV, is 0.35% per month or 4.2% per

annum with a t-statistic of 3.76. The alpha of the purged investment factor from the CAPM

regression is 0.38% per month (t-statistic = 4.00). And its alpha from purged Fama-French

factor regression is 0.29% per month (t-statistic = 3.04). Finally, the correlation between

the unpurged and purged investment factors is 0.90.


                                              16
   Table 6 reports the issuer-purged factor regressions. Although weakened somewhat quan-

titatively, our basic result on the importance of investment in driving SEO underperformance

remains unchanged. From Panel A, adding purged investment factor into purged Fama-

French three-factor regression reduces the magnitude of underperformance for the equally-

weighted prior 36-month SEO portfolio by about 36% from −0.39% to −0.25% per month.

The corresponding t-statistic drops from −3.28 to −2.11, albeit still being significant. The

value-weighted alpha drops by 23% in magnitude from −0.33% to −0.26% (the t-statistic

drops from −2.85 to −2.26). Panel B reports similar results using prior 60-month SEO

portfolios. The equally-weighted alpha drops by 37% from −0.28% to −0.17%, and the

value-weighted alpha drops by 23% from −0.23% to −0.18%. In both cases, adding purged

investment factor reduces significant SEO underperformance to insignificant levels.

   Table 6 also reports factor regressions with purged size and value factors but unpurged

investment factor. We also consider unpurged investment factor because investment emerges

as a priced factor across diverse equilibrium models in recent investment-based asset pricing

literature spurred by Cochrane (1991, 1996) and Berk, Green, and Naik (1999). Table 6

shows that using unpurged investment factor further reduces the magnitude of underperfor-

mance. The percentage reduction in the magnitude of alpha from adding the investment

factor into purged Fama-French (1993) model ranges from 43% for the value-weighted prior

36-month SEO portfolio to 50% for the equally-weighted, prior 60-month SEO portfolio. All

the alphas are insignificant in the augmented factor regressions.

Event-Time Factor Regressions

To study how the SEO underperformance evolves over the post-SEO years, we perform event-

time factor regressions (e.g., Ball and Kothari (1989)). The difference between event-time



                                             17
regressions and calendar-time regressions is that we now have three separate SEO portfolios

on the left-hand side of regressions. The first portfolio consists of firms that have issued

equity in the prior 12 months, the second portfolio consists of firms that have issued equity

between 13 and 24 months ago, and the third portfolio consists of firms that have issued

equity between 25 and 36 months ago.8

       Tables 7 and 8 report event-time factor regressions with and without the investment

factor using equally-weighted and value-weighted SEO portfolios, respectively. The under-

performance appears mostly in the first two years, especially in the second year. Specifically,

from Panel A of Table 7, the equally-weighted alpha in the CAPM regression in the first

post-event year is only −0.15% per month (t-statistic = −0.96). The alpha increases to

−0.63% (t-statistic = −3.77) in year two, and then drops to −0.02% (t-statistic = −0.12)

in year three. Using the Fama-French (1993) model yields similar results. Panel A of Table

8 reports similar results using value-weighted SEO portfolios. The difference is that the

value-weighted alphas in year one from the CAPM and the Fama-French model are −0.30%

and −0.24% with significant t-statistics of −2.52 and −2.07 respectively.

       More importantly, depending on factor model and post-event horizon, adding the invest-

ment factor explains 28–75% of the equally-weighted underperformance and 23–50% of the

value-weighted underperformance. Specifically, from Panel B of Table 8, the value-weighted

alphas from the CAPM and the Fama-French model reduce from significant −0.30% and

−0.24% in year one to −0.15% (t-statistic = −1.34) and −0.14% (t-statistic = −1.22), re-

spectively. Although the investment factor explains a fair amount of underperformance, both

the equally-weighted and the value-weighted alphas from the CAPM and the Fama-French
   8
    We have also used SEO portfolios that consist of firms with seasoned equity between 37 and 48 months
and between 49 and 60 months ago. But the underperformance mostly concentrates in the first three post-
SEO years. To save space, we thus only present event-time regressions for the first three post-SEO years.



                                                   18
models remain economically and statistically significant in the second post-event year.

   The event-time regressions also reveal some interesting patterns on time-varying factor

loadings. The loadings on the investment factor are all negative, and are highly significant in

most specifications. The magnitudes of these loadings display a hump shape across the three

post-event years, where the loadings in year two are the highest. This loading pattern is

similar to the pattern in the magnitude of the underperformance across the post-event years.


4.4    Why Does Investment Help Explain SEO Underperformance?

We now ask why the investment factor helps explain the SEO underperformance. To this

end, we examine the investment behavior of seasoned equity issuers relative to nonissuers

with similar size and book-to-market. Our basic result is that issuers invest much more than

matching nonissuers at the time of issuance. The dispersion in investment-to-asset between

these two classes of firms does not converge until five years after portfolio formation. Because

low-investment firms earn higher average returns than high-investment firms, it is natural

that the investment factor helps explain the underperformance.

   Each month we independently sort all firms that have not issued equity within prior

60 months into quintiles of size and book-to-market using the breakpoints from Kenneth

French’s website. As a result, we have 25 size and book-to-market portfolios of nonissuers.

For each issuer, we use these breakpoints to identify its matching portfolio. We then compare

the median characteristics of the matching portfolio with those of the issuer. We choose to

match issuers with nonissuers by size and book-to-market because these two characteristics

are primary determinants of the cross-section of returns (e.g., Fama and French (1992)).

Matching firms to individual nonissuers as in Loughran and Ritter (1997), instead of size

and book-to-market portfolios, produces quantitatively similar results.


                                              19
       Figure 3 reports SEO firms’ and matching firms’ median investment-to-asset and prof-

itability in the 60 months after equity issuance. To measure statistical significance of the

differences in characteristics, we also report Z-statistics associated with Wilcoxon matched-

pairs signed-rank tests, following Loughran and Ritter (1997). The null hypothesis is that

the distributions of issuers’ and nonissuers’ characteristics are identical. Z-statistics between

−2 and 2 indicate failure to reject the null hypothesis.9

       Panel A of Figure 3 documents a large dispersion in investment-to-asset between issuers

and matching nonissuers for most of the post-event window. In the first year after is-

suance, issuers’ investment-to-asset ratio is around 0.09, about 40% higher than nonissuers’

investment-to-asset ratio, around 0.055. This dispersion remains stable for almost two years

after issuance and then starts to decline. The investment-to-asset ratio of issuers converges

fully to that of non-issuers at the end of the 60-month post-event window. From Panel B, the

dispersion in investment-to-asset ratio is highly significant, especially in the few years after

issuance. Finally, Panels C and D show that issuers are more profitable than matching nonis-

suers in the first three years after equity issuance, but become less profitable than nonissuers

thereafter. But the dispersion in profitability between issuers and matching nonissuers is both

economically and statistically less significant than the dispersion in investment-to-asset.

       Extending the event-time evidence in Figure 3, Table 9 reports calendar-time evidence

on issuers’ and matching nonissuers’ investment-to-asset and profitability in the year pre-

ceding their SEOs. From Panel A, issuers invest more than nonissuers, and the difference in
   9
    Denote the difference in the characteristic between issuer i and its matching portfolio by d i . We rank
the absolute values of di ’s from 1 to n, where n is the number of SEOs. We next sum the        ranks of the
                                                                               h            i q
                                                                                     n(n+1)     n(n+1)(2n+1)
positive values of di and denote the sum by D. The Z-statistic is then Z ≡ D − 4             /       24      .
Under the null, Z follows a standard normal distribution. Importantly, in rare cases the sign of the Z-
statistic can be inconsistent with the sign of the difference between issuing firms’ and matching portfolios’
median characteristics. The reason is that the Wilcoxon test is concerned with the whole distribution of
characteristics, and not just with the medians.



                                                     20
investment-to-asset ratio is significant for every year from 1970 to 2003. The sample average

investment-to-asset ratio of issuers is 0.09, about 40% higher than that of nonissuers, 0.054.

The Z-statistic is highly significant, suggesting that issuers have a different distribution

of investment-to-asset than nonissuers. Panel B shows that issuers have somewhat higher

profitability than nonissuers. But the magnitude of this dispersion is very small, only 0.001.

   Although broadly consistent with the evidence in Loughran and Ritter (1997), our results

shed additional light on the driving forces of the SEO underperformance. Loughran and

Ritter document that issuers have higher ratios of capital expenditure plus R&D expense

relative to assets than nonissuers for four years after issuance. Specifically, their Figure

1 reports that this ratio is about 10.5% for issuers and 6% for nonissuers at the time of

issuance. A comparison with Panel A of our Figure 3 reveals that this dispersion is mostly

due to capital investment, not R&D expense.

   This evidence is important. First, our empirical analysis is motivated from the theoretical

work of Carlson, Fisher, and Giammarino (2005) and Zhang (2005), who model directly the

relation between returns and capital investment, not R&D. Second and more importantly,

unlike the negative association between investment-to-asset and future returns, the empirical

association between R&D-to-asset and future returns is positive (e.g., Chan, Lakonishok and

Sougiannis (2001) and Chambers, Jennings and Thompson (2002)). Chu (2005) argues that

this difference arises because growth options tend to be riskier than assets in place, and R&D

generates growth options, while capital investment extinguishes growth options.

   Supplementing Table 9, Figure 4 presents the number of SEO firms across investment-

to-asset deciles. We sort nonissuing firms in June of each year on their investment-to-asset

ratios to obtain the decile breakpoints. We then assign each issuer to one of the deciles based

on the breakpoints. Figure 4 shows that issuers are likely to be firms with high investment-

                                              21
to-asset ratios. Firms in the highest investment-to-asset decile issue seasoned equity about

three and a half times more frequently than firms in the lowest investment-to-asset decile.

   In sum, we present strong evidence that SEO firms invest much more than matching

nonissuers both before and after issuance. This evidence, combined with the fact that the

low-minus-high investment-to-asset factor earns a significant 0.37% per month, explains why

this factor can substantially reduce the magnitude of SEO underperformance.


4.5    Exploring Alternative Hypotheses

This subsection explores two alternative explanations of the SEO underperformance.

Testing the Overinvestment Hypothesis

Similar to our hypothesis, the overinvestment hypothesis of Richardson and Sloan (2003) ar-

gues that the underperformance results from the negative relation between investment and

average returns. The big difference is that while we argue that optimal investment drives the

negative relation between investment and expected returns, Richardson and Sloan argue that

investor underreaction to overinvestment by empire-building managers drives the negative re-

lation between investment and average abnormal returns, as in Titman, Wei, and Xie (2004).

   We aim to distinguish the overinvestment hypothesis from our optimal-investment hy-

pothesis. Investor underreaction and overinvestment are two necessary conditions for the

overinvestment hypothesis to work. Testing underreaction directly would require a model of

the normal level of reaction. Because the literature has not converged on such a model, we

focus instead on the other necessary condition, i.e., overinvestment.

   The idea is simple. Under the overinvestment hypothesis, the negative investment-return

relation should be stronger among firms more vulnerable to overinvestment by empire-



                                             22
building managers. To implement this idea, we split the sample into two based on ex-

ante measures of vulnerability to empire-building. We then perform Fama-MacBeth (1973)

cross-sectional regressions of future returns onto investment-to-asset ratio and compare the

magnitudes of the slopes across the two subsamples. As a more direct test, we also compare

measures of vulnerability to empire-building across issuers and matching nonissuers.

   We measure a firm’s vulnerability to empire-building using the corporate governance in-

dex of Gompers, Ishii, and Metrick (2003). Democratic firms with strong shareholder rights

(low values of the governance index) should be less vulnerable to overinvestment than dic-

tatorial firms with weak shareholder rights (high values of the governance index). Indeed,

Gompers et al. show that firms with stronger shareholder rights have lower capital expen-

ditures and make fewer corporate acquisitions than firms with weaker shareholder rights.

Under the overinvestment hypothesis, firms with strong shareholder rights should display

weaker investment-return relation than firms with weak shareholder rights.

   We take the intersection of our sample and the sample (from 1990 to 2003) of Gompers,

Ishii, and Metrick (2003) from Andrew Metrick’s website. This intersection gives us a sample

that has between 1315 and 1990 firms each year with an average of 1585 firms. We define

the democratic sample with the governance index less than or equal to nine (the median)

and the dictatorial sample with the governance index greater than or equal to ten.

   The evidence in Table 10 is inconsistent with the overinvestment hypothesis. Panels A

and B show that the slope on investment-to-asset ratio in univariate regressions is on average

−1.31 in the democratic sample. The slope is −0.79, about 40% lower in magnitude, in the

dictatorial sample. Adding size and book-to-market to the regression yields quantitatively

similar results. The slope on investment-to-asset becomes −0.94 in the democratic sample,

and its magnitude is more than 50% higher than that in the dictatorial sample, −0.44, which

                                             23
is insignificant. This evidence suggests that overinvestment is unlikely to be the driving force

of the negative investment-return relation.10

       Our basic result is robust to using an alternative measure of vulnerability to empire-

building. Several papers have recently questioned the governance index constructed in Gom-

pers, Ishii, and Metrick (2003). Bebchuk, Cohen, and Ferrell (2005) show that an entrench-

ment index based on six out of 24 IRRC provisions fully drives the negative relation between

the governance index and stock returns (see also Bebchuk and Cohen (2004)). The relation

between the entrenchment index and future stock returns is robust during the 1990–2003

period. In contrast, Core, Guay, and Rusticus (2005) show that the correlation between the

governance index and future returns exhibit a reversal from 2000 to 2003 following Gompers,

Ishii, and Metrick’s sample period from 1990 to 1999.

       Further, the entrenchment index can be a more precise measure of vulnerability to empire-

building than the governance index. Among the six provisions included in the entrenchment

index are four provisions that limit the power of a majority of shareholders (staggered boards,

limits to shareholder bylaw amendments, supermajority requirements for mergers, and super-

majority requirements for charter amendments) and two provisions that reduce the likelihood

of a hostile takeover (poison pills and golden parachutes).

       We repeat all the tests after replacing the governance index with the entrenchment index.

The sample is the interaction of our sample and the sample (from 1991 to 2003) of Bebchuk,

Cohen, and Ferrell (2005) from Lucian Bebchuk’s website. We define the low-entrenchment

sample with the entrenchment index less than or equal to two (the median) and the high-

entrenchment sample with the index greater than or equal to three. From Panels C and
  10
    The weakly negative slopes on book-to-market in Table 10 are not surprising. The sample period in
Gompers, Ishii, and Metrick (2003) is largely the expansionary period from 1990 to 2003, in which growth
firms outperformed value firms most of the time (e.g., Petkova and Zhang (2005)). And the sample mostly
contains large firms, among which the value premium is weak.

                                                  24
D in Table 10, our basic result remains unchanged. The average slope on investment-to-

asset in univariate regressions is −0.91 in the low-entrenchment sample, but is −0.73 in the

high-entrenchment sample. If we control for size and book-to-market, the average slope on

investment-to-asset becomes −0.60 in the low-entrenchment sample, and the average slope

in the high-entrenchment sample is only −0.20.

   Going further than analyzing the driving force of the investment-return relation, we

now examine the overinvestment hypothesis in the context of SEOs. If the overinvestment

hypothesis is true, issuers should have weaker shareholder rights (high governance index) and

higher degrees of entrenchment (high entrenchment index), and should be more vulnerable

to empire-building than matching nonissuers.

   The evidence is again inconsistent with the overinvestment hypothesis. Panels A and B in

Table 11 report that, from 1990 to 2003, issuers have on average lower governance indexes,

suggesting stronger shareholder rights, than matching nonissuers, with the difference in

means being significant. Although the median governance index is the same across issuers

and nonissuers, the Wilcoxon test shows that the index distribution of issuers is more left-

skewed. Finally, Panels C and D report similar results using the entrenchment index.

   Supplementing the calendar-time evidence in Table 11, the event-time evidence in Fig-

ures 5 and 6 shows basically the same picture. The median governance indexes of issuers

and nonissuers both equal nine during the first two post-SEO years. Afterwards the me-

dian index of issuers drops to eight, while the index of nonissuers remains constant at nine.

The median entrenchment indexes of issuers and nonissuers remain at two throughout the

five-year post-event window. But the Wilcoxon tests report consistently more left-skewed

governance-index and entrenchment-index distributions for issuers during the five post-SEO

years. Issuers have lower mean governance and entrenchment indexes than matching nonis-

                                             25
suers, and the differences in means are mostly significant.

Testing the Leverage Hypothesis

Eckbo, Masulis, and Norli (2000) document that equity issuers have lower exposures to risk

factors such as unexpected inflation, default spread, and changes in the slope of the term

structure. Their multifactor model based on these variables can reduce the SEO underper-

formance to insignificant levels. Eckbo et al. argue that issuing equity lowers issuers’ leverage

and reduces their risk and expected returns relative to those of matching nonissuers.

   A necessary condition for this explanation is that after SEOs, issuers should have lower

leverage than matching nonissuers. If issuers have higher leverage, their lower loadings on

risk factors than those of nonissuers must be driven by forces unrelated to leverage. As

a direct test, we compare market leverage and book leverage across issuers and matching

nonissuers. We find that, contrary to the leverage hypothesis, issuers have higher leverage

than matching nonissuers even after equity issuance.

   We measure book leverage as the sum of debt in current liabilities (item 9) and long-term

debt (item 34) divided by the lagged book value of assets. The denominator of the market

leverage ratio is the market value of the firm, which is the sum of the market value of equity

(December closing price times number of shares outstanding) and the book value of debt

(item 9 plus item 34). Our results are robust to changes in the definition of leverage, such

as classifying preferred equity as debt.

   Table 12 reports that, from 1970 to 2003, both market and book leverage ratios of issuers,

measured at the fiscal yearend following issuance, are usually higher than those of nonissuers.

The median market leverage of issuers is 0.22, slightly higher than the median market leverage

of nonissuers, 0.19. And the Z-statistic from the Wilcoxon equal-distribution test is 16.96.


                                               26
Except for the year 2000, issuers have higher market leverage than nonissuers in all the other

years in the sample, and the difference is mostly significant. The dispersion in book leverage

is even larger. The book leverage of issuers is on average 0.36, while that of nonissuers is

only 0.21 (Z-statistic = 38.89). Issuers have higher book leverage than nonissuers during

every year in the sample, and the Z-statistics are all significant.

       Figure 7 reports the event-time evolution of leverage for issuers and matching nonissuers

for 60 months after issuance. From Panels A and C, although issuing equity lowers somewhat

the leverage ratios of issuers during the first two post-event years, their leverage ratios are still

higher than those of matching nonissuers. The Z-statistics reported in Panels B and D sug-

gest that the differences in leverage ratios are significant throughout the post-event window.

       In untabulated tests, we also conduct Fama-MacBeth (1973) cross-sectional regressions

of future returns onto market and book leverage. In univariate regressions, book leverage

has a monthly average slope of −0.31% (t-statistic = −4.19). And the market leverage has

a average monthly slope of 0.38% (t-statistic = 1.45). When market and book leverage are

used jointly, their slopes are 0.91% (t-statistic = 3.00) and −0.78% (t-statistic = −6.11),

respectively. The pattern that the two leverage ratios are correlated to future returns but

with opposite signs is consistent with Fama and French (1992). But more importantly, the

negative relation between book leverage ratios and future returns is again inconsistent with

the leverage explanation of SEO underperformance.

       Finally, the leverage hypothesis is inconsistent with underperformance following debt

offerings documented by Spiess and Affleck-Graves (1999). According to the leverage hy-

pothesis, issuing debt increases leverage and equity risk, debt issuers should thus outperform

matching nonissuers. But the evidence can be consistent with our investment hypothesis.11
  11
       Eckbo, Masulis, and Norli (2000) also propose the liquidity hypothesis, i.e., issuing equity increases stock


                                                         27
5     Conclusion

We study investment-related sources of long-run underperformance following seasoned equity

offerings. A return factor constructed by buying stocks with the lowest 30% investment-

to-asset ratios and selling stocks with the highest 30% investment-to-asset ratios, while

controlling for size and book-to-market, earns on average 0.37% per month with a highly

significant t-statistic of 4.35. More importantly, adding this investment factor into standard

factor regressions makes the SEO underperformance largely insignificant and reduces its

magnitude by around 40%. The reason is that equity issuers invest much more than matching

nonissuers. In the year preceding issuance, the average investment-to-asset of issuers is 0.09,

40% higher than that of nonissuers, 0.055, the difference being highly significant.

    Our evidence lends support to the investment-based models of SEO underperformance

proposed by Carlson, Fisher, and Giammarino (2005) and Zhang (2005). Cochrane (1991,

1996) and Berk, Green, and Naik (1999) predict a negative relation between real investment

and expected returns. Carlson et al. and Zhang argue that this negative relation can poten-

tially drive the SEO underperformance because the balance-sheet constraint requires that

the uses of funds must add up to the sources of funds. Issuers thus invest more and earn

ex-ante lower rates of return than matching nonissuers.

    We also document new evidence inconsistent with existing explanations based on over-

investment (e.g., Richardson and Sloan (2003)) and leverage (e.g., Eckbo, Masulis, and

Norli (2000)). Inconsistent with the overinvestment theory, the negative investment-return

relation is even stronger among firms with strong shareholder rights, manifested by low
turnover and trading volume, thereby lowering issuers’ liquidity risk and expected returns required to com-
pensate for that risk. Although this explanation is intuitive in the context of IPOs and SEOs, it is not clear
how issuing debt, initiating or omitting dividends, and announcing bank loans should affect stock liquidity.
But the evidence is again potentially consistent with our investment hypothesis, as discussed in Section 2.



                                                     28
Gompers-Ishii-Metrick (2003) governance and Bebchuk-Cohen-Ferrell (2005) entrenchment

indexes. In addition, SEO firms are less vulnerable to overinvestment by empire-building

managers than matching nonissuers with similar size and book-to-market. Inconsistent with

the leverage-based explanation of SEO underperformance, even after equity issuance, SEO

firms have market and book leverage ratios higher than those of matching nonissuers.

   As discussed in Section 2, the investment hypothesis in principle can be applied to other

external financing anomalies including underperformance following IPOs, debt offerings, pri-

vate placements of equity, and loan announcements, as well as overperformance following

dividend initiations, tender offers, and open market share repurchases. The balance-sheet

constraint implies that firms raising capital should invest more and earn lower expected re-

turns, and that firms distributing capital should invest less and earn higher expected returns.

We plan to test these predictions in the future.




                                              29
                                       References

Abel, Andrew B., Avinash K. Dixit, Janice C. Eberly, and Robert S. Pindyck, 1996, Op-
    tions, the value of capital, and investment, Quarterly Journal of Economics 111, 753–
    777.

Anderson, Christopher W., and Luis Garcia-Feijóo, 2005, Empirical evidence on capital
   investment, growth options, and security returns, forthcoming, Journal of Finance.

Ball, Ray, and S.P. Kothari, 1989, Nonstationary expected returns: Implications for tests
     of market efficiency and serial correlation in returns, Journal of Financial Economics
     25, 51–74.

Barber, Brad M., and John D. Lyon, 1997, Detecting long-run abnormal sock returns: The
    empirical power and specification of test statistics, Journal of Financial Economics 43,
    341–372.

Barberis, Nicholas, Ming Huang, and Tano Santos, 2001, Prospect theory and asset prices,
    Quarterly Journal of Economics 116, 1–53.

Bebchuk, Lucian and Alma Cohen, 2005, The costs of entrenched boards, Journal of Fi-
    nancial Economics 78, 409–433.

Bebchuk, Lucian, Alma Cohen, and Allen Ferrell, 2005, What matters in corporate gover-
    nance? working paper, Harvard Law School.

Berk, Jonathan B, Richard C. Green, and Vasant Naik, 1999, Optimal investment, growth
    options, and security returns, Journal of Finance 54, 1153–1607.

Billett, Matthew T., Mark J. Flannery, and Jon A. Garfinkel, 2005, The long-run perfor-
     mance of firms following loan announcements, working paper, University of Iowa and
     University of Florida.

Brav, Alon and Paul A. Gompers, 1997, Myth or reality? The long-run underperformance
    of initial public offerings: evidence from venture and nonventure capital-backed com-
    panies, Journal of Finance 52, 1791–1812.

Brav, Alon, Christopher Geczy and Paul A. Gompers, 2000, Is the abnormal return follow-
    ing equity issuances anomalous?, Journal of Financial Economics 56, 209–249.

Brealey, Richard A., Stewart C. Myers, and Franklin Allen, 2006, Principles of corporate
    finance, 8th edition, Irwin McGraw-Hill.

Butler, Alexander W., Gustavo Grullon and James P. Weston, 2005, Can managers forecast
    aggregate market returns?, Journal of Finance 60, 963–986.

Carhart, Mark M., 1997, On persistence in mutual funds performance, Journal of Finance
    52, 57–82.


                                            30
Carlson, Murray, Adlai Fisher, and Ron Giammarino, 2004, Corporate investment and asset
    price dynamics: Implications for the cross section of returns, Journal of Finance 59,
    2577–2603.

Carlson, Murray, Adlai Fisher, and Ron Giammarino, 2005, Corporate investment and
    asset price dynamics: Implications for SEO event studies and long-run performance,
    forthcoming, Journal of Finance.

Chambers, Dennis, Ross Jennings, and Robert B. Thompson II, 2002, Excess returns to
   R&D intensive firms, Review of Accounting Studies 7, 133–158.

Chan, Louis K. C., Joseph Lakonishok, and Theodore Sougiannis, 2001, The stock market
   valuation of research and development expenditures, Journal of Finance 56, 2431–2456.

Chu, Yangchun, 2005, R&D, capital investment, and stock returns, working paper, Univer-
    sity of Rochester.

Cochrane, John H., 1991, Production-based asset pricing and the link between stock returns
    and economic fluctuations, Journal of Finance 46, 209–237.

Cochrane, John H., 1996, A cross-sectional test of an investment-based asset pricing model,
    Journal of Political Economy 104, 572–621.

Core, John E., Wayne R. Guay, and Tjomme O. Rusticus, 2005, Does weak governance
    cause weak stock returns? An examination of firm operating performance and investors’
    expectations, forthcoming, Journal of Finance.

Eberhart, Allan C. and Akhtar Siddique, 2002, The long-term performance of corporate
    bonds (and stocks) following seasoned equity offerings, Review of Financial Studies 15,
    1385–1406.

Eckbo, B. Espen, Ronald W. Masulis and Øyvind Norli, 2000, Seasoned public offerings:
    Resolution of the “new issues puzzle,” Journal of Financial Economics 56, 251–291.

Fama, Eugene F., 1998, Market efficiency, long-term returns, and behavioral finance, Jour-
   nal of Financial Economics 49, 283–306.

Fama, Eugene F. and Kenneth R. French, 1992, The cross-section of expected stock returns,
   Journal of Finance 47, 427–466.

Fama, Eugene F. and Kenneth R. French, 1993, Common risk factors in the returns on
   stocks and bonds, Journal of Financial Economics 33, 3–56.

Fama, Eugene and James MacBeth, 1973, Risk, return, and equilibrium: empirical tests,
   Journal of Political Economy 81, 607–636.

Gompers, Paul A., Joy L. Ishii, and Andrew Metrick, 2003, Corporate governance and
   equity prices, Quarterly Journal of Economics 118, 107–155.



                                           31
Hertzel, Michael, Michael Lemmon, James Linck, and Lynn Rees, 2002, Long-run perfor-
    mance following private placements of equity, Journal of Finance 57, 2595-2617.

Ikenberry, David, Josef Lakonishok, and Theo Vermaelen, 1995, Market underreaction to
    open market share repurchases, Journal of Financial Economics 39, 181–208.

Kang, Jun-Koo, Yong-Cheol Kim, and René M. Stulz, 1999, The underreaction hypothesis
   and the new issues puzzle: evidence from Japan, Review of Financial Studies 12, 519–
   534.

Kothari, S. P., and Jerold B. Warner, 1997, Measuring long-horizon security price perfor-
    mance, Journal of Financial Economics 43, 301–339.

Li, Qing, Maria Vassalou, and Yuhang Xing, 2004, Sector investment growth rates and the
     cross-section of equity returns, forthcoming, Journal of Business.

Lakonishok, Josef, and Theo Vermaelen, 1990, Anomalous price behavior around repurchase
    tender offers, Journal of Finance 45, 455–477.

Loughran, Tim and Jay R. Ritter, 1995, The new issues puzzle, Journal of Finance 50,
    23–51.

Loughran, Tim, and Jay R. Ritter, 1997, The operating performance of firms conducting
    seasoned equity offerings, Journal of Finance 52, 1823–1850.

Loughran, Tim, and Jay R. Ritter, 2000, Uniformly least powerful tests of market efficiency,
    Journal of Finance 55, 361–389.

Michaely, Roni, Richard H. Thaler, and Kent L. Womack, 1995, Price reactions to dividend
    initiations and omissions: overreaction or drift? Journal of Finance 50, 573–608.

Mitchell, Mark L. and Erik Stafford, 2000, Managerial decisions and long-term stock price
    performance, Journal of Business 73, 287–320.

Petkova, Ralitsa, and Lu Zhang, 2005, Is value riskier than growth? Journal of Financial
    Economics 78, 187–202.

Polk, Christopher, and Paola Sapienza, 2005, The real effects of investor sentiment, working
    paper, Northwestern University.

Richardson, Scott A., and Richard G. Sloan, 2003, External financing, capital investment,
    and future stock returns, working paper, The Wharton School, University of Pennsyl-
    vania.

Ritter, Jay R., 1991, The long-run performance of initial public offerings, Journal of Finance
    46, 3–27.

Ritter, Jay R., 2003, Investment banking and securities issuance, in George Constantinides,
    Milton Harris, and René Stulz, eds.: Handbook of the Economics of Finance (North-
    Holland, Amsterdam).

                                             32
Schultz, Paul, 2003, Pseudo market timing and the long-run underperformance of IPOs,
    Journal of Finance 58, 483–517.

Spiess, Katherine D., and John Affleck-Graves, 1995, Underperformance in long-run stock
    returns following seasoned equity offerings, Journal of Financial Economics 38, 243–
    267.

Spiess, Katherine D., and John Affleck-Graves, 1999, The long run performance of stock
    returns following debt offerings, Journal of Financial Economics 54, 45–73.

Titman, Sheridan, K.C. John Wei, and Feixue Xie, 2004, Capital investments and stock
    returns, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 39, 677–700.

Viswanathan, S., and Bin Wei, 2004, Endogenous events and long run returns, working
    paper, Duke University.

White, Halbert L., Jr., 1980, A heteroscedasticity-consistent covariance matrix estimator
   and a direct test for heteroscedasticity, Econometrica 48, 817–838.

Xing, Yuhang, 2005, Interpreting the value effect through the Q-theory: an empirical in-
    vestigation, working paper, Rice University.

Zhang, Lu, 2005, Anomalies, NBER working paper 11322.




                                          33
                    Table 1 : The Number of Seasoned Equity Offerings

This table reports the total number of SEOs sample in SDC by year (column 1), the number of SEOs that
can be matched with CRSP by NCUSIP (column 2), by CUSIP (column 3), the number of SEO firms on
NYSE (column 4), AMEX (column 5), and NASDAQ (column 6), the number of primary offerings (column
7), mixed offerings (column 8), the number of SEOs by non-utilities (column 9), non-financials (column 10),
the number of SEOs by U.S. firms with common stocks on NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ with return data
at some point during post-SEO period (column 11), and the number of firms from column 11 with valid
market size, book-to-market, and investment data (column 12).


            1       2     3    4    5    6    7                    8       9       10       11      12
 Year      All NCUSIP CUSIP NYSE AMEX NASD Prim                  Mix Non-Util Non-Fin       US SEO-Inv
 1970      92        91      55      66      26       0     54    38        58        88     72        62
 1971     232       230     138     142      90       0     94   138       177       209    164       138
 1972     218       217     141     135      69      14     87   131       164       200    165       144
 1973     140       139      68      85       3      51     92    48        76       129    101        85
 1974      82        81      33      62       2      17     65    17        30        81     68        63
 1975     178       178      87     136       5      37    130    48        78       174    135       129
 1976     190       187     112     123      17      50    130    60       101       183    150       137
 1977     134       133      71      87       7      40     94    40        63       131    100        98
 1978     179       178     101     104      14      61    127    52       105       166    143       128
 1979     160       159      96      84      19      56    117    43        92       155    118       109
 1980     319       317     208     158      41     120    227    92       229       308    244       223
 1981     337       336     212     168      32     136    231   106       253       309    258       208
 1982     361       360     232     235      27      99    194   167       267       328    279       234
 1983     661       657     505     296      80     285    348   313       587       591    510       436
 1984     202       201     139      92      18      92    118    84       172       155    140       106
 1985     323       322     243      99      38     186    189   134       297       231    217       147
 1986     414       413     300     106      48     260    248   166       390       275    278       195
 1987     236       234     185      89      31     116    157    79       224       183    168       111
 1988     114       111      92      39      20      55     70    44       101        90     88        64
 1989     193       191     146      50      29     114    116    77       172       152    153       111
 1990     148       148     114      54      21      73     82    66       135       122    117        86
 1991     416       410     323     154      43     219    260   156       384       349    339       244
 1992     421       420     334     173      49     199    261   160       387       316    330       216
 1993     622       618     495     241      45     334    362   260       577       455    469       309
 1994     389       387     327     176      23     189    224   165       372       299    263       190
 1995     538       535     444     188      22     328    277   261       517       428    394       275
 1996     674       671     552     246      27     401    337   337       660       527    493       335
 1997     655       651     557     272      36     346    362   293       642       459    436       299
 1998     498       496     435     252      25     221    301   197       477       319    312       215
 1999     403       402     364     126      11     265    191   212       396       356    319       201
 2000     355       355     328      87      10     258    176   179       344       332    306       208
 2001     374       374     361     194      20     160    220   154       355       246    249       197
 2002     385       385     370     225      13     147    267   118       356       275    255       194
 2003     449       449     442     252      19     178    314   135       423       308    293       225
 All    11,092   11,036   8,610   4,996     980   5,107 6,522 4,570       9,661    8,929 8,126      6,122




                                                    34
     Table 2 : Calendar-Time Factor Regressions of SEO portfolio Excess Returns
                          (January 1970 to December 2003)

This table reports calendar-time factor regressions of SEO portfolio excess returns. The portfolios consist of
firms that have conducted SEOs during 36 months (Panel A) and 60 months (Panel B) prior to the month
of portfolio formation. We use two factor models, the CAPM and the Fama and French (1993) three-factor
model. We obtain the factor returns, MKT, SMB, and HML from Kenneth French’s website. The t-statistics
reported in parentheses are computed using White (1980) heteroscedasticity-consistent standard errors.


                                          Panel A: Prior 36-month SEO portfolios
                         Equally-weighted returns                            Value-weighted returns
                       CAPM             Fama-French                       CAPM             Fama-French
     α                 −0.279                 −0.291                      −0.356                 −0.280
                      (−1.91)                (−2.89)                     (−3.56)                (−2.92)
     MKT                 1.282                  1.131                       1.124                  1.084
                       (33.96)                (33.90)                     (36.23)                (35.86)
     SMB                                        0.714                                              0.015
                                              (13.64)                                             (0.36)
     HML                                      −0.049                                             −0.121
                                             (−0.92)                                            (−2.08)
     Adj-R2              0.799                  0.921                      0.885                  0.888
                                           Panel B: Prior 60-month SEO portfolios
                         Equally-weighted returns                            Value-weighted returns
                       CAPM             Fama-French                       CAPM             Fama-French
     α                 −0.114                 −0.208                      −0.249                 −0.205
                      (−0.79)                (−2.29)                     (−2.84)                (−2.56)
     MKT                 1.259                  1.134                       1.116                  1.090
                       (32.60)                (36.43)                     (30.19)                (46.24)
     SMB                                        0.776                                              0.023
                                              (16.98)                                             (0.69)
     HML                                        0.076                                            −0.071
                                               (1.65)                                           (−1.46)
     Adj-R2              0.792                  0.932                      0.915                  0.917




                                                     35
 Table 3 : Calendar-Time Factor Regressions of SEO Portfolio Excess Returns onto
the Eckbo-Masulis-Norli (2000) Six-Factor Model (January 1970 to December 2002)

This table reports calendar-time factor regressions of portfolios consisting of firms that have conducted SEOs
during 36 months (Panel A) and 60 months (Panel B) prior to the month of portfolio formation. The model
of normal returns is the Eckbo-Masulis-Norli (2000) six-factor model. The sample period is from January
1970 to December 2002 because the data of the six factors from Øyvind Norli end at December 2002. The
factors are as follows. RM is the excess return on the CRSP value-weighted market index. 4RPC is a
factor mimicking portfolio for the percent change in the real per capita consumption of nondurable goods.
BAA−AAA is a factor mimicking portfolio for the difference in the monthly yield changes on bonds rated
BAA and AAA by Moody’s. UI is a factor mimicking portfolio for unanticipated inflation generated from
a model of expected inflation involving a regression of real returns (returns on 30-day Treasury bills less
inflation) on a 12 of its lagged values and a constant. 20y−1y is the return difference between Treasury
bonds with 20 years to maturity and Treasury bonds with one year to maturity. TBILLspr is the return
difference between 90-day and 30-day Treasury bills. The t-statistics reported in parentheses are computed
using White (1980) heteroscedasticity-consistent standard errors.


                        Panel A: Prior 36-month SEOs                    Panel B: Prior 60-month SEOs
                     Equally-weighted       Value-weighted           Equally-weighted      Value-weighted
  α                             −0.515              −0.359                      −0.413              −0.263
                               (−3.22)             (−3.38)                     (−2.68)             (−3.00)
  RM                              1.297               1.112                       1.271               1.105
                                (35.08)             (37.60)                     (36.26)             (46.00)
  4RPC                            1.121               0.261                       1.296               0.147
                                 (3.17)              (1.47)                      (3.42)              (0.97)
  BAA−AAA                       −0.062                0.451                     −0.193                0.411
                               (−0.18)               (2.60)                    (−0.61)               (2.82)
  UI                              5.195             −3.572                        7.949             −3.100
                                 (2.45)            (−2.96)                       (3.95)            (−3.15)
  (20y−1y)/100                  −0.201              −0.029                      −0.185              −0.028
                               (−3.23)             (−0.68)                     (−3.03)             (−0.81)
  TBillSpr/100                    2.815               1.517                       2.756               1.368
                                 (1.87)              (1.58)                      (1.85)              (1.80)
  Adj-R2                          0.814               0.896                      0.820               0.923




                                                     36
 Table 4 : Explaining the Investment Factor with the CAPM and the Fama-French
    (1993) Three-Factor Model (January 1970 to December 2003) and with the
  Eckbo-Masulis-Norli (2000) Six-Factor Model (January 1970 to December 2002)

This table reports calendar-time factor regressions of the investment factor using the CAPM, the Fama-
French (1993) three-factor model, and the Eckbo-Masulis-Norli (2000) six-factor model. We construct the
investment factor from a triple sort on size, book-to-market, and investment-to-asset ratio. Investment-to-
asset ratio is measured as the annual change in gross property, plant and equipment (Compustat annual
item 7) divided by the lagged book value of assets (item 6). In June of each year, we sort all stocks in
ascending order independently on size, book-to-market, and investment-to-asset ratio into three groups, the
top 30%, the medium 40%, and the bottom 30%. The investment factor is defined as the average low-
investment portfolio minus the average high-investment portfolio. The factor returns, MKT, SMB, and
HML are obtained from Kenneth French’s website. The EMN six factors are from Øyvind Norli and are as
follows. RM is the excess return on the CRSP value-weighted market index. 4RPC is a factor mimicking
portfolio for the percent change in the real per capita consumption of nondurable goods. BAA−AAA is a
factor mimicking portfolio for the difference in the monthly yield changes on bonds rated BAA and AAA by
Moody’s. UI is a factor mimicking portfolio for unanticipated inflation generated from a model of expected
inflation involving a regression of real returns (returns on 30-day Treasury bills less inflation) on a constant
and 12 of its lagged values. 20y−1y is the return difference between Treasury bonds with 20 years to
maturity and Treasury bonds with one year to maturity. TBILLspr is the return difference between 90-
day and 30-day Treasury bills. The t-statistics reported in parentheses are computed using White (1980)
heteroscedasticity-consistent standard errors.


                          CAPM               Fama-French                                           EMN
      α                     0.397                     0.268           α                             0.282
                           (4.88)                    (3.33)                                        (3.06)
      MKT                  −0.040                     0.006           RM                          −0.054
                          (−2.09)                    (0.34)                                      (−2.88)
      SMB                                             0.076           4RPC                          0.035
                                                     (2.75)                                        (0.18)
      HML                                             0.198           BAA−AAA                     −0.114
                                                     (6.75)                                      (−0.87)
                                                                      (20y−1y)/100                  0.119
                                                                                                   (3.57)
                                                                      TBillSpr/100                  1.154
                                                                                                   (1.36)
      Adj-R2                0.011                    0.124                                         0.089




                                                      37
Table 5 : Calendar-Time Factor Regressions Augmented with the Investment Factor
                        (January 1970 to December 2003)

This table reports calendar-time factor regressions of excess returns of portfolios consisting of firms that
have conducted SEOs during 36 months (Panel A) and 60 months (Panel B) prior to the month of portfolio
formation. We augment the CAPM and the Fama and French (1993) three-factor model with the investment
factor, denoted INV. We obtain the factor returns MKT, SMB, and HML from Kenneth French’s website.
We construct INV from a triple sort on size, book-to-market, and investment-to-asset ratio. Specifically,
investment-to-asset ratio is measured as the annual change in gross property, plant and equipment (Com-
pustat annual item 7) divided by the lagged book value of assets (item 6). In June of each year, we sort
all stocks in ascending order independently on size, book-to-market, and investment-to-asset ratio into three
groups, the top 30%, the medium 40%, and the bottom 30%. The investment factor is defined as the average
low-investment portfolio minus the average high-investment portfolio. The t-statistics reported in parenthe-
ses are computed using White (1980) heteroscedasticity-consistent standard errors. |4α|/|α| denotes the
reduction of alphas from using the investment factor as an additional explanatory variable divided by the
magnitudes of the alphas from the CAPM and the Fama-French three-factor model reported in Table 2.


                                           Panel A: Prior 36-month SEO portfolios
                         Equally-weighted returns                            Value-weighted returns
                        CAPM            Fama-French                       CAPM            Fama-French
    α                   −0.151                 −0.166                     −0.195                −0.177
                       (−0.94)                (−1.62)                    (−2.12)                 (1.90)
    MKT                   1.270                  1.134                      1.108                  1.087
                        (34.21)                (36.94)                    (40.64)                (38.12)
    SMB                                          0.749                                             0.044
                                               (15.04)                                            (1.19)
    HML                                          0.043                                           −0.044
                                                (0.90)                                          (−0.82)
    INV                 −0.323                 −0.465                     −0.405                 −0.388
                       (−2.51)                (−5.84)                    (−5.36)                (−5.91)
    |4α|/|α|             0.459                  0.430                      0.452                  0.368
            2
    Adj-R                0.804                  0.931                      0.898                  0.899
                                           Panel B: Prior 60-month SEO portfolios
                         Equally-weighted returns                            Value-weighted returns
                        CAPM            Fama-French                       CAPM            Fama-French
    α                   −0.066                 −0.122                     −0.137                 −0.131
                       (−0.41)                (−1.27)                    (−1.46)                (−1.65)
    MKT                   1.254                  1.136                      1.105                  1.092
                        (32.48)                (38.37)                    (48.92)                (48.68)
    SMB                                          0.800                                             0.044
                                               (18.08)                                            (1.43)
    HML                                          0.140                                           −0.016
                                                (3.17)                                          (−0.35)
    INV                 −0.120                 −0.322                     −0.280                 −0.278
                       (−0.96)                (−4.25)                    (−4.30)                (−4.85)
    |4α|/|α|             0.421                  0.414                      0.450                  0.361
            2
    Adj-R                0.792                  0.937                      0.922                  0.923

                                                     38
        Table 6 : Calendar-Time Factor Regressions of SEO Portfolios onto Issuer-Purged Fama-French Factors and the
                         Purged and Unpurged Investment Factors (January 1975 to December 2003)

     This table reports calendar-time factor regressions with and without the investment factor (both purged and unpurged of SEO firms). The dependent
     variables are equally-weighted and value-weighted portfolio excess returns of firms that have conducted SEOs during 36 months (Panel A) and during
     60 months (Panel B) prior to the month of portfolio formation. The size and book-to-market factors used in the regressions, denoted pSMB and pHML
     respectively, are purged of firms that have issued new equity within the previous five years. The data of pSMB and pHML are from Jay Ritter. The
     issuer-purged investment factor, denoted pINV, is also purged of firms that have issued new equity within the previous 60 months. The sample starts
     at January 1975 because we purge firms with prior 60-month SEOs. We also report factor regressions with pSMB, pHML, and unpurged investment
     factor, denoted INV. We construct pINV and INV by triple sorting on size, book-to-market, and investment-to-asset. Specifically, investment-to-asset
     is measured as the annual change in gross property, plant and equipment (Compustat annual item 7) divided by the lagged book value of assets (item
     6). In June of each year, we sort all stocks in ascending order independently on size, book-to-market, and investment-to-asset ratio into three groups,
     the top 30%, the medium 40%, and the bottom 30%. The investment factor is defined as the average low-investment portfolio minus the average
     high-investment portfolio. The t-statistics reported in parentheses are computed using White (1980) heteroscedasticity-consistent standard errors.
     |4α|/|α| denotes the reduction of alphas from adding the investment factor (purged and unpurged) divided by the magnitudes of the alphas from the
     purged Fama-French (1993) factor regressions.
39




                               Panel A: Prior 36-month SEO portfolio                                 Panel B: Prior 60-month SEO portfolio
                         Equally-weighted                   Value-weighted                      Equally-weighted                  Value-weighted
       α            −0.393     −0.253     −0.201      −0.334     −0.256     −0.190         −0.276     −0.174     −0.137     −0.230     −0.178     −0.126
                   (−3.28)    (−2.11)    (−1.74)     (−2.85)    (−2.26)    (−1.74)        (−2.50)    (−1.50)    (−1.21)    (−2.39)    (−1.89)    (−1.38)
       MKT            1.183      1.173      1.180       1.095      1.089      1.092         1.181       1.173     1.178       1.097      1.093       1.095
                    (30.53)    (31.96)    (34.70)     (30.30)    (31.10)    (32.85)       (31.27)     (31.96)   (33.61)     (38.56)    (39.46)     (41.17)
       pSMB           0.790      0.818      0.837       0.049      0.065      0.085         0.856       0.876     0.890       0.570      0.067       0.082
                    (14.49)    (16.17)    (17.67)      (0.99)     (1.35)     (1.92)       (16.57)     (17.84)   (18.98)      (1.40)     (1.71)      (2.23)
       pHML         −0.140     −0.038     −0.017      −0.113     −0.057     −0.021          0.003       0.077     0.092     −0.062     −0.024        0.004
                   (−1.99)    (−0.61)    (−0.29)     (−1.61)    (−0.85)    (−0.34)         (0.05)      (1.32)    (1.59)    (−1.07)    (−0.44)       (0.08)
       pINV                    −0.482                            −0.267                               −0.349                           −0.179
                              (−5.54)                           (−3.27)                              (−4.24)                          (−2.53)
       INV                                −0.624                            −0.467                               −0.451                           −0.337
                                         (−7.72)                           (−6.47)                              (−5.77)                          (−5.39)
       |4α|/|α|                  0.356      0.489                 0.234      0.431                     0.370       0.504                 0.226      0.452
       Adj-R2         0.909      0.923      0.930      0.873      0.878      0.890          0.919      0.926       0.930      0.908      0.911      0.917
Table 7 : Event-Time Factor Regressions, Equally-Weighted SEO Portfolios (January
                             1970 to December 2003)

This table reports event-time factor regressions of equally-weighted portfolios consisting of SEO firms for
three years after the event. Panel A uses factor models including the CAPM and the Fama and French
(1993) three-factor model. We obtain the factor returns MKT, SMB, and HML from Kenneth French’s
website. Panel B augments the factor models in Panel A with the investment factor, INV. We construct
INV from a triple sort on size, book-to-market, and investment-to-asset ratio. Specifically, investment-to-
asset is measured as the annual change in gross property, plant and equipment (Compustat annual item 7)
divided by the lagged book value of assets (item 6). In June of each year, we sort all stocks in ascending
order independently on size, book-to-market, and investment-to-asset ratio into three groups, the top 30%,
the medium 40%, and the bottom 30%. The investment factor is defined as the average low-investment
portfolio minus the average high-investment portfolio. The t-statistics reported in parentheses are computed
using White (1980) heteroscedasticity-consistent standard errors. |4α|/|α| reported in Panel B denotes the
reduction of alphas from using the investment factor as an additional explanatory variable divided by the
magnitudes of the corresponding alphas without using the investment factor reported in Panel A. We do not
report this ratio when the alpha after adding the investment factor becomes positive.


                         Year 1                             Year 2                            Year 3
               CAPM        Fama-French            CAPM        Fama-French          CAPM         Fama-French
                                  Panel A: Factor regressions without the investment factor
 α             −0.150              −0.057          −0.631             −0.653       −0.023               −0.220
              (−0.96)             (−0.54)         (−3.77)            (−4.65)      (−0.12)              (−1.46)
 MKT             1.280               1.086          1.285               1.140        1.233               1.150
               (32.32)             (35.65)        (30.72)             (28.54)      (23.72)             (24.97)
 SMB                                 0.679                              0.679                            0.817
                                   (14.04)                             (8.42)                          (11.61)
 HML                               −0.211                             −0.064                             0.198
                                  (−3.66)                            (−0.89)                            (2.74)
 Adj-R2          0.784               0.909          0.755              0.860         0.694               0.835
                                   Panel B: Factor regressions with the investment factor
 α             −0.037                0.027         −0.455             −0.494         0.085              −0.067
              (−0.24)               (0.26)        (−2.48)            (−3.44)        (0.40)             (−0.42)
 MKT             1.269               1.088          1.270               1.148        1.222                1.156
               (33.04)             (36.93)        (31.62)             (31.06)      (23.72)              (26.88)
 SMB                                 0.703                              0.727                             0.863
                                   (15.27)                             (9.19)                           (12.88)
 HML                               −0.149                               0.059                             0.315
                                  (−2.63)                              (0.91)                            (4.76)
 INV           −0.283              −0.314          −0.454             −0.612       −0.275               −0.590
              (−2.52)             (−4.11)         (−2.85)            (−5.30)      (−1.56)              (−4.57)
 |4α|/|α|        0.753                −             0.279              0.244          −                  0.696
         2
 Adj-R           0.788               0.914          0.766              0.878         0.697               0.852




                                                      40
 Table 8 : Event-Time Factor Regressions, Value-Weighted SEO Portfolios (January
                             1970 to December 2003)

This table reports event-time factor regressions of value-weighted portfolios consisting of SEO firms for three
years after the event. Panel A uses factor models including the CAPM and the Fama and French (1993) three-
factor model. We obtain the factor returns MKT, SMB, and HML from Kenneth French’s website. Panel
B augments the factor models in Panel A with the investment factor, INV. We construct INV from a triple
sort on size, book-to-market, and investment-to-asset ratio. Specifically, investment-to-asset is measured as
the annual change in gross property, plant and equipment (Compustat annual item 7) divided by the lagged
book value of assets (item 6). In June of each year, we sort all stocks in ascending order independently
on size, book-to-market, and investment-to-asset ratio into three groups, the top 30%, the medium 40%,
and the bottom 30%. The investment factor is defined as the average low-investment portfolio minus the
average high-investment portfolio. The t-statistics reported in parentheses are computed using White (1980)
heteroscedasticity-consistent standard errors. |4α|/|α| reported in Panel B denotes the reduction of alphas
from using the investment factor as an additional explanatory variable divided by the magnitudes of the
corresponding alphas without using the investment factor reported in Panel A.


                         Year 1                             Year 2                            Year 3
               CAPM        Fama-French            CAPM        Fama-French           CAPM        Fama-French
                                  Panel A: Factor regressions without the investment factor
  α             −0.298             −0.240          −0.602             −0.500        −0.141              −0.185
               (−2.52)            (−2.07)         (−4.30)            (−3.57)       (−1.09)             (−1.36)
  MKT            1.099               1.055          1.141               1.084         1.127              1.151
               (31.30)             (28.66)        (26.56)             (26.03)       (32.91)            (29.26)
  SMB                                0.072                              0.021                          −0.011
                                    (1.43)                             (0.33)                          (-0.19)
  HML                              −0.098                             −0.171                             0.070
                                  (−1.38)                            (−2.03)                            (1.17)
  Adj-R2         0.831               0.835          0.796              0.802         0.812               0.812
                                   Panel B: Factor regressions with the investment factor
  α             −0.150             −0.140          −0.414             −0.384        −0.074              −0.124
               (−1.34)            (−1.22)         (−2.97)            (−2.70)       (−0.56)             (−0.90)
  MKT            1.084               1.058          1.125               1.090         1.120               1.154
               (33.36)             (30.06)        (29.17)             (27.10)       (33.76)             (29.43)
  SMB                                0.100                              0.056                             0.008
                                    (2.14)                             (0.91)                            (0.15)
  HML                              −0.024                             −0.081                              0.117
                                  (−0.36)                            (−1.03)                             (1.91)
  INV           −0.372             −0.375          −0.483             −0.448        −0.171              −0.234
               (−4.29)            (−4.89)         (−3.98)            (−4.04)       (−1.73)             (−2.34)
  |4α|/|α|       0.497               0.417          0.312              0.232         0.475               0.330
  Adj-R2         0.842               0.845          0.813              0.815         0.814               0.816




                                                      41
        Table 9 : Equity Issuers and Matching Nonissuers’ Investment-to-Asset and
                       Profitability in Calendar Time (1970 to 2003)
This table reports equity issuers and matching nonissuers’ investment-to-asset ratios and profitability in
calendar time from 1970 to 2003. We report the median values of these two characteristics for the issuers and
matching nonissuer portfolios in the fiscal yearend prior to SEO. We also report the Z-statistics associated
with the Wilcoxon test for differences in distributions. The null hypothesis is that the characteristics of
issuers and nonissuers are both drawn from the same distribution. We measure profitability as net income
before extraordinary items (Compustat item 18) divided by lagged book value of assets (item 6). We measure
investment-to-asset as the change in gross property, plant, and equipment (item 7) divided by book assets.


 Year                  Panel A: Investment-to-asset                        Panel B: Profitability
                                      non-                                            non-
                     issuers       issuers            Z              issuers       issuers             Z
 1970                 0.130         0.086         4.71                 0.138         0.136           2.14
 1971                 0.111         0.074         5.39                 0.158         0.142           2.78
 1972                 0.097         0.053         7.54                 0.134         0.126           2.84
 1973                 0.131         0.047         7.65                 0.137         0.112           3.33
 1974                 0.140         0.054         6.27                 0.139         0.122           2.97
 1975                 0.124         0.062         8.03                 0.140         0.145           1.20
 1976                 0.100         0.056         7.63                 0.133         0.146           1.18
 1977                 0.107         0.049         7.06                 0.129         0.129           1.00
 1978                 0.116         0.052         8.14                 0.153         0.146           2.52
 1979                 0.139         0.063         7.78                 0.144         0.142           0.63
 1980                 0.131         0.071         9.08                 0.158         0.181           1.62
 1981                 0.123         0.068         8.62                 0.143         0.167           0.45
 1982                 0.103         0.072         5.71                 0.144         0.147           2.84
 1983                 0.078         0.066         5.40                 0.136         0.135           1.90
 1984                 0.079         0.052         4.28                 0.129         0.103           2.35
 1985                 0.109         0.071         6.72                 0.172         0.117           5.22
 1986                 0.081         0.060         4.61                 0.154         0.104           4.10
 1987                 0.089         0.057         3.88                 0.119         0.087           0.10
 1988                 0.089         0.054         3.81                 0.130         0.088           2.13
 1989                 0.103         0.050         6.10                 0.126         0.088           3.26
 1990                 0.078         0.050         3.29                 0.130         0.096           1.31
 1991                 0.084         0.050         5.88                 0.112         0.106          −0.35
 1992                 0.069         0.042         5.09                 0.093         0.089           0.63
 1993                 0.058         0.043         6.16                 0.102         0.090           1.57
 1994                 0.059         0.047         4.46                 0.103         0.107          −1.04
 1995                 0.078         0.054         6.29                 0.118         0.110          −0.43
 1996                 0.074         0.055         5.65                 0.094         0.105          −2.04
 1997                 0.106         0.061         7.82                 0.132         0.121           0.74
 1998                 0.077         0.057         5.11                 0.117         0.109          −0.09
 1999                 0.104         0.052         6.96                 0.110         0.139          −2.49
 2000                 0.105         0.054         7.29                 0.066         0.130          −3.37
 2001                 0.058         0.055         3.72                 0.102         0.139          −2.37
 2002                 0.062         0.042         5.13                 0.110         0.093           2.32
 2003                 0.027         0.024         3.76                 0.047         0.059          −3.18
  All                 0.090         0.054        36.09                 0.129         0.128           1.96



                                                      42
Table 10 : Cross-Sectional Tests of the Over-Investment Hypothesis by Splitting the
Sample Based on the Gompers-Ishii-Metrick (2003) Governance Index (January 1990
 to December 2003) and on the Bebchuk-Cohen-Ferrell (2005) Entrenchment Index
                         (January 1991 to December 2003)
This table reports cross-sectional regression tests of the over-investment hypothesis performed by splitting
the sample based on the Gompers-Ishii-Metrick (2003) corporate governance (G) index (Panels A and B)
and on the Bebchuk-Cohen-Ferrell (2005) entrenchment (E) index (Panels C and D). Panels A and B are
based on the intersection of our sample and that used by Gompers et al. that goes from 1990 to 2003. We
split the joint sample into two: the sample with strong shareholder rights contains firms with governance
index values less than or equal to nine (G ≤ 9) and the sample with weak shareholder rights contains firms
with governance index values greater than or equal to ten (G ≥ 10). Panels A and B report Fama-MacBeth
(1973) cross-sectional regressions of returns onto size, book-to-market, and investment-to-asset ratios in the
samples with G ≤ 9 and G ≥ 10, respectively. Panels C and D are based on the intersection of our sample and
that used by Bebchuk et al. that goes from 1991 to 2003. We split the joint sample into two subsamples: the
low-entrenchment sample contains firms with entrenchment index values less than or equal to two (E ≤ 2)
and the high-entrenchment sample contains firms with entrenchment index values greater than or equal to
three (E ≥ 3). Panels C and D report Fama-MacBeth (1973) cross-sectional regressions of returns onto size,
book-to-market, and investment-to-asset ratios in the low-entrenchment and high-entrenchment samples,
respectively.


     Panel A: Strong shareholder rights (G ≤ 9)              Panel B: Weak shareholder rights (G ≥ 10)
  log(ME)     log(BE/ME)       investment-to-asset        log(ME)     log(BE/ME)       investment-to-asset

                                     −1.308                                                  −0.789
                                     (−3.03)                                                 (−2.83)
  −0.180         −0.059              −0.941                −0.129        −0.035              −0.443
  (−1.90)        (−0.35)             (−2.41)               (−1.52)       (−0.26)             (−1.56)
        Panel C: Low entrenchment (E ≤ 2)                       Panel D: High entrenchment (E ≥ 3)
  log(ME)     log(BE/ME)       investment-to-asset        log(ME)     log(BE/ME)       investment-to-asset
                                     −0.907                                                  −0.729
                                     (−2.32)                                                 (−1.86)
  −0.188         −0.153              −0.597                −0.154         0.116              −0.202
  (−1.96)        (−0.85)             (−1.73)               (−1.68)        (0.83)             (−0.55)




                                                     43
 Table 11 : SEOs and Matching Firms’ Corporate Governance Index (1990 to 2003)
             and Entrenchment Index (1991 to 2003) in Calendar Time
Panels A and B of this table report issuers’ and matching nonissuers’ median and mean Governance indexes
based on Gompers, Ishii, and Metrick (2003) in calendar time from 1990 to 2003. Gompers et al. obtain
firm-level corporate governance provisions from the Investor Responsibility Research Center (IRRC). The
index counts the number of unique provisions each firm, and it ranges from 1 to 24. We intersect the sample
used by Gompers et al. with our sample based on size, book-to-market, and investment-to-asset ratio. Panels
C and D of this table report issuers’ and matching nonissuers’ median and mean entrenchment indexes based
on Bebchuk, Cohen, and Ferrell (2005) in calendar time from 1991 to 2003. Bebchuk et al. construct their
index based on six out of 24 provisions from the IRRC. The six provisions include staggered boards, limits
to shareholder bylaw amendments, supermajority requirements for mergers, supermajority requirements for
charter amendments, poison pills, and golden parachutes. The entrenchment index counts the number of
unique provisions each firm has in the sample, and it ranges from 0 to 6. We intersect the sample used by
Bebchuk et al. with our sample based on size, book-to-market, and investment-to-asset. In Panels A and C
we also report Z-statistics from the Wilcoxon matched-pairs signed-rank test for differences in distributions.
The null hypothesis is that the characteristics of issuers and nonissuers are both drawn from the same
distribution. In Panels B and D we report t-statistics for the differences in means.


                   Panel A: Median governance index                   Panel B: Mean governance index
Year              issuers      non-issuers            Z              issuers      non-issuers            t
1990                   9                 8        −0.35               8.926             9.009       −0.15
1991                   9                 8        −2.05               8.881             9.334       −1.49
1992                   9                 8        −1.08               8.903             9.247       −0.86
1993                   9                 9        −0.61               9.367             9.377       −0.03
1994                   9                 9        −1.17               8.854             9.245       −0.87
1995                   8                 9        −3.55               8.175             9.490       −3.53
1996                   9                 9        −0.79               9.333             9.322        0.03
1997                 8.5                 9        −2.29               8.946             9.508       −1.51
1998                   8                 8        −2.19               8.313             9.092       −2.05
1999                   8               8.5        −3.16               8.073             9.250       −3.22
2000                   8                 9        −3.29               8.085             9.303       −3.20
2001                  10                 9         0.48               9.070             9.332       −0.62
2002                   9                 9        −1.03               9.315             9.359       −0.16
2003                   9                 9        −1.43               9.274             9.451       −0.53
 All                   9                 9        −6.09               8.847             9.320       −4.78
                  Panel C: Median entrenchment index                 Panel D: Mean entrenchment index
Year              issuers      non-issuers            Z              issuers      non-issuers            t
1991                   3                 2         0.38               2.387             2.312        0.32
1992                   2                 2        −0.19               2.297             2.273        0.14
1993                   2                 2        −1.91               2.188             2.276       −0.69
1994                   3                 2        −0.01               2.317             2.286        0.16
1995                   2                 2        −2.01               2.091             2.392       −1.51
1996                   2                 2        −1.58               2.104             2.355       −1.22
1997                   2                 2        −1.99               2.024             2.388       −2.03
1998                   2                 2        −1.77               2.081             2.316       −1.03
1999                   2                 2        −1.54               2.000             2.304       −1.32
2000                   2                 2        −2.80               1.750             2.232       −2.56
2001                   3                 2         1.35               2.635             2.317        1.64
2002                   3                 3        −0.49               2.562              2.48        0.60
2003                   3                 3        −0.21               2.580              2.47        0.73
 All                   2                 2        −3.26               2.261             2.344       −1.66
                                                     44
       Table 12 : SEOs and Matching Firms’ Market Leverage and Book Leverage in
                             Calendar Time (1970 to 2003)
This table reports SEOs and matching firms’ market leverage and book leverage ratios in calendar time from
1970 to 2003. We report the median values of these two characteristics for the issuers and matching nonissuer
portfolios, as well as the Z-statistics associated with the Wilcoxon test for differences in distributions. The
null hypothesis is that the characteristics of issuers and nonissuers are both drawn from the same distribution.
We measure market leverage as the sum of debt in current liabilities (item 9) and long-term debt (item 34)
divided by the sum of the market value of equity at the calendar year end and the book value of debt (item
9 plus item 34). We measure book leverage as the sum of item 9 plus item 34 divided by item 6.


Year                     Panel A: Market leverage                            Panel B: Book leverage
                                      non-                                                non-
                     issuers       issuers            Z                 issuers        issuers           Z
1970                  0.441          0.291         3.97                  0.562          0.318          5.35
1971                  0.266          0.264         4.58                  0.429          0.295          5.84
1972                  0.270          0.231         4.16                  0.402          0.273          6.54
1973                  0.540          0.267         6.07                  0.533          0.273          6.95
1974                  0.683          0.471         6.32                  0.575          0.297          6.77
1975                  0.637          0.376         8.21                  0.530          0.262          9.06
1976                  0.511          0.301         5.99                  0.473          0.255          7.58
1977                  0.582          0.312         7.29                  0.501          0.262          7.90
1978                  0.538          0.304         7.74                  0.484          0.264          8.37
1979                  0.535          0.308         7.31                  0.482          0.273          8.23
1980                  0.270          0.204         6.42                  0.451          0.262          8.80
1981                  0.342          0.231         7.01                  0.444          0.260          8.64
1982                  0.342          0.318         5.55                  0.379          0.235          8.27
1983                  0.230          0.193         4.79                  0.303          0.233          8.52
1984                  0.243          0.258         2.26                  0.313          0.236          4.09
1985                  0.187          0.159         2.59                  0.326          0.248          4.76
1986                  0.187          0.143         3.09                  0.297          0.242          4.25
1987                  0.244          0.199         3.05                  0.314          0.253          3.99
1988                  0.272          0.178         2.47                  0.384          0.256          3.77
1989                  0.200          0.217         1.30                  0.385          0.252          4.10
1990                  0.186          0.197         0.45                  0.341          0.239          2.95
1991                  0.183          0.182         1.43                  0.322          0.222          5.09
1992                  0.240          0.176         4.02                  0.343          0.211          6.90
1993                  0.178          0.156         4.85                  0.295          0.195          7.56
1994                  0.106          0.106         1.63                  0.235          0.182          4.05
1995                  0.083          0.116         0.94                  0.240          0.191          4.76
1996                  0.096          0.119         2.62                  0.276          0.192          7.09
1997                  0.114          0.078         4.28                  0.309          0.174          8.05
1998                  0.180          0.129         6.26                  0.385          0.181          8.64
1999                  0.103          0.065         2.47                  0.295          0.201          6.50
2000                  0.029          0.074        −2.47                  0.164          0.186          3.44
2001                  0.135          0.107         3.94                  0.288          0.180          6.70
2002                  0.299          0.177         6.86                  0.365          0.186          8.19
2003                  0.250          0.060         2.66                  0.273          0.083          3.47
 All                  0.220          0.193         16.96                 0.358          0.208         38.89



                                                      45
Figure 1. The Investment Hypothesis of Underperformance Following Seasoned
                            Equity Offerings


                                     6
                                         Expected return




                      

                                                             Issuers
     Matching nonissuers                            High investment-to-asset firms
 Low investment-to-asset firms




                                                                            -
                                 0                         Investment-to-asset




                                            46
     Figure 2 : The Frequency Distribution and New Equity-to-Asset Ratio of SEO Firms Across Size and Book-to-Market
                                         Quintiles (January 1970 to December 2003)

     Panel A of this figure plots the number of SEO firms in each of the 25 size and book-to-market portfolios. Panel B reports the median new equity-
     to-asset ratio among equity issuers by size and book-to-market quintiles. We measure book assets as Compustat annual item 6. We calculate size
     as the price at the end of June times the number of shares outstanding. We define book equity as stockholder’s equity (item 216), minus preferred
     stock, plus balance sheet deferred taxes and investment tax credit (item 35) if available, minus post-retirement benefit asset (item 330) if available. If
     stockholder’s equity is missing, we use common equity (item 60) plus preferred stock par value (item 130). If these variables are missing, we use book
     assets (item 6) less liabilities (item 181). We measure preferred stock as preferred stock liquidating value (item 10), or preferred stock redemption
     value (item 56), or preferred stock par value (item 130), in that order of availability. To calculate the book-to-market ratio, we use the market size at
     the end of the fiscal year, which is December closing price times the number of shares outstanding. We obtain the size and book-to-market quintile
     breakpoints from Kenneth French’s website. We measure new equity-to-asset as the market value of new equity (obtained from SDC) divided by the
     book value of assets at the end of the fiscal year preceding the equity issue.


                                                                                                  Panel B: New Equity-to-Asset by ME and
                           Panel A: Number of SEOs by ME and BE/ME Quintiles
                                                                                                             BE/ME Quintiles
47




                                                                                          Issue Rate


                                                                                      1.20
           Number of SEOs
               900
                                                                                       1.00
                 800

                 700                                                                   0.80

                 600
                                                                                        0.60
                 500

                  400                                                                   0.40

                  300
                                                                                         0.20
                  200

                  100                                                                    0.00
                                                                                 1                                                                   1
                                                                             2                    5
                       0                                                                                                                        2
                                                                         3                             4
                           5                                         4       BE/ME                                                         3    BE/ME
                                 4                                                                     ME   3
                                       3                         5                                                 2                  4
                               ME              2
                                                      1                                                                   1     5
   Figure 3 : Equity Issuers’ and Matching Nonissuers’ Investment-to-Asset and
 Profitability During 60 Months After Equity Issuance (January 1970 to December
                                      2003)

This figure plots SEO firms’ and matching nonissuers’ median investment-to-asset ratio and profitability
during 60 months after equity issuance in Panels A and C, as well as their corresponding Z-statistics from
the Wilcoxon test for testing distributional differences in Panels B and D, respectively. Z statistics between
-2 and 2 indicate failure to reject the null hypothesis of equal distribution of characteristics between SEOs
and their matching firms. Month 0 is the month of equity issuance. We measure investment-to-asset ratio as
the ratio of the change in gross property, plant, and equipment (Compustat item 7) and lagged book assets
(item 6). Profitability is defined as net income before extraordinary items (item 18) divided by lagged book
assets. The solid lines are for issuers and the broken lines are for matching nonissuers. We use the following
matching procedure. At the end of June every year, all firms that have not issued equity within the prior 36
months are sorted by their size and book-to-market equity to form 25 size and book-to-market portfolios of
nonissuers. For each issuer, we use the breakpoints of size and book-to-market sort to identify its matching
portfolio. The matching portfolio’s median characteristics are then compared with those of the issuer.



                                     Panel A: Investment-to-Asset                                                                                             Panel B: Z, Investment-to-Asset
                      0.10                                                                                                                     40

                      0.09
                                                                                                                                               35
                      0.08
                                                                                                                                               30
                      0.07
                                                                                                                         Z(Investment-to-Assets)
   Investment-to-Assets




                                                                                                                                               25
                      0.06

                      0.05                                                                                                                     20

                      0.04
                                                                                                                                               15
                      0.03
                                                                                                                                               10
                      0.02
                                                                                                                                                   5
                      0.01

                      0.00                                                                                                                         0
                             1 3 5 7 9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23 25 27 29 31 33 35 37 39 41 43 45 47 49 51 53 55 57 59                                      1 3 5 7 9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23 25 27 29 31 33 35 37 39 41 43 45 47 49 51 53 55 57 59
                                                             Post-even month                                                                                                           Post-event month



                                            Panel C: Profitability                                                                                                   Panel D: Z, Profitability
                      0.16                                                                                                              15

                      0.14
                                                                                                                                        10
                      0.12


                      0.10                                                                                                                         5
   Profitability




                                                                                                                         Z(Profitability)




                      0.08
                                                                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                                                                       1 3 5 7 9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23 25 27 29 31 33 35 37 39 41 43 45 47 49 51 53 55 57 59
                      0.06

                                                                                                                                           -5
                      0.04


                      0.02                                                                                                        -10

                      0.00
                             1 3 5 7 9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23 25 27 29 31 33 35 37 39 41 43 45 47 49 51 53 55 57 59                 -15
                                                             Post-event month                                                                                                            Post-event month




                                                                                                                    48
 Figure 4 : The Frequency Distribution of SEOs across Investment-to-Asset Deciles
                        (January 1970 to December 2003)

This figure plots the number of SEO firms in each of the investment-to-asset deciles. We measure book assets
as Compustat annual item 6, and we measure capital investment as the change in item 7 (gross property,
plant, and equipment). We sort nonissuing firms each year by their investment-to-asset ratios to obtain the
decile breakpoints. We then assign each SEO firm to one of the investment-to-asset deciles based on the
breakpoints.




                                  1600


                                  1400


                                  1200


                                  1000
                 Number of SEOs




                                   800


                                   600


                                   400


                                   200


                                     0
                                         1   2   3    4      5        6        7    8   9   10
                                                     Investment-to-Assets Deciles




                                                           49
Figure 5 : SEO Firms’ and Matching Firms’ Corporate Governance Indexes During
        60 Months After Equity Issuance (January 1990 to December 2003)

This figure plots SEO firms’ (solid lines) and matching firms’ (dotted lines) median and mean corporate
governance indices as defined by Gompers, Ishii, and Metrick (2003) during 60 months after equity issuance
in Panels A and C, respectively. We also report in Panel B the Z-statistics from the Wilcoxon matched-
pairs signed-rank test for distributional differences in the median indices between issuers and nonissuers. Z
statistics between −2 and 2 indicate failure to reject the null hypothesis of equal distribution of characteristics
between issuers and nonissuers. Panel D reports the t-statistics for zero-difference between the mean indices
between the two classes of firms. Month 0 is the month of equity issuance. Gompers et al. obtain firm-level
corporate governance provisions from the Investor Responsibility Research Center (IRRC). The index counts
the number of unique provisions each firm has in the sample, and it ranges from 1 to 24. We use the following
matching procedure. At the end of June every year, all firms that have not issued equity within the prior 36
months are sorted by their size and book-to-market equity to form 25 size and book-to-market portfolios of
nonissuers. For each issuer, we use the breakpoints of size and book-to-market sort to identify its matching
portfolio. The matching portfolio’s median and mean characteristics are then compared with those of the
issuer.


                                                        Panel A: Median Governance Index                                                                                                                  Panel B: Z, Median Governance Index
                                        9.2                                                                                                                                                       0
                                                                                                                                                                                                      1   3   5   7   9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23 25 27 29 31 33 35 37 39 41 43 45 47 49 51 53 55 57 59

                                            9                                                                                                                                                    -1


                                        8.8                                                                                                                                                      -2


                                        8.6                                                                                                                                                      -3
                                                                                                                                                                           Z(Governance Index)
                     Governance Index




                                        8.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                 -4

                                        8.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                 -5

                                            8
                                                                                                                                                                                                 -6

                                        7.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                 -7

                                        7.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                 -8

                                        7.4
                                                1   3       5    7   9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23 25 27 29 31 33 35 37 39 41 43 45 47 49 51 53 55 57 59                                                -9
                                                                                             Post-event month                                                                                                                                 Post-event month




                                                            Panel C: Mean Governance Index                                                                                                                    Panel D: t, Mean Governance Index
                    9.8                                                                                                                                                         0.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                      1   3   5   7   9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23 25 27 29 31 33 35 37 39 41 43 45 47 49 51 53 55 57 59

                                                                                                                                                                           -0.5
                    9.6


                                                                                                                                                                           -1.0
                    9.4

                                                                                                                                                                           -1.5
                                                                                                                                                     t(Governance Index)
 Governance Index




                    9.2

                                                                                                                                                                           -2.0
                    9.0

                                                                                                                                                                           -2.5
                    8.8
                                                                                                                                                                           -3.0

                    8.6
                                                                                                                                                                           -3.5

                    8.4
                                                                                                                                                                           -4.0

                    8.2
                                        1       3   5   7       9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23 25 27 29 31 33 35 37 39 41 43 45 47 49 51 53 55 57 59                               -4.5
                                                                                         Post-event month                                                                                                                                      Post-even month




                                                                                                                                                    50
                       Figure 6 : SEO Firms’ and Matching Firms’ Entrenchment Indexes During 60
                             Months After Equity Issuance (January 1991 to December 2003)

This figure plots SEO firms’ (solid lines) and matching firms’ (dotted lines) median and mean entrenchment
indexes as defined by Bebchuk, Cohen, and Ferrell (2005) during 60 months after equity issuance in Panels A
and C, respectively. We also report in Panel B the Z-statistics from the Wilcoxon matched-pairs signed-rank
test for distributional differences in the median indices between issuers and nonissuers. Z statistics between
−2 and 2 indicate failure to reject the null hypothesis of equal distribution of characteristics between issuers
and nonissuers. Panel D reports the t-statistics for zero-difference between the mean indices between the
two classes of firms. Month 0 is the month of equity issuance. Bebchuk et al. construct their entrenchment
index based on six out of 24 provisions from the Investor Responsibility Research Center (IRRC). The six
provisions are staggered boards, limits to shareholder bylaw amendments, supermajority requirements for
mergers, supermajority requirements for charter amendments, poison pills, and golden parachutes. The
index counts the number of unique provisions each firm has in the sample, and it ranges from 0 to 6. We use
the following matching procedure. At the end of June every year, all firms that have not issued equity within
the prior 36 months are sorted by their size and book-to-market equity to form 25 size and book-to-market
portfolios of nonissuers. For each issuer, we use the breakpoints of size and book-to-market sort to identify
its matching portfolio. The matching portfolio’s median and mean characteristics are then compared with
those of the issuer.


                                        Panel A: Median Entrenchment Index                                                             Panel B: Z, Median Entrenchment Index
                                  2.5                                                                                                0.0
                                                                                                                                            1       4       7    10 13 16 19 22 25 28 31 34 37 40 43 46 49 52 55 58

                                                                                                                                     -1.0
                                   2


                                                                                                                                     -2.0
                 Median E-Index




                                  1.5
                                                                                                                        Z(E-Index)




                                                                                                                                     -3.0
                                   1

                                                                                                                                     -4.0

                                  0.5

                                                                                                                                     -5.0

                                   0
                                        1   4    7   10 13 16 19 22 25 28 31 34 37 40 43 46 49 52 55 58                              -6.0
                                                                      Event-time                                                                                                  Event-time




                                            Panel C: Mean Entrenchment Index                                                                Panel D: t, Mean Entrenchment Index
                                                                                                                            0.0
                  2.4                                                                                                                  1        4       7       10 13 16 19 22 25 28 31 34 37 40 43 46 49 52 55 58
                                                                                                                         -0.5
                  2.4
                                                                                                                         -1.0
                  2.3
                                                                                                                         -1.5
                  2.3
  Mean E-Index




                                                                                                           t(E-Index)




                                                                                                                         -2.0
                  2.2
                                                                                                                         -2.5
                  2.2
                                                                                                                         -3.0
                  2.1
                                                                                                                         -3.5
                  2.1
                                                                                                                         -4.0
                  2.0
                                   1    4    7   10 13 16 19 22 25 28 31 34 37 40 43 46 49 52 55 58                      -4.5
                                                                    Event-time                                                                                                    Event-time




                                                                                                          51
  Figure 7 : SEO Firms’ and Matching Firms’ Market Leverage and Book Leverage
               During 60 Months After Equity Issuance (1970 to 2003)

This figure plots issuers’ and matching nonissuers’ median market leverage ratio and book leverage ratio
during 60 months after equity issuance in Panels A and C, respectively, and their corresponding Z-statistics
from the Wilcoxon test for testing distributional differences in Panels B and D. Z statistics between -2 and
2 indicate failure to reject the null hypothesis of equal distribution of characteristics between SEOs and
their matching firms. Month 0 is the month of equity issuance. We define book leverage as the sum of debt
in current liabilities (Compustat annual item 9) and long-term debt (item 34) divided by the lagged book
value of assets. The denominator of the market leverage ratio is the market value of the firm, calculated
as the sum of the market value of equity (December closing price times number of shares outstanding) and
the book value of debt (item 9 plus item 34). The solid lines are for issuers and the broken lines are for
matching nonissuers. We use the following matching procedure. At the end of June every year, all firms
that have not issued equity within the prior 36 months are sorted by their size and book-to-market equity
to form 25 size and book-to-market portfolios of nonissuers. For each issuer, we use the breakpoints of size
and book-to-market sort to identify its matching portfolio. The matching portfolio’s median characteristics
are then compared with those of the issuer.


                                  Panel A: Market Leverage                                                                                            Panel B: Z, Market Leverage
                0.30                                                                                                                    45

                                                                                                                                        40
                0.25
                                                                                                                                        35

                0.20                                                                                                                    30
                                                                                                                   Z(Market Leverage)
   Market Leverage




                                                                                                                                        25
                0.15
                                                                                                                                        20

                0.10                                                                                                                    15

                                                                                                                                        10
                0.05
                                                                                                                                         5

                0.00                                                                                                                     0
                       1 3 5 7 9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23 25 27 29 31 33 35 37 39 41 43 45 47 49 51 53 55 57 59                                  1 3 5 7 9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23 25 27 29 31 33 35 37 39 41 43 45 47 49 51 53 55 57 59
                                                       Post-event month                                                                                                      Post-event month



                                    Panel C: Book Leverage                                                                                              Panel D: Z, Book Leverage
               0.40                                                                                                                     45

               0.35                                                                                                                     40

                                                                                                                                        35
               0.30
                                                                                                                                        30
                                                                                                                   Z(Book Leverage)




               0.25
   Book Leverage




                                                                                                                                        25
               0.20
                                                                                                                                        20
               0.15
                                                                                                                                        15

               0.10                                                                                                                     10

               0.05                                                                                                                      5

                                                                                                                                         0
               0.00
                       1 3 5 7 9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23 25 27 29 31 33 35 37 39 41 43 45 47 49 51 53 55 57 59                                  1   4   7 10 13 16 19 22 25 28 31 34 37 40 43 46 49 52 55 58 61
                                                      Post-event month                                                                                                Post-event month




                                                                                                              52
