NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DO FORMAL INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS
HINDER THE FREE FLOW OF SCIENTIFIC KNOWLEDGE?
AN EMPIRICAL TEST OF THE ANTI-COMMONS HYPOTHESIS
Fiona Murray
Scott Stern
Working Paper 11465
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11465
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2005

We thank Jeff Furman, both for extremely insightful comments and suggestions as well as for generous
assistance in obtaining the citation data. We also thank Tim Bresnahan, Iain Cockburn, Wes Cohen, Maryann
Feldman, Roberto Fernandez, Joshua Gans, Shane Greenstein, Rebecca Henderson, Ed Roberts, Roberto
Rigobon, Paula Stephan, participants in the NBER Academic Science and Entrepreneurship Conference, as
well as participants numerous conferences and seminars. We also thank Max Bulbin, Kyle Jensen, Mitun
Ranka and Kranthi Vistakula for excellent research assistance. All errors are our own. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
©2005 by Fiona Murray and Scott Stern. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Do Formal Intellectual Property Rights Hinder the Free Flow of Scientific Knowledge? An
Empirical Test of the Anti-Commons Hypothesis
Fiona Murray and Scott Stern
NBER Working Paper No. 11465
June 2005
JEL No. O300, O330, O340, L330
ABSTRACT

While the potential for intellectual property rights to inhibit the diffusion of scientific knowledge
is at the heart of several contemporary policy debates, evidence for the “anti-commons effect”
has been anecdotal. A central issue in this debate is how intellectual property rights over a given
piece of knowledge affects the propensity of future researchers to build upon that knowledge in
their own scientific research activities. This article frames this debate around the concept of dual
knowledge, in which a single discovery may contribute to both scientific research and useful
commercial applications. A key implication of dual knowledge is that it may be simultaneously
instantiated as a scientific research article and as a patent. Such patent-paper pairs are at the heart
of our empirical strategy. We exploit the fact that patents are granted with a substantial lag, often
many years after the knowledge is initially disclosed through paper publication. The knowledge
associated with a patent paper pair therefore diffuses within two distinct intellectual property
environments – one associated with the pre-grant period and another after formal IP rights are
granted. Relative to the expected citation pattern for publications with a given quality level,
anticommons theory predicts that the citation rate to a scientific publication should fall after
formal IP rights associated with that publication are granted. Employing a differencesindifferences estimator for 169 patent-paper pairs (and including a control group of publications
from the same journal for which no patent is granted), we find evidence for a modest anticommons effect (the citation rate after the patent grant declines by between 9 and 17%). This
decline becomes more pronounced with the number of years elapsed since the date of the patent
grant, and is particularly salient for articles authored by researchers with public sector
affiliations.
Scott Stern

Fiona Murray

Kellogg School of Management

MIT, Sloan School of Management

Northwestern University

50 Memorial Drive

2001 Sheridan Road

E52-530

Evanton, IL 60208

Cambridge, MA 02142

and NBER

fmurray@mit.edu

s-stern2@northwestern.edu

I.

Introduction
In the early 1980s, Professor Phil Leder, recently recruited to head the new Genetics

department at the Harvard Medical School, developed the first genetically engineered mouse,
dubbed the Oncomouse. Leder and his post-doc Tim Stewart had used novel transgenic
techniques to insert an oncogene into a mouse embryo; the result was a mouse that was highly
susceptible to cancer. Using the mice to examine the importance of genes in the onset of cancer,
Leder came to recognize that “it could serve a variety of different purposes, some purely
scientific others highly practical” (Kevles, 2002, p. 83). This research was published in Cell in
1984, and, in 1988 a broad patent for the Oncomouse was granted by the US Patent Office
(USPTO). The Oncomouse patent was more controversial than most; not only was the
Oncomouse the first living mammal to be patented, but Harvard’s licensee Dupont aggressively
enforced the property rights, including demands for “reach-through” rights and review of
publications that used the Oncomouse in further scientific research. The generation of scientific
ideas such as the Oncomouse - ideas that are simultaneously of value as a scientific discovery
and as a useful, inventive construct - is increasingly widespread, particularly in the disciplines
that underpin modern biotechnology (Stokes, 1997)
. Dual-purpose ideas provide their originators with multiple disclosure choices, including
an option to both publish research in the scientific literature and obtain intellectual property
rights (IPR) over that knowledge. In academia, an increasing number of scientists haven chosen
this path of dual knowledge disclosure – which we describe as patent-paper pairs (Murray, 2002;
Ducor 2000). Patent-paper pairs are linked scientific articles and individual patents which
disclose (and serve as a property right over) the same underlying “piece” of knowledge. Patentpaper pairs are thus more than simply a reflection of the rise in patenting in academia over
knowledge unrelated (or only tangentially related) to scientific research. Rather, by embedding
the same piece of knowledge in two distinct institutional regimes, they instantiate the expansion
of formal intellectual property rights over knowledge that was traditionally disclosed solely
through scientific publication.
The increased use of intellectual property rights (IPR) in scientific research has sparked a
vigorous academic and policy debate over what is known as the “anti-commons effect.” At its
core, the anti-commons debate is an argument over whether such expansion of IPR (in the form

3

of patents and/or copyrights) is “privatizing” the scientific commons, and limiting the benefits
from scientific progress (Heller and Eisenberg, 1998; Argyres & Liebskind, 1998; David,
2001b). Specifically, the anti-commons hypothesis states that IPR may inhibit the free flow and
diffusion of scientific knowledge and the ability of researchers to cumulatively build on each
other’s discoveries (Heller & Eisenberg, 1998; David, 2003, 2000; Lessig, 2002; Etzkowitz,
1998; Krimsky, 2003). Conversely, IPR may facilitate the creation of a market for ideas and
mitigate disincentives to disclose and exchange knowledge which might otherwise remain secret
(Merges & Nelson, 1990, 1994; Arora, Fosfuri, and Gambardella, 2001; Gans and Stern, 2003).
Building on several key case examples in the literature, this article frames the anticommons debate around the concept of dual knowledge as instantiated in patent-paper pairs.
Building on this framework we then report a novel empirical strategy to evaluate the salience of
the anti-commons effect on the cumulative impact of scientific knowledge. Our strategy exploits
the existence of patent-paper pairs as not only the instantiation of the expansion of intellectual
property rights over dual knowledge but also a concrete and specific starting point from which to
identify the impact of such rights on the rate of scientific knowledge diffusion.
Our approach is to compare patterns of scientific citations to scientific articles that are
part of patent-paper pairs, relative to citation patterns for articles that are not part of patent-paper
pairs (but are similar along other dimensions). This allows us to evaluate several key hypotheses
at the center of the anti-commons debate. First, we evaluate whether citation patterns are
different for scientific research which is ultimately also patented. In other words, to what extent
does published scientific knowledge disclosed as a patent-paper pair differ in its future
cumulative impact on public domain research (as measured by forward citations to the
publication) to papers that are similar in topic, published in the same journal in the same time
period, but never receive IPR? Second, we take advantage of patent grant delay. While
publication lags are usually modest (on the order of a few months), patent grant delays are
substantial (in most cases IPR is usually granted two to four years after initial application).
Consequently, scientific knowledge associated with a patent-paper pair diffuses under two
distinctive institutional environments – a pre-grant period where no IP rights are present and a
post-grant period in which specific property rights have been granted. This difference allows us
to ask: how does the grant of formal patent rights over such knowledge influence the trajectory

4

of forward citations and therefore the impact of the scientific research findings in the public
domain?
The “experiment” afforded by the combination of patent-paper pairs and patent grant
delay allows for a set of precise tests motivated by the anti-commons hypothesis: if the grant of
intellectual property hinders the ability of researchers to build (in the public domain) on a given
piece of knowledge, then the citation rate to the scientific publication disclosing that knowledge
should be lower than for scientific publications with no IP and should fall after formal property
rights are granted. Of course, such an analysis must control for the fact that citation patterns
vary with the underlying quality of the article and with the time elapsed since publication. Our
use of patent grant delay allows us to do so. Specifically, by observing a given piece of
knowledge in two different institutional environments, we are able to evaluate how differences in
the institutional environment affect the diffusion of a given piece of knowledge. In our
empirical work, we therefore implement a differences-in-differences estimator, with fixed effects
for each article in our sample. To evaluate the anti-commons hypothesis, we examine how the
grant of IPR changes the citation rate to scientific articles, accounting for fixed differences in
citation rates across articles and relative to the trend in citation rates for articles with similar
characteristics.
Our sample is composed of 340 peer-reviewed scientific articles appearing between 1997
and 1999 in Nature Biotechnology, perhaps the leading publication for research exhibiting
knowledge duality in the life sciences. The incidence of patent-paper pairs is quite high within
this sample: For just under 50% of the scientific articles in our sample, a US patent has been
granted over the knowledge covered in that publication. As well, for those articles which
ultimately receive a patent, there is a significant lag between scientific publication and patent
grant (on average, 37.5 months). We exploit these data to establish three core findings. First,
published articles also associated with formal IP are more highly cited than those whose authors
choose not to file for patents; however this can largely be accounted for by observed
characteristics such as author location and number of authors on the article. Second, there is
robust evidence for a quantitatively modest but statistically significant anti-commons effect;
across different specifications, the article citation rate declines by 9 to 17% after a patent grant.
Thirdly, the anti-commons effect is particularly salient for articles with US and public sector coauthors. While we are cautious in our interpretation of the precise mechanisms that give rise to

5

this dampening effect on citations, our evidence suggests that, at a broad level, the anti-commons
effect seems to have a sound empirical basis, although the size of the effect may be modest.
The remainder of the paper is as follows. The next section reviews the economic
foundations of the anti-commons hypothesis, framed around the nature and institutional
foundations of dual knowledge. Section III develops the empirical test and predictions of the
anti-commons hypothesis. After a review of the data in Section IV, Section V presents our
empirical findings. We conclude with implications for future empirical work and policy
development.

II.

The Anti-commons Effect
The anti-commons debate focuses on the impact of intellectual property rights over

knowledge that was traditionally placed in the public domain through scientific disclosure.1
According to the traditional literature a clear distinction should be drawn between basic and
applied research, with basic research being focused on questions of fundamental scientific
interest, and applied research focused on questions of usefulness and applications (Stokes, 1997).
Scholarship in the “new” economics of Science compares alternative institutional arrangements
associated with these distinctive types of knowledge, and assumes strongly exogenous
institutional regimes and disclosure choices (Dasgupta and David 1994). Basic research is
undertaken in the institutions of Open Science and disclosed through publication; applied
research takes place in a Private Property regime and is disclosed through patents (to the extent
that disclosure takes place).
Knowledge production in the Open Rights regime (“Science”) is characterized (in the
stylized case) by a distinctive set of economic incentives for cumulative knowledge production,
including the adoption of norms that facilitate full disclosure and diffusion of knowledge. This
system includes the recognition of scientific priority and a system of public (or coordinated)
expenditures to reward those who contribute to cumulative knowledge production over the long
term (Merton, 1973; Dasgupta and David, 1994). By premising career rewards (such as tenure)
on disclosure through publication, Open Science leverages the public goods nature of basic
research and therefore promotes cumulative innovation and “standing on the shoulders of
1

In contrast, much knowledge produced in industry is often maintained as a trade secret, or only disclosed through
the patent system. However, an increasing amount of industry-produced knowledge is also disclosed through
scientific publication, often to serve specific strategic purposes.

6

giants.”2 In contrast, the incentives that govern the private property rights regime pay little
attention to the basis of a researcher’s ultimate impact on follow-on research, but rather depend
on the degree to which a researcher can exclude others and so appropriate some of the value
created by their knowledge through the commercialization of new technology (Nelson 1959;
Arrow 1962; Levin et al. 1987; Kremer 1997; Scotchmer 1987).
While concise in its formulation of the relationship between the nature of knowledge and
incentives for its production and distribution, this analytical framework fails when knowledge
has both basic and applied value. By highlighting its duality, Stokes (1997) reformulated the
traditional distinction between basic and applied research; a single discovery could
simultaneously possess both applied and basic characteristics. Figure A illustrates this essential
insight. Stokes’ formulation allows for “use-inspired basic research,” as exemplified by the
research activities of scientists such as Pasteur (hence the term Pasteur’s Quadrant). Like
Leder’s Oncomouse research in the 1980s, Pasteur’s fundamental insights into microbiology
served both as a foundation for the germ theory of disease and had practical application for
cholera and rabies (Geison 1995; Stokes 1997).
For knowledge generated in Pasteur’s Quadrant disclosure becomes endogenous:
scientists have a well-defined set of disclosure choices, including publication in scientific
journals and application for protection through formal intellectual property rights. Moreover,
these choices are not mutually exclusive – a given piece of knowledge can both be disclosed
through scientific publication and be protected by intellectual property rights. The phenomena of
“dual knowledge – dual disclosure” is perhaps most clearly instantiated in the context of “patentpaper pairs” – linked scientific articles and individual patents which disclose (and serve as a
property right over) the same underlying “piece” of knowledge.3 Patent-paper pairs are thus
more than simply a reflection of the rise in patenting in academia over knowledge unrelated (or
only tangentially related) to scientific research. Rather, they embed the same piece of knowledge

2

While closely associated with university research, Open Science is also feasible (and profitably adopted) by private
firms, including many within industries dependent on the life sciences (Cockburn and Henderson, 1998; Zucker et
al., 1998; Stern, 2004; Murray, 2002).
3
There is also evidence for increased secrecy and delay in publication as a result of increased economic incentives
in academia, the disclosure requirements of patent applications in the US and Europe, and the strictures placed on
academics when their research is funded by private industry (Blumenthal et al. 1996, Campbell et al. 2000). The
growing privatization of basic research may also be associated with refocusing of research agendas (Thursby and
Thursby, 2003; David 2003) and an increased potential for bias in research results (Nelkin 1984; Krimsky 2003).

7

in two distinct institutional regimes, each of which is governed by specific (and potentially
opposing) rules for access and attribution.

The Anti-Commons Debate in Molecular Biology
While not limited to life sciences, many of the key issues that animate the anti-commons
discussion surround the interaction between public and private knowledge exploitation in areas
related to biotechnology (Kenney, 1986; Orsenigo, 1989; Powell et al., 1996; Gambardella,
1995). The shift towards dual knowledge as embodied in dual institutions reflects at least three
related forces: The expanding promise of biotechnology, reductions in the costs of academic
patenting, and increases in the scope of IPR over knowledge produced in the life sciences. The
rise in dual knowledge in this field can be traced back to the early 1970s; most key scientific
milestones in the field, but for noted exceptions, have been disclosed as patent-paper pairs4:
•

The techniques of recombinant DNA which provide insights into the cellular
machinery of the cell but also laid the foundation for the production of
recombinant therapeutic proteins (Cohen et al., 1973),

•

The Oncomouse simultaneously provided great insight into the sources of cancer
while becoming a model for investigating cancer therapies (Stewart et al. 1984),

•

The discovery of RNA interference represented a further step towards explaining
DNA replication but also the foundation of a potentially new therapeutic category
(Zamore et al. 2000),

•

The development of embryonic stem cells teaching us how cells develop but also
having the potential to serve as novel therapeutics or the foundations of organ
replacement (Thomson et al. 1998).

At the same time, policy shifts encouraged academics to claim IPR over their dual knowledge.
Prior to this time, patent applications filed by universities on behalf of investigators required
case-by-case negotiation of the assignment of patent rights and their subsequent licensing. The
4

Perhaps the most interesting exception to this pattern concerns the Nobel Prize-winning work on the development
of hybridomas that allowed understanding of the immune systems and also allowed the creation of monoclonal
antibodies (Kohler and Milstein, 1975). As Kohler and Milstein submitted their ground breaking findings to Nature,
they also submitted the manuscript to their funding agency (the Medical Research Council) with a proposal to file
for a patent. However, the request was refused, on the basis that “It is certainly difficult for us to identify any
immediate practical applications which could be pursued as a commercial venture, even assuming that publication
had not already occurred.” (http://www.path.cam.ac.uk/~mrc7/mab25yrs/index.html last accessed March 14, 2005)

8

1980 Bayh-Dole Act assigned IPR to Universities along with a duty to license the patents and
facilitate their translation and commercialization (Mowery and Sampat 2001). This clarification
in institutional practice likely increased the propensity for dual knowledge to be disclosed
through both scientific publications and patents. Nevertheless, individual researchers and
institutions varied widely in their response to this new environment5.
Third, there was a significant expansion in the scope of IPR across the life sciences.
After the 1980 Diamond vs. Chakrabarty decision and the granting of the Oncomouse patent in
1988, IPR comprehensively covered the domain of genetically modified living organisms – from
bacteria to mammals (Kevles 2002). In combination with the developments in the biotech
industry, “universities were literally propelled into an awareness of the potential economic value
of the technology that was being generated in their research programs” (Bremer 2001).
Thus the ground work for the anti-commons debate was laid: increasingly dual
knowledge and the widening scope of patents meant that many scientific discoveries now
contained patentable inventions. This potential for dual disclosure together with more
streamlined institutional rules for patenting and changes in university culture shifted the likely
set of disclosure decisions to more frequently include patenting. In the period between 1989 and
1999 US Research One universities received over 6,000 life science patents (Owen-Smith and
Powell 2002) and patent-paper pairs became an important disclosure phenomenon (Murray
2002). In short, the life science commons were increasingly littered with intellectual property
rights.
Increasingly, economists, law and technology scholars, and policymakers have focused
on key cases to highlight concerns over the impact of this expansion in IPR on the growth and
diffusion of scientific knowledge (Heller and Eisenberg, 1998; David, 2001a; Campbell et al.
2002; Strauss et al. 2002; Walsh et al. 2002). Consider the Oncomouse (Murray 2005). The
knowledge described by Leder’s Cell publication was also covered by a “paired” Oncomouse
patent (4,736,866). This patent was licensed exclusively to DuPont Corporation who, as the
donor of a broad research gift to support Leder’s lab, actually participated in the decision to
5

In this context, the traditional justification of IP rights over Open Science relates not to scientific knowledge
accumulation but rather to cumulative commercial innovation. IP provides incentives for further commercial
investment. IPR may also facilitate a “market for ideas” by encouraging the exchange and trade of knowledge
particularly with private sector researchers (Merges and Nelson, 1994; Arora et al, 2001; Gans and Stern, 2000;
Gambardella, 1995). For knowledge generated in academia the third leg of the traditional argument for IP - as an
inducement for disclosure over secrecy - does not apply since there is a presumption of and evidence for disclosure
in publications.

9

patent. Soon after the patents were filed, DuPont imposed their property rights through a series
of stringent licensing clauses: “reach-through” clauses that specified royalties for DuPont for any
discoveries or products that might be developed using the Oncomouse, oversight and control of
scientific publications, and limits on informal sharing of these mice among scientific colleagues.
Each of these practices represented a dramatic shift in scientific norms.
These limits were seen as a severe impediment to scientific research and a contravention
of the norms of the scientific community. Scientists were vocal in their opposition to DuPont;
led by Harold Varmus, senior scientists in mouse genetics met at Cold Spring Harbor in 1992
and began talking of revolution. In response, the NIH stepped in and sanctioned a non-profit
central facility (The Jackson Laboratory) to serve as a repository for genetically altered mouse
strains. However, while the Jackson Labs could distribute the mice, the Oncomouse was still
constrained by restrictive licensing terms. For example, DuPont continued to contact scientists
and demand review of their articles before publication and “nobody was able to exchange
materials” (Marshall, 2000). When Varmus became the Director of the NIH, he furthered his
campaign to limit DuPont’s actions on the basis that they “seriously impede further basic
research” and in 1999 an agreement was reached between NIH and DuPont which outlined the
terms under which the technology could be used in research supported by the NIH. DuPont
commented that they “deeply appreciate the importance of wide dissemination of tools for basic
research and are committed to making this tool available to the academic community…while
retaining our commercial rights” (NIH News Release January 19, 2000). While lifting key
restrictions in the license, all non-profit recipients were still required to have an overarching
agreement in place with DuPont, while commercial entities are required to purchase a
commercial license.
The anti-commons debate was further sharpened by controversies over patenting of gene
fragments known as expressed sequence tags (ESTs) - small fragments of DNA generated to
identify regions of a gene using well known research methods. Like the Oncomouse, researchers
wanted to file patent applications on gene sequences that would also be placed into the public
domain. This raised considerable debate among the scientific and legal communities; some
argued that EST patents would distort research priorities, encourage researchers to search for and
patent ESTs rather than focus on characterizing full-length genes, and preclude further research
on entire genes (Kimball, 2001). Furthermore, it was anticipated that these patents would lead to

10

complex and inefficient litigation and ownership disputes over full genes (Eisenberg, 1996).
Others suggested that these patents would, like many other patents on novel ideas, spur
innovation. Although no longer considered patentable by the USPTO on the basis of a lack of
utility, the EST episode highlights the potential for complex transactions in the use of genes for
biomedical research and development (Merges and Nelson 1990; Lawson, 2002) and the
complexity of the debate over IPR over research conducted in “Open Science” that goes beyond
the anti-commons issues.
Overall the anti-commons hypothesis suggests that intellectual property rights over
scientific knowledge traditionally disclosed only through publication may have a negative impact
on the capability for cumulative progress within the scientific community. Varmus and others in
the transgenic mouse community felt that the means through which DuPont imposed their
property rights impeded scientific enquiry and impinged upon their ability to “stand on the
shoulders of giants” such as Leder and others. By its very nature, scientific knowledge is nonrivalrous, so that the diffusion of that knowledge can serve repeatedly (and with little additional
cost) as an input into future knowledge production and hence cumulative innovation. Because IP
can serve to exclude follow-on researchers from exploiting scientific discoveries, the anticommons hypothesis posits that the use of IP over areas traditionally maintained in the public
commons can undermine the process of cumulative scientific discovery (Heller, 1998; Heller and
Eisenberg, 1998; David 2003). In other words, the rise of patent-paper pairs with their effective
privatization of the scientific commons imposes a “tax” on the use of the knowledge and may
restrict the diffusion of that knowledge and so lower the equilibrium level of research
productivity.6 Finally it is useful to note that the policy concerns surrounding the anti-commons
effect is most salient for knowledge produced in public settings such as universities and/or
funded from public expenditures.

III.

The Empirical Framework
Anti-commons theory suggests that while the scientific community as a whole may

benefit from the free dissemination and diffusion of knowledge, individual researchers have
strong incentives to take advantage of the protections afforded by formal IP rights. If protected
6

Furthermore, to the extent that IPR is narrow in scope and highly dispersed across individuals and institutions,
fragmentation can impose a further tax in the form of significant transaction costs (Eisenberg, 1996; Shapiro, 2001;
Hall and Ziedonis, 2001; Ziedonis, 2004).

11

by IPR, the impact of an individual piece of knowledge on follow-on research by others is
diminished, resulting in a lower equilibrium level of on-going cumulative research productivity.
These theoretical ideas have observable empirical implications: Published ideas that are also
covered by IPR (such as the Oncomouse) will be expected to have lower levels of cumulative
scientific impact, relative to the impact that would be realized in the absence of IPR. Moreover,
we expect the salience of this effect to be higher for certain types of researchers (e.g., for patentpairs associated with public sector research) and certain types of discoveries (e.g., for patentpaper pairs over research tools). This section first develops an empirical approach for evaluating
the anti-commons effect, and then links this framework to a number of specific theoretical
predictions of the anti-commons theory.
The empirical challenge in documenting the anti-commons effect is straightforward:
How can we compare the impact a given piece of knowledge would have with IPR versus the
impact of that knowledge without IPR? For a given piece of knowledge with IPR, one cannot
observe the counterfactual impact of that knowledge in the event that the IPR had been waived.
For example, knowledge protected by IPR may tend to have a higher (or lower) intrinsic
scientific value than knowledge that is not protected by IPR. A simple comparison between
patented and non-patented knowledge may therefore be biased by unobserved heterogeneity.
The key empirical challenge in adjudicating the impact of disclosure regimes is thus an
identification problem – from an experimental perspective, the econometrician would ideally like
to observe a given piece of knowledge in two distinct institutional environments (e.g., a nonpatent versus patented environment), and compare the impact on future research for each case.
Our approach exploits the existence and nature of patent-paper pairs. A patent-paper pair
is the dual instantiation of a given piece of knowledge as both a scientific research article and a
patent. Consider the following example of research undertaken in the biology department at the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology in the field of bacterial genetics and metabolism:
“A method has been developed for control of molecular weight and molecular weight
dispersity during production of polyhydroxyalkanoates in genetically engineered
organisms by control of the level and time of expression of one or more PHA synthases
in the organisms. The method was demonstrated by constructing a synthetic operon for
PHA production in E. coli …Modulation of the total level of PHA synthase activity in the
host cell by varying the concentration of the inducer …was found to effect the molecular
weight of the polymer produced in the cell.” (Snell; Kristi D. (Belmont, MA); Hogan;

12

Scott A. (Troy, MI); Sim; Sang Jun (Seoul, KR); Sinskey; Anthony J. (Boston, MA);
Rha; Chokyun (Boston, MA) 1998, Patent No. 5,811,272)

“A synthetic operon for polyhydroxyalkanoate (PHA) biosynthesis designed to yield high
levels of PHA synthase activity in vivo was constructed …by positioning a genetic
fragment … behind a modified synthase gene containing an Escherichia coli promoter
and ribosome binding site. Plasmids containing the synthetic operon …were transformed
into E. coli DH5 alpha and analyzed for polyhydroxybutyrate production… Comparison
of the enzyme activity levels of PHA biosynthetic enzymes in a strain encoding the native
operon with a strain possessing the synthetic operon indicates that the amount of
polyhydroxyalkanoate synthase in a host organism plays a key role in controlling the
molecular weight and the polydispersity of polymer. (Sim SJ, Snell KD, Hogan SA,
Stubbe J, Rha CK, Sinskey AJ , Nature Biotechnology 1997)

As outlined in these brief excerpts, the research described in both documents is based on a
specific genetic modification of a bacterium (E. Coli) designed to control the type and amount of
particular chemicals (PHA) the bacteria would ordinarily produce. From the scientific
perspective, the publication emphasizes that these experiments deepen our understanding of the
genes that regulate particular chemical pathways in bacteria. However, as highlighted in the
patent, they also provide practical techniques for the manipulation of bacteria and the
optimization of their use as a source of useful biomaterials. In other words, this single discovery
has been instantiated as both a publication emphasizing its scientific contribution and as a patent
disclosure emphasizing its utility.
Our empirical approach exploits three key aspects of the phenomenon associated with the
production of patent-paper pairs:
(a) Within the scope of published scientific research which is potentially patentable, a
significant fraction of researchers choose to forego formal IPR, and
(b) Among those who pursue formal IPR, there is usually a significant delay between the
first publication of that knowledge within the scientific literature and the granting of
formal IPR over that knowledge and
(c) Future scientific citations are a noisy but useful measure of the impact of a scientific
article on future scientific research. Combining these factors, we exploit the existence of
patent-paper pairs to evaluate the impact of IPR on the diffusion of scientific knowledge.

13

The first step in our approach is to collect a sample of published scientific research
articles which are of roughly similar “quality” (though we will account for quality variation
among articles in our empirical framework) and which disclose knowledge that is potentially
patentable (whether or not the researchers choose to apply for IPR). We draw a set of research
articles, within a specific time frame, from a top-tier research journal that specializes in
publishing dual knowledge discoveries, Nature Biotechnology (we discuss this choice further in
Section IV). By limiting our sample to articles published within a narrow time window within a
specialized journal, we ensure that all articles share some affinity in topic, and are subjected to
the same peer-review process. By choosing a journal whose editorial policy is to focus on
research that is simultaneously of scientific and commercial interest, we consider the
publications in our dataset to be “at risk” of being associated with a USPTO patent and thus
forming a patent-paper pair. As we discuss further in the next section, we are able provide
qualitative support for our assumption of comparability between the articles within our sample
with analysis of the article’s scientific content and review of the potential patentability of the
knowledge disclosed in the non-patented articles by an experienced intellectual property lawyer.
Of course, the decision to patent a piece of dual knowledge is endogenous to the specific
circumstances of individual researchers, including factors such as their institutional affiliation
and their gender (Azoulay, Ding and Stuart, 2005; Ding, Murray, and Stuart, 2005; Markiewicz
and Diminin 2004; Agrawal and Henderson 2002). Our procedure simply assumes that the
impact of intellectual property on the use of knowledge by follow-on researchers is
(conditionally) independent of the patent filing decision.
Within our sample of articles (only a subset of which are associated with a patent-paper
pair), we then exploit the fact that for any patent-paper pair, there exists a patent grant delay – a
substantial gap between the date of scientific publication and the date at which the associated
patent is granted.7 And, in many cases, follow-on researchers are unaware of whether or not a
particular discovery will ultimately be associated with a patent-paper pair. This empirical
technique exploits the insight that while publication in the scientific literature often occurs within
7

The specifics of patent law regarding the precise timing of disclosure is complex, varies across countries and has
been subject to change. However, broadly speaking, under US patent law, inventors have a grace period of twelve
months between public disclosure (for example in an academic publication or presentation) and filing for patenting
covering that knowledge. Thus, the timing of the publication submission and patent application can vary among
patent applications with some filed before publication and some after. In the Oncomouse case, a patent was filed on
June 22, 1984, the article was submitted on August 21, 1984, the article was published in October, 1984 and patent
grant and publication occurred on April 12, 1988.

14

six months (or less) after initial submission to a journal, the delay between the initial application
and receipt of a patent is often many years (in most cases a 2-4 year time window). It is
important to emphasize that patent grant delay is more than simply a matter of the timing of a
pro forma administrative decision. During the time between application and grant, applicants
and examiners undertake detailed negotiations about the scope and extent of the patent grant, and
so there is significant uncertainty about the extent of IPR prior to grant (Cockburn, Kortum, and
Stern, 2003; Jaffe and Lerner, 2004). Perhaps more saliently, prior to the patent grant date, the
patent applicant holds no formal IPR, and, in nearly all cases, cannot sue for infringement for
activities undertaken during the pre-patent grant period. Finally, until 2001 (and thus for nearly
all of the cases within our empirical work), USPTO patent applications remained secret until
granted. In other words, for any given patent-paper pair, we observe the same “piece” of
knowledge in two distinct institutional regimes: one associated with the pre-patent grant period
and then a regime shift into the post-patent grant period.
Of course, the behavioral response to the patent grant date will depend importantly on the
degree to which the patent grant serves as “news”: To what extent were researchers aware of the
impending grant, and how does patent grant (and associated post-grant enforcement activities)
change behavior by raising the perceived “price” of building on a prior discovery? If follow-on
researchers believe that a patent-paper pair is likely (as might occur, for example, for articles
published by researchers from a for-profit company), the impact on patent grant on behavior is
likely to be modest (since researchers will anticipate the potential for IPR in advance and
incorporate these potential costs into their research decisions). On the other hand, if only a
minority of university researchers engage in patenting behavior, the potential for a post-patent
grant “surprise” is quite high. For the purpose of the current analysis, we assume that at least
some potential follow-on researchers may experience the patent grant as “news,” though of
course the level of news may depend on factors such as the institutional affiliations or locations
of the originating authors, and the amount of time elapsed since the patent grant date.8
We combine these elements into an empirical model by taking the annual rate of citation
to an article in follow-on scientific research articles as a measure of the cumulative impact of that
8

It is also theoretically possible that follow-on researchers will exploit the “window” between publication date and
the patent grant date to take advantage of the absence of IPR over knowledge which will ultimately be protected.
While we acknowledge this theoretical possibility, our fieldwork strongly mitigates against this strategy. Few
laboratories are able to predict the precise timing of their research results, and so are unlikely to strategically enter
and then exit a research area that will come under patent protection at an uncertain date in the future.

15

article through time. Though scientific citations are by no means a perfect measure of the impact
of a specific article, they provide a useful (if noisy) index of the relative salience of research in
follow-on research which is also disclosed in scientific publications (Merton 2000; Cole 2000).
More precisely, if the granting of IPR raises the cost of building on a specific piece of
knowledge, then the citation rate to IPR-linked scientific publication should decline post patent
grant. Of course, measuring the impact of scientific research using citations implies that we
must account for its form as count data skewed to the right (and likely over-dispersed relative to
Poisson). Therefore, except where noted, we employ a negative binomial model of the citations
produced per year for each scientific article in our dataset. However, the impact of a given piece
of research, as measured by citations, will vary considerably with the underlying importance of
the research discovery, with the time elapsed since initial publication, and with the year for
which the citations are being considered. To control for these factors, our empirical
specifications will account for individual publication quality (through article fixed effects) and
for the effects of publication age and the overall rate of citation in a given year (through age and
citation year fixed effects).9 Taken together, our baseline empirical test for the anti-commons
hypothesis is therefore:

CITESi ,t = f (ε i ,t ; γ i + δ t − pubyear + β t + ψ POST − GRANTi ,t )

(1)

where γi is a fixed effect for each article, δ t - pubyear captures the age of the article, βt is a fixed
effect for each citation year, and POST-GRANT is a dummy variable equal to one only for years
in which a patent is in force for an individual article.10 Because we observe citations to a
scientific publication both before and after the patent is received (and because we observe a
control group of similar publications which never receive a patent) we are able to identify how
the temporal pattern of citations to a scientific publication changes as the result of patent grant.11
9

Several subtle issues, including an incidental parameters problem, arise in incorporating multiple fixed effect
vectors into a negative binomial specification. We experimented with a range of alternative approaches, including
the conditional negative binomial estimator (Hausman, Griliches, and Hall, 1984) and the fixed effects estimator
(Allison and Waterman, 2002). All of our qualitative findings are unchanged across these different procedures;
building on the simulation results reported by Allison and Waterman (2002), we report the results associated with
the fixed effects procedure, which also facilitates straightforward computation of robust standard errors.
10
Of course, it is possible to constrain this specification in order to, for example, obtain a separate estimate of the
impact of unobserved heterogeneity between patented versus unpatented articles versus the impact of patent grant
itself. In this case, one could simply replace the article fixed effect with a dummy variable for those articles which
ultimately receive a patent: CITESi ,t = f (ε i ,t ; δ t − pubyear + β t + λ PATENTEDi + ψ POST GRANT
. i ,t )
11

This baseline analysis does assume that the age fixed effects associated with citation depend on whether a paper
receives a patent. In particular, a key assumption of our base model (which we later relax) is that patented articles

16

This test goes beyond the potentially biased test of whether patented publications are more or
less highly cited that those that are not associated with patents. In other words, we test for the
anti-commons effect by calculating how the citation rate for a scientific publication changes after
patent rights are granted, accounting for fixed differences in the citation rate across articles and
relative to the (non-parametric) trend in citation rates for articles with similar characteristics.
At its core, anti-commons theory predicts that if the grant of intellectual property hinders
the ability of researchers to cumulatively build on a given piece of knowledge, then the citation
rate to the scientific publication disclosing that knowledge should fall after formal IP rights are
granted over that knowledge. In addition to this baseline prediction, theory and the details of
our empirical setting suggest a number of more nuanced hypotheses. First, as we discussed
earlier, the ability to infer the impact of IPR from the date of patent grant (and not before)
depends importantly on the fact that the patent grant represents “news” to at least some followon researchers. As such, we expect our proposed test to be more salient among researchers with
public sector author affiliations (e.g., government or university researchers). When a purely
private research team publishes a scientific result, potential follow-on researchers may
(rationally) anticipate that the knowledge and/or tools described in the article will eventually be
covered by IPR. Accordingly, in contrast to the “news” associated with public sector patent
grant, researchers may be deterred at the outset from research areas in which private sector
researchers are publishing, whether or not the patent grant has yet been issued. Furthermore, we
would expect that the “news” from a particular patent grant likely diffuses among researchers
over time, particularly in the few years after the grant. Taken together, we expect that the impact
of patent grant changes with the time elapsed since patent grant:
CITESi ,t = f (ε i ,t ; γ i + δ t − pubyear + β t
+

∑ψ

k =1....r

PRE _ k

PRE − GRANT ( k )i ,t +

∑ψ

l =1.... s

POST _ l

POST − GRANT (l )i ,t )

This specification allows us to evaluate both whether the impact of patent grant was anticipated
(in terms of changes of citation behavior that preceded the actual patent grant date) as well as
how the impact of patent grant changes with the years elapsed since the patent grant.
are not simply “shooting stars” – articles that, for exogenous reasons, experience a high rate of early citation
followed by a rapid decline. In part, this characterization is counterfactual to the most well-documented pattern of
scientific citation, the so-called Matthew Effect, in which articles with a high rate of early citation tend to continue
to receive an ever-higher rate of citation after a favorable early record (Merton, 1973). Also, in our robustness
analysis, we actually rely exclusively on a sample of patented articles (with varying patent grant lag times), with no
change in our core results.

17

Anti-commons theory also offers several additional predictions that provide precision in
terms of the types of knowledge most likely to be associated with the anti-commons effect. First,
the effect should be greatest for patent-paper pairs with particular patent characteristics – namely
patents associated with significant prior art, broad scope, and specifically focused on research
tools. The anti-commons hypothesis is premised on the difficulty of using contracting methods
to access to knowledge covered by patent protection. While contractual difficulties may be
relatively unimportant when there is only a single patent or area of prior art, transaction costs
(and bargaining break-down) are likely to be more important when there are multiple competing
claims limiting access to knowledge and materials. Therefore, patents with significant patent
prior art and non-patent prior art might be expected to be associated with denser patent thickets
and hence stronger anti-commons effects. In addition, broad patents represent the broadest
definition of the patent-paper pair and the strongest rights over the published knowledge. As
such they are likely to have the greatest anti-commons impact. Likewise, patents on research
tools rather than compositions of matter, pathways etc. – tools like the Oncomouse, cell lines,
gene probes – would also be predicted to have a larger anti commons effect. They represent
ideas that are of broad relevance to many researchers and are also subject to greater transparency
in their use; cell deposits, material transfer agreements, and other institutional arrangements
facilitate their dissemination but potentially also alert patent holders to possible infringement.
Finally, the impact of patent grant may be strongest for publications by US-based
authors. For articles written exclusively by non-US authors, the process of applying for and
having a US patent granted is likely a very heterogeneous process, and enforcement activities
may be uneven. As a result, we expect to observe a more salient effect associated with grant
behavior for articles with a US domestic author. Overall, our empirical framework provides a
rich setting for evaluating a number of detailed hypotheses implied by the anti-commons
argument. The remainder of this paper focuses on evaluating these empirical questions.

IV.

The Data

IV.A. Sample Definition
The data for this study is based on the entire population of peer-reviewed research articles
published in the journal Nature Biotechnology over the period 1997 to 1999. While the journal
publishes scholarly material in a variety of formats, we confine our data to research articles
18

which are defined by the editorial policies of the journal as “a substantial novel research study”
(see Nature Biotechnology, A Guide to Authors). Under these criteria, the dataset consists of
340 unique research articles.
Our sample population was chosen to focus on research exhibiting the duality
emphasized by Stokes (1997). As noted above, biotechnology is a particularly salient arena for
dual knowledge. In Nature Biotechnology’s first issue in 1996, the editorial mission of the
journal was described as: “cover[ing] business, financial, and regulatory matter: not to do so
would be perverse and self-defeating. But its emphasis will be unashamedly on research and
development, the fuel for biotechnology's fire.” (Nature Biotechnology, 1996).12 The publishing
policy adopted by Nature Biotechnology explicitly aimed at research with potential applications
to biotechnology: “[the journal] aims to publish high-quality original research that describes the
development and application of new technologies in the biological, pharmaceutical, biomedical,
agricultural and environmental sciences, and which promise to find real-world applications in
academia or industry. We also have a strong interest in research that describes the application of
existing technologies to new problems or challenges, and basic research that reports novel
findings that are directly relevant and/or of interest to those who develop biology into
technology.” Since its inception, Nature Biotechnology has established itself as the leading
outlet (in terms of measured scientific impact) for refereed scientific research relating to
biotechnology and continues to play this role. In other words, research published in Nature
Biotechnology is both “at risk” of serving as a foundation for future scientific studies and for
commercial exploitation.
For each of the 340 articles article, we determined whether a patent associated (or paired)
with the article had been granted by the USPTO. Using the USPTO search engine, we defined a
series of searches for each article. The basic search included i) the first, last and corresponding
authors for the article and ii) the list of institutions found in the article “address field” in the Web
of Science database. For some institutions, specific name variations were used to account for the
fact that some institutions patent under distinctive institutional names: For example, patents
assigned to the University of Oxford are listed under the name of its separately incorporated
technology licensing office, ISIS Innovation. Different combinations of authors and/or

12

The new journal was not entirely new. It “picked up the torch from Bio/Technology”, a journal founded in 1983
to explore and publish leading edge science in biotechnology.

19

institutions were used from the most to the least inclusive in order to identify all issued patents
associated with the authors and institutional affiliations whose research appeared in Nature
Biotechnology. For example, since some patents were assigned to individuals (rather than an
institution), the search procedure examined whether each author for each article received a patent
within the time frame in question. After establishing the set of patent grants received by
individuals and institutions represented in the articles, patent abstracts and claims were read to
establish the presence of a patent-paper “pair.” To do so, we verified whether the material
described in the abstract of the article was incorporated into the description, claims and/or
examples of the granted patent.13 By checking the precise content of patents granted to those
whose research is published in Nature Biotechnology, our procedure provides a consistent way to
identify the subset of articles within our overall sample which are also patent-paper pairs. Using
this procedure, 169 of the 340 articles were found to be associated with a patent as of October,
2003. In other words, approximately half of all publications in Nature Biotechnology are
associated with a patent-paper pair within five years of publication.
Since, as noted above, our empirical work relies on the fact that a) the entire sample of
articles is initially “at risk” of being patented, and b) but for being patented the articles do not
vary systematically along an unobserved dimension impacting the citation time trend we checked
the comparability assumption in several ways. First, the sample design ensures that the articles
are comparable insofar as all are drawn from the same (reasonably specialized) high-quality
journal. All articles have undergone a similar refereeing process, and editorial decisions are
presumably made with the journal’s editorial mission in mind. Second, for a subset of 34 of the
non-patented articles, we undertook a detailed evaluation of their innate patentability. The
standard for patentability (defined in 35 U.S.C. Section 101) is defined as “new and useful
processes, machines, manufactures, compositions of matter; and any new or useful
improvements thereof….subject to the conditions of patentability” where conditions of
patentability include novelty, non-obviousness and utility (see, for example, Merges, 2003, for
an overview of the law and economics of the patent system). It is important to note that this
standard excludes important categories of knowledge which might be reflected in scientific
13

One of the authors (Murray) holds a PhD in Applied Sciences and has conducted detailed qualitative research on
the scientific content of contemporary biotechnology and applied microbiological research (Murray, 2002). The
criteria used to assign a patent-paper pair was conservative insofar as there had to be a direct connection between the
disclosures in the article abstract and patent record. In the vast majority of cases, the presence (or not) of a patentpaper pair was unambiguous.

20

research articles, such as the discovery of new scientific principles, abstract ideas, and the
identification of naturally occurring materials. However, novel “research tools” and
“compositions of matter” are patentable, and constitute the bulk of patented technologies in the
sample. An experienced patent attorney (graciously) undertook an examination of the
publication abstracts and was asked to make a “conservative” determination of whether the
research findings included a potentially patentable discovery. Of the articles submitted for
review, more than 75% (27 out of 34) were considered to be obviously patentable; of the
remaining, most contained at least some potential for patentability (i.e., while they failed the
conservative test we requested, they likely would have passed a more lenient (but still plausible)
standard for patentability). In particular, most of the articles not considered patentable under
our test reported research results using standard techniques on pre-existing materials, and so the
abstract did not include a description of a novel research tool or composition of matter. While
these evaluations do not constitute a formal legal opinion, this check does provide support for the
assumption that most (if not entirely all) articles within the sample are at risk of being patented.
Third, we directly compared the similarity of articles within the sample. The MedLine
database includes a feature allowing the identification of “similar” articles, based on keyword
matching. For each patented article, we identified the “most similar” non-patented article within
the sample and qualitatively evaluated a subset of these for comparability. By and large,
matched articles were found to be qualitatively similar, both in terms of their underlying
scientific content and their potential for patentability.14
Finally we gathered a series of variables associated with the number of authors, the
number and type of institutional affiliations, and the author age, rank and gender. On the one
hand, there are some (marginally) significant differences between the unpatented and patented
articles. For example, articles with private sector affiliations tend to have a higher patenting rate

14

Consider the following matched example. One article, published in June, 1997, describes a research study (by
researchers at John Hopkins University) of a novel method of using bacteriophage which express ligands on their
surface to detect the interaction between key proteins, thus allowing “a powerful approach to the molecular studies
of protein-protein interactions” (Li, 1997). The second article, published in December, 1999, by researchers at
Sugen (a biotechnology firm) describes a novel display technique to examine the interaction among specific proteins
using a library of DNA fragments that contain specific mutations used to reduce non-specific binding that will
render results imprecise and difficult to analyze. The method was applied to key signal transduction pathways and
the authors suggest could be “a rapid and efficient tool for elucidating protein networks” (Zozulya et al. 1999).
Though both articles are concerned with extremely similar scientific issues (methods for identifying protein
interactions) and both are clearly describing (patentable) research tools, only the first is associated with a USPTO
patent grant.

21

than those with exclusively public sector affiliations; articles with US-based authors tend to have
a higher rate of USPTO patenting than those articles with exclusively foreign authors. Indeed, at
one level, this institutional variation is precisely what we are exploiting in our core empirical
specification. More importantly, there were no significant correlations between patenting and
any aspect of the nature of the scientific research contribution (e.g., article length, the number of
authors, or the number of backward references). Overall, given the nature of the sampling
process, and the qualitative comparisons, we assume that articles within our sample are each “at
risk” of being patented (in a technical sense), and both observable and unobservable institutional
factors are important in determining this outcome. In most of the empirical work, we therefore
assume that, after controlling for the overall quality an article, the sample population is
composed of articles at risk of being patented and, but for a patent grant, the time trend for all
articles follows the same stochastic process.
The dataset is drawn from three distinct sources, each noted in Table 1. Article-specific
characteristics are gathered from Nature Biotechnology; the date of publication, the number of
authors, and the location and institutional affiliation of each author (available from the address
list provided for each article). For each article we identified the lead author (the so-called
Principal Investigator) for whom we gathered individual and institutional information from
institutional websites and author resumes. The citation counts for each article (through October,
2003) are calculated using the Science Citation Index Expanded (SCI).15 For each article
associated with a USPTO patent, we collected a number of patent characteristics from the
USPTO public database.

IV.B. Summary Statistics
For the variables used in our analysis, Table 1 provides variable names and definitions
and Tables 2 and 3 reports summary statistics. For each article in the dataset, we track citations
beginning in the year in which the article was published and continuing until the end of 2002.
The total number of article-year observations is 1688.
The key dependent variable in our analysis is FORWARD CITATIONS, the number of
articles that reference the focal article in a given year. Not surprisingly given the prestige and

15

Maintained by the Institute for Scientific Information (ISI), SCI records reference and citation information for
nearly six thousand scientific and technical journals in approximately 150 disciplines.

22

quality of Nature Biotechnology, the average level of annual citations received by articles in this
dataset is quite high, relative to randomly selected academic articles (mean = 9.35), and, by the
end of 2002, the average article had received more than 54 total cumulative citations. Consistent
with prior citation analysis studies, the distribution of citation counts is quite skewed, with nearly
20% of the citation-years receiving either 0 or 1 citation, but also including one publication with
an annual citation count equal to 181 (Figure B). Because we observe article-years from 1997
through 2002 (but only observe articles published in 1998 or 1999 for a shorter set of years), the
average CITATION YEAR is at the margin of the 2000 calendar year, and the average AGE
observed within the sample is just a little over 2.0 years.
While the heart of the analysis incorporates article fixed effects to account for differences
between articles in terms of their impact and overall quality, we examined a number of articlespecific characteristics. These characteristics include the number of authors (# AUTHORS,
mean = 5.89) as well as their institutional affiliations. For example, US AUTHOR is a dummy
variable measuring whether at least one of the authors lists a US address (mean = 0.59). We
assign university and government researcher affiliations as “public sector” institutions and
pharmaceutical and biotechnology affiliations as “private sector” organizations. We then define
two dummy variables, PUBLIC SECTOR AUTHOR and PRIVATE SECTOR AUTHOR, which
are equal to one if at least one author is associated with a public sector or private sector
organization, respectively. Interestingly, nearly 90% of the articles in the sample have at least
one public sector author, and more than 30% have at least one private sector author.
Finally, our data includes information about the 169 patents associated with each patentpaper pair. The average date of patent grant (weighted by article) is mid-2000 with the average
lag between the patent application and patent grant date is just over 3 years).16 Interestingly,
while the patent grant lag is correlated with some traditional factors (such as the number of
backward references in the patent), the overall patent grant delay is not robustly correlated with
institutional affiliations (PUBLIC SECTOR AUTHOR, PRIVATE SECTOR AUTHOR, or US
AUTHOR). PATENTED, POST-GRANT is the dummy variable indicating whether the
citation-year is linked to a patent-paper pair, and whether the patent has been issued and is in

16

Some patents have been issued as late as 2003 (mostly associated with 1999 publications). Inclusion or exclusion
of these 23 articles from the analysis does not change any of the qualitative findings (primarily because our strategy
relies on articles where we observe a change in the IP regime during those years where we observe a citation count).

23

force.17 We also measure several patent-specific characteristics which along with article-specific
characteristics can be interacted with PATENTED, POST-GRANT to assess whether the impact
of patent grant on the citation rate depends on observable characteristics of the article or
associated patent.
First, similar to PUBLIC SECTOR AUTHOR, PUBLIC SECTOR ASSIGNEE (mean =
0.65) is a dummy variable equal to one if there is at least one assignee from the public sector. In
addition, when the research upon which a patent is based is funded (even in part) by the Federal
government, the applicant must disclose a Federal “interest” (indeed, the ability to retain patent
rights in most cases despite this Federal interest is at the heart of the Bayh-Dole Act). Of the 169
articles associated with patents in our dataset, 49 report a Federal interest. To the extent that
contemporary policy proposals related to the anti-commons effect would most likely impact
Federally funded research, the impact of patent grant on citation is particularly interesting for
those patents for which GOVT FUNDED = 1. We then measure the number of listed inventors
(# INVENTORS, mean = 3.04); interestingly, the average for # INVENTORS is just over half
that associated with # AUTHORS. We also calculate two measures of the level of prior art cited
by the patent, including the number of citations to prior patents (PATENT BACK CITATIONS)
and the number of citations to prior non-patent references (PATENT BACK REFERENCES).
As the number of prior art references increases, the potential for a “patent thicket” increases
(Shapiro, 2001); in the spirit of Heller and Eisenberg (1998), the presence of a patent thicket may
exacerbate the anti-commons effect and result in a greater decline in the post-grant citation rate
of patented articles. Interestingly, relative to the overall means for citations made to patented
prior art by “biotechnology” patents reported by Allison and Lemley (2002), the averages for
both PATENT BACK CITATIONS (mean = 7.26) and PATENT BACK REFERENCES (mean
= 28.19) are somewhat high. We also include two measures of the type and scope of the patent.
# CLAIMS is simply the number of allowed claims which is an extremely imperfect (and noisy)
measure of the strength of patent rights, but does provide at least a weak measure of patent scope
thus an increase in # CLAIMS should intensify the impact of patent grant on article citation
rates. TOOLS PATENT is a dummy variable equal to one if the primary class for the patent is
within the 435 and 800 patent classes (mean = 0.58). Out of the 11 3-digit patent classes
17

PATENT, POST-GRANT is equal to one from the year of the patent grant date. All of the qualitative results are
robust either to including the years associated with the year of the patent grant in the “pre-grant” category or
dropping these article-year observations from the analysis.

24

represented across the patents within the sample, these two 3-digit classes are most closely
associated with processes and tools. Since research tools have been of particular concern within
the anti-commons debate (relative to composition of matter patents), the TOOLS PATENT
dummy will allow us to assess whether the impact of patent grant on citation is greater for
patents covering research tools and methods.

IV.C. Patented Versus Non-Patented Articles
Table 3 compares the means of patented and unpatented articles within the sample. A
few notable differences stand out. First, the average rate of citation is relatively similar across
the two groups, with the patented articles receiving, on average, an additional citation per articleyear over the sample. However, this 10% average difference masks more substantial differences
that manifest themselves over time. In Figure C, the average FORWARD CITATIONS are
plotted by AGE (years since publication). During the year of publication and in the subsequent
three years, PATENTED articles have a significant citation advantage, equivalent to an
approximately 15-18% “boost” over the citations rates for non-patented articles. However, in the
fourth and fifth years after disclosure in the literature, patented articles converge to the citation
rate associated with non-patented articles. As we explore further in the next section, it is during
these later years in which patented articles are in the post-grant phase, perhaps helping to explain
the decline relative to trend experienced by patent-paper pair publications. In addition to these
overall differences in citation rates, it is important to recognize that there are also differences in
article characteristics. Relative to non-patented articles, patented articles have a significantly
higher chance of having at least one US author, or at least one author from a private sector
organization (the differences in means in # AUTHORS and PUBLIC SECTOR AUTHOR are
not significant).18
These data suggest that the number of citations and article characteristics vary across the
margin of whether or not an article is part of a patent-paper pair. While the drop-off in the
citation advantage associated with patented articles is consistent with the presence of an anticommons effect, such an effect could result from differences in the characteristics of articles

18

Appendix A explores these conditional means in more detail by breaking them out according to whether a public
sector author is associated with article. Notably, among patented articles, there is a distinct citations advantage
associated with those articles with PUBLIC SECTOR AUTHOR equal to 0.

25

represented in the different age-cohort categories. In order to precisely identify the source of
these differences, the next section undertakes a systematic econometric analysis of these patterns.

V.

Empirical Analysis

The empirical analysis proceeds in several stages. We first compare the cross-sectional
differences in citation rates between patented and unpatented articles allowing for controls for
other article characteristics. We then turn to the principal empirical exercise, examining how the
citation rate changes with the grant of formal intellectual property under a variety of control
structures and examining how the effect of IP manifests itself over time. Finally, we examine
how our diffs-in-diffs estimates vary with article and patent characteristics. As noted above,
except where noted, all specifications employ a negative binominal regression. Coefficients are
reported as incident rate ratios, and so should be interpreted as a multiplicative effect on the
expected number of citations received in a given year resulting from a one unit change in a
regressor (i.e., the null hypothesis of no effect yields a coefficient of 1.0).
We begin in Table 4 with two negative binomial specifications, each of which includes
YEAR and AGE fixed effects. While PATENTED articles are associated with a higher rate of
citation without any additional controls, this effect is reduced in magnitude and statistically
insignificant when controls for # AUTHORS, US AUTHOR, and PUBLIC SECTOR AUTHOR
are included. In other words, the overall citation advantage observed in the conditional means
can be (primarily) explained by differences in observable article characteristics.19 This brief
cross-sectional analysis motivates our main empirical analysis of the impact of patent grant
conditional on article quality. We begin in (5-1) with a regression, in which the dependent
variable is equal to the natural log of FORWARD CITATIONS + 1; this OLS regression
includes fixed effects for each calendar year, article age, and article fixed effects. Though this
specification does not account for the nature of citations as skewed count data, the results
provide support for nearly a 10% decline in the rate of citation after patent grant (significant at
the 10% level). The remainder of this table turns back to negative binomial regression. In (5-2)
and (5-3), we estimate both the overall difference between patented and non-patented articles and
the marginal impact of being in the post-grant phase. For each of these specifications, we
19

Though it is not the principal focus of the analysis, several unreported specifications confirm this qualitative
finding. Though PATENTED is significant when controls are not included, the estimated effect becomes both
smaller and imprecise when even a single observable article characteristic is included.

26

include the same article controls included in (4-2); as well, whereas (5-2) employs a parametric
treatment for the impact of AGE (including a linear and quadratic term), (5-3) includes a
complete set of age and year fixed effects. In both cases, patented articles enjoy approximately
an 18% overall citation boost; however, the receipt of a patent – establishment of a granted
patent-paper pair - effectively erases this advantage, resulting in an estimated 15-17% decline in
the expected citation rate. Finally, in our differences-in-differences estimate in (5-4), we include
a separate fixed effect for every article (and a complete set of year and age fixed effects); as
such, these estimates are identified exclusively off the within-article contrasts between pre-grant
and post-grant citation levels (and after accounting for the impact of age and year). According to
this specification, the estimated post-grant decline is estimated at just over 9% with a high level
of statistical significance. Moreover, these results are robust to alternative specifications and
sample definitions.20 At face value, these estimates provide concrete evidence for the existence
of an anti-commons effect. Simply put, the impact of a given piece of scientific research on
scientific research declines after IP rights are granted. At an intuitive level, the results suggests
that between 1 in 11 and 1 in 6 researchers building on a given paper may forego a specific
research project requiring citation to the patent-paper pair after IPR is granted.
The evidence for an anti-commons effect is even stronger when we examine the relative
citation rate for an article in the years preceding and following the patent grant. To do so, we
estimate a fixed effects negative binomial regression including specific dummy variables for
each year preceding and following the patent grant date. In Figure D, we display the coefficients
from that specification. Overall, patented articles tend to have an overall higher citation rate
(relative to the baseline of 0 which is the value of the “average” fixed effect in the sample).
Earlier, we had attributed this overall difference to differences in observable characteristics such
as author affiliations. More importantly, Figure D provides evidence consistent with the idea
that the anti-commons effect grows in the time elapsed since patent grant (though individual
coefficients are estimated imprecisely). Though articles receive an up-tick in citations in the
year prior to patent grant, there is an intermediate decline in the year of patent grant which
continues steadily through four years after the date of patent grant. The difference between the
pre-grant average and the average four years after patent grant is more than 25%, suggesting that

20

For example, the results are similar (though a bit more noisy) if broken out by individual years of publication, or if
(the incomplete record for) 2003 citations are included as an additional year of data.

27

the impact of IPR accumulates over time; taking these pattern at face value, the “size” of the
anticommons effect becomes a sizable deterrent after IPR are in force for several years.

The Role of Institutional Affiliations, Location and Funding
As noted above, the focus of the anti-commons debate is on scientific research conducted
with US government funds that involves university or other public sector researchers. In Table 6,
we move beyond the baseline analysis to examine how the effect of patent grant on citations
varies with the affiliations of article authors. Each specification consists of a negative binomial
with fixed effects for articles, article age, and calendar year (as in (5-4)). In (6-1) and (6-2), we
examine how the impact of patent grant varies with whether an article has any public authors and
whether it has any private authors. The results are striking. While there is an insignificant effect
when there is at least one private author (or all private authors), the decline in citations is most
closely associated with the case where there are no private authors. It is possible that articles
associated with private sector researchers are assumed to have intellectual property associated
with them, and so the actual receipt of a patent has little impact on behavior by those who might
build on that research. In contrast, until the patent grant date, researchers put a lower probability
on purely public sector authored papers having a patent associated with them; the effect of IP in
this case is to chill follow-on research endeavors. Interestingly, there is much less difference in
the citation decline depending on whether the article is associated with at least one US author (63); moreover, (6-4) demonstrates that the anticommons effect is identified even if one excludes
all articles without at least one US author. In other words, though the impact of patent grant is
muted for those articles without at least some public sector involvement (perhaps due to
expectations about IPR by follow-on researchers), these results do not provide evidence for the
hypothesis that the sensitivity of citation to patent grant depends on author location.
In our final analysis of the impact of institutional affiliation on the anticommons effect,
we turn to the affiliations as reported on the patent rather than the publication and assess whether
the source of funding for research mediates the sensitivity of the citation rate to patent grant. In
(7-1), we compare the coefficients associated with patents for which at least one of the assignees
is a public sector organization versus those that are exclusively assigned to private firms. In (72), we divide out the impact of patent grant according to whether the patent applicant
acknowledges Federal funding for the research upon which the patent is based. In both cases,

28

one cannot distinguish a separate impact according to the source of reported research funding (in
the patent). However, since policy interventions aimed at the anticommons effect would be
primarily focused on research funded by public sector organizations or the Federal government
itself, it is important to emphasize the anti-commons effect may exist in organizations beyond
the direct province of the most likely policy interventions.

Does the Impact of Patent Grant Depend on Patent Type?
At its heart, the anti-commons hypothesis is premised on the difficulty of using
contracting methods to overcome the limitations on access to knowledge covered under patent
protection. As noted above we would expect contractual difficulties or the imposition of patent
rights to be strongest for patents with multiple competing claims (extensive prior art), broad
claims, in areas of broad applicability such as tools. Table 8 explores this hypothesis by
examining the interaction between the POST-GRANT dummy and our two measures of the
degree of prior art cited in the patent (PATENT BACKWARD CITATIONS and PATENT
BACKWARD REFERENCES). In both cases, there is a quantitatively large and statistically
significant interaction. A one standard deviation increase in the level of prior patent art citation
made by a patent-paper pair is associated with an additional 6% decline in the expected citation
rate after the patent is issued. Table 9 shifts the focus from the extent of the patent thicket to the
scope and nature of the patent grant. Though # CLAIMS is an extremely imperfect (and noisy)
measure of the strength of patent rights evidence for the anticommons effect is strengthened by
the fact that the predicted decline of citations as the result of patent grant is larger as the number
of patent claims increases. In contrast, though a key tenet of the anticommons theory is that the
effects are particularly salient for research tool patents, there is no evidence that the impact of
patent grant depends on the nature of the invention.

Exploiting Variation in Patent Grant Delay
Though encouraging, it is important to emphasize that the results so far have relied on the
presence of the control group of non-patented articles. While we have emphasized the
comparable nature of our control group, and included variables to account for observable
differences, the potential for unobserved differences in the two groups which correlate to the
pattern of forward citations remains a possibility. We examine this by exploring an empirical

29

approach relying exclusively on a sample composed of articles which are ultimately associated
with a patent-paper pair. In the absence of a control group, it is difficult to disentangle the
impact of patent grant from the impact of age on the citation rate, particularly if one
simultaneously controls for fixed quality differences across articles. Indeed, if the amount of
time elapsed between publication and patent grant were constant across articles, the impact of
post-grant would not be separately identified from a set of age fixed effects.
Nonetheless, in Table 10 we the estimate of the impact of patent grant relying solely on
differences across articles in the amount of time between publication and patent grant. The first
column of Table 10 suggests that the anticommons effect is indeed identified by this variation.
This specification controls for article quality by including #AUTHORS, US AUTHOR, and
PUBLIC SECTOR AUTHOR, as well as a full set of age and year fixed effects. The coefficient
on POST-GRANT is quantitatively and statistically significant, with a magnitude similar to that
found in the second and third columns of Table 5 (patent grant is associated with a 14-17%
decline in citation rate). Following the analysis in Table 6, the last two columns of Table 10
address include article fixed effects with the difference between the two specifications being that,
whereas (10-2) includes the entire sample, (10-3) only focuses on articles which have at least one
US author and at least one author with a public sector affiliation.

VI.

Discussion

This paper provides the first systematic empirical test of the anti-commons hypothesis.
Our empirical approach exploits the fact that the duality of knowledge is captured in the
phenomenon of patent-paper pairs. Specifically, we exploit variation in both the occurrence of
patent-paper pairs among a group of similar scientific publications and the patent grant delay
thus allowing us to examine pieces of knowledge in distinctive institutional settings. Our
evidence suggests that knowledge duality in general and patent-paper pairs in particular are an
important phenomenon (nearly 50% of articles published in Nature Biotechnology are associated
with a pair). And, that for scientific knowledge subject to both Open and Private Property
institutional regimes, the granting of IPR is associated with a significant but modest decline in
knowledge accumulation as measured by forward citations. Moreover, the decline in forward
citations becomes more pronounced with the number of years elapsed since patent grant, and is
greatest for knowledge produced with university or public institutions for which patent grant is

30

likely to be “news”. We also find that the decline in forward citations is greatest for scientific
articles paired with patents that cite a high levels of both patent and non-patent (publicationbased) prior art. Overall, we are able to reject the null hypothesis that IP rights have no impact
on the diffusion of scientific knowledge.
These patterns provide a novel perspective on the economic consequences of the
privatization of the scientific commons. Rather than simply serving to facilitate a “market for
ideas,” IP may indeed restrict the diffusion of scientific research and the ability of future
researchers to “stand on the shoulders of giants”. However, erecting a (property rights) barrier to
the accumulation of knowledge does not eliminate all Open Science use of that knowledge. The
demand for specific published findings by follow-on researchers is relatively inelastic, limiting
the empirical impact of the anti-commons effect in our estimates to between one in six and one
in eleven research projects. Furthermore, disentangling the differential anti-commons effect
among different types of future researchers – in the public versus the private sector, in the same
or different geographic area as the initial publishing authors (be it local, regional or national), or
among those who themselves generate patent-paper pairs or not – remains an open empirical
question and the subject of future research. The magnitude and distribution of the anti-commons
effect among distinctive groups of researchers has important implications for policy and for the
degree to which anti-commons issues should be used to animate and justify changes in patent
policy over dual knowledge generated in academia. For example, the policy implications of our
findings would depend considerably on whether the “missing” citations are associated with
independent public sector researchers versus being centered exclusively on follow-on research
by private sector teams.
Moreover, it should be emphasized that our evidence for the anti-commons effect
captures only one aspect of the impact of IP on dual knowledge. IPR may enhance incentives for
(unobserved) research (particularly by private sector organizations) or lead to more effective
commercialization (which is far more costly than the basic research component itself). Without
a detailed accounting of the size of these effects versus the effect identified here, it is impossible
to infer the elements of an optimal policy.
Despite these caveats, the importance of adjudicating this debate should not be
understated. The production of dual-use knowledge is increasingly central in scientific research
and of great interest to those who fund research. Biotechnology and the life sciences have grown

31

enormously as a share of overall research activities, and similar questions arise in the context of
areas such as nanotechnology and open source software. Because biotechnology and related
disciplines simultaneously offer the potential for fundamental scientific discoveries and
commercial breakthroughs, our traditional understanding of the role of Private Property
institutions and the norms of Open Science is open to question. By providing a window into the
impact of IP rights on the diffusion and accumulation of scientific knowledge, this paper offers
some insights into the policy tradeoffs associated with embedding scientific knowledge in two
distinctive and potentially opposing institutional regimes.

32

References
Adams, J. (1990) “Fundamental Stocks of Knowledge and Productivity Growth,” Journal of Political Economy, 98,
673-702.
Allison, Paul D. and Richard Waterman. 2002. “Fixed effects negative binomial regression models.” Ross
Stolzenberg (ed.), Sociological Methodology 2002. Boston: Basil Blackwell.
Agrawal, Ajay and Rebecca M. Henderson. 2002. “Putting Patents in Context: Exploring Knowledge Transfer from
MIT”. Management Science, 48:1, pp. 44-60.
Argyres, Nicholas. and Julia. Liebskind (1998). “Privatizing the Intellectual Commons: Universities and the
Commercialization of Biotechnology Research," Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization..
Arora, Ashish. 1995. Licensing Tacit Knowledge: Intellectual Property Rights And The Market For Know-How",
Economics of Innovation and New Technology, 1995, Vol. 4, 41-49.
Arora, Ashish, Andrea Fosfuri, Alfonso Gambardella (2001) "Markets for Technology: Economics of Innovation
and Corporate Strategy", Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, December 2001
Arrow, Kenneth. "Economic Welfare and the Allocation of Resources for Invention." In The Rate and Direction of
Inventive Activity, edited by Richard R. Nelson, 609-25. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1962.
Azoulay, Pierre, Waverly Ding, and Toby Stuart. (2005). “The Impact of Academic Patenting on (Public) Research
Output. Working Paper 2005.
Blumenthal, David, Causino, Nancy, Eric Campbell, and Karen Seashore Louis (1996). “Relationships between
Academic Institutions and Industry in the Life Sciences — An Industry Survey” New England Journal of
Medicine, Volume 334:368-374.
Bremmer, H. The First Two Decades of the Bayh-Dole Act as Public Policy. Address to the National Association of
State Univrsities and Land Grant Colleges, November 11, 2001.
Bush, V. (1945). Science: The Endless Frontier, A Report to the President. Washington, D.C., U.S. Government
Printing Office.
Campbell, Eric G., Brian R. Clarridge, Manjusha Gokhale, Lauren Birenbaum, Stephen Hilgartner, Neil A.
Holtzman, and David Blumenthal. 2002. Data Withholding in Academic Genetics: Evidence from a
National Survey. Journal of the American Medical Association 287 (4):473 - 479.
Campbell EG, Weissman JS, Causino N, Blumenthal D. Data-withholding in academic medicine: Characteristics of
faculty denied access to research results and biomaterials. Research Policy 2000;29:303-12.
Cockburn, Iain, and Rebecca Henderson "Absorptive Capacity, Coauthoring Behavior, and the Organization of
Research in Drug Discovery." Journal of Industrial Economics, 1998, 46(2), pp. 157-182.
Cockburn, Iain, Samual Kortum and Scott Stern. 2002. “Are All Patent Examiners Created Equal? Examiners,
Patent Characteristics and Litigation Outcomes.” Intellectual Property in the Knowledge-Based Economy,
National Academy of Sceinces, 2003.
Cohen, S., Chang, A., Boyer, H., & Helling, R. 1973. Construction of biologically functional bacterial plasmids in
vitro. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, Vol. 70: 3240-3244.
Crespi, R. S. ‘Patents on Genes: Can the Issues be clarified?’ (1999/2000) 5 BioScience Law Review, 199 – 204.
Dasgupta, Partha. and David, Paul. 1994. “Towards a New Economics of Science” Research Policy (23), 487-521.
David, Paul. 2003. “Can ‘Open Science’ be Protected from the Evolving Regime of IPR Protections?” Stanford
Working Paper #03-011.

33

David, Paul. 2001a. “From Keeping 'Nature's Secrets' to the Institutionalization of 'Open Science” Stanford Working
Paper #01-006.
David, Paul. 2001b. “Will Building Good Fences really make Good Neighbors in Science” Stanford Working Paper
#01-005.
David, Paul. 2000. “The Digital Technology Boomerang: New Intellectual Property Rights Threaten Global "Open
Science" Stanford Working Paper #00-016.
Ding, Waverly, Fiona Murray and Toby Stuart. 2005. “An Empirical Study of Gender Differences in Patenting in
the Academic Life Sciences”, Working Paper.
Ducor P., 2000. Intellectual property. Coauthorship and coinventorship. Science 289(5481), 873-875.
Eisenberg, R. 1996. “Public Research and Private Development: Patents and Technology Transfer in GovernmentSponsored Research.” Virginia Law Review :1663-1727.
Etzkowitz, H., 1998. The norms of entrepreneurial science: cognitive effects of the new university-industry linkages.
Research Policy 27, 823-833.
Galambos L. and J. Sewell. 1995. Networks of Innovation: Vaccine Development at Merck, Sharp & Dohme, and
Mulford, 1895-1995. (New York: Cambridge University Press.
Gambardella, A. 1995. Science and Innovation. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge UK.
Gans, J. and S. Stern 2000. Incumbency and R&D Incentives: Licensing the Gale of Creative Destruction," (with. J.
Gans), Journal of Economics and Management Strategy, 2000
Geison, G. L. 1995. The Private Science of Louis Pasteur. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Hall, B.H. and R.H. Ziedonis (2001). “The Patent Paradox Revisited: An Empirical Study of Patenting in the US
Semiconductor Industry, 1979-95.” RAND Journal of Economics, 32(1): 101-128.
Hardin, G. 1968. "The Tragedy of the Commons," Science, 162(1968):1243-1248.
Hausman, Jerry A., Zvi Griliches, and Broonwyn Hall. 1984. “Econometric Models for Count Data with an
Application to the Patents-R&D Relationship. Econometrica 52 (July), pp. 909-937.
Heller, M. 1998. "The Tragedy of the Anticommons: Property in the Transition from Marx to Markets," 111
Harvard Law Review 621 (1998).
Heller, M. and R. Eisenberg. 1998. "Can patents deter innovation? The anticommons in biomedical research",
Science, vol. 280.
Henderson, R., A. Jaffe, M. Trajtenberg. 1994. Geographic Localization of Knowledge Spillovers as Evidenced by
Patent Citations. Quarterly Journal of Economics, August 1993, Vol. 434, pp. 578-598
Jaffe, Adam B. and Josh Lerner. 2004. Innovation and Its Discontents: How our broken patent system is
endangering innovation and progress, and what to do about it. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Jensen, Richard and Marie C. Thursby. 2001. "Proofs and prototypes for sale: The licensing of university
inventions." American Economic Review, 91:1, pp. 240-59.
Kenney M., 1986. Biotechnology: The University-Industrial Complex. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Kimball, D. 2001. “Patenting Genes: Risks and Rewards versus Politics and Policies”, Christie Parker & Hale LLP
Publications.

34

Kline S, and Nathan Rosenberg, 1986, “An Overview of Innovation,” in The Positive Sum Strategy: Harnessing
Technology for Economic Growthy, eds. R. Landau and N. Rosenberg, National Academy Press,
Washington (DC).
Köhler, G. & Milstein, C. 1975. 'Continuous cultures of fused cells secreting antibody of predefined specificity.'
Nature 256, 495-497.
Kremer, M. 1997. “Patent Buy-Outs: A Mechanism for Encouraging Innovation,” NBER, Working Paper no. 6304.
Krimsky, Sheldon. 2003. Science and the Private Interest. Rowman-Littlefield Publishing Co., August 2003.
Lawson, Charles. 2002. Patenting genes and gene sequences and competition: patenting at the expense of
competition. Federal Law Review 30:97-133.
Lemley, M.A. and Allison, J.R. (2002). “The Growing Complexity of the United States Patent System,” Boston
University Law Review, 82, p. 77-144.
Lessig, L. 2002. The Future of Ideas: The Fate of the Commons in a Connected World. Random House.
Levin, R., A. Klevorick, R. Nelson, S. Winter. 1987. Appropriating the returns from industrial R&D. Brookings
Papers Econom. Activity 3 783-831.
Li, M. 1997. Use of a modified bacteriophage to probe the interactions between peptides and ion channel receptors
in mammalian cells. Nature Biotechnology 15:6 (559-563)
Markiewicz, Kira and Alberto DiMinin. 2004. “Commercializing the Laboratory: The Relationship between Faculty
Patenting and Publishing”. Working Paper.
Marshall, Elliott. 2000. “Property Claims: A Deluge of Patents Creates Legal Hassles for Research”. Vol. 288, p.
255.
Merges, R., Mennell, P.S. and M. Lemley (2003), Intellectual Proprety in the New Technological Age, Aspen
Publishers.
Merges, R. and Nelson, R. R. 1990. “On the Complex Economics of Patent Scope,” Columbia Law Review, Vol. 90.
Merges, R.P. and Nelson, R.R. (1994). On Limiting or Encouraging Rivalry in Technical Progress: The Effect of
Patent Scope Decisions. Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 25 (1), 1-24.
Merton, R. The Sociology of Science: Theoretical and Empirical Investigations. Edited by Norman Storer. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1973.
Mowery, David, Richard Nelson, Bhaven Sampat, and Arvids Ziedonis. 2001. “The Growth of Patenting and
Licensing by U.S. Universities: An Assessment of the Effects of the Bayh-Dole Act of 1980.” Research
Policy 30:99-119.
Murray, F. 2002. “Innovation as overlapping Scientific and Technological trajectories: exploring tissue
engineering”, Research Policy, Vol. 31.
Narin, F., Olivastro, D., 1992. Status Report: Linkage Between Technology and Science. Research Policy Vol 21(3).
Nature Biotechnology 1996. Editorial: A Broad and Inclusive Enterprise. March 1996 Volume 14 Number 3 p235.
Nelkin, D. 1984. Science as Intellectual Property: Who Controls Scientific Research? New York: MacMillan
Publishing Co.
Nelson, R.R. (1959) “The Simple Economics of Basic Scientific Research,” Journal of Political Economy 67(3),
297-306.

35

Orsenigo, L. 1989. The Emergence of Biotechnology: Institutions and Markets in Industrial Innovation.", Pinter
Publishers, London.
Powell. W., Koput, K., Smith-Doerr, L. 1996. Inter-organizational Collaboration and the locus of Innovation:
Networks of learning in Biotechnology. Administrative Science Quarterly 41, 116-145.
Romer, Paul M, 1990. "Endogenous Technological Change," Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 98 (5) pp. S71-102.
Rosenberg, N. (1974). “Science, Invention, and Economic Growth.” The Economic Journal 84(333): 90-108
Shapiro, C. (2001), “Navigating the Patent Thicket: Cross Licenses, Patent Pools, and Standard Setting,” in A.B.
Jaffe, J. Lerner and S. Stern (eds.), Innovation Policy and the Economy, Vol. 1.
Stern, Scott. 1999. “Do Scientists Pay to be Scientists”. NBER Working Paper w7410.
Stokes, Donald. 1997. Pasteur’s Quadrant: basic science and technological innovation. Washington D.C.: The
Brookings Institution.
Straus, Joseph, Henrik Holzapfel, and Matthias Lindenmeir. 2002. Empirical Survey on "Genetic Inventions and
Patent Law". Munich.
Thomson, J.A. et al. (1998). Science 282, 1145-1147.
Thursby, G., Thursby M. 2003. University Licensing Under Bayh-Dole: What are the Issues and Evidence?
Working Paper accessed from opensource.mit.edu/papers/Thursby.pdf.
Walsh, John P., Ashish Arora, and Wesley M. Cohen. 2002. The Patenting and Licensing of Research Tools and
Biomedical Innovation: US National Academies' Science, Technology and Economic Policy Board.
Weitzman, M. "Free Access vs. Private Ownership as Alternative Systems for Managing Common Property."
Journal of Economic Theory 8, no. 2 (June 1974): 225-234.
Williams-Jones, B. (2002) “History of a Gene Patent: Tracing the Development, Marketing, and Application of
Commercial BRCA Testing in Canada" Health Law Journal, Vol. 10, p. 121-144.
Zamore, P.D., Tuschl, T, Sharp, P.A., and Bartel, D.P. (2000). “RNAi: Double-stranded RNA directs the ATPdependent cleavage of mRNA. Cell, 101(1), 25-33.
Ziedonis, R. (2004). “Don’t Fence Me In: Fragmented Markets for Technology and the Patent Acquisition
Strategies of Firms,” Management Science, June.
Zucker, L., Darby, M., Brewer, M., 1998. Intellectual Human Capital and the Birth of U.S. Biotechnology
Enterprises American Economic Review 88, 290-306.
Zozulya, S., Lioubin, M., Hill, R.J., Abram, C., Gishizky, M. 1999. Mapping Signal transduction pathways by phage
display. Nature Biotechnology, 17:2 (1193-1198).

36

TABLE 1
VARIABLES & DEFINITIONS
VARIABLE
DEFINITION
CITATION-YEAR CHARACTERISTICS
FORWARD
CITATIONSjt
YEARt
AGEjt

# of Forwad Citations to Article j in Year t
Year in which FORWARD CITATIONS are received
YEAR – PUBLICATION YEAR

SOURCE
Science Citation
Index (SCI)
SCI
Nature
Biotechnology
(NB)

PUBLICATION CHARACTERISTICS
PUBLICATION
YEARj
# AUTHORSj

Year in which article is published

NB

Count of the number of authors of Article j

NB

US AUTHORj

Dummy variable equal to 1 if at least one of the institutional
affiliations associated with Article j is in the US; 0 otherwise
Dummy variable equal to 1 if at least one of the institutional
affiliations associated with Article j is a university or government
organization; 0 otherwise
Dummy variable equal to 1 if at least one of the institutional
affiliations associated with Article j is a biotechnology or
pharmaceutical firm; 0 otherwise
# of FORWARD CITATIONS from publication date to 2003

NB

PUBLIC
AUTHORj
PRIVATE
AUTHORj
TOTAL
CITATIONSj

NB

NB

SCI

PATENT CHARACTERISTICS
PATENTEDj
GRANT YEARj
PATENT, POSTGRANTjy
# INVENTORS
PATENT LAGj
PATENT BACK
CITATIONSj
PATENT BACK
REFERENCESj
# CLAIMS
TOOLS PATENTj

PUBLIC SECTOR
ASSIGNEEj
GOVT. FUNDEDj

Dummy variable equal to 1 if Article is associated with a patent issued
by the USPTO prior to October, 2003
YEAR in which PATENT has been granted
Dummy variable equal to 1 if PATENTED = 1 and
YEAR > GRANT YEAR
Count of the number of inventors listed in the granted patent
associated with Article j; 0 if PATENTED = 0.
Days elapsed between patent priority application and grant dates, 0 if
PATENTED = 0
Count of the number of citations to patented prior art included in the
granted patent associated with Article j; 0 if PATENTED = 0
Count of the number of citations to non-patent prior art included in
the granted patent associated with Article j; 0 if PATENTED = 0
Count of the number of allowed claims; 0 if PATENED = 0
Dummy variable equal to 1 if primary patent classes are associated
with research tools (as opposed to composition of matter patents); 0 if
PATENTED = 0
Dummy variable equal to 1 if at least one of the assignees on the
patent associated with Article j is a university or government
organization; 0 otherwise
Dummy variable equal to 1 if patent disclosure reports a Federal
interest, indicating Federal funding of research upon which patent is
based; 0 otherwise

USPTO
USPTO
USPTO
USPTO
USPTO
USPTO
USPTO
USPTO
USPTO; author
verification
USPTO; author
verification
USPTO

37

TABLE 2
MEANS & STANDARD DEVIATIONS
VARIABLE

N

CITATION-YEAR CHARACTERISTICS
FORWARD CITATIONS
1688
TOTAL CITATIONS
1688
CITATION YEAR
1688
AGE
1688

MEAN

9.35
54.74
1999.95
2.05

STANDARD
DEVIATION

12.29
58.84
1.52
1.52

MIN

MAX

0
2
1997
0

184
523
2002
5

PUBLICATION CHARACTERISTICS (N=340 total articles)
PUBLICATION YEAR
340
1998.03
0.83
1997
1999
# AUTHORS
340
5.89
3.20
1
20
US AUTHOR
340
0.59
0.49
0
1
PUBLIC SECTOR AUTHOR
340
0.90
0.30
0
1
PRIVATE SECTOR AUTHOR
340
0.32
0.47
0
1
PATENT CHARACTERISTICS (N = 340 total articles, 169 articles associated with USPTO patents)
PATENTED
340
0.50
0.50
0
1
GRANT YEAR*
169
2000.54
1.71
1996
2002
PATENT, POST-GRANT^
1688
0.24
0.43
0
1
# INVENTORS*
169
3.04
1.59
1
8
PATENT LAG*
169
1126.07
480.10
238
3714
*
PATENT BACK CITATIONS
169
7.26
13.10
0
79
PATENT BACK REFERENCES*
169
28.19
37.25
0
226
# CLAIMS*
169
21.12
15.00
2
94
TOOLS PATENT *
169
0.58
0.49
0
1
*
PUBLIC SECTOR ASSIGNEE
169
0.65
0.48
0
1
GOVT FUNDED *
169
0.29
0.45
0
1
* Summary statistics for these measures is calculated only for those article for which PATENTED = 1 and is
weighted by Article (i.e., N = 169).
^ Summary statistics for PATENT, POST-GRANT is calculated over all articles, weighted by citation year

38

TABLE 3
MEANS CONDITIONAL ON PATENT STATUS

NO PATENT

# Publications

171

PATENTED

169

FORWARD
CITATIONS

8.96

10.04

# AUTHORS

5.76

6.03

US AUTHOR

0.53

0.65

PUBLIC SECTOR
AUTHOR

0.93

0.86

PRIVATE SECTOR
AUTHOR

0.25

0.38

39

TABLE 4
CROSS-SECTIONAL RESULTS

PATENTED
# AUTHORS
US AUTHOR
PUBLIC SECTOR
AUTHOR
Parametric Restrictions
Age FEs = 0
Year FEs = 0~

NEGATIVE BINOMIAL
Dep Var = FORWARD CITATIONS
(Coefs reported as incident rate ratios)
(4-1)
(4-2)
Baseline Model*
With Publication Controls*
1.085
1.156
(0.056)
(0.063)
1.034
(0.008)
1.266
(0.064)
0.930
(0.108)
# Restrict
5
219.83
χ2
p-value
0.000
# Restrict
5
20.80
χ2
p-value
0.001

# Restrict
5
236.83
χ2
p-value
0.000
# Restrict
5
16.76
χ2
p-value
0.005

R-squared
Log-likelihood
P-value of Chi
# of Observations

-5257.86

-5230.73

0.00

0.00

1688

1688

* Robust standard errors are in parentheses.
~
Year FEs included for 1998-2002 (1997 is excluded).

40

TABLE 5
THE IMPACT OF PATENT GRANT:
DIFFERENCES-IN-DIFFERENCES ESTIMATES
OLS: DepVar =
ln(FORWARD
CITATIONS)

NEGATIVE BINOMIAL
Dep Var = FORWARD CITATIONS
(Coefs reported as incident rate ratios)

(5-1)

(5-2)

(5-3)

(5-4)

Marginal Impact,
with Article FEs

Selection and Marginal
Effects w/ Controls

Selection and Marginal
Effects w/. AGE &
YEAR FE

Marginal Effects, with
Article FEs

PATENT CHARACTERISTICS
PATENTED
PATENTED, POST-GRANT

-0.097
(0.056)

1.177
(0.078)
0.834
(0.069)

1.181
(0.081)
0.841
(0.070)

1.035
(0.008)
1.282
(0.066)
0.906
(0.108)
3.151
(0.199)
0.834
(0.011)
1.251
(0.073)
1.263
(0.089)

1.035
(0.008)
1.272
(0.065)
0.922
(0.065)

0.911
(0.039)

CONTROL VARIABLES
# AUTHORS
US AUTHOR
PUBLIC SECTOR AUTHOR
AGE
AGE*AGE

0.959
(0.033)
-0.160
(0.006)

PUBLICATION YEAR = 1998
PUBLICATION YEAR = 1998
Parametric Restrictions
Article FEs = 0

# Restrict 340
10882.97
χ2
p-value
0.00
# Restrict
5
χ2
237.92
p-value
0.00
# Restrict
5
χ2
17.40
p-value
0.004

Age FEs = 0
Year FEs = 0~

# Restrict 338
χ2
11038.17
p-value
0.00
# Restrict
5
480.30
χ2
p-value
0.00
# Restrict
5
8.97
χ2
p-value
0.11

Regression Statistics
Log-likelihood

-5266.35

-5227.61

-4028.87

P-value of Chi

0.00

0.00

0.00

R-Squared
# of Observations

0.75
1688

1688

1688

1688

* Robust standard errors are in parentheses.
~
Year FEs included for 1998-2002 (1997 is excluded).

41

TABLE 6
DIFFS-IN-DIFFS RESULTS
BY INSTITUTIONAL OR NATIONAL AFFILIATION*
NEGATIVE BINOMIAL REGRESSIONS
Dep Var = FORWARD CITATIONS
(6-1)
No Public Author v.
Public Author

(6-2)
No Private Author v.
Private Author

(6-3)
No US Author v.
US Author

(6-4)
US Author Articles
Only

ARTICLE CHARACTERISTICS
PATENTED, POSTGRANT
PATENTED, POSTGRANT *
NO PUBLIC AUTHOR
PATENTED, POSTGRANT *
PUBLIC AUTHOR
PATENTED, POSTGRANT *
NO PRIVATE AUTHOR
PATENTED, POSTGRANT *
PRIVATE AUTHOR
PATENTED, POSTGRANT *
NO US AUTHOR
PATENTED, POSTGRANT *
US AUTHOR

0.900
(0.049)
0.952
(0.106)
0.903
(0.041)
0.882
(0.045)
0.955
(0.062)
0.913
(0.058)
0.910
(0.047)

CONTROL VARIABLES
Article Pair FEs = 0
Age FEs = 0
Year FEs = 0~

# Restrict 338
10963.05
χ2
p-value
0.00
# Restrict
5
χ2
475.44
p-value
0.00
# Restrict
5
χ2
2.51
p-value
0.77

# Restrict 338
χ2
11205.55
p-value
0.00
# Restrict
5
χ2
469.29
p-value
0.00
# Restrict
5
χ2
1.00
p-value
0.96

# Restrict 338
χ2
11022.10
p-value
0.00
# Restrict
5
χ2
469.89
p-value
0.00
# Restrict
5
χ2
1.34
p-value
0.93

# Restrict 198
χ2
9398.12
p-value
0.00
# Restrict
5
χ2
328.69
p-value
0.00
# Restrict
5
χ2
3.75
p-value
0.59

Regression Statistics
Log-likelihood

-4028.70

-4028.32

-4028.87

-2429.43

P-value of Chi

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

# of Observations

1688

1688

1688

994

* Robust standard errors are in parentheses.
~
Year FEs included for 1998-2002 (1997 is excluded).

42

TABLE 7

DIFFS-IN-DIFFS RESULTS
BY NATURE OF RESEARCH FUNDING *

PATENTED, POSTGRANT * NO PUBLIC
SECTOR ASSIGNEE
PATENTED, POSTGRANT * PUBLIC
SECTOR ASSIGNEE
PATENTED, POSTGRANT *
NON-GOVT. FUNDED
PATENTED, POSTGRANT *
GOVT. FUNDED
Parametric Restrictions
Article Pair FEs = 0
Age FEs = 0
Year FEs = 0~

NEGATIVE BINOMIAL
Dep Var = FORWARD CITATIONS
(Coefs reported as incident rate ratios)
(7-1)
(7-2)
No Public Sector
Non Govt. Funded
Assignee Versus
Versus Govt. Funded
Public Sector
Assignee
0.899
(0.056)
0.921
(0.049)
0.913
(0.046)
0.907
(0.061)

# Restrict 338
11053.87
χ2
p-value
0.00
# Restrict
5
517.05
χ2
p-value
0.00
# Restrict
5
48.68
χ2
p-value
0.07

# Restrict 338
10919.50
χ2
p-value
0.00
# Restrict
5
471.38
χ2
p-value
0.000
# Restrict
5
11.37
χ2
p-value
0.05

Log-likelihood

-4028.82

-4028.86

P-value of Chi

0.00

0.00

# of Observations

1688

1688

* Robust standard errors are in parentheses.
~
Year FEs included for 1998-2002 (1997 is excluded).

43

TABLE 8
DIFFS-IN-DIFFS RESULTS
WITH PATENT CHARACTERISTIC INTERACTIONS *
NEGATIVE BINOMIAL REGRESSIONS
Dep Var = FORWARD CITATIONS
(8-1)
PATENT LAG Interaction

(8-2)
PATENT BACKWARD
CITATIONS Interaction

(8-3)
PATENT BACKWARD
REFERENCE Interaction

“DIRECT” EFFECT OF PATENT GRANT
PATENTED, POSTGRANT

1.043
(0.097)

0.952
(0.045)

0.987
(0.049)

INTERACTION EFFECTS
PATENTED, POSTGRANT *
PATENT LAG
PATENTED, POSTGRANT *
PATENT BACKWARD
CITATIONS
PATENTED, POSTGRANT *
PATENT BACKWARD
REFERENCES

0.999
(0.0000)
0.995
(0.001)
0.997
(0.0000)

CONTROL VARIABLES
Article Pair FEs = 0
Age FEs = 0
Year FEs = 0~

# Restrict 340
χ2
10965.59
p-value
0.00
# Restrict
5
535.25
χ2
p-value
0.00
# Restrict
5
76.93
χ2
p-value
0.000

# Restrict 340
χ2
10838.08
p-value
0.00
# Restrict
5
480.83
χ2
p-value
0.00
# Restrict
5
18.24
χ2
p-value
0.00

# Restrict 340
χ2
11070.68
p-value
0.00
# Restrict
5
471.55
χ2
p-value
0.00
# Restrict
5
0.89
χ2
p-value
0.97

Regression Statistics
Log-likelihood

-4027.97

-4026.88

-4024.95

P-value of Chi

0.00

0.00

0.00

# of Observations

1688

1688

1688

* Robust standard errors are in parentheses.
~
Year FEs included for 1998-2002 (1997 is excluded).

44

TABLE 9

DIFFS-IN-DIFFS RESULTS
BY TYPE OF IPR*

PATENTED, POSTGRANT
PATENTED, POSTGRANT *
NUMBER OF CLAIMS
PATENTED, POSTGRANT *
NON-RESEARCH TOOL
PATENTED, POSTGRANT *
RESEARCH TOOL
Parametric Restrictions
Article Pair FEs = 0
Age FEs = 0
Year FEs = 0~
Log-likelihood

NEGATIVE BINOMIAL
Dep Var = FORWARD CITATIONS
(Coefs reported as incident rate ratios)
(9-2)
(9-1)
No Tools Versus
NUMBER OF
CLAIMS Interaction * Research Tools Patents*
1.017
(0.063)
0.995
(0.002)
0.899
(0.055)
0.918
(0.048)

# Restrict 338
11139.06
χ2
p-value
0.00
# Restrict
5
484.17
χ2
p-value
0.00
# Restrict
5
10.15
χ2
p-value
0.07

# Restrict 340
11037.62
χ2
p-value
0.00
# Restrict
5
481.60
χ2
p-value
0.000
# Restrict
5
11.00
χ2
p-value
0.05

-4026.73

-4028.83

P-value of Chi

0.00

0.00

# of Observations

1688

1688

* Robust standard errors are in parentheses.
~
Year FEs included for 1998-2002 (1997 is excluded).

45

TABLE 10
PATENTED ARTICLES ONLY
NEGATIVE BINOMIAL
Dep Var = FORWARD CITATIONS
(Coefs reported as incident rate ratios)
(10-1)

(10-2)

(10-3)

Marginal Effects w/. AGE &
YEAR FE

Marginal Effects, with Article
FEs
(Full Sample)

Marginal Effects, with Article
FEs
(US Public Sector Authors
Only)

PATENT CHARACTERISTICS
PATENTED, POST-GRANT

0.857
(0.079)

0.978
(0.048)

0.877
(0.053)

# Restrict 167
χ2
5740.68
p-value
0.00
# Restrict
5
321.26
χ2
p-value
0.00
# Restrict
5
51.01
χ2
p-value
0.00

# Restrict 167
4784..79
χ2
p-value
0.00
# Restrict
5
235.05
χ2
p-value
0.00
# Restrict
5
93.56
χ2
p-value
0.00

CONTROL VARIABLES
# AUTHORS
US AUTHOR
PUBLIC SECTOR AUTHOR

1.043
(0.010)
1.430
(0.103)
0.893
(0.131)

Parametric Restrictions
Article FEs = 0
Age FEs = 0
Year FEs = 0~

# Restrict
5
124.19
χ2
p-value
0.00
# Restrict
5
4.28
χ2
p-value
0.510

Regression Statistics
Log-likelihood

-2667.07

P-value of Chi

0.00

# of Observations

849

-2039.791
0.00
849

-1099.151
0.00
462

* Robust standard errors are in parentheses.
~
Year FEs included for 1998-2002 (1997 is excluded).

46

APPENDIX A

CONDITIONAL MEANS
BY PATENTED & AUTHOR AFFILIATION *

# PUBS
FORWARD
CITATIONS
# AUTHORS
US AUTHOR

No Patent
No Public
Public Author
Author
12
159
9.38
8.92
7.75
0.67

5.61
0.52

Patented
No Public
Public Author
Author
23
146
12.02
9.73
7.61
0.83

5.78
0.62

47

FIGURE A
THE STOKES MODEL

Quest for
Fundamental
Understanding?

Consideration of Use?
NO
YES
Pure Applied
NO
Research
(Edison)
Use-inspired /
Pure Basic
translational
YES
Research
Basic research
(Bohr)
(Pasteur)

48

FIGURE B
CITATION DISTRIBUTION

FREQUENCY

DISTRIBUTION OF ANNUAL FORWARD CITATIONS
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
1

13 25 37 49 61 73 85 97 109 121 133 145 157 169 181
CITATIONS

49

AVERAGE CITATIONS PER
YEAR

FIGURE C
CITATIONS BY TYPE BY AGE

16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
0

1

2

3

4

5

YEARS SINCE PUBLICATION
NO PATENT

PATENTED

50

0.3
0.25
0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05

T+
4

T+
3

2
T-

T+
2

3
T-

T+
1

4

-0.05

PA
T
T G -1
R
AN
T

0

T-

Coefficient on Dummies for Time
to/after Patent Grant

FIGURE D
IMPACT OF PATENT GRANT ON FORWARD CITATIONS,
BY YEAR BEFORE AND AFTER PATENT GRANT
(NEGATIVE BINOMIAL WITH ARTICLE FEs)

51

