                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               SOCIALLY OPTIMAL DISTRICTING

                                              Stephen Coate
                                               Brian Knight

                                          Working Paper 11462
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w11462


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       June 2005




For helpful comments we thank Tim Besley, Andrew Gelman and seminar participants at UC Berkeley,
Princeton, and Rutgers. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by Stephen Coate and Brian Knight. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Socially Optimal Districting
Stephen Coate and Brian Knight
NBER Working Paper No. 11462
June 2005
JEL No. D7

                                            ABSTRACT



This paper provides a welfare economic analysis of the problem of districting. In the context of a

simple micro-founded model intended to capture the salient features of U.S. politics, it studies how

a social planner should allocate citizens of different ideologies across districts to maximize

aggregate utility. In the model, districting determines the equilibrium seat-vote curve which is the

relationship between the aggregate vote share of the political parties and their share of seats in the

legislature. To understand optimal districting, the paper first characterizes the optimal seat-vote

curve which describes the ideal relationship between votes and seats. It then shows that under rather

weak conditions the optimal seat-vote curve is implementable in the sense that there exist

districtings which make the equilibrium seat-vote curve equal to the optimal seat-vote curve. The

nature of these optimal districtings is described. Finally, the paper provides a full characterization

of the constrained optimal seat-vote curve and the districtings that underlie it when the optimal seat-

vote curve is not achievable.

Stephen Coate
Department of Economics
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14853
and NBER
sc163@cornell.edu

Brian Knight
Department of Economics
Brown University
Providence, RI 02912
and NBER
brian_knight@brown.edu
1     Introduction

Districting plans, which allocate voters across districts for the purpose of electing representa-
tives to a central legislature, are frequently perceived as unfair to voters of certain ideologies
or race. These perceptions of unfairness have lead to conflicts over how district lines should be
drawn. As computer technology and the information available to oﬃcials charged with districting
have improved, districting plans have become more refined, and these conflicts between groups
of voters have intensified.      As a result of these conflicts, courts have become more involved in
the process, and independent commissions have been established in some cases to oversee the
districting process.
    There is little consensus, however, on what types of districting plans are socially desirable.
Should all districts be identical in their composition of voter types or should districts be heteroge-
nous? Should all districts be competitive or should some districts be “safe seats”? How should
the allocation of seats in the legislature respond to changes in national support for the parties?
Should the system be biased in favor of certain groups of voters? In addressing these normative
questions, some have advocated an axiomatic approach, which adheres as closely as possible to
“traditional districting principles”, such as the spatial notions of compactness and contiguity as
well as the democratic ideals of respecting political subdivisions and recognizing communities of
actual shared interest.1
    As an alternative to this axiomatic method of evaluating districting plans, this paper explores
an approach rooted in traditional welfare economics. This approach begins with the observation
that citizens have preferences over policy outcomes, which depend upon the representation of
groups of voters in the legislature, which in turn depends upon how diﬀerent groups of voters are
allocated across districts. This induced linkage between citizen preferences and districting plans
allows for an explicit characterization of how diﬀerent groups of voters should be allocated across
districts in order to maximize social welfare.
    The paper studies a theoretical model of a community divided into political districts each of
which elects a single representative to a legislature. There are three types of voters: Democrats,
Republicans, and Independents. Democrats and Republicans have fixed ideologies, while Inde-
pendents’ ideologies may vary across elections. There are two political parties, one representing
   1 The U.S. Supreme Court defined traditional districting principles in 1990s redistricting cases, including Shaw

vs. Reno and Miller vs. Johnson.


                                                        1
Democrats and the other Republicans. These parties field candidates in each district and the can-
didates with the most votes are elected. The legislature’s policy choices depend upon the average
ideology of the elected legislators which in turn depends upon the share of seats each party holds
in the legislature. The allocation of voters across districts determines the equilibrium seat-vote
curve which is the relationship between the aggregate vote share of the two parties and their share
of seats. This relationship determines how responsive the legislature’s policy choices are to swings
in the aggregate vote share created by changes in the ideological leanings of Independents.
   In the context of this model, we analyze how the three types of voters should be allocated across
districts to maximize social welfare. We approach the problem by first characterizing the optimal
seat-vote curve, which relates the optimal fraction of Democrats in the legislature to the aggregate
fraction of voters supporting Democrat candidates across all districts. Under our assumptions,
the optimal relationship between aggregate votes and seats is linear, with a slope that depends
on the degree of variation in the preferences of Independents. Interestingly, we also find that the
optimal seat-vote curve is biased in favor of the party with the largest partisan base.
   We then explore whether this optimal seat-vote curve is implementable, in the sense that there
exist feasible allocations of Democrat, Republican, and Independent citizens across districts that
would make the equilibrium seat-vote curve equal to the optimal seat-vote curve. If so, then
such allocations clearly represent socially optimal districtings. We develop simple necessary and
suﬃcient conditions for the optimal seat-vote curve to be implementable. These conditions are in
terms of the fractions of the various groups in the community and the Independents’ preference
parameters. We also describe some of the districtings that generate the optimal seat-vote curve.
   While the conditions under which the optimal seat-vote curve is implementable are permissive,
there are interesting situations in which they are not satisfied. To characterize optimal alloca-
tions of voters across districts in these cases requires a more sophisticated approach. First, we
must characterize implementable seat-vote curves - those that can be generated by some feasible
districting. Then, we must choose the best of these implementable seat-vote curves. We develop
an analytical approach that permits a complete characterization of the shape of the constrained
optimal seat-vote curve. We also identify the districtings that generate these constrained optimal
seat-vote curves.
   Throughout the paper we ignore geographical constraints in the way in which districts may
be formed. Thus, we assume that the planner can allocate citizens to districts in any way he


                                                 2
likes, rather than requiring districts be connected subsets of some geographic space. While this is
certainly a weakness of the analysis, we feel that given the diﬃculty of knowing how to model geo-
graphic constraints, it makes sense to first understand what optimal districtings look like without
them. Moreover, when the optimal seat-vote curve is implementable, we show that it can typically
be implemented by a large class of districtings, some of which look quite “straightforward”, and
hence geographic constraints may actually be easily accommodated.
    This paper fits into the growing literature applying contemporary political economy modelling
and welfare economic methods to explore the optimal design of political institutions.2                         This
literature includes eﬀorts to understand the relative merits of diﬀerent electoral systems (e.g.,
Lizzeri and Persico (2001) and Myerson (1999)); systems of campaign finance (e.g., Coate (2004a)
and Prat (2002)); and methods of choosing policy-makers (e.g., Maskin and Tirole (2004)). It also
includes analyses of the desirability of citizens’ initiatives (e.g., Matsusaka and McCarty (2001));
the optimal allocation of functions across layers of government (e.g., Lockwood (2002)); and the
relative merits of presidential and parliamentary systems (e.g., Persson, Roland and Tabellini
(2000)). The districting problem is somewhat diﬀerent from these constitutional design questions
in that it must be done on an on-going basis in any political system with geographically based
districts. This makes the problem particularly salient.
    The organization of the remainder of the paper is as follows. The next section discusses the
relationship of the analysis to the existing literature on districting. Section 3 outlines the model
and introduces the notion of an equilibrium seat-vote curve. Section 4 introduces the idea of the
optimal seat-vote curve and characterizes it. This section also shows that the optimal seat-vote
curve is not necessarily implementable. Section 5 describes a general method for determining
whether a seat-vote curve is implementable and this is used in Section 6 to find the conditions
under which the optimal seat-vote curve is implementable. Section 7 characterizes the constrained
optimal seat-vote curve and discusses the districtings that generate it. Section 8 discusses the role
of some of the key assumptions of the model and Section 9 concludes with a summary of the
lessons of the analysis.
   2 A parallel empirical literature explores the consequences of political institutions for observed policy choices.

See Besley and Case (2003) and Persson and Tabellini (2004) for surveys.




                                                         3
2     Relation to the districting literature

There are two strands of political science literature on districting - one empirical and the other
theoretical. The main focus of the empirical literature has been on understanding how redistricting
in the U.S. States has impacted partisan bias and responsiveness. In a two-party system, partisan
bias and responsiveness are conceptualized in terms of properties of the seat-vote curve that a
districting generates. The seat-vote curve is formally represented by a function S(V ) where V
is the aggregate fraction of votes received by (say) the Democrats and S is the fraction of seats
in the legislature that they hold. A seat-vote curve exhibits partisan symmetry if the fraction of
seats that one Party gets with any particular share of the vote is the same as the other Party
would receive with the same share. Formally, the condition is that S(V ) = 1 − S(1 − V ) for all
V . A seat-vote curve exhibits partisan bias if it deviates from partisan symmetry in a systematic
way by giving one Party more seats. The responsiveness of a seat-vote curve is measured by the
proportionate change in seat share following an increase in vote share. If the seat-vote curve is
diﬀerentiable, then its responsiveness at vote share V is measured by the derivative S 0 (V ).
    A common approach in the literature has been to specify parameterized functional forms for
seat-vote curves and estimate them. One popular specification is the linear seat-vote curve, which
can be written as
                                                     1            1
                                          S(V ) =      + b + r(V − ).                                             (1)
                                                     2            2
The parameter b measures partisan bias and r measures responsiveness. In a well-known study,
Tufte (1973) estimates linear seat-vote curves using historical data for the U.K., the U.S., New
Zealand and three U.S. States and found that the linear form fits the data well.3 In an influential
series of papers, Gary King and co-authors worked with bilogit seat-vote curves of the general form
                                                           1
                                       S(V ) =                      V
                                                                         .                                        (2)
                                                 1 + exp(−b − r ln 1−V )
Again, the parameters b and r can be interpreted as measuring bias and responsiveness.4                         This
family of curves admits a broad range of possible shapes (see Browning and King (1987) and King
   3 He found, for example, that for New York State in the time period 1934-66 with S measuring democratic seats,

r equalled 1.28 and b equalled −0.055.
   4 To see this, consider the equivalent log-odds formulation: ln [S(V )/(1 − S(V ))] = b + r ln [V /(1 − V )] . This

makes clear that the responsiveness parameter r determines how changes in votes are translated into changes
in seats. Further, note that when voters are equally divided between parties [V = 0.5], seats are given by
S = exp(b)/[1 + exp(b)], and Democrats thus secure a majority (minority) of seats if the bias parameter (b) is
positive (negative). While these parameters share the same interpretation as Tufte (1973), the exact formulations
are somewhat diﬀerent.


                                                          4
(1989)). King (1989) developed techniques to estimate bias and responsiveness parameters using
only data from a single redistricting period.
   Gelman and King (1990), (1994) significantly advance the literature by dispensing with the
assumption of a particular functional form for the seat-vote curve. Instead, they specify an under-
lying statistical model of the district-by-district vote generating process which implies a relation-
ship between expected votes and expected seats. They then develop a procedure for estimating
the parameters of this underlying statistical model and explore how the implied relationship be-
tween seats and votes is impacted by redistricting. In particular, they study whether cross-state
variation in redistricting institutions gives rise to systematically diﬀerent patterns of change in
bias and responsiveness.
   While this general line of inquiry strikes us as very interesting, the underlying foundations of
the analysis are somewhat opaque. Rather than beginning with a functional form for the seat-vote
curve or a statistical model for the vote generating process, it would seem more satisfying to begin
with a description of the voters, their political preferences and what is generating the variation in
these preferences. A districting, or distribution of voter types across districts, would then imply
both a district-specific vote generating process and a seat-vote curve. It would also seem useful to
spell out how the composition of the legislature matters for citizens’ welfare, so that the normative
significance of partisan bias and responsiveness could be assessed.
   The theoretical literature has largely focused on understanding how political districts should
be crafted with the aim of maximizing a Party’s expected seat share. Its motivation has been the
purely positive one of shedding light on how partisan redistricting committees might further their
political objectives. Important strategies for expected seat maximization are concentration - the
packing of an opponent’s supporters into a few districts - and dispersion - the spreading of the
remainder thinly over the remaining districts.
   Owen and Grofman (1988) present a classic analysis of this problem that incorporates aggregate
uncertainty in voters’ behavior (see also Gilligan and Matsusaka (1999) and Sherstyuk (1998)).
Their model assumes that each district j is characterized by some threshold αj ∈ [−1, 1] and that
there is some random variable Z such that district j votes for the Party controlling the districting
if and only if αj < Z. The districting determines the αj for each district, but subject to two
                                                                                         P
constraints. First, if y(α) is the fraction of districts with αj = α, it is required that α y(α) = 1.
                                                                                      P
Second, the average value of the thresholds across districts must be zero, so that α αy(α)dα = 0.


                                                 5
The districting problem is to choose the function y(α) to maximize the controlling Party’s expected
seat share. The solution is very simple: there exists some α∗ > 0 such that y(−1) = α∗ /(1 + α∗ )
and y(α∗ ) = 1/(1 + α∗ ). Thus, a fraction α∗ /(1 + α∗ ) of districts will be overwhelmingly for the
opposition, while the complementary fraction will be solidly for the controlling Party.
      While the principles emerging from the theoretical literature seem natural, the mapping from
the models used to the problem of districting is again somewhat opaque. For example, in Owen
and Grofman’s formulation it is not clear precisely what the threshold αj is, nor why the average
value of the thresholds across districts must be zero. Moreover, the interpretation of the random
variable Z is unclear.
      What our paper contributes to both the empirical and theoretical literatures is a micro-founded
model for the study of districting questions. The model is simple, but captures important aspects of
the U.S. political scene. It permits a clear understanding of the mapping between districtings and
seat-vote curves. It also provides a consistent story for why the properties of the seat-vote curve
matter for welfare, as is implicitly assumed in the empirical literature. As in Owen and Grofman’s
theoretical analysis, each district does indeed have a critical threshold and this threshold depends
upon the distribution of voter types in the district.5          The random variable in the model is the
distribution of the aggregate vote between the two Parties and this randomness is generated by
variation in the ideological attachments of Independent voters.
      Some of the same concerns about the empirical literature on seat-vote curves motivate the
independent work of Besley and Preston (2005). These authors develop an alternative micro-
founded model that generates an equilibrium relationship between seats and votes. They use their
model to solve for what the distribution of voter types must be across districts if the equilibrium
seat-vote curve is to be of the bilogit form. Their main theoretical point is to show that this
distribution, and hence the shape of the seat-vote curve, is a key determinant of Parties’ electoral
incentives to put in eﬀort on the part of their constituents. They provide empirical evidence in
favor of their theory by showing that local government performance in the U.K. is related to
the parameters of the local seat-vote curve in the way the theory suggests. Their work therefore
suggests a novel theoretical mechanism why the form of the seat-vote curve (and hence districting)
matters for citizens’ welfare and provides evidence for this. By contrast, our model reflects the
  5 As we will note, however, Owen and Grofman’s constraint that the average threshold is zero is not implied by
the model.




                                                       6
conventional view that districting matters because it determines which Party gets the most seats
and hence the ideological composition of the legislature.
    Also in the spirit of this paper is the recent work of Epstein and O’Hallaran (2004) on
racial gerrymandering.6           They seek to understand the allocation of voter types across dis-
tricts that would maximize the welfare of blacks. Their model formalizes the intuition that there
maybe a trade-oﬀ between descriptive and substantive representation. Descriptive representa-
tion is achieved by having districts elect black representatives, while substantive representation
is achieved when the legislature chooses policies that favor black voters. Maximizing descrip-
tive representation may require concentrating black voters into majority-minority districts, while
maximizing substantive representation may require a more even spreading of black voters. The
underlying structure of Esptein and O’Hallaran’s model is simpler than the one presented here in
that it does not allow for Independents and there is no aggregate uncertainty in voters’ prefer-
ences. On the other hand, to incorporate substantive representation, they model strategic policy
choices on the part of politicians, whereas in our model parties’ positions are fixed.


3     The model

We consider a community divided into n equally sized districts, indexed by i = 1, ..., n. Policies
are chosen by a legislature consisting of a representative from each district. Each district chooses
its representative in an election. The policy outcomes chosen by the legislature depend upon the
average ideology of the elected representatives, where ideology is measured on a 0 to 1 scale.7
    In terms of ideologies, citizens are divided into three groups - Democrats, Republicans, and
Independents. Democrats and Republicans have ideologies 0 and 1, respectively. Independents
   6 See also the interesting work of Shotts (2002) who studies the impact of federally mandated majority-minority

districts on policy outcomes under the assumptions that districting at the state level is done by partisan districters
and that the median voter theorem applies in district level elections.
    7 This assumption should be distinguished from the obvious alternative that the policy outcome chosen by

the legislature depends upon the median ideology of the elected representatives. While it is certainly possible
to undertake the analysis under the median assumption, it implies that the properties of the seat-vote curve are
irrelevant for citizens’ welfare over almost of its range and hence makes the problem much less interesting. For
example, suppose that the aggregate vote for Democrats increases from 30% to 40% and suppose their initial seat
share is 30%. Then whether their seat share increases to 35% or 45% has no impact on policy because in either
situation the median legislator remains a Republican. Thus, the responsiveness of the seat-vote curve over this
range is irrelevant. All that matters for welfare is the vote share at which the Democrats become the majority
party. In essence, to make sense of the concern in the districting literature over the responsiveness of seat-vote
curves one needs to assume something like average legislator ideology matters and this motivates the modelling
choice we have made. From a theoretical perspective, whether policy choices reflect the preferences of the median
or mean legislator ultimately depends upon the nature of legislative bargaining.




                                                          7
have ideologies that are uniformly distributed on the interval [m−τ, m+τ ] where τ > 0. Reflecting
the fluid nature of these voters’ attitudes, the ideology of the median Independent is ex ante
uncertain. Specifically, m is the realization of a random variable uniformly distributed on [1/2 −
ε, 1/2 + ε], where ε ∈ (0, τ ) and ε + τ ≤ 1/2. The latter assumption guarantees that the ideologies
of the Independents are always between those of Democrats and Republicans, while the former
guarantees that some Independents lean Democrat and some lean Republican. The fraction of
voters in district i who are Democrats, Republicans, and Independents are, respectively, πD (i),
πR (i) and πI (i).8     Let πD , πR and πI denote, respectively, the fraction of voters in the entire
community who are Democrats, Republicans, and Independents.
       Each district must elect a representative. Candidates are put forward by two political or-
ganizations: the Democrat and Republican Parties. Following the citizen-candidate approach,
candidates are citizens and are characterized by their ideologies (see Besley and Coate (1997)
and Osborne and Slivinski (1996)). Each Party must select from the ranks of its membership,
so that the Democrat Party always selects a Democrat and the Republican Party a Republican.9
 Elections are held simultaneously in each of the n districts and the candidate with the most
votes wins. If the average ideology of the elected representatives is α0 , a citizen with ideology α
experiences a payoﬀ given by −(α − α0 )2 . Thus, citizens have quadratic loss functions.10
       In each district, every citizen votes sincerely for the representative whose ideology is closest
to his own.11      Accordingly, if the median independent has ideology m, the fraction of voters in
   8 Note for future reference that since π (i) = 1 − π (i) − π (i) the allocation of voters in district i is fully
                                           R           I       D
described by the pair (πD (i), πI (i)).
   9 This assumption substantially simplifies the problem because it means that Parties have no strategic choices

to make as regards candidates. It would be interesting to extend the model to allow Parties some flexibility in
candidate choice, perhaps by assuming that Democrats and Republicans come in varying ideologies (as in Coate
(2004b)). Districting would then shape the incentives for Parties to put up moderate or extreme candidates. It is
important to note, however, that going all the way to a Downsian vision of political competition in which candidates
adopt the ideology that makes them most likely to win would devoid the problem of much of its content. In each
district both Parties’ candidates would adopt the position of the expected median voter and which candidate won
would have no signifcance for welfare. Thus, while the problem of optimal districting could still be posed, the
seat-vote curve and the ideas of partisan bias or responsiveness would cease to have much meaning.
  10 The roles of this assumption and the assumption that the ideologies of the Independents are uniformly dis-
tributed are discussed in Section 8.
  11 This is an assumption. An Independent voter who leans Democrat may be better oﬀ if his district elects

a Republican if other districts disproportionately elect Democrats. For the average legislator ideology would be
closer to his ideal point if his district elected a Republican. As an empirical matter, however, it is not clear that
most voters are this sophisticated. Similar incentives to diverge from voting for the candidate closest to one’s own
ideology arise when voters are electing congressional and presidential candidates and the policy outcome depends
upon a weighted average of the ideologies of the median congressman and the president (Alesina and Rosenthal
(1995) and Fiorina (1992)). While it is certainly the case that some voters do “split their tickets”, Degan and Merlo
(2004) estimate that the vast majority (82%-93%) vote sincerely.



                                                         8
district i voting for the Democrat is
                                                                1/2 − (m − τ )
                                 V (i; m) = πD (i) + πI (i)[                   ].                               (3)
                                                                     2τ
This group consists of the Democrats and the Independents whose ideologies are less than 1/2.
The aggregate vote share of the Democrat Party is
                                                             1/2 − (m − τ )
                                      V (m) = πD + πI [                     ].                                  (4)
                                                                  2τ
Let V and V denote, respectively, the maximum and minimum aggregate Democrat vote shares;
i.e., V = V (1/2 − ε) and V = V (1/2 + ε).
    We can now use the model to derive the equilibrium relationship between seats and the aggre-
gate Democratic vote share. First, for all V ∈ [V , V ], let m(V ) denote the ideology of the median
Independent that would generate the vote share V ; i.e., m(V ) = V −1 (V ). From (4), we have that
                                                  1      πI + 2πD − 2V
                                      m(V ) =       + τ[               ].                                       (5)
                                                  2            πI
Substituting this into (3), we obtain
                                                                      V − πD
                                   V (i; m(V )) = πD (i) + πI (i)[           ].                                 (6)
                                                                        πI
District i elects a Democrat if V (i; m(V )) ≥ 1/2, or, equivalently, if
                                                                1/2 − πD (i)
                                    V ≥ V ∗ (i) = πD + πI [                  ],                                 (7)
                                                                   πI (i)
where V ∗ (i) is the critical aggregate vote threshold above which district i elects a Democrat. It is
natural to say that district i is a safe Democrat (safe Republican) seat if V ∗ (i) ≤ V (V ∗ (i) ≥ V ).
A seat which is not safe is called competitive.
    Without loss of generality, order the districts so that V ∗ (1) ≤ V ∗ (2) ≤ .... ≤ V ∗ (n). Then, the
fraction of seats the Democrats receive when they have aggregate vote share V is
                                                  M ax{i : V ∗ (i) ≤ V }
                                        S(V ) =                          .                                      (8)
                                                           n
This is the equilibrium seat-vote curve. It is determined by the allocation of citizens across districts
(πD (i), πI (i))ni=1 which determine their critical vote thresholds (V ∗ (i))ni=1 .12         Note also that the
  12 It is worth noting that this model oﬀers partial micro-foundations for the assumptions made in Owen and

Grofman’s (1988) analysis of optimal partisan districting discussed in section 2. The vote threshold in district
i is V ∗ (i) and the random variable is V - the aggregate Democrat vote share. Moreover,
                                                                                     Pn      districting determines
the vote thresholds across districts. However, the average value of the thresholds           ∗ (i)/n is not constant
                                                                                       i=1 V P
                                                                                                 n     ∗
across districtings as Owen and Grofman’s analysis assumes it must be. We have that              i=1 V (i) = πD +
    P n 1/2−πD (i)                               Pn                             Pn
πI i=1 [ π (i) ] and all we know is that              π
                                                   i=1 I (i)/n =  πI  and  that      π
                                                                                  i=1 D  (i)/n  =  πD .  Thus, their
               I
characterization of optimal partisan districtings cannot be applied to this model.


                                                         9
average ideology of the elected representatives is 1 − S(V ).


4     The optimal seat-vote curve

We are interested in the problem of a planner who must choose how to allocate citizens across
the districts to maximize aggregate utility. The districting matters for welfare because, as just
demonstrated, it determines the equilibrium relationship between aggregate votes and the com-
position of the legislature - the equilibrium seat-vote curve. It is important to note, however,
that there is not a one-to-one mapping between districtings and seat-vote curves. The seat-vote
curve is determined by the pattern of critical vote thresholds across districts. As is clear from
(7), the same pattern of critical vote thresholds could in principle be achieved by many diﬀerent
districtings. Thus, the problem is not as simple as writing welfare as a function of the allocation
of citizens and choosing the best such allocation.
    To solve the problem, we need to think of the planner as choosing the seat-vote curve but
subject to the constraint that it be an equilibrium for some districting. The optimal districtings
will then be those that are associated with the constrained optimal seat-vote curve. However, this
is a hard problem, because of the diﬃculties in formalizing the constraint that a seat-vote curve be
an equilibrium for some districting. Accordingly, we will begin our analysis by characterizing the
optimal relationship between seats and aggregate votes - the optimal seat-vote curve - ignoring
the constraint that it be an equilibrium for some districting. We will then investigate whether
there exist allocations of voters that generate this optimal seat-vote curve. If there do exist such
districtings, these will clearly be optimal. This two-stage procedure will not totally eliminate the
need to consider the grand constrained optimization, but the insights that it yields will make the
problem more manageable.
    Consider then the problem of the planner deciding on the number of seats S that should be
allocated to the Democrats when their vote share is V given that the resulting policy outcome
will be 1 − S. Aggregate utility when the median Independent has ideology m and the Democrats
have seat share S is given by:

                                                          Z   m+τ
                                           2         2                             dx
                 W (S; m) = −[πD (1 − S) + πR S + πI                (1 − S − x)2      ].        (9)
                                                              m−τ                  2τ
If the vote share is V , the median Independent has ideology m(V ) and hence the optimal seat



                                                10
share is
                                      S o (V ) = arg max
                                                       i
                                                         W (S; m(V )).                          (10)
                                                     S∈{ n }

To avoid tedious integer concerns, assume that the number of districts is very large, so that we
can interpret S as the fraction of seats held by the Democrats and treat the choice set in the
optimization problem as the unit interval [0, 1]. Then, S o (V ) satisfies the following first order
condition:
                                           ∂W (S o ; m(V ))/∂S = 0.                             (11)

Solving this first order condition allows us to establish the following result13 :

Proposition 1: The optimal seat-vote curve S o : [V , V ] → [0, 1] is given by

                           S o (V ) = 1/2 + (πD − πR )(1/2 − τ ) + 2τ (V − 1/2).                (12)

      Recalling our discussion in section 2, Proposition 1 tells us that the optimal seat-vote curve
is linear, with bias (πD − πR )(1/2 − τ ) and responsiveness 2τ . This curve is illustrated in Figure
1. The horizontal axis measures the aggregate Democratic vote and the vertical the Democrats’
share of seats. Since τ < 1/2, the slope of the optimal seat-vote curve is less than 1 meaning
that the fraction of Democrat seats increases at a constant but less than proportional rate as the
aggregate Democrat vote increases. The seat-vote curve intersects the 45o line when the aggregate
vote is πD + πI /2. Thus, when exactly half the Independents lean Democrat, the optimal share
of Democratic seats is πD + πI /2. Notice also that S o (V ) > 0 and S o (V ) < 1 so that, under this
optimal system, there are safe seats for both Parties.
      To understand why the optimal responsiveness is 2τ , note first that the welfare maximizing
Democratic seat share must be such that the social gains from increasing it marginally just equal
the social losses. With the quadratic preferences, this condition implies that the Democratic seat
share must be such as to make the ideology of the average legislator equal the average ideology
in the population. Thus, when the mean (which equals the median) Independent has ideology
m, the optimal Democrat seat share should be πD + πI (1 − m) because this would make the
average ideology in the legislature equal to the population average - which is πR + πI m. When
the aggregate Democrat vote share increases marginally, the change in the mean Independent’s
ideology is dm/dV = −2τ /πI and hence the increase in the optimal Democrat seat share is just
 13   The proofs of this and all subsequent propositions can be found in the Appendix.


                                                       11
2τ . Recall that τ measures the diversity of views among Independents, so that responsiveness is
positive correlated with this diversity. This is because the greater the diversity of Independent
views, the greater the change in mean Independent ideology signalled by any given increase in
vote share.
      To understand why the optimal seat-vote curve is biased, consider the case when the Democrats
get exactly half the aggregate vote (V = 1/2). If the optimal seat-vote curve were unbiased then
the Democrats should get half the seats (S o (1/2) = 1/2). This would indeed be optimal if the
average ideology in the population were 1/2. However, while the median voter in the population
must have ideology 1/2 in this case, the average voter’s ideology will only equal 1/2 when the
fractions of Democrats and Republicans are equal. To see this, note from (5) that when V = 1/2,
the median Independent’s ideology must be m(1/2) = 1/2 + τ (πD − πR )/πI which implies that
the average ideology in the population is 1/2 + (πR − πD )(1/2 − τ ). Thus, to make the average
legislator’s ideology equal to the population average it will be necessary to have the Democratic
seat share greater than 1/2 if πD is greater than πR . Fundamentally, then, the bias in the optimal
seat-vote curve stems from the fact that the ideology of the median voter will typically diﬀer from
that of the average voter. This in turn reflects the fact that partisans feel more intensely about
ideology than do Independents.
      Having understood the nature of the optimal seat-vote curve, we must tackle the question of
implementability; that is, whether there exist districtings which generate an optimal relationship
between seats and votes. Such a districting would make the composition of the legislature such that
average legislator ideology always equals the population average. Clearly, this cannot be achieved
by making each district a microcosm of the community as a whole, because then all districts
would vote in the same way and the legislature would be either all Democrat or all Republican.
However, with appropriate district level heterogeneity, implementability seems possible. While
the conditions that might guarantee it are by no means obvious, it is apparent that the fraction
of Independents must matter. For, if there were no Independents, then the optimal seat-vote
curve would be a single point and could be implemented, for example, by creating a fraction πR
districts majority Republican and a fraction πD districts majority Democrat. On the other hand,
if the entire population were Independents, then all districts would necessarily be identical and
the optimal seat-vote curve is clearly not implementable.14
 14   In this case, the optimal seat-vote curve is S o (V ) = 1/2 + 2τ (V − 1/2), while the equilibrium seat-vote curve


                                                          12
       This discussion leaves us with two general questions: first, what are the conditions under which
the optimal seat-vote curve is implementable? Second, when it is not implementable, what does
the “constrained” optimal seat-vote curve look like? The remainder of the paper is devoted to
answering these questions.


5        Determining when a seat-vote curve is implementable

In this section, we outline a method for determining whether a particular seat-vote curve is
implementable. This method will not only allow us to understand when the optimal seat-vote
curve is implementable, but also how to specify the constraints for the problem of choosing the
constrained optimal seat-vote curve.15
       In developing this method, it is more convenient to work with inverse seat-vote curves rather
than seat-vote curves. An inverse seat-vote curve is described by a triple {i, i, V ∗ (·)} where i
and i are scalars satisfying 0 ≤ i ≤ i ≤ 1 and V ∗ (·) is a non-decreasing function defined on [i, i]
with range [V , V ]. The interpretation is that i is the fraction of districts that are safe Democrat;
1 − i the fraction that are safe Republican; and V ∗ (i) is the critical aggregate vote threshold for
competitive district i ∈ [i, i]. Given a seat vote curve S(V ) we form its inverse in the following
way: i is just S(V ); i is S(V ) and for all i ∈ [i, i], V ∗ (i) is such that S(V ) = i. In the event
that S(V ) is flat over some part of its range, we let V ∗ (i) be the smallest value of V such that
S(V ) = i and, in the case in which S(V ) is discontinuous and there does not exist a V such that
S(V ) = i, we let V ∗ (i) be the smallest value of V such that S(V ) ≥ i. The relationship between
a seat-vote curve and its inverse is illustrated in Figure 2.
       We will need the following definitions. A districting is a description of the fractions of voter
types in each district {(πD (i), πI (i)) : i ∈ [0, 1]}. It must be the case that for all i, (πD (i), πI (i))
belongs to the two dimensional unit simplex ∆2+ . This ensures that πD (i) and πI (i) are non-
negative and satisfy the constraint that πD (i)+πI (i) ≤ 1. The latter guarantees that the associated
fraction of Republicans in the district πR (i) = 1 − πD (i) − πI (i) is non-negative. A districting
{(πD (i), πI (i)) : i ∈ [0, 1]} is feasible if it is the case that the average fractions of voter types equal
                    R1                        R1
the actual; i.e., 0 πI (i)di = πI and 0 πD (i)di = πD . Notice that this definition of feasibility
is S(V ) = 0 if   V < 1/2 and S(V ) = 1 if V > 1/2.
  15 The reader anxious to see the conditions under which the optimal seat-vote curve is implementable and/or
what the constrained optimal seat-vote curve looks like, can jump ahead to the Propositions in Sections 6 and 7
with little loss of continuity.



                                                      13
neglects any geographic constraints on districting.
    A districting {(πD (i), πI (i)) : i ∈ [0, 1]} generates the inverse seat-vote curve {i, i, V ∗ (·)} if
(i) πD + πI [ 1/2−π  D (i)
                 πI (i)    ] ≤ V for all i ∈ [0, i); (ii) πD + πI [ 1/2−π  D (i)
                                                                       πI (i)    ] ≥ V for all i ∈ (i, 1]; and
(iii) πD + πI [ 1/2−π  D (i)
                   πI (i)    ] = V ∗ (i) for all i ∈ [i, i]. Requirement (i) is that districts i ∈ [0, i) are
safe Democrat seats and requirement (ii) is that districts i ∈ (i, 1] are safe Republican seats.
Requirement (iii) is that competitive district i ∈ [i, i] has a critical aggregate vote threshold
just equal to V ∗ (i). A seat-vote curve is implementable if there exists a feasible districting that
generates its associated inverse seat-vote curve.
    Consider then a particular seat-vote curve S(V ) with inverse {i, i, V ∗ (·)}. We want to know
if it is implementable. We assume only that S(V ) is piecewise continuously diﬀerentiable and
non-decreasing. This allows S(V ) to have both jumps and flat spots.16                          These properties will
                                           ∗
also be shared by the function V (·).
    We begin by describing the districtings that can generate the inverse seat-vote curve {i, i, V ∗ (·)}.
In describing this set, there is no loss of generality in assuming that the safe Democrat and Repub-
lican districts are identical. Thus, we may assume that (πD (i), πI (i)) = (π D , π I ) for all i ∈ [0, i)
and (πD (i), πI (i)) = (πD , πI ) for all i ∈ (i, 1] where (π D , π I ), (π D , π I ) ∈ ∆2+ .17                Using the
definitions of V and V (see (4)), requirements (i) and (ii) from above imply that

                                                              τ −ε    1
                                                  πD + πI [        ]≥                                                 (13)
                                                               2τ     2

and
                                                              τ +ε   1
                                                  πD + πI [        ]≤ .                                               (14)
                                                               2τ    2
These inequalities reflect the fact that the minimum and maximum fraction of Independents voting
                                    τ −ε         τ +ε
Democrat are, respectively,          2τ    and    2τ .

    In the competitive districts [i, i], requirement (iii) ties down what the function πD (i) must
look like over the interval [i, i] given any choice of the function πI (i). Specifically, πD (i) =
f (πI (i), V ∗ (i)) where
                                                            1  x
                                               f (x, y) =     − (y − πD ).                                            (15)
                                                            2 πI
   16 By piecewise continuously diﬀerentiable we mean that S(V ) is continuously diﬀerentiable except possibly at a

finite number of points. Thus, if S(V ) has jumps, it has only a finite number.
  17 For example, if (π (i), π (i)) varied over the safe Democrat seats i ∈ [0, i), then we could create a districting
                        D        I
with identical safe Democrat districts   R that usedR exactly         the same fractions of voter types in the safe Democrat
districts by letting (πD (i), πI (i)) = ( 0i πD (i) di
                                                     i
                                                       , 0i πI (i) di
                                                                    i
                                                                       ) for all i ∈ [0, i).



                                                              14
In addition, we must have that (πI (i), f (πI (i), V ∗ (i))) ∈ ∆2+ for all i ∈ [i, i]. This constraint
amounts to the requirement that


                                                                   πI                      πI
                           πI (i) ∈ [0, min{                    ∗ (i) −
                                                                                     ;                  }].                                            (16)
                                                         2(V                  πD ) 2(πI + πD − V ∗ (i))
                                                                                                                                      πI
Notice that V ∗ (i) − πD is less than πI + πD − V ∗ (i) if and only if V ∗ (i) is less than                                            2   + πD . Thus,
letting bi be such that V ∗ (i) ≤               πI
                                                2    + πD for all i ∈ [i, bi) and V ∗ (i) ≥                     πI
                                                                                                                2    + πD for all i ∈ (bi, i], we
can write the constraint as18
                                                         ½
                                                             [0, 2(πI +ππDI−V ∗ (i)) ]          if i < bi
                                              πI (i) ∈                 πI
                                                                                                            .                                          (17)
                                                          [0,    2(V ∗ (i)−πD ) ]            otherwise

       We conclude from this that the districtings that generate the inverse seat-vote curve {i, i, V ∗ (·)}
can be described by the set of all {(πD , πI ), (π D , π I ), πI (i)} such that (π D , π I ) and (π D , πI ) belong
to ∆2+ and satisfy (13) and (14) and πI (i) satisfies (17) for all i ∈ [i, i]. We call this the set of
generating districtings and denote it by G(i, i, V ∗ (·)). The question of implementability is whether
there exists a districting in this set which is feasible; i.e., which satisfies
                                                                               Z     i
                                                 iπ I + (1 − i)π I +                     πI (i)di = πI                                                 (18)
                                                                                 i

and
                                                                     Z    i
                                        iπD + (1 − i)π D +                    f (πI (i), V ∗ (i))di = πD .                                             (19)
                                                                      i

       How do we know when this is true? The following observation is key to the method that
we use. Let G∗ (i, i, V ∗ (·)) denote the subset of generating districtings that satisfy the feasibility
requirement that the average fraction of Independents equals the actual fraction of the population
(i.e., (18)). Then we have:

Lemma 1: Let {(π oD , πoI ), (π oD , π oI ), πIo (i)} and {(π1D , π1I ), (π 1D , π 1I ), πI1 (i)} be two districtings in
the set G∗ (i, i, V ∗ (·)) such that
                                Z       i                                                                            Z   i
        iπ oD + (1 − i)π oD +               f (πIo (i), V ∗ (i))di ≥ πD ≥ iπ 1D + (1 − i)π1D +                               f (πI1 (i), V ∗ (i))di.
                                    i                                                                                i


Then there exists a feasible districting in the set G(i, i, V ∗ (·)).

  18  There will exist such an bi whenever there are safe seats for both Parties. If V ∗ (i) = π2I + πD for a set of
districts, then bi can be any element of this set. If i = 0 and V ∗ (0) > π2I + πD , let bi = 0, while if i = 1 and
V ∗ (1) < π2I + πD , let bi = 1.



                                                                          15
Thus, if there exists two districtings in the set G∗ (i, i, V ∗ (·)) one of which involves a higher average
fraction of Democrats than there are in the population and one of which involves a lower fraction,
then there must exist a feasible districting in G∗ (i, i, V ∗ (·)).
    Consider now the following pair of optimization problems:

                                                       Ri
                         min iπD + (1 − i)π D +         i
                                                            f (πI (i), V ∗ (i))di    Pmin

                            s.t. {(πD , π I ), (π D , π I ), πI (i)} ∈ G∗ (i, i, V ∗ (·))

and
                                                       Ri
                         max iπ D + (1 − i)πD +         i
                                                            f (πI (i), V ∗ (i))di     Pmax

                            s.t. {(πD , π I ), (π D , π I ), πI (i)} ∈ G∗ (i, i, V ∗ (·))

The minimization problem selects the districting in G∗ (i, i, V ∗ (·)) that has the minimal fraction of
Democrats, while the maximization problem selects the districting that has the maximal fraction
of Democrats or, equivalently, the minimal fraction of Republicans. Letting the values of these
problems be Ω(i, i, V ∗ (·)) and Ω(i, i, V ∗ (·)) respectively, it follows from Lemma 1 that there exists
a feasible districting generating {i, i, V ∗ (·)} if and only if Ω(i, i, V ∗ (·)) ≤ πD ≤ Ω(i, i, V ∗ (·)).
Thus, the seat-vote curve S(V ) is implementable if and only if πD lies between Ω(i, i, V ∗ (·)) and
Ω(i, i, V ∗ (·)).


6      When is the optimal seat-vote curve implementable?

Given the method just outlined, to see whether the optimal seat-vote curve S o (V ) is implementable
we proceed as follows. First, we find the associated inverse seat-vote curve {io , io , Vo∗ (·)}. Next,
we find the values of the associated minimization and maximization problems Ω(io , io , Vo∗ (·)) and
Ω(io , io , Vo∗ (·)). Then, we compare these values with the actual fraction of Democrats πD . In this
way, we establish the following result:

Proposition 2: The optimal seat-vote curve is implementable if and only if

                                            ε                     ε
                                    πI (      + ε − (τ + ε) ln(1 + )) ≤ πD                            (20)
                                           2τ                     τ

and
                                 ε                     ε
                         πI (      + ε − (τ + ε) ln(1 + )) ≤ 1 − πD − πI = πR .                       (21)
                                2τ                     τ


                                                        16
     Thus, we need that there be “enough” Republicans and Democrats relative to Independents.
This makes good intuitive sense given the discussion of implementability in Section 4. There
are several points to note about the coeﬃcient multiplying the fraction of Independents (i.e.,
 ε
2τ   + ε − (τ + ε) ln(1 + τε )). First, for all τ , its value of the coeﬃcient converges to zero as ε
converges to zero. This means that the optimal seat-vote curve is necessarily implementable when
the degree of uncertainty in the identity of the median Independent is suﬃciently small. Second,
for given ε, the coeﬃcient is decreasing in τ and hence the optimal seat-vote curve is more likely
to be implementable when there is more diversity in the ideologies of Independents. Third, and
most importantly, for any values of ε and τ satisfying our assumptions, the coeﬃcient is less than
1/2 and hence we have the following useful suﬃcient condition for the optimal seat-vote curve to
be implementable.

Corollary: The optimal seat-vote curve is implementable if πI ≤ 2 min{πD , πR }.

According to data from Erikson, Wright and McGuiver (1993), this suﬃcient condition is satisfied
in all but four U.S. States.19
     When the conditions of Proposition 2 are satisfied, we can use arguments developed in the
proof of Proposition 2 to show that the optimal seat-vote curve can always be implemented by a
districting of the form
                                   ⎧
                                   ⎪
                                   ⎪
                                   ⎪
                                   ⎪                    (π D , πI )   if i ∈ [0, io )
                                   ⎪
                                   ⎪
                                   ⎪
                                   ⎪
                                   ⎪
                                   ⎪          π
                                         πD + 2I −i
                                   ⎨ (                , π + ππI I−i+π
                                                                 τ
                                                                        )      if i ∈ [io , πD +     πI
                                       π
                                           πI
                                        D + 2 −i+πI τ    D           Iτ                               2 )
              (πD (i), πI (i)) =                             2
                                                                                                             (22)
                                   ⎪
                                   ⎪
                                   ⎪        (0, i−(π  πI τ
                                                                 )      if i ∈ [πD +     πI
                                   ⎪
                                   ⎪                   πI
                                                    D + 2 )+πI τ                          2 , io ]
                                   ⎪
                                   ⎪
                                   ⎪
                                   ⎪
                                   ⎪
                                   ⎩                   (πD , π I )     if i ∈ (io , 1]

The voter allocations in the safe seats (πD , π I ) and (πD , πI ) must satisfy inequalities (13) and
(14) and the aggregate feasibility conditions

                                                        ε
                                   io π I + 2πI τ ln(1 + ) + (1 − io )πI = πI                                (23)
                                                        τ

and
                                                              ε
                           io π D + 2[πI ε − πI τ ln(1 +        )] + (1 − io )π D = πD .                     (24)
                                                              τ
  19 Of course, just because a person reports that they are a Democrat does not mean that they always vote for

the Democrat candidate as the model assumes. Nonetheless, the requirement that the fraction of swing voters is
less than twice the fraction of voters who either always vote Democrat or always vote Republican seems permissive.


                                                         17
Under the conditions of Proposition 2, there will exist some (πD , π I ) and (π D , π I ) that satisfy all
these requirements.
      The allocations of voters in the competitive districts in districtings of this form are of particu-
                                                                                            πI
lar interest. They are divided into Democrat-leaning districts (i ∈ [io , πD +               2 ))   and Republican-
                                   πI
leaning districts (i ∈ [πD +       2 , io ]).   The Democrat-leaning districts are populated by only De-
mocrats and Independents, with the fraction of Independents varying from τ /(τ + ε) to 1. These
districts all elect a Democrat candidate when the majority of Independents prefer the Democrats;
i.e., when V ≥ πD + π2I . However, they diﬀer in their critical vote thresholds because they contain
diﬀerent fractions of Independents. Thus, the fraction of these districts electing Democrats varies
                                                                                            πI
smoothly as the aggregate Democrat vote share increases from V to πD +                       2 .    The Republican-
leaning districts are populated by only Republicans and Independents, with the fraction of Inde-
pendents varying from 1 to τ /(τ + ε). These districts all elect Republicans when the majority of
Independents prefer Republicans, but the fraction electing a Republican varies smoothly as the
                                                       πI
aggregate vote share increases from πD +                2   to V .
      In general, not much of interest can be said about the allocation of voters in the safe seats.
However, when one of the two conditions in Proposition 2 holds with equality, there is a unique
districting (in the class of districtings with homogeneous safe seats) that generates the optimal
seat-vote curve. Accordingly, the allocation of voters in the safe seats is tied down uniquely.
It will be helpful in understanding constrained optimal seat-vote curves to see what this looks
like. Consider the case in which condition (20) holds with equality, so that there are just enough
Democrats. Then, (π D , π I ) = (ε/(τ +ε), τ /(τ +ε)) and (π D , π I ) = (0, ( π2I −πI τ ln(1+ τε ))/(1− π2I −
πI ε − πD )). Thus, the safe Democrat districts are just populated by Democrats and Independents
and the safe Republican districts by Republicans and Independents. The fraction of Democrats in
the safe Democrat districts is no more than necessary to ensure that the fraction of Democrats and
Democrat-favoring Independents always exceeds the fraction of Republican-favoring Independents.
Assuming that condition (21) holds as an inequality, the fraction of Republicans in the safe
Republican districts is greater than the minimal suﬃcient level.20                       Thus, there are surplus
Republicans in the safe Republican seats.
      The districtings of the form described in (22) are extreme in the sense that the competitive
                                                        πI             ε)
 20                                                      2
                                                           −πI τ ln(1+ τ          τ
      If condition (21) holds as an inequality, then       π                <        .
                                                        1− 2I −πI ε−πD          τ +ε




                                                              18
districts have no voters of one type. It is reasonable to object that such districts are unlikely
to be practically feasible when account is taken of geographic constraints. However, it is im-
portant to note that the optimal seat-vote curve can typically be implemented with much more
“straightforward” districtings. To illustrate, consider the class of districtings in which the fraction
of Independents is constant across districts. In this class, all that varies across districts is the
fraction of Democrats and Republicans. Then, we have the following result:

Proposition 3: The optimal seat-vote curve is implementable with a districting of the form
                                   ⎧
                                   ⎪
                                   ⎪
                                   ⎪
                                   ⎪           (π D , πI ) if i ∈ [0, io )
                                   ⎪
                                   ⎪
                                   ⎨                     π
                (πD (i), πI (i)) =                 π + I −i                                (25)
                                   ⎪ ( 12 − π2I + D 2τ2 , πI ) if i ∈ [io , io ]
                                   ⎪
                                   ⎪
                                   ⎪
                                   ⎪
                                   ⎪
                                   ⎩           (π D , πI ) if i ∈ (io , 1]

if and only if
                               πI ε(1 − πI ) + ( 12 − πI ( 12 − 2τ
                                                                 ε
                                                                   ))πI ( 12 − ε)
                                              1        1      ε                   ≤ πD                   (26)
                                              2 + πI ( 2 − 2τ )
and
                       πI ε(1 − πI ) + ( 12 − πI ( 12 − 2τ
                                                         ε
                                                           ))πI ( 12 − ε)
                                      1        1      ε                   ≤ 1 − πD − πI = πR .           (27)
                                      2 + πI ( 2 − 2τ )

   The encouraging point to note is that the conditions of Proposition 3 are not that much more
restrictive than those of Proposition 2. Figure 3 illustrates the sets of (πD , πI ) that satisfy the
conditions of Propositions 2 and 3 under the assumption that ε = 0.1 and τ = 0.2. The horizontal
axis measures πI and the vertical axis measures πD . The two dimensional unit simplex ∆2+ is the
area below the line connecting the points (0, 1) and (1, 0). The set of (πD , πI ) that satisfy the
conditions of Proposition 3 is the smaller triangular area between the two lines that are closest
to each other and the set satisfying the conditions of Proposition 2 is the larger triangular area.
The two sets are almost the same.
   The competitive districts in districtings of the form described in Proposition 3 can still be
                                                                 πI
divided into Democrat-leaning districts (i ∈ [io , πD +           2 ])   and Republican-leaning districts (i ∈
        πI
[πD +    2 , io ]).   However, all districts contain all three types of voters. The Democrat-leaning
districts just have a greater fraction of Democrats than Republicans, with the ratio of Democrats
to Republicans varying from [1 − πI ( τ −ε            τ +ε
                                        τ )]/[1 − πI ( τ )] to 1. The Republican-leaning districts

have a greater fraction of Republicans, with the ratio of Democrats to Republicans varying from
1 to [1 − πI ( τ +ε            τ −ε
                 τ )]/[1 − πI ( τ )].


                                                         19
7       The constrained optimal seat-vote curve

While the optimal seat-vote curve is implementable in a broad class of circumstances, there are
interesting situations in which it might not be. For example, according to Erikson, Wright and
McGuiver (1993), the suﬃcient conditions of the Corollary are not satisfied in four New England
States, where many voters are not aﬃliated with either political party. In two states (MA and
RI) there are enough Democrats (πI ≤ 2πD ) but too few Republicans (πI > 2πR ), while these
conditions are reversed in two others (NH and VT). In such cases, what does the constrained
optimal seat-vote curve look like?
    We find the constrained optimal seat-vote curve by solving for the implementable inverse seat-
vote curve that maximizes aggregate welfare.21                  Let F −1 denote the set of all inverse seat-vote
curves {i, i, V ∗ (·)} that have the property that V ∗ (·) is piecewise continuously diﬀerentiable. In
addition, let EW ({i, i, V ∗ (·)}) denote expected aggregate utility under the inverse seat-vote curve
{i, i, V ∗ (·)}. Then, the problem we solve is

                                    max            EW ({i, i, V ∗ (·)})          Pcon
                              {i,i,V ∗ (·)}∈F −1

                              s.t. Ω({i, i, V ∗ (·)}) ≥ πD ≥ Ω({i, i, V ∗ (·)}).

The constrained optimal seat-vote curve is the seat-vote curve corresponding to the solution of
this problem.
    When (20) and (21) are satisfied, Proposition 2 implies that the optimal inverse seat-vote
curve {io , io , Vo∗ (·)} solves this problem and the constraints are not binding. When this is not the
case, there are three possibilities. First, only (21) is satisfied and there are not enough Democrats.
Second, only (20) is satisfied and there are not enough Republicans. Finally, neither inequality is
satisfied and there are not enough Democrats or Republicans. We discuss each of these cases in
turn.

7.1     Not enough Democrats

In this case, we are able to establish the following result:

Proposition 4: Suppose that there are not enough Democrats and let S ∗ (V ) denote the con-
                                                         πI ε
strained optimal seat-vote curve. (a) If πD ≤            2τ (1 − τ   − 2ε), then S ∗ (V ) = πD τ +ε
                                                                                                 ε on the interval

  21 By an “implementable” inverse seat-vote curve we mean one for which there exists a feasible districting that

generates it.


                                                           20
             πI                                                      πI                        πI ε
[V , πD +    2 )   and S ∗ (V ) = S o (V ) on the interval [πD +      2 ,V   ]. (b) If πD >    2τ (1   − τ − 2ε) there
exists Ve ∈ (V , πD +      πI
                           2 )       such that: (i) S ∗ (V ) is positive, increasing, and strictly convex on the
interval [V , Ve ); (ii) S ∗ (V ) is constant on the interval [Ve , πD +       πI
                                                                                2 );   and (iii) S ∗ (V ) = S o (V ) on
                        πI
the interval [πD +       2 ,V   ].

   The result is illustrated in Figure 4. Panel (a) illustrates the case in which πD is less than
πI ε                                                                                      πI ε
2τ (1   − τ − 2ε) and panel (b) the case in which πD is greater than                      2τ (1   − τ − 2ε). In the
                                                                                                              πI
former case, the constrained optimal seat-vote curve is constant on the interval [V , πD +                     2 )   and
                                                                                                               πI
then jumps up discontinuously to equal the optimal seat-vote curve on the interval [πD +                        2 ,V   ].
The logic of the constrained optimum is to allocate the available Democrats to make as many
safe Democrat districts as possible. In the case illustrated in panel (b) the seat-vote curve is
first increasing and at an increasing rate. However, at some aggregate vote level between V and
        πI
πD +     2   the curve becomes flat. It then jumps up discontinuously to equal the optimal seat-vote
                                       πI
curve on the interval [πD +             2 ,V   ]. It can be shown that as πD gets larger (holding constant πI )
the point at which the curve flattens (Ve ) moves to the right and, for suﬃciently large πD , equals
        πI
πD +     2   and the flat spot disappears.
   In either case, the constrained optimal seat-vote curve lies below the optimal seat-vote curve
                                     πI
on the interval [V , πD +             2 )   and equals it thereafter. What this tells us is when the median
Independent favors the Republicans, it is not possible to elect enough Democrats to make the
average ideology of the legislature equal to the population average. However, when the median
Independent favors the Democrats there is no longer a problem, because Democrats can be elected
from districts that are populated solely by Independents. In case (a) the shortage of Democrats
is dealt with by creating as many safe Democrat seats as possible. This means that the seat-vote
curve is non-responsive on the interval [V , πD + π2I ), implying that the divergence between average
population and legislator ideology is increasing. In case (b) the seat-vote curve is first increasingly
responsive, and then becomes unresponsive. This implies that the divergence between the average
population and legislator ideology displays a more complex pattern, first increasing and then
decreasing. This counter-intuitive pattern stems from an inherent non-convexity in Problem Pcon
that is discussed in the proof of Proposition 4.
   What can be said about the districting underlying the constrained optimal seat-vote curve? In
contrast to the situation when the optimal seat-vote curve can be implemented, there is a unique
districting (in the class with homogeneous safe seats) generating the constrained optimal seat-vote


                                                             21
                                   πI ε
curve. When πD is less than        2τ (1  − τ − 2ε), this optimal districting is
                                         ⎧
                                         ⎪
                                         ⎪
                                         ⎪           ε
                                                 ( τ +ε     τ
                                                        , τ +ε  ) if i ∈ [0, πD τ +ε
                                         ⎪
                                         ⎪                                        ε )
                                         ⎪
                                         ⎪
                                         ⎪
                                         ⎪
                                         ⎪
                                         ⎨     (0, 1)        if i ∈ [πD τ +ε       πI
                                                                          ε , πD + 2 )
                    (πD (i), πI (i)) =                                                            .               (28)
                                         ⎪
                                         ⎪
                                         ⎪
                                         ⎪ (0, i−(π +πIπτI )+π τ )      if i ∈ [πD + π2I , io ]
                                         ⎪
                                         ⎪         D           I
                                         ⎪
                                         ⎪
                                                        2
                                         ⎪
                                         ⎪         πI             ε
                                                    2 −πI τ ln(1+ τ )
                                         ⎩     (0, 1−π      π         )      if i ∈ (io , 1]
                                                         D− I −π ε
                                                               2      I


It is instructive to compare this with the optimal districting when there are “just enough De-
mocrats” discussed in Section 6. The safe Democrat districts look exactly the same, but there
are less of them since πD (τ + ε)/ε is smaller than io . However, the Democrat-leaning competitive
                                                                                                      πI
districts from (22) have been replaced by a group of districts (i ∈ [πD τ +ε
                                                                          ε , πD +                     2 ])   that are
populated solely by Independents. These districts all vote in the same way and elect a Democrat
candidate if and only if the median Independent votes Democrat or, equivalently, if the aggregate
                                                       πI
vote share for the Democrats exceeds πD +               2 .   This is what generates the discontinuity in the
seat-vote curve illustrated in Figure 4(a). The Republican-leaning competitive districts and the
safe Republican districts look the same as in the districting described by (22).
                                            πI ε
    In the case in which πD exceeds         2τ (1   − τ − 2ε), the optimal districting is more complicated.
There exists scalars i, i∗ and a function ϕ defined on [i, i∗ ] such that
                                     ⎧
                                     ⎪
                                     ⎪
                                     ⎪
                                     ⎪
                                                     ε
                                                 ( τ +ε     τ
                                                        , τ +ε ) if i ∈ [0, i)
                                     ⎪
                                     ⎪
                                     ⎪
                                     ⎪
                                     ⎪
                                     ⎪  πI /2+πD −ϕ(i)          πI /2
                                     ⎪                                                    ∗
                                     ⎪ ( πI +πD −ϕ(i) , πI +πD −ϕ(i) ) if i ∈ [i, i )
                                     ⎪
                                     ⎪
                                     ⎨
                  (πD (i), πI (i)) =           (0, 1)       if i ∈ [i∗ , πD + π2I )                               (29)
                                     ⎪
                                     ⎪
                                     ⎪
                                     ⎪
                                     ⎪
                                     ⎪
                                     ⎪            πI τ
                                                                      if i ∈ [πD + π2I , io )
                                     ⎪ (0, i−(πD + π2I )+πI τ )
                                     ⎪
                                     ⎪
                                     ⎪
                                     ⎪
                                     ⎪
                                     ⎪         πI
                                                  −π τ ln(1+ τε )
                                     ⎩     (0, 2 I             πI  )       if i ∈ [i , 1]
                                                                                      o
                                                      1−πD −    2   −πI ε

where ϕ(i) is increasing, strictly concave and satisfies ϕ(i) = V . Again, the safe Democrat districts
look exactly the same as when there are just enough Democrats, but there are less of them since
i is smaller than io . The Democrat-leaning competitive districts from (22) are now replaced by two
groups of districts. One group (i ∈ [i, i∗ )) contains both Democrats and Independents. This group
have diﬀering critical vote thresholds, with the fraction of Independents increasing from τ /(τ + ε)
to πI /2(πI +πD −ϕ(i∗ )). Accordingly, the fraction of these districts electing a Democrat candidate
varies smoothly with the aggregate Democrat vote. However, in contrast to the case where the

                                                          22
optimal seat-vote curve is implementable, the critical vote threshold (which is ϕ(i)) increases at a
decreasing rate in i as opposed to a linear rate. This generates a strictly convex seat-vote curve.
                                                         πI
The other group of districts (i ∈ [i∗ , πD +              2 ))    are populated solely by Independents as in the
earlier case. Notice that the aggregate vote level Ve described in Proposition 4 part (b) is ϕ(i∗ ).
                          πI
When i∗ = πD +             2 ,   the group of districts populated solely by Independents disappears and
                   πI
ϕ(i∗ ) = πD +       2 .


7.2     Not enough Republicans

The properties of the constrained optimal seat-vote curve when there are not enough Republicans,
can be deduced from Proposition 4. As noted in the proof of Proposition 2, one can redefine
the seat-vote curve as representing the relationship between the fraction of seats held by the
Republican Party and its share of the aggregate vote. Such a Republican seat-vote curve is denoted
by SR (VR ), where SR is the fraction of seats held by Republicans and VR is the fraction of votes
they received. One can then apply Proposition 4 to deduce the properties of the constrained
                                    ∗
optimal Republican seat-vote curve SR (VR ) when there are not enough Republicans. Finally, one
can use the fact that S ∗ (V ) = 1 − SR
                                      ∗
                                        (1 − V ) to find the properties of the constrained optimal
Democrat seat-vote curve. In this way, the following result can be established:

Proposition 5: Suppose that there are not enough Republicans and let S ∗ (V ) denote the con-
                                                           πI ε
strained optimal seat-vote curve. (a) If πR ≤              2τ (1 − τ    − 2ε), then S ∗ (V ) = S o (V ) on the interval
            πI                                                                 πI                       πI ε
[V , πD +    2 ]   and S ∗ (V ) = 1 − πR τ +ε
                                           ε on the interval (πD +              2 ,V   ]. (b) If πR >   2τ (1   − τ − 2ε)
there exists Vb ∈ (πD +           πI
                                   2 ,V   ) such that: (i) S ∗ (V ) = S o (V ) on the interval [V , πD +         πI
                                                                                                                  2 ];   (ii)
                                                     πI b
S ∗ (V ) is constant on the interval (πD +            2 , V ];   and (iii) S ∗ (V ) is increasing and strictly concave
on the interval (Vb , V ].

   This result is illustrated in Figure 5. Panel (a) illustrates the case in which πR is less than
πI ε                                                                                   πI ε
2τ (1 − τ   − 2ε) and panel (b) the case in which πR is greater than                   2τ (1 − τ   − 2ε). In the former
                                                                                                                         πI
case, the constrained optimal seat-vote curve equals the optimal one on the interval [V , πD +                            2 ]
                                                                                                    πI
and then jumps up discontinuously and flattens out on the interval (πD +                             2 ,V   ]. Again, the
logic of the constrained optimum is to allocate the available Republicans to make as many safe
Republican districts as possible. In the latter case, the seat-vote curve equals the optimal one on
the interval [V , πD + π2I ], jumps up at πD + π2I and stays constant until Vb . It then starts increasing
at a decreasing rate on the interval [Vb , V ]. As πR gets larger, Vb moves to the left and eventually

                                                                 23
                πI
equals πD +     2 .


7.3      Not enough Democrats or Republicans

The optimal districting when there are not enough Democrats allocates all the available De-
                                             πI
mocrats in the districts [0, πD +             2 ).    Similarly, when there are not enough Republicans, the
                                                                           πI
available Republicans are allocated to the districts (πD +                  2 , 1].   Accordingly, when there are
neither enough Democrats or Republicans the optimal districting is just an amalgam of the two
                                                                                          πI
cases: the Democrats are allocated optimally over the districts [0, πD +                   2 )   and the Republicans
                               πI
over the districts (πD +        2 , 1].    The corresponding constrained optimal seat-vote curve therefore
just pieces together the two distorted ends of the seat-vote curves.
      This is illustrated in Figure 6. Panel (a) depicts the case in which both πD and πR are
                 πI ε
smaller than     2τ (1 − τ   − 2ε) and in panel (b) the case in which both πD and πR are greater than
πI ε
2τ (1 − τ   − 2ε). In the former case, the constrained optimal seat-vote curve is flat on [V , πD + π2I ),
                                              πI                                                       πI
jumps up discontinuously at πD +               2     and then is constant on the interval (πD +         2 ,V   ]. In the
latter case, the seat-vote curve is first increasing and at an increasing rate. However, at aggregate
vote level Ve the curve becomes constant, jumps up discontinuously at πD + π2I and stays constant
until Vb . It then starts increasing at a decreasing rate on the interval [Vb , V ]. In the case in which
both Ve and Vb equal πD +         πI
                                   2 ,    the seat-vote curve is S-shaped.

7.4      General lessons

There are three general lessons we can draw concerning the properties of constrained optimal seat-
vote curves. The first is that they always have safe seats. When either Democrats or Republicans
are in short supply, at least some fraction of them are optimally concentrated together to make
safe seats for their party.
      The second lesson is that when there is a shortage of one group of partisans, the constrained
optimal seat-vote curve is biased toward the party with the largest partisan base, but when there
is a shortage of both groups this is not uniformly the case. Consider first the case in which there
is a shortage of one group - say, Republicans. The constrained optimal seat-vote curve is biased
in favor of the Democrats if for all V we have that S ∗ (V ) > 1 − S ∗ (1 − V ).22                      The optimal
seat-vote curve is biased in favor of the Democrats in this case, so that S (V ) > 1 − S o (1 − V ).
                                                                                            o


 22   To be more precise, the inequality must hold for all V ∈ [V , V ] such that 1 − V ∈ [V , V ].



                                                             24
Moreover, from Figure 5, the constrained optimal seat-vote curve lies on or above the optimal
seat-vote curve in this case, so that S ∗ (V ) ≥ S o (V ) and S ∗ (1 − V ) ≥ S o (1 − V ). Combining these
inequalities yields the result.
    By contrast, consider a case in which there are too few Republicans and Democrats. Assume
                                           πI ε
that both πD and πR are smaller than       2τ (1   − τ − 2ε) so that we have the situation illustrated
in Figure 6(a) and suppose that πD is larger than πR . Consider the situation in which exactly
one half the population vote for the Democrats so that V = 1/2. Then, since πD is larger
than πR , it must be the case that 1/2 < πD + πI /2, implying that the Democrats’ seat share is
S ∗ (1/2) = πD (τ + ε)/ε (see Figure 6(a)). In order for S ∗ (1/2) > 1 − S ∗ (1/2), it must be the case
that S ∗ (1/2) exceeds 1/2. But this will not be the case whenever πD < 2ε/(τ + ε). The diﬃculty
that arises here is that because πD is larger than πR , it must be the case that the majority of
Independents favor the Republicans when V = 1/2. Thus all the Independent districts elect
a Republican giving the Republicans an advantage in this case. It should be stressed that this
anomaly does not arise for all V because whenever V is suﬃciently small so that 1−V > πD +πI /2
the condition that S ∗ (V ) > 1 − S ∗ (1 − V ) will be satisfied. But the existence of the anomaly
means that the constrained optimal seat-vote curve is not necessarily uniformly biased toward the
larger party.
    The final lesson is that the responsiveness of the constrained optimal seat-vote curve can be
anywhere from zero to infinity. Moreover, as is clear from Figures 4-6, responsiveness can vary
discontinuously as one moves along the seat-vote curve. Accordingly, while the notion of the
optimal degree of responsiveness makes sense for the optimal seat-vote curve, it does not for the
constrained optimal seat-vote curve.


8     The role of the assumptions

In analyzing socially optimal districting in our model, we have worked with quite specific assump-
tions on citizens’ political preferences. Specifically, we have assumed that citizens have quadratic
loss functions and that the distribution of Independents’ ideologies is uniform across its support.
To highlight the role these play in the analysis, this section briefly discusses the implications of
working with more general assumptions.
    With respect to the distribution of Independents’ ideologies, the basic model can be generalized
by assuming that the fraction of Independents with ideologies less than x ∈ [m − τ, m + τ ] is

                                                    25
H( x−(m−τ
      2τ
          )
            ) where H : [0, 1] → [0, 1] is a continuously diﬀerentiable, increasing distribution
function with a density h that is symmetric around 1/2. This allows us to capture the possibility,
say, that there are more Independents with ideologies closer to the median than in the tails of the
support. With respect to citizens’ loss functions, the model can be generalized by assuming that
if the average ideology of the elected representatives is α0 , a citizen with ideology α experiences a
payoﬀ given by −v(|α − α0 |) where v : <+ → <+ is increasing, strictly convex, twice continuously
diﬀerentiable and satisfies v 0 (0) = 0. This allows us to vary the degree of convexity in citizens’
loss functions.
       It is important to note that these generalizations make little diﬀerence to the positive aspects
of the analysis. The derivation of the equilibrium seat-vote curve is basically the same and, in par-
ticular, the critical aggregate vote threshold for district i is still given by (7).23 Consequently, the
method for determining the implementability of a seat-vote curve outlined in Section 5 generalizes
straightforwardly under these assumptions.24
       Where the generalizations have implications is for the normative analysis; in particular, the
form of the optimal seat-vote curve. Consider first the implications of generalizing the distribution
of Independents’ ideologies. Maintaining the assumption of quadratic loss functions, the optimal
seat-vote curve can now be written as:

                                                                           V − πD
                S o (V ) = 1/2 + (πD − πR )(1/2 − τ ) + 2τ (πI H −1 (             ) − (1/2 − πD )).               (30)
                                                                             πI

This seat-vote curve remains biased in favor of the party with the largest partisan base and its
responsiveness continues to depend upon the degree of preference variation among the Indepen-
dents, as measured by 2τ . However, the responsiveness is 2τ /h( 1/2−(m(V
                                                                      2τ
                                                                          )−τ )
                                                                                ) and thus depends
upon the density of Independents’ ideologies. Intuitively, this is because the size of this density
determines the change in the mean Independent’s ideology that is signalled by a marginal increase
in the Democrats’ vote share. The implication of this is that the optimal seat-vote curve is no
longer linear. In particular, under the assumption that the density h is increasing on [0, 1/2], the
optimal seat-vote curve will be strictly concave on [V , πD + π2I ) and strictly convex on (πD + π2I , V ].
  23   If the median independent has ideology m, the fraction of voters in district i voting for the Democrat is
V (i; m) = πD (i) + πI (i)H( 1/2−(m−τ
                                 2τ
                                      )
                                        ) and the average fraction of voters voting for the Democrat Party is V (m) =
              1/2−(m−τ )
πD + πI H(       2τ
                       ). Accordingly, m(V ) = 1/2 + τ − 2τ H −1 ( V −π
                                                                     πI
                                                                        D
                                                                          ) and V (i; m(V )) = πD (i) + πI (i)[ V −π
                                                                                                                  πI
                                                                                                                     D
                                                                                                                       ]
which is just (6). Hence (7) still holds.
                                                                               −ε
  24   The only diﬀerence is that equations (13) and (14) become π D + π I H( τ2τ ) ≥ 1/2 and π D + π I H( τ2τ
                                                                                                            +ε
                                                                                                               ) ≤ 1/2.



                                                           26
      With the more general loss function, it is no longer possible to obtain a closed form solution
for the optimal seat-vote curve. Rather, it is defined implicitly by the first order condition that
the social marginal benefit from having more Democrat seats just equals the social marginal cost.
Maintaining the uniform distribution assumption, this condition is given by25
                         Z   1−S o                                                Z   m(V )+τ
                                                        dα                                                            dα
 πD v0 (1 − S o ) + πI               v0 (1 − S o − α)      = πR v 0 (S o ) + πI                 v0 (α − (1 − S o ))      . (31)
                         m(V )−τ                        2τ                        1−S o                               2τ

Despite the lack of a closed form solution, it is possible to explore the bias and responsiveness
of the optimal seat-vote curve. It is straightforward to show that when V = 1/2, the optimal
Democratic seat share S o (V ) is greater or smaller than 1/2 as πD is greater or smaller than πR ,
so that the optimal seat-vote curve remains biased towards the party with the largest partisan
base. Moreover, it can be shown that there exists αD ∈ (0, 1 − S o (V ) − (m(V ) − τ )) and αR ∈
(0, m(V ) + τ − (1 − S o (V ))) such that

            dS o (V )        (v 00 (αD ) + v00 (αR ))/2       v00 (αD ) − v 00 (αR )
                      = 2τ [                            ] + [                        ](1 − S o (V ) − m(v)),              (32)
              dV                         Ev00                         Ev 00

where Ev00 is the population average second derivative of the loss function. Thus, the responsive-
ness of the optimal seat-vote curve still depends upon the degree of preference variation among
the Independents, but now also on the behavior of the second derivative of the loss function.
      It should now be clear that the role of our assumptions concerning citizens’ preferences and the
distribution of Independents’ ideologies is to ensure that the optimal seat-vote curve has a simple
tractable form. This allows us to easily compute the values of the minimization and maximization
problems associated with the optimal inverse seat-vote curve Ω(io , io , Vo∗ (·)) and Ω(io , io , Vo∗ (·))
and hence derive the simple conditions for implementability presented in Proposition 2. More-
over, these assumptions permit the characterization of the optimal constrained seat-vote curve
by ensuring that the social welfare function EW ({i, i, V ∗ (·)}) has a relatively tractable form.
In this sense, our assumptions are key. Nonetheless, they are not misleading because, as just
demonstrated, the determinants of partisan bias and responsiveness in the basic model remain in
more general models. Thus, the nature of socially optimal districting in more general models is
not going to be fundamentally diﬀerent - it is just that additional considerations will come into
play. Obviously, understanding precisely how such considerations impact both the conditions for
implementability and the nature of the constrained optimal seat-vote curve is an interesting (and
 25   This assumes that the optimal Democrat seat-share S o lies between m(V ) − τ and m(V ) + τ .


                                                             27
challenging) subject for further research.


9     Conclusion

This paper has developed a welfare economic analysis of the problem of districting. In the con-
text of a simple micro-founded model intended to capture salient features of U.S. politics, it has
studied how a social planner should allocate citizens of diﬀerent ideologies across districts to max-
imize aggregate utility. Ideally, the social planner would like the Democratic seat share in the
legislature to be such that the social gains from marginally increasing it just equal the social
costs. Since changes in the parties’ aggregate vote share reflect changes in voters’ ideologies, the
optimal composition of the legislature will depend on the aggregate vote share. This yields the
key conceptual innovation of the paper - the optimal seat-vote curve. Under the assumptions of
the model, the optimal seat-vote curve is of the same simple linear form estimated in the early
empirical literature. Its “responsiveness” depends on the magnitude of the change in average voter
ideology signalled by a change in vote share, which in turn depends on the degree of preference
variation among Independents. Its “bias” depends on the diﬀerence in the fractions of Democrats
and Republicans in the population; specifically, it is biased in favor of the party with the largest
partisan base.
    If there exists a way of districting voters that makes the equilibrium seat-vote curve equal to the
optimal seat-vote curve, then the social planner can do no better than to choose such a districting.
The first analytical achievement of the paper is to show that there exist such districtings if (and
only if) the fraction of Independents in the population is not “too large” relative to either the
fraction of Democrats or Republicans. These conditions appear permissive and would be satisfied
in the vast majority of U.S. States. Moreover, while the analysis does not take into account the
geographical constraints faced by oﬃcials charged with redistricting in the real world, the optimal
seat-vote curve can typically be generated by districtings that look straightforward to achieve.
This nurtures the hope that the optimal seat-vote curve may be an attainable benchmark for
districters.
    When the fraction of Independents in the population is large, the optimal seat-vote curve will
not be implementable even if the planner has the flexibility in allocating voter types that we have
assumed. The second analytical achievement of the paper is to fully characterize the constrained
optimal seat-vote curve. In contrast to the situation when the first best is implementable, the

                                                  28
constrained optimal seat-vote curve is generated by a unique districting. These optimal districtings
involve a complex pattern of voter types, with some districts being all Independent and the
remainder containing only Independents and Democrats or Independents and Republicans.
       While the shape of the constrained optimal seat-vote curve diﬀers from that of the optimal seat-
vote curve, they do share several general features, which can be interpreted as lessons for districting
practices. While many commentators consider uncompetitive districts to be undesirable from the
perspective of democracy, our welfare economic perspective provides general support for a mix of
competitive and safe seats. In addition, the analysis provides support for partisan bias as both the
optimal and constrained optimal seat-vote curves are typically biased in favor of the party with
the largest voter base. Regarding the districtings underlying these seat-vote curves, our analysis
provides support for districts that are heterogeneous, rather than identical, in their compositions
of voter ideology. While the optimal and constrained optimal systems concur on these issues of the
number of safe seats, partisan bias, and cross-district heterogeneity, they diﬀer on the appropriate
degree of responsiveness. In particular, while the first-best system has a constant responsiveness,
the constrained optimal seat-vote curve exhibits responsiveness that varies from zero to infinity.
       The model and techniques developed in this paper can be used to address other districting
questions. One could study the classic question of optimal partisan gerrymandering by char-
acterizing the implementable seat-vote curve that maximizes the expected utility of (say) the
Democrats. This requires solving a problem similar to that studied in Section 7, except the objec-
tive function would be the expected welfare of the Democrats rather than the population at large.
This exercise might be useful for developing predictions concerning the districtings that a partisan
redistricting committee might choose. The model would also facilitate a precise understanding of
the determinants of the welfare loss associated with partisan districting.26
       The model can also be used as a basis to empirically estimate and evaluate seat-vote curves.
Coate and Knight (2005) use the model to develop an empirical methodology for estimating
seat-vote curves for the U.S. States and measuring citizen welfare. This allows the comparison
of actual and optimal seat-vote curves and the estimation of the welfare loss associated with
observed districtings. Given our argument that it may be reasonably easy to achieve the optimal
relationship between seats and votes, we might hope this welfare loss to be small. Following
  26 It would also be interesting to explore the determinants of the level of partisan bias under the optimal partisan
gerrymander as in Gilligan and Matsusaka [1999].




                                                         29
King (1989) and Gelman and King (1994), one could also investigate the correlation between
redistricting institutions and welfare loss.
   Finally, it will be clear to the reader that this paper is very much a first cut at the problem
and there are numerous ways the model could usefully be extended. First, it would be interesting
to see how strategic voting of the sort discussed in the split-ticket voting literature (Alesina and
Rosenthal (1995) and Fiorina (1992)) would impact the analysis. Second, it would be highly
desirable to be able to incorporate geographic constraints in a meaningful way. Perhaps the most
fruitful approach would be to devise a way of studying the welfare consequences of local changes
in districting. Third, it would be useful to incorporate a governor or president into the model.
Fourth, it would be interesting to make the model dynamic and incorporate incumbency. In
reality, incumbents have a significant advantage (perhaps due to greater experience) and, it is
often argued that redistricting is done with an eye to preserving the seats of incumbents. Fifth,
it would be interesting to give parties a strategic role in terms of candidate selection, perhaps by
assuming that they can choose between moderate and extremist candidates.




                                                30
References
   Alesina, Alberto and Howard Rosenthal, [1995], Partisan Politics, Divided Government and
   the Economy, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
   Besley, Timothy and Anne Case, [2003], “Political Institutions and Policy Choices: Evidence
   from the United States,” Journal of Economic Literature, 41, 7-73.
   Besley, Timothy and Stephen Coate, [1998], “An Economic Model of Representative Democ-
   racy,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112(1), 85-114.
   Besley, Timothy and Ian Preston, [2005], “Electoral Bias and Policy Choices: Theory and
   Evidence,” mimeo, London School of Economics.
   Coate, Stephen, [2004a], “Pareto-Improving Campaign Finance Policy,” American Economic
   Review, 94, 628-655.
   Coate, Stephen, [2004b], “Political Competition with Campaign Contributions and Informa-
   tive Advertising,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 2(5), 772-804.
   Coate, Stephen and Brian Knight, [2005], “Socially Optimal Districting: An Empirical
   Analysis,” mimeo, Cornell University.
   Degan, Arianna and Antonio Merlo, [2004], “Do Citizens Vote Sincerely (If They Vote at
   All)? Theory and Evidence from U.S. National Elections,” mimeo, University of Pennsylva-
   nia.
   Epstein, David and Sharon O’Hallaran, [2004], “The 45% Solution: Racial Gerrymandering
   and Representative Democracy,” mimeo, Columbia University.
   Erikson, Robert, Gerald Wright and John McIver, [1993], Statehouse Democracy: Public
   Opinion and Policy in the American States, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
   Fiorina, Morris, [1992], Divided Government, New York: Mcmillan.
   Gelman, Andrew and Gary King, [1990], “Estimating the Electoral Consequences of Leg-
   islative Redistricting,” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 85, 274-282.
   Gelman, Andrew and Gary King, [1994], “Enhancing Democracy through Legislative Redis-
   tricting,” American Political Science Review, 88(3), 541-559.
   Gilligan, Thomas and John Matsusaka, [1999], “Structural Constraints on Partisan Bias
   under the Eﬃcient Gerrymander,” Public Choice, 100, 65-84.
   King, Gary, [1989], “Representation through Legislative Redistricting: A Stochastic Model,”
   American Journal of Political Science, 33(4), 787-824.
   King, Gary and Robert Browning, [1987], “Democratic Representation and Partisan Bias in
   Congressional Elections,” American Political Science Review, 81(4), 1251-1273.
   Lizzeri, Alessandro and Nicola Persico, [2001], “The Provision of Public Goods under Alter-
   native Electoral Incentives,” American Economic Review, 91, 225-339.
   Lockwood, Ben, [2002], “Distributive Politics and the Costs of Centralization,” Review of
   Economic Studies, 69, 313-337.


                                            31
Maskin, Eric and Jean Tirole, [2004], “The Politician and the Judge: Accountability in
Government,” American Economic Review, 94, 1034-1054.
Matsusaka, John and Nolan McCarty, [2001], “Political Resource Allocation: Benefits and
Costs of Voter Initiatives,” Journal of Law, Economics and Organization, 17, 413-448.
Myerson, Roger, [1999], “Theoretical Comparisons of Electoral Systems,” European Eco-
nomic Review, 43, 671-697.
Osborne, Martin and Al Slivinski, [1996], “A Model of Political Competition with Citizen-
Candidates,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111(1), 65-96.
Owen, Guillermo and Bernard Grofman, [1988], “Optimal Partisan Gerrymandering,” Po-
litical Geography Quarterly, 1988, 7(1), 5-22.
Persson, Torsten, Gerard Roland and Guido Tabellini, [2000], “Comparative Politics and
Public Finance,” Journal of Political Economy, 108, 1121-1161.
Persson, Torsten and Guido Tabellini, [2004], “Constitutions and Economic Policy,” Journal
of Economic Perspectives, 18, 75-98.
Prat, Andrea, [2002], “Campaign Advertising and Voter Welfare,” Review of Economic
Studies, 69, 999-1018.
Sherstyuk, Katerina, [1998], “How to Gerrymander: A Formal Analysis,” Public Choice, 95,
27-49.
Shotts, Kenneth, [2002], “Gerrymandering, Legislative Composition, and National Policy
Outcomes,” American Journal of Political Science, 46, 398-414.
Tufte, Edward, [1973], “The Relationship Between Seats and Votes in Two-Party Systems,”
American Political Science Review, 67(2), 540-554.




                                         32
10       Appendix27

Proof of Proposition 1: Diﬀerentiating (9) yields

                                    ∂W (S; m)/∂S = 2{πD + πI (1 − m) − S}.

Thus, ∂W (S o ; m(V ))/∂S = 0 if and only if

                                                S o = πD + πI (1 − m(V )).

In addition, note that ∂ 2 W (S; m)/∂S 2 < 0 so that the first order condition is suﬃcient for S o to
be optimal. Substituting in the expression for m(V ) from (5), we obtain

                              S o (V ) = 1/2 + (πD − πR )(1/2 − τ ) + 2τ (V − 1/2)

as required. QED

Proof of Lemma 1: Let
                                                                      Z       i
                                    o
                                 Ω =     iπoD   + (1 −   i)π oD   +               f (πIo (i), V ∗ (i))di
                                                                          i

and
                                                                      Z       i
                                   1
                                 Ω =    iπ1D    + (1 −   i)π 1D   +               f (πI1 (i), V ∗ (i))di.
                                                                      i

Choose λ ∈ [0, 1] such that
                                                 λΩo + (1 − λ)Ω1 = πD .

Then consider the districting {(πλD , π λI ), (π λD , π λI ), πIλ (i)} that is the convex combination of {(π oD , π oI ),
(π oD , π oI ), πIo (i)} and {(π1D , π1I ), (π 1D , π 1I ), πI1 (i)} with weight λ. This districting is in the set G(i, i, V ∗ (·))
and is feasible. QED

Proof of Proposition 2: The proof has four parts. In Part I, we develop expressions for the
values of the minimization and maximization problems Ω(i, i, V ∗ (·)) and Ω(i, i, V ∗ (·)) associated
with an arbitrary inverse seat-vote curve {i, i, V ∗ (·)}. This is more general than we need, but we
will use these expressions later in the paper. In Part II, we compute the inverse seat-vote curve
{io , io , Vo∗ (·)} associated with the optimal seat-vote curve S o (V ). In Part III, we show that the
optimal inverse seat-vote curve {io , io , Vo∗ (·)} satisfies the constraint that Ω(io , io , Vo∗ (·)) ≤ πD if
  27 In the interests of brevity, some of the details of the proofs are omitted. Detailed proofs can be found in the

version available at http://www.econ.brown.edu/fac/Brian Knight/optlong.pdf.


                                                              33
and only if (20) holds and in Part IV we show that it satisfies the constraint that Ω(io , io , Vo∗ (·)) ≥
πD if and only if (21) holds.

Part I
   Let {i, i, V ∗ (·)} be an arbitrary inverse seat-vote curve satisfying the requirement that V ∗ (·) is
piecewise continuously diﬀerentiable and consider the minimization problem Pmin . To simplify the
problem, note that in any solution it is clearly optimal to have no more Democrats than necessary
in the safe Democrat seats. Thus, from (13), we have that

                                                         1        τ −ε
                                                πD =       − πI (      ).                                               (33)
                                                         2         2τ

Similarly, it is optimal to have no Democrats at all in the safe Republican seats and hence

                                                           πD = 0.                                                      (34)

                                                                           τ
It follows from (34) that we can rewrite (14) as π I ≤                   τ +ε .   Similarly, (33) implies that the constraint
                                            τ
that π D +π I ≤ 1 amounts to πI ≤         τ +ε .   Thus, we can rewrite the minimization problem as follows:

                                          Ri
                    min{πI (i),πI ,πI }   i
                                                                                      −ε
                                               f (πI (i), V ∗ (i))di + i[ 12 − π I ( τ2τ )]         Pmin
                                            τ                 τ
                            s.t. πI ∈ [0, τ +ε ]; π I ∈ [0, τ +ε ]; (17) and (18)

   In order for this problem to have a solution, it must be the case that the set G∗ (i, i, V ∗ (·)) is
non-empty. Thus, there must exist at least one generating districting which has the property that
the average fraction of Independents equals the actual fraction in the population. A necessary
and suﬃcient condition for this to be true is that
                       Z bi                          Z i
                 τ                  πI                        πI                       τ
        πI ≤ i       +                     ∗
                                                di +        ∗
                                                                        di + (1 − i)      .                             (35)
               τ +ε     i 2(πI + πD − V (i))          bi 2(V (i) − πD )              τ +ε

The expression on the right hand side is the fraction of Independents associated with the generating
districting that maximizes the use of Independents. We will assume that {i, i, V ∗ (·)} satisfies this
inequality.
   To state the value of the minimization problem, it is convenient to introduce some additional
notation. Let β(i, i, V ∗ (·)) denote the fraction of Independents that would be used up if in each
competitive district i ∈ [i, bi] πI (i) were set equal to its maximal level; that is,
                                                       Z       bi
                                                                            πI
                                β(i, i, V ∗ (·)) =                                       di.                            (36)
                                                           i        2(πI + πD − V ∗ (i))

                                                                    34
Similarly, let β(i, i, V ∗ (·)) denote the fraction of Independents that would be used up if in each
competitive district i ∈ [bi, i] πI (i) were set equal to its maximal level; that is,
                                                                                                         Z    i
                                                                                    ∗                                      πI
                                                        β(i, i, V (·)) =                                                ∗ (i) −
                                                                                                                                         di.                                      (37)
                                                                                                         bi       2(V             πD )

Then we have:28
                            τ               τ                      τ
Lemma A.1: (i) If πI ∈ [i τ +ε + β + β, i τ +ε + β + β + (1 − i) τ +ε ], then
                                                              Z        bi
                                                                                πI /2 + πD − V ∗ (i)           ε
                                                      Ω=                    (                        )di + i      .
                                                                   i             πI + πD − V ∗ (i)           τ +ε
                         τ
(ii) If πI ∈ [β + β, i τ +ε + β + β], then
                                      Z     bi
                                                     πI /2 + πD − V ∗ (i)         1    πI − β − β τ − ε
                                Ω=               (                        )di + i[ − (           )(     )].
                                        i             πI + πD − V ∗ (i)           2         i       2τ

(iii) If πI ∈ [β, β + β], then
                                                        Z    i∗                         Z   bi
                                                                   1                                 πI /2 + πD − V ∗ (i)         1
                                            Ω=                       di +                        (                        )di + i
                                                         i         2                      i∗          πI + πD − V ∗ (i)           2

where i∗ is defined by
                                                         Z    bi
                                                                           πI
                                                                                        di + β = πI .
                                                             i∗    2(πI + πD − V ∗ (i))
(iv) If πI ∈ [0, β], we have that
                                                                                                 Z       i∗∗
                                                                                                                  1        1
                                                                                    Ω=                              di + i
                                                                                                     i            2        2
          ∗∗
where i        is defined by
                                                                       Z        i
                                                                                                  πI
                                                                                               ∗ (i) −
                                                                                                                         di = πI .
                                                                            i∗∗         2(V                       πD )
Proof of Lemma A.1: Ignoring the inequality constraints on the choice variables, the Lagrangian
for the problem is
                  Z    i                                                                                                                  Z       i
                                                                                    1        τ −ε
           £=                  f (πI (i ), V ∗ (i ))di + i [                          − πI (      )] + λ[i πI +                                       πI (i )di + (1 − i )π I ]
                   i                                                                2         2τ                                              i

where λ is the Lagrange multiplier on the aggregate constraint (18). Using the definition of the
function f (·) we can write this as
                   Z       i
                                                     (V ∗ (i) − πD )                    τ −ε
           £=                  πI (i )[λ −                           ]di + π I i [λ − (      )] + πI (1 − i )λ + constant
                       i                                    πI                           2τ
  28 To economize on notation and where it will not cause confusion, we will not recognize the dependence of β,

β, Ω and Ω on the inverse seat-vote curve {i, i, V ∗ (·)}.


                                                                                                             35
We can therefore minimize the Lagrangian pointwise with respect to πI (i), πI and π I , respecting
the inequality constraints on these variables. The value of the multiplier λ must be such that (18)
is satisfied.
    We know that
                            τ +ε   (V ∗ (i) − πD )   τ −ε
                                 ≥                 ≥      >0                    for all i ∈ [i, i].
                             2τ           πI          2τ
                         τ +ε
It follows that λ ≤       2τ ,   for if this were not the case, then the solution involves πI (i) = 0 for all i,
πI = 0 and πI = 0. This means that constraint (18) cannot be satisfied. In addition, note that if
                                                  τ −ε
the multiplier lies in the interval 0 to           2τ    this generates no more potential solutions than values
of the multiplier equal to 0. Thus, we can restrict attention to three possibilities: (i) λ = 0; (ii)
     τ −ε
λ=    2τ ;
                              −ε τ +ε
             and (iii) λ ∈ ( τ2τ , 2τ ).

Case 1: λ = 0
    In this case, the solution involves setting the fraction of Independents in the safe Democrat
                                                                                                   τ
seats and competitive seats equal to their maximal levels, so that π I =                         τ +ε   and
                                                 ½           πI
                                                     2(πI +πD −V ∗ (i))     if i ∈ [i, bi)
                                      πI (i) ∈                                               .
                                                            πI
                                                      2(V ∗ (i)−πD )      if i ∈ [bi, i]
The fraction of Independents in the safe Republican seats does not aﬀect the value of the La-
                                                           τ
grangian and hence can be set equal to any level x ∈ [0, τ +ε ]. In order that (18) be satisfied we
need that
                                                τ
                                          i        + β + β + (1 − i)x = πI .
                                              τ +ε
                                                           τ               τ                      τ
Thus, for this to be a solution, it must be that πI ∈ [i τ +ε + β + β, i τ +ε + β + β + (1 − i) τ +ε ].
                  τ −ε
Case 2: λ =        2τ

    In this case, the solution involves setting the fractions of Independents in the competitive seats
equal to their maximal levels, so that
                                                 ½           πI
                                                     2(πI +πD −V ∗ (i))     if i ∈ [i, bi)
                                      πI (i) ∈              πI
                                                      2(V ∗ (i)−πD )      if i ∈ [bi, i]
and the fraction of Independents in the safe Republican seats equal to zero so that π I = 0. The
fraction of Independents in the safe Democrat seats does not eﬀect the value of the Lagrangian
                                                  τ
and hence can be set equal to any level x ∈ [0, τ +ε ]. In order that constraint (18) be satisfied we
need that
                                                       τ
                                                 x        + β + β = πI .
                                                     τ +ε

                                                               36
                                                                  τ
Thus, for this to be a solution, it must be that πI ∈ [β + β, i τ +ε + β + β].
               −ε τ +ε
Case 3: λ ∈ ( τ2τ , 2τ )
                                                                               V ∗ (i)−πD
   Let i(λ) denote the value of i at which λ is at least as large as                πI      for all i ∈ [i, i(λ)] and
                ∗
               V (i)−πD
smaller than      πI       for all i ∈ (i(λ), i]. There are two subcases depending on whether i(λ) is
greater or less than bi.
Case 3a: i(λ) ∈ [i, bi]
   In this case, the fraction of Independents in the safe Democrat and Republican seats equals
zero, so that π I = 0 and πI = 0. In the competitive seats,
                                    ⎧
                                    ⎪
                                    ⎪
                                    ⎪
                                    ⎪           0 if i ≤ i(λ)
                                    ⎪
                                    ⎪
                                    ⎨
                           πI (i) =
                                    ⎪
                                             πI
                                      2(πI +πD −V ∗ (i)) if i ∈ (i(λ), bi) .
                                    ⎪
                                    ⎪
                                    ⎪
                                    ⎪
                                    ⎪
                                    ⎩          πI
                                                            if i ≥ bi
                                             ∗    2(V (i)−πD )


The value of the multiplier must be such that i(λ) satisfies the constraint that
                                 Z   bi
                                                  πI
                                                               di + β = πI ,
                                   i(λ)   2(πI + πD − V ∗ (i))

and lies in the interval [i, bi]. Thus, it must be that πI ∈ [β, β + β].
Case 3b: i(λ) ∈ [bi, i]
   In this case, we still have that the fraction of Independents in the safe Democrat and Republican
seats equals zero, so that πI = 0 and π I = 0, but in the competitive seats,
                                       ⎧
                                       ⎪
                                       ⎪
                                       ⎨       0 if i ≤ i(λ)
                              πI (i) =                              .
                                       ⎪
                                       ⎪
                                       ⎩     ∗
                                               πI
                                                       if i > i(λ)
                                                   2(V (i)−πD )


The value of the multiplier must be such that i(λ) satisfies the constraint that
                                          Z   i
                                                         πI
                                                                   di = πI ,
                                          i(λ)    2(V ∗ (i) − πD )

and lies in the interval [bi, i]. Thus, it must be that πI < β.
                                      τ               τ                      τ
   We conclude that: (i) If πI ∈ [i τ +ε + β + β, i τ +ε + β + β + (1 − i) τ +ε ], then we are in Case 1




                                                          37
and the solution to the minimization problem is
                                    ⎧
                                    ⎪
                                    ⎪
                                    ⎪
                                    ⎪
                                                 τ
                                                       if i ∈ [0, i)
                                    ⎪
                                    ⎪          τ +ε
                                    ⎪
                                    ⎪
                                    ⎪
                                    ⎪
                                    ⎨            πI
                                       2(πI +πD −V ∗ (i))      if i ∈ [i, bi)
                           πI (i) =                                           .
                                    ⎪
                                    ⎪
                                    ⎪
                                    ⎪
                                               π I                   b
                                                            if i ∈ [i, i]
                                    ⎪
                                    ⎪   2(V ∗ (i)−πD )
                                    ⎪
                                    ⎪
                                    ⎪
                                    ⎪          τ
                                    ⎩ πI −[i τ +ε +β+β]       if i ∈ (i, 1]
                                              1−i

                         τ
(ii) If πI ∈ [β + β, i τ +ε + β + β], then we are in Case 2 and the solution to the minimization
problem is                                  ⎧
                                            ⎪
                                            ⎪         πI −[β+β]
                                            ⎪
                                            ⎪                           if i ∈ [0, i)
                                            ⎪
                                            ⎪              i
                                            ⎪
                                            ⎪
                                            ⎪
                                            ⎪
                                            ⎨             πI
                                                   2(πI +πD −V ∗ (i))       if i ∈ [i, bi)
                               πI (i) =                                                      .
                                            ⎪
                                            ⎪
                                            ⎪
                                            ⎪
                                            ⎪
                                                          πI
                                                    2(V ∗ (i)−πD )        if i ∈ [bi, i]
                                            ⎪
                                            ⎪
                                            ⎪
                                            ⎪
                                            ⎪
                                            ⎩             0        if i ∈ (i, 1]

(iii) If πI ∈ [β, β + β], then we are in Case 3a and the solution to the minimization problem is
                                       ⎧
                                       ⎪
                                       ⎪
                                       ⎪
                                       ⎪           0 if i ∈ [0, i∗ )
                                       ⎪
                                       ⎪
                                       ⎪
                                       ⎪
                                       ⎪
                                       ⎪
                                       ⎨           πI
                                          2(πI +πD −V ∗ (i))    if i ∈ [i∗ , bi)
                              πI (i) =                                           .
                                       ⎪
                                       ⎪
                                       ⎪
                                       ⎪
                                                  π I                  b
                                                              if i ∈ [i, i]
                                       ⎪
                                       ⎪    2(V ∗ (i)−πD )
                                       ⎪
                                       ⎪
                                       ⎪
                                       ⎪
                                       ⎩           0    if i ∈ (i, 1]

where i∗ is defined by
                                  Z   bi
                                                   πI
                                                                di + β = πI .
                                    i∗     2(πI + πD − V ∗ (i))
(iv) If πI ∈ [0, β], then we are in Case 3b and the solution to the minimization problem is
                                       ⎧
                                       ⎪
                                       ⎪
                                       ⎪
                                       ⎪          0 if i ∈ [0, i∗∗ )
                                       ⎪
                                       ⎪
                                       ⎨
                              πI (i) =          πI
                                                             if i ∈ [i∗∗ , i] .
                                       ⎪
                                       ⎪  2(V ∗ (i)−πD )
                                       ⎪
                                       ⎪
                                       ⎪
                                       ⎪
                                       ⎩          0     if i ∈ (i, 1]

where i∗∗ is defined by
                                           Z   i
                                                          πI
                                                                    di = πI .
                                            i∗∗    2(V ∗ (i) − πD )



                                                              38
   We can now prove the Lemma by deriving the corresponding allocation of Democrats across
districts and computing the aggregate fraction of Democrats used. For example, in case (i),
equations (33), (34), and the fact that πD (i) = f (πI (i), V ∗ (i)) for all i ∈ [i, i], imply that
                                     ⎧
                                     ⎪
                                     ⎪
                                     ⎪
                                     ⎪
                                                 ε
                                                       if i ∈ [0, i)
                                     ⎪
                                     ⎪         τ +ε
                                     ⎪
                                     ⎪
                                     ⎪
                                     ⎪               ∗
                                     ⎨ πI /2+πD −V∗ (i) if i ∈ [i, bi)
                                         πI +πD −V (i)
                            πD (i) =                                       .
                                     ⎪
                                     ⎪
                                     ⎪
                                     ⎪          0             b
                                                    if i ∈ [i, i]
                                     ⎪
                                     ⎪
                                     ⎪
                                     ⎪
                                     ⎪
                                     ⎪
                                     ⎩         0    if i ∈ (i, 1]

Thus, we have that
                                    Z    bi
                                                  πI /2 + πD − V ∗ (i)           ε
                               Ω=             (                 ∗
                                                                       )di + i      .
                                     i             πI + πD − V (i)             τ +ε
This completes the proof of Lemma A.1. ¥

   To understand the result, recall that the problem is to choose the districting that uses as few
Democrats as possible from the set of districtings that both generate the inverse seat-vote curve
and satisfy the constraint that the fraction of Independents used equals πI . Precisely what that
districting looks like will depend upon the actual fraction of Independents available. In case (i)
of the Lemma, there are a large fraction of Independents available, and it is optimal to set the
fractions of Independents in both the safe Democrat and competitive districts (π I and πI (i) for
all i ∈ [i, i]) equal to their maximal level, with the remaining Independents allocated to the safe
Republican districts. The opposite extreme is case (iv), in which there are only a small fraction
of Independents available and it is only in Republican-leaning competitive districts (i ∈ [i∗∗ , i])
that the fractions of Independents are set equal to their maximal level. In all other districts, the
fraction of Independents equals its minimal level - which is 0. Cases (ii) and (iii) lie in between
these extremes.
   The nature of the solution to the maximization problem can be deduced from the observation
that selecting the districting in G∗ (i, i, V ∗ (·)) that has the maximal fraction of Democrats is
equivalent to choosing the districting that has the minimal fraction of Republicans. One can
alternatively define the seat-vote curve as representing the relationship between the fraction of
seats held by the Republican Party and its share of the aggregate vote. Let such a Republican
seat-vote curve be denoted by SR (VR ), where SR is the fraction of seats held by Republicans
and VR is the fraction of votes they received. We can analogously define V R and V R to be


                                                             39
the minimal and maximal vote shares received by the Republican Party. Associated with this
Republican seat-vote curve, we can define an inverse Republican seat-vote curve {iR , iR , VR∗ (·)}
and deduce the minimal fraction of Republicans - call it ΩR - directly from Lemma A.1. The value
of the maximization problem will then be given by Ω = 1 − πI − ΩR . The only drawback with
this procedure is that the expressions for the value Ω will be in terms of the inverse Republican
seat-vote curve {iR , iR , VR∗ (·)}. However, these expressions are readily converted into ones in terms
of the inverse (Democrat) seat-vote curve {i, i, V ∗ (·)}, by noting that iR = 1 − i, iR = 1 − i, and
VR∗ (i) = 1 − V ∗ (1 − i). In this way, we can establish:
                                          τ        τ                      τ
Lemma A.2: (i) If πI ∈ [β + β + (1 − i) τ +ε , i τ +ε + β + β + (1 − i) τ +ε ], then
                                                    Z        i
                                                                     V ∗ (i) − πD − πI /2                 ε
                       Ω = 1 − πI −                              (                        )di − (1 − i)      .
                                                        bi                V ∗ (i) − πD                  τ +ε
                                       τ
(ii) If πI ∈ [β + β, β + β + (1 − i) τ +ε ], then
                           Z     i
                                         V ∗ (i) − πD − πI /2               1    πI − β − β τ − ε
           Ω = 1 − πI −              (                        )di − (1 − i)[ − (           )(     )]
                            bi                V ∗ (i) − πD                  2       1−i       2τ

(iii) If πI ∈ [β, β + β], then
                                           Z     i∗                                              Z   i
                                                          V ∗ (i) − πD − πI /2                           1              1
                   Ω = 1 − πI −                         (                      )di −                       di − (1 − i)
                                            bi                 V ∗ (i) − πD                       i∗     2              2

where i∗ is defined by
                                               Z        i∗
                                                                    πI
                                                                              di + β = πI .
                                                   bi        2(V ∗ (i) − πD )
(iv) If πI ∈ [0, β], we have that
                                                                            Z   i
                                                                                     1              1
                                            Ω = 1 − πI −                               di − (1 − i)
                                                                              i∗∗    2              2

where i∗∗ is defined by
                                            Z      i∗∗
                                                                     πI
                                                                                  di = πI .
                                               i             2(πI + πD − V ∗ (i))
Part II
   Using the definition of an inverse seat-vote curve and the expression for the optimal seat-vote
curve in Proposition 1, we find that the optimal inverse seat-vote curve is given by

                                                             io = πD + πI (1/2 − ε),                                        (38)

                                                             io = πD + πI (1/2 + ε),                                        (39)

                                                                                40
and
                                                             [i − (πD + π2I )(1 − 2τ )]
                                                 Vo∗ (i) =                              .                 (40)
                                                                       2τ
Part III
     For the optimal inverse seat-vote curve, it is straightforward to show that β = β = πI τ ln(1+ τε ).
This means that
                                                                      ε
                                             β + β = πI 2τ ln(1 +       ) ≤ πI ln(2) < πI .
                                                                      τ
Accordingly, only cases (i) and (ii) of Lemma A.1 are possible which simplifies matters. Further-
more, it can be shown that
                                Z   bi
                                             πI /2 + πD − Vo∗ (i)                         ε
                                         (                        )di = πI ε − πI τ ln(1 + ).
                                io            πI + πD − Vo∗ (i)                           τ
                                                          τ
Thus, we can deduce from Lemma A.1 that (a) if πI ∈ [io τ +ε                           τ
                                                             + πI 2τ ln(1 + τε ), io τ +ε + πI 2τ ln(1 +
ε                  τ
τ)   + (1 − io ) τ +ε ], then
                                                                          ε          ε
                                                Ω = πI ε − πI τ ln(1 +      ) + io      ,
                                                                          τ        τ +ε
and (b) if πI ∈ [πI 2τ ln(1 + τε ), io τ +ε
                                         τ
                                            + πI 2τ ln(1 + τε )], then

                                                        ε         1    πI − πI 2τ ln(1 + τε ) τ − ε
                    Ω = πI ε − πI τ ln(1 +                ) + io [ − (                       )(     )].
                                                        τ         2             io              2τ
                                                                                         τ
In addition, observe that after substituting in for io from (38), we have that πI ≥ io τ +ε +
πI 2τ ln(1 + τε ) if and only if

                                                                      πD
                                              πI ≥                                                        (41)
                                                     (1 + τε )[1 − 2τ ln(1 + τε )] + ε −    1
                                                                                            2

so that case (a) arises if (41) holds and case (b) otherwise.
     Suppose that (41) holds so that case (a) arises. Then, after substituting in for io , we have that

                                                     πI   ε          τ               ε
                                Ω = (πD +               )   + πI ε      − πI τ ln(1 + )
                                                     2 τ +ε        τ +ε              τ

Thus, in this case, the constraint that Ω ≤ πD is satisfied if and only if

                                                            ε                     ε
                                               πD ≥ πI (      + ε − (τ + ε) ln(1 + ))
                                                           2τ                     τ

which is just (20).
     Next suppose that (41) does not hold and case (b) arises. Then, after substituting in for io ,
we have
                                                 πI     ε 1    πD              ε
                                         Ω=         (ε + − ) +    − πI ε ln(1 + )
                                                 2      τ 2     2              τ

                                                                    41
and thus the constraint that Ω ≤ πD is satisfied if and only if
                                   πI     ε 1               ε    πD
                                      (ε + − ) − πI ε ln(1 + ) ≤                                   (42)
                                   2      τ 2               τ     2
To summarize, if (41) holds the constraint Ω ≤ πD will be satisfied if and only if (20) is satisfied.
If (41) does not hold the constraint that Ω ≤ πD will be satisfied if and only if (42) is satisfied.
       We can now prove Part III. Suppose first that (20) is not satisfied. This implies that (41) holds
since
                        ε                     ε         ε               ε        1
                   (      + ε − (τ + ε) ln(1 + )) < (1 + )(1 − 2τ ln(1 + )) + ε − .
                       2τ                     τ         τ               τ        2
It follows that the constraint Ω ≤ πD will be violated. Next suppose that (20) is satisfied. Then
we claim that (42) must also be satisfied. We need to show that
                                                 ε                     ε
                                   πD ≥ πI (       + ε − (τ + ε) ln(1 + ))
                                                2τ                     τ
implies that
                                                    ε 1              ε
                                   πD ≥ πI {(ε +      − ) − 2ε ln(1 + )}
                                                    τ  2             τ
This amounts to 1 ≥ 2ε ln(1 + τε ), which holds under our assumptions on ε and τ . It follows that,
irrespective of whether (41) holds, the constraint Ω ≤ πD will be satisfied. This completes Part
III.

Part IV
       Note first that since Ω = 1−πI −ΩR , the constraint that Ω ≥ πD is equivalent to the constraint
that πR ≥ ΩR where ΩR is the minimized fraction of Republicans defined above. But by applying
                                                                                            ∗
the argument just presented to the optimal Republican inverse seat-vote curve {iRo , iRo , VRo (·)},
we can show that πR ≥ ΩR if and only if
                                           ε                     ε
                                   πI (      + ε − (τ + ε) ln(1 + )) ≤ πR .
                                          2τ                     τ
This completes the proof of Proposition 2. QED

Proof of Corollary: We need to show that
                                      ε                     ε
                                        + ε − (τ + ε) ln(1 + ) ≤ 1/2.
                                     2τ                     τ
As already noted, for a given value of ε, the coeﬃcient is decreasing in τ . Thus, since 0 < ε < τ
by assumption, it suﬃces to show that

                                            1/2 + ε − 2ε ln(2) ≤ 1/2.

                                                       42
This follows from the fact that 2 ln(2) > 1. QED

Proof of Proposition 3: Using the definitions in section 5, the optimal seat-vote curve is
implementable with a districting of the form in (25) if and only if (a) the proposed districting is
a feasible districting and (b) πD + 1/2 − π D ≤ V and πD + 1/2 − π D ≥ V .
     The proposed districting is a feasible districting if and only if the following conditions are
                                                                                                                     π
                                                                                                                 πD + 2I −i
satisfied: (a.i) πD ∈ [0, 1 − πI ]; (a.ii) π D ∈ [0, 1 − πI ]; (a.iii) for all i ∈ [io , io ],   1
                                                                                                 2   − π2I +         2τ       ∈
[0, 1 − πI ]; and (a.iv)
                                    Z   io
                                              1 πI   πD + π2I − i
                        io π D +             [ −   +              ]di + (1 − io )πD = πD .                               (43)
                                     io       2  2       2τ
                                                                                                          τ
It is straightforward to show that condition (a.iii) is satisfied if and only if πI ≤                   τ +ε .    Condition
(a.iv) can be simplified by noting that
                           Z io
                                 1 πI     πD + π2I − i
                                [ −     +              ]di = πI ε(1 − πI )
                            io 2     2        2τ
so that (43) can be rewritten as

                                        io πD + πI ε(1 − πI ) + (1 − io )π D = πD .                                      (44)

Using the definitions of V and V , the inequality requirements in (b) can be rewritten as πD ≥
1
2
            −ε
    − πI ( τ2τ ) and πD ≤     1
                              2   − πI ( τ2τ
                                          +ε
                                             ).
     Combining all this, the optimal seat-vote curve is implementable with a districting of the form
                                                     −ε
in (25) if and only if there exist πD ∈ [ 12 − πI ( τ2τ ), 1 − πI ] and π D ∈ [0, 12 − πI ( τ2τ
                                                                                             +ε
                                                                                                )] that satisfy
(44). Solving (44), we have that
                                                     πD − πI ε(1 − πI ) − io π D
                                              πD =                               .
                                                              1 − io
So defining the function:
                                                      πD − πI ε(1 − πI ) − io πD
                                          g(π D ) =                              ,
                                                               1 − io
the optimal seat-vote curve is implementable with a districting of the form in (25) if and only if
                               −ε
there exists πD ∈ [ 12 − πI ( τ2τ ), 1 − πI ] such that g(π D ) ∈ [0, 12 − πI ( τ2τ
                                                                                 +ε
                                                                                    )].
                                                             −ε
     Since g is decreasing, it follows that if g( 12 − πI ( τ2τ )) ≤           1
                                                                               2   − πI ( τ2τ
                                                                                           +ε
                                                                                              ) the condition is met if
                          −ε
and only if g( 12 − πI ( τ2τ                                −ε
                             )) ≥ 0, while if g( 12 − πI ( τ2τ )) >       1
                                                                          2   − πI ( τ2τ
                                                                                      +ε
                                                                                         ) the condition is met if and
                        1
only if g(1 − πI ) ≤    2   − πI ( τ2τ
                                    +ε
                                       ). Observe that

                           1       τ −ε                                           −ε
                                             πD − πI ε(1 − πI ) − io [ 12 − πI ( τ2τ )]
                         g( − πI (      )) =
                           2        2τ                      1 − io

                                                              43
                      −ε
so that g( 12 − πI ( τ2τ )) ≤   1
                                2   − πI ( τ2τ
                                            +ε
                                               ) if and only if πD ≤ πR . Thus, if πD ≤ πR the condition is
                                −ε
met if and only if g( 12 −πI ( τ2τ )) ≥ 0 and if πD > πR it is met if and only if g(1−πI ) ≤ 12 −πI ( τ2τ
                                                                                                       +ε
                                                                                                          ).
   So suppose that πD ≤ πR . Then, the condition is
                                                                          −ε
                                     πD − πI ε(1 − πI ) − io [ 12 − πI ( τ2τ )]
                                                                                ≥ 0,
                                                    1 − io
which is equivalent to (26). On the other hand, if πD > πR , then the condition is

                            πD − πI ε(1 − πI ) − io (1 − πI )  1       τ +ε
                                                              ≤ − πI (      )
                                        1 − io                 2        2τ

which with a little work can be shown equivalent to (27). QED

Proof of Proposition 4: The problem we need to solve is

                                        max             EW ({i, i, V ∗ (i)})       Pcon
                                {i,i,V ∗ (i)}∈F −1

                                s.t. Ω({i, i, V ∗ (i)}) ≥ πD ≥ Ω({i, i, V ∗ (i)}),

under the assumption that condition (21) is satisfied but that condition (20) is not. The idea of
the proof is to first hope that the constraint that Ω({i, i, V ∗ (i)}) ≥ πD will not be binding and
second substitute in for the expression Ω({i, i, V ∗ (i)}) the formula from part (i) of Lemma A.1.
The logic for the second step is that when condition (20) is not satisfied, this is the range in which
the constraint is violated (see the proof of Proposition 2). Thus, we consider the problem

                                          max            EW ({i, i, V ∗ (i)})   PconD
                                    {i,i,V ∗ (i)}∈F −1

                                         Z     bi πI
                                                   2   + πD − V ∗ (i)           ε
                                s.t.            (                     )di + i      ≤ πD .              (45)
                                           i        πI + πD − V ∗ (i)         τ +ε
We will first characterize the solution to this problem and then show that it indeed solves Problem
Pcon .
   Before we can do this, however, we must develop an expression for the objective function
EW ({i, i, V ∗ (i)}).

Lemma A.3: Let {i, i, V ∗ (i)} ∈ F −1 . Then,
                                 Z i
                                                 πI
         EW ({i, i, V ∗ (i)}) = [ {2[i − (πD + )(1 − 2τ )]V ∗ (i) − 2τ V ∗ (i)2 }di
                                  i               2
                                        2           πI             2
                                +[2τ iV + 2(πD + )(1 − 2τ )iV − i V ]
                                                    2
                                                    πI
                                −[2τ iV 2 + 2(πD + )(1 − 2τ )iV − i2 V ] + constant]/[V − V ].
                                                    2

                                                                44
Proof of Lemma A.3: Let S(V ) ∈ F be the seat-vote curve associated with the inverse seat-vote
curve {i, i, V ∗ (i)}. Welfare with aggregate votes V is
                                                                                          Z    m(V )+τ
                                                                                                                            dx
        W (S(V ); m(V )) = −[πD (1 − S(V ))2 + πR S(V )2 + πI                                            (1 − S(V ) − x)2      ],
                                                                                              m(V )−τ                       2τ

which can be rewritten as:

               W (S(V ); m(V )) = −[c(V ) + S(V )2 − 2πD S(V ) − 2πI S(V )(1 − m(V ))],

where
                                                        πI τ 2
                                        c(V ) = πD +           + πI (1 − m(V ))2 .
                                                          3
Note that c(V ) is independent of the number of seats and hence the seat-vote curve. Using the
equation for m(V ) given in (5), we can re-write welfare as follows:

                                                                          πI
            W (S(V ); m(V )) = −[c(V ) + S(V )2 + 2(πD +                     )(2τ − 1)S(V ) − 4τ V S(V )].
                                                                          2

The expected welfare associated with the seat-vote curve S(V ) is accordingly given by
                      Z   V
                                                         πI                                     dV
      EW (S(V )) =            [4τ V S(V ) + 2(πD +          )(1 − 2τ )S(V ) − S(V )2 − c(V )][      ].                               (46)
                       V                                 2                                     V −V

Now note that
                                        Z   V                             Z       i
                                                S(V )dV = iV − iV −                   V ∗ (i)di,
                                           V                                  i

                                   Z   V                                  Z       i
                                                         2
                                            S(V )2 dV = i V − i2 V −                  2iV ∗ (i)di,
                                    V                                         i

and
                               Z   V                                          Z       i
                                                        i 2 i 2                           1 ∗ 2
                                        S(V )V dV =       V − V −                           V (i) di.
                                V                       2    2                    i       2
Substituting these formulas into (46) yields the result. ¥

    The first point to note about the solution to Problem PconD , is that it can be shown straight-
                                                             πI
forwardly that i and V ∗ (i) on the range [πD +               2 , i]   are exactly as in the unconstrained problem.
Thus, we have:

                                                                                                                                    πI
Fact A.1: Let {i, i, V ∗ (i)} solve Problem PconD . Then, i = io and on the interval [πD +                                           2 , i],

V ∗ (i) = Vo∗ (i).



                                                             45
To understand this intuitively, observe that constraint (45) is independent of i and the behavior
of the function V ∗ (i) for i ≥ bi.
   Since Vo∗ (πD + π2I ) = πD + π2I , it follows from Fact A.1 that we can assume that if {i, i, V ∗ (i)}
solves Problem PconD , then bi = πD + π2I . It remains to solve for i and the behavior of the function
                                  πI
V ∗ (i) on the range [i, πD +      2 ).   Using Lemma A.3, these must solve the problem:
                                  R πD + π2I                         πI
                 max{i,V ∗ (i)}    i
                                               {2[i − (πD +           2 )(1   − 2τ )]V ∗ (i) − 2τ V ∗ (i)2 }di

                                  −[2τ iV 2 + 2(πD +             πI
                                                                  2 )(1   − 2τ )iV − i2 V ]
                                                                                                                        (47)
                                                  R πD + π2I    πI
                                                                    +π −V ∗ (i)                  ε
                                 s.t. πD ≥         i
                                                               ( πI +πDD−V ∗ (i) )di
                                                                 2
                                                                                       +     i τ +ε
                                                   πI                                 πI
                        V ∗ (i) ∈ [V , πD +        2 ]    for all i ∈ [i, πD +         2 )   and i ≥ 0.
                                                   πI                                  πI
The constraint that V ∗ (i) ∈ [V , πD +             2 ]   for all i ∈ [i, πD +          2 )    is implied by the requirement
that V ∗ (·) must be a non-decreasing function defined on [i, i] with range [V , V ] given that we
                        πI                 πI
know that V ∗ (πD +      2 )   = πD +       2 .   It is not necessary to impose the constraint that V ∗ (i) be
                                 πI
non-decreasing on [i, πD +        2 )   since it will not bind.
  The Lagrangian for the problem is
     Z πD + π2I
                                                          πI                                     ε
  £=            h(V ∗ (i ), i, λ)di − [2 τ i V 2 + 2 (πD + )(1 − 2 τ )i V − i 2 V ] + λ[πD − i       ]
      i                                                   2                                    τ + ε
where λ is the Lagrange multiplier and
                                                                                  πI
                                                    πI                               + πD − V
                 h(V, i, λ) = 2[i − (πD +              )(1 − 2τ )]V − 2τ V 2 − λ( 2           ).
                                                    2                            πI + πD − V
Diﬀerentiating the Lagrangian with respect to i, we have that
                                          ∂£
                                             = h(V , i, λ) − h(V ∗ (i), i, λ).
                                          ∂i
Thus, the Kuhn-Tucker condition for i is that

                                   h(V , i, λ) ≤ h(V ∗ (i), i, λ) ( = if i > 0).                                        (48)

                                                                               πI
In addition, it must be the case that for all i ∈ [i, πD +                      2 )

                                                                                               πI
                               V ∗ (i) ∈ arg max{h(V, i, λ) : V ∈ [V , πD +                       ]}.                   (49)
                                                                                               2
   Before we develop the implications of these conditions, it is useful to note two properties of
the function h(V, i, λ). The first property is its shape. Diﬀerentiating, we have that
                 ∂h(V ; i, λ)              πI                          λπI
                              = 2[i − (πD + )(1 − 2τ )] − 4τ V +                  ,
                    ∂V                     2                     2(πI + πD − V )2

                                                                46
so that
                                     ∂ 2 h(V ; i, λ)               λπI
                                                     = −4τ +                 .
                                          ∂V 2               (πI + πD − V )3
                                            πI
Notice that for all V ∈ [V , πD +            2 ]

                                      λ8 τ 3              λπI        λ8
                                         (      ) ≤                 ≤ 2.
                                      πI2 τ + ε     (πI + πD − V )3  πI

Thus, if λ ∈ (0, τ πI2 /2] then h(·, i, λ) is a strictly concave function on [V , πD + π2I ] for all i ∈ [i, πD +
πI
 2 ).   On the other hand, if λ ≥ (τ + ε)3 πI2 /2τ 2 then h(·, i, λ) is strictly convex. In the intermediate
case in which λ ∈ (τ πI2 /2, (τ + ε)3 πI2 /2τ 2 ) then, for all i ∈ [i, πD + π2I ), h(·, i, λ) is strictly concave
                                                                                                    πI
on [V , πD + πI − (λπI /4τ )1/3 ) and strictly convex on (πD + πI − (λπI /4τ )1/3 , πD +             2 ].

    The second important property of the function h(V, i, λ) is monotonicity. In particular, it is
straightforward to show that if V > V 0 , i > i0 , and h(V, i0 , λ) ≥ h(V 0 , i0 , λ), then it must be the
case that h(V, i, λ) > h(V 0 , i, λ).
    We can now develop the implications of conditions (48) and (49). Matters are simplified by
noting that it can be shown that there is no loss of generality in assuming that i > 0 and hence
(48) can be assumed to hold with equality. We begin by describing what the solution to conditions
(48) and (49) must look like for given λ, denoting this by {i(λ), V ∗ (i; λ)}.
    Suppose first that λ ∈ (0, τ πI2 /2] so that h(·, i, λ) is a strictly concave function on [V , πD + π2I ]
                        πI
for all i ∈ [i, πD +     2 ).   Let i(λ) be such that

                 ∂h(V ; i, λ)              πI                          λπI
                              = 2[i − (πD + )(1 − 2τ )] − 4τ V +                  =0
                    ∂V                     2                     2(πI + πD − V )2

and let i∗ (λ) be such that
               ∂h(πD + π2I ; i∗ , λ)               πI                     πI   2λ
                                     = 2[i∗ − (πD + )(1 − 2τ )] − 4τ (πD + ) +    = 0.
                     ∂V                            2                      2    πI
                                                                           πI
It is straightforward to show that 0 < i(λ) < i∗ (λ) < πD +                2 .   For all i ∈ [i(λ), i∗ (λ)], the
concavity of h(·, i, λ) means that V ∗ (i; λ) is implicitly defined by the first order condition

               ∂h(V ∗ ; i, λ)              πI                             λπI
                              = 2[i − (πD + )(1 − 2τ )] − 4τ V ∗ +                    = 0,
                  ∂V                       2                       2(πI + πD − V ∗ )2
                                     πI                                                                     πI
while for all i ∈ (i∗ (λ), πD +       2 )   the monotonicity property implies that V ∗ (i; λ) = πD +         2 .

    Suppose next that λ ≥ (τ + ε)3 πI2 /2τ 2 so that h(·, i, λ) is a strictly convex function for all
               πI                                                           πI
i ∈ [i, πD +    2 ).   Then, let i(λ) be such that h(V ; i, λ) = h(πD +      2 ; i, λ),   which implies that

                                                      πI (1 − ε)  λ    τ
                                      i(λ) = πD +                − (       ).
                                                           2      πI τ + ε

                                                          47
                                                              πI (1−ε)
This will be greater than 0 provided that λ < πI ( τ +ε
                                                     τ )(πD +     2    ). Since h(·, i(λ), λ) is a convex
function, it is clear that

                                       πI                                        πI
                             πD +         ∈ arg max{h(V, i(λ), λ) : V ∈ [V , πD + ]}
                                       2                                         2
                                                             πI
and hence we can choose V ∗ (i(λ); λ) = πD +                  2 .   Condition (48) is then satisfied by construction.
                              πI                                                                               πI
For all i ∈ (i(λ), πD +        2 )   the monotonicity property implies that V ∗ (i; λ) = πD +                   2 .

   Finally, consider the intermediate case in which λ ∈ (τ πI2 /2, (τ + ε)3 πI2 /2τ 2 ). In this case,
there are two possibilities depending on the value of λ. The first possibility is that the solution
                                                                                                       πI
is exactly as in the convex case; that is, i(λ) is such that h(V ; i, λ) = h(πD +                       2 ; i, λ)   and, for all
                  πI                             πI
i ∈ (i(λ), πD +    2 ),   V ∗ (i; λ) = πD +       2 .   This is the solution if and only if

             ∂h(V ; i, λ)                 πI                          λπI
                          = 2[i(λ) − (πD + )(1 − 2τ )] − 4τ V +                  ≤ 0.
                ∂V                        2                     2(πI + πD − V )2

Since
                                     πI                            λπI                    2λετ
           2[i(λ) − (πD +               )(1 − 2τ )] − 4τ V +                  = πI ε −             ,
                                     2                       2(πI + πD − V )2          πI (τ + ε)2
                              πI2 (τ +ε)2
this requires that λ ≥             2τ     .
             πI2 (τ +ε)2
   For λ <        2τ     ,   let Ve (λ) ∈ (V , πD +       πI
                                                           2 )   and i∗ (λ) satisfy the following equations:

                                                                            πI ∗
                                              h(Ve ; i∗ , λ) = h(πD +         ; i , λ)
                                                                            2

and
             ∂h(Ve ; i∗ , λ)               πI                           λπI
                             = 2[i∗ − (πD + )(1 − 2τ )] − 4τ Ve +                   = 0.
                 ∂V                        2                      2(πI + πD − Ve )2
It should be clear that Ve (λ) must belong to the region in which h(·, i∗ , λ) is concave. It follows
that
                                                                            πI                   πI
                    arg max{h(V, i∗ (λ), λ) : V ∈ [V , πD +                    ]} = {Ve (λ), πD + }
                                                                            2                    2
                                                                  πI                                 πI
and hence we can choose V ∗ (i∗ (λ); λ) = πD +                     2 .   For all i ∈ (i∗ (λ), πD +    2 )   the monotonicity
                                                    πI
property implies that V ∗ (i; λ) = πD +             2 .   Then, let i(λ) be such that

              ∂h(V ; i, λ)              πI                          λπI
                           = 2[i − (πD + )(1 − 2τ )] − 4τ V +                  = 0.
                 ∂V                     2                     2(πI + πD − V )2

It is straightforward to show that 0 < i(λ) < i∗ (λ). For all i ∈ [i(λ), i∗ (λ)), the concavity of
h(·, i, λ) means that V ∗ (i; λ) is implicitly defined by the first order condition

             ∂h(V ∗ ; i, λ)              πI                             λπI
                            = 2[i − (πD + )(1 − 2τ )] − 4τ V ∗ +                    = 0.
                ∂V                       2                       2(πI + πD − V ∗ )2

                                                                  48
    We have now described the solution {i(λ), V ∗ (i; λ)} for any given λ. The value of the multiplier
                                                                              b where
must be such that constraint (45) holds with equality, implying that λ equals λ
                                              Z    πD +
                                                          πI
                                                                   πI                b
                              b      ε                     2
                                                                    2 + πD − V ∗ (i; λ)
                            i(λ)        +                      (                        )di = πD .
                                   τ +ε             b
                                                  i(λ)                               b
                                                                   πI + πD − V ∗ (i; λ)

                                                                 b and V ∗ (i; λ).
The solution to the problem described in (47) is then given by i(λ)            b

    The next step is to provide conditions that inform us as to the type of solution that will arise.
                                                                                               πI ε
Fact A.2: Let {i, i, V ∗ (i)} solve Problem PconD . Then, if πD ≤                              2τ (1    − τ − 2ε) we have that
                                             πI                               πI
i = πD τ +ε
         ε and for all i ∈ [i, πD +           2 ),   V ∗ (i) = πD +            2 .

Proof of Fact A.2: To prove this, all we need to show is that under the stated condition, the
                        b is such that λ
                                       b≥                  πI2 (τ +ε)2
value of the multiplier λ                                       2τ     .     Notice that the proposed solution {i, V ∗ (i)}
                                                                                              b from
necessarily satisfies the constraint (45). However, we can obtain the value of the multiplier λ
the requirement that
                                             τ +ε b           πI    τ +ε b
                                  h(V ; πD       , λ) = h(πD + ; πD     , λ)
                                               ε              2       ε
which implies that
                                          2
                                     b = πI (1 − ε)(ε + τ ) − τ πI πD (ε + τ ) .
                                     λ
                                                2τ                  ετ
Thus, we need that
                                πI2 (1 − ε)(ε + τ ) τ πI πD (ε + τ )  π2 (τ + ε)2
                                                   −                 ≥ I
                                        2τ                ετ               2τ
which is equivalent to
                                                   επI
                                                       (1 − 2ε − τ ) ≥ πD .
                                                   2τ
¥
                                                                                                πI ε
Fact A.3: Let {i, i, V ∗ (i)} solve Problem PconD . Then, if πD >                               2τ (1    − τ − 2ε), there exists
                         πI
some i∗ ∈ (V , πD +       2 ]   such that V ∗ (i) is increasing and strictly concave on [i, i∗ ] and equal to
       πI                                                                πI ε
πD +    2   thereafter. For πD suﬃciently close to                       2τ (1   − τ − 2ε), V ∗ (i∗ ) will be strictly less than
       πI
πD +    2   and hence V ∗ (i) will be discontinuous at i∗ .
Proof of Fact A.3: This follows almost immediately from the above discussion of the properties
of the solution. When πD exceeds             πI ε                                                                  b
                                             2τ (1       − τ − 2ε) but is close to it, the value of the multiplier λ
                                      πI2 (τ +ε)2                        b < πD +
will only be slightly less than            2τ        and V ∗ (i∗ ) = Ve (λ)                     πI
                                                                                                 2 .   When πD is much larger
       πI ε
than   2τ (1 − τ   − 2ε), the value of the multiplier will be less than                     τ πI2 /2   and V ∗ (i∗ ) = πD + π2I . In




                                                                        49
                                                                                                   b
either case, on the interval [i, i∗ ], V ∗ (i) is defined by the first order condition ∂h(V ∗ ; i, λ)/∂V =0
implying that
                                                                2         ∗       b
                                 dV ∗  − ∂ h(V ;i,λ)                                                 2
                                      = 2 ∂V∗ ∂ib =                                             b I
                                                                                                                    >0
                                  di    ∂ h(V ;i,λ)                                             λπ
                                                                                                             − 4τ
                                                                    ∂V 2                   (πI +πD −V ∗ )3

                             d2 V ∗
It is also apparent that      di2          < 0. Thus, V ∗ (i) is increasing and strictly concave as claimed.¥

   We have now characterized the solution to Problem PconD . It remains to show that it solves
Problem Pcon .

Fact A.4: Suppose that condition (20) does not hold and and that condition (21) holds and let
{i, i, V ∗ (i)} solve Problem PconD . Then it solves Problem Pcon .
Proof of Fact A.4: To prove this, we first need to show that {i, i, V ∗ (i)} is feasible for Problem
Pcon . This requires demonstrating that it satisfies the constraints Ω({i, i, V ∗ (i)}) ≥ πD and
Ω({i, i, V ∗ (i)}) ≤ πD .
   To show that Ω({i, i, V ∗ (i)}) ≤ πD , we can use what we know about {i, i, V ∗ (i)} to demonstrate
               τ               τ                      τ
that πI ∈ [i τ +ε + β + β, i τ +ε + β + β + (1 − i) τ +ε ]. It then follows from Lemma A.1 that
                                                                          Z       bi πI
                                                  ∗                                   2   + πD − V ∗ (i)           ε
                            Ω({i, i, V (i)}) =                                     (               ∗
                                                                                                         )di + i
                                                                              i        πI + πD − V (i)           τ +ε

which by construction is equal to πD .
                                                                                  τ        τ
   To see that Ω({i, i, V ∗ (i)}) ≥ πD suppose first that πI ∈ [β + β + (1 − i) τ +ε , i τ +ε +β+β+
          τ
(1 − i) τ +ε ]. Then, by Lemma A.2
                                                       Z        i
                                                                        V ∗ (i) − πD − πI /2                 ε
                        Ω = 1 − πI −                                (                        )di − (1 − i)      ,
                                                           bi                V ∗ (i) − πD                  τ +ε
                                                         1−i
which is bigger than πD when (21) holds. If πI ∈ [β + β, 1+ ε + β + β] then by Lemma A.2
                                                                                                         τ

                             Z     i
                                           V ∗ (i) − πD − πI /2               1    πI − β − β τ − ε
            Ω = 1 − πI −               (          ∗
                                                                )di − (1 − i)[ − (           )(     )],
                              bi                V (i) − πD                    2       1−i       2τ

which is again bigger than πD when (21) holds.

   Given that {i, i, V ∗ (i)} is feasible for Problem Pcon , if it were not a solution there would exist
some alternative inverse seat-vote curve {ia , ia , Va∗ (i)} which was also feasible but yielded a higher
level of welfare. Now clearly it must be the case that
                                       Z    bia       πI
                                                       2 + πD − Va∗ (i)            ε
                                                  (               ∗
                                                                        )di + ia      > πD ,
                                           ia         πI + πD − Va (i)           τ +ε


                                                                                          50
because otherwise {i, i, V ∗ (i)} could not solve Problem PconD . However, we can show using Lemma
A.1 that it must be that
                                                   Z    bia       πI
                                                                     + πD − Va∗ (i)            ε
                      Ω({ia , ia , Va∗ (i)})   ≥              (    2
                                                                                    )di + ia
                                                       ia         πI + πD − Va∗ (i)          τ +ε

which contradicts the assumption that {ia , ia , Va∗ (i)} is feasible for Problem Pcon . ¥

The Proposition now follows from combining Facts A.1 - A.4. QED




                                                                   51
     S
                                            45o
      1




S o (V )                         S o (V )



S o (V )




         0   V   πD +πI /2   V              1     V


                 Figure 1
    S                               V


                                    V             V*(i)


S (V )                S (V )


                                    V̂
S (V )


                                    V




     0   V   V̂   V            V     0    i               i
                                              i



                               Figure 2
  1


0.8


0.6


0.4


0.2


  0    0.2   0.4              0.6   0.8   1
                      x
-0.2



                   Figure 3




                     65
           S                                                   S




     S o (V )                         S*(V )             S o (V )                               S*(V )

πD + πI / 2                                          πD + πI / 2




     1+ ε /τ
πD
      ε /τ

            0   V   πD + πI / 2   V              V              0   V   V̂    πD + πI / 2   V            V


                    (a)                                                      (b)

                                               Figure 4
               S                                                 S

         1+ ε /τ
1− π R                                       S*(V )                                             S*(V )
          ε /τ



   πD + πI / 2


  So(V)




                   0   V   πD + πI / 2   V            V          0   V   πD + πI / 2   V̂   V            V


                            (a)                                          (b)

                                                      Figure 5
               S                                                   S

         1+ ε /τ
1− π R                                       S*(V )                                                    S*(V )
          ε /τ



   πD + πI / 2                                            πD + πI / 2




         1+ ε /τ
  πD
          ε /τ

                       V   πD + πI / 2                                  V   ~   πD + πI / 2
                   0                     V            V             0       V                 V̂   V            V


                            (a)                                                 (b)

                                                      Figure 6
