NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

IMPLICATIONS OF DYNAMIC FACTOR MODELS
FOR VAR ANALYSIS
James H. Stock
Mark W. Watson
Working Paper 11467
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11467
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2005

Prepared for the conference “Macroeconomics and Reality, 25 Years Later,” Bank of Spain/CREI, Barcelona,
April 7-8 2005. We thank Jean Boivin, Piotr Eliasz, Charlie Evans, James Morley, Jim Nason, Serena Ng,
Glenn Rudebusch, Matthew Shapiro, Xuguang Sheng, Christopher Sims, and Ken West and for helpful
comments and/or discussions. This research was funded in part by NSF grant SBR-0214131. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
©2005 by James H. Stock and Mark W. Watson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

Implications of Dynamic Factor Models for VAR Analysis
James H. Stock, Mark W. Watson
NBER Working Paper No. 11467
June 2005
JEL No. C32, E17
ABSTRACT

This paper considers VAR models incorporating many time series that interact through a few
dynamic factors. Several econometric issues are addressed including estimation of the number of
dynamic factors and tests for the factor restrictions imposed on the VAR. Structural VAR
identification based on timing restrictions, long run restrictions, and restrictions on factor loadings
are discussed and practical computational methods suggested. Empirical analysis using U.S. data
suggest several (7) dynamic factors, rejection of the exact dynamic factor model but support for an
approximate factor model, and sensible results for a SVAR that identifies money policy shocks using
timing restrictions.
James H. Stock
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
james_stock@harvard.edu
Mark W. Watson
Department of Economics
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
mwatson@princeton.edu

1. Introduction
A fundamental contribution of Sims (1980) was his constructive argument that
many of the “incredible” identifying restrictions underlying the structural
macroeconometric models of the 1960s and 1970s are unnecessary either for forecasting
or for certain types of policy analysis. Instead of imposing large numbers of identifying
restrictions that permitted system estimation by two- or three-stage least squares, Sims
proposed that the system dynamics be left completely free. His key insight was that the
effect of policy interventions – an autonomous increase in the money supply or an
autonomous decrease in government spending – could be analyzed by examining the
moving average representation relating macroeconomic reality (outcome variables of
interest) directly to the structural economic shocks. To identify these policy effects, one
only needed to identify the structural economic shocks; then the dynamic policy effects
could be computed as the impulse response function obtained by inverting the vector
autoregressive (VAR) representation of the data, linearly transformed to yield the moving
average representation with respect to the structural shock. Restrictions on the dynamic
structure were neither required nor desired – all that was needed was some scheme to sort
through the VAR forecast errors, or innovations, in just the right way so that one can
deduce the structural economic shock or shocks desired for undertaking the policy
analysis.
This final requirement – moving from the VAR innovations to the structural
shocks – is the hardest part of so-called structural VAR (SVAR) analysis, for it requires
first that the structural shocks can in theory be obtained from the innovations, and second
that there be some economic rationale justifying how, precisely, to distill the structural
shocks from the innovations. The first of these requirements can be thought of as
requiring that there is no omitted variable bias: if a variable is known to individuals,
firms, and policy-makers and that variable contains information about a structural
economic shocks distinct from what is already included in the VAR, then omitting that
variable means that the VAR innovations will not in general span the space of the
structural shocks, so the structural shocks cannot in general be deduced from the VAR
innovations. This difficulty has long been recognized and indeed has been pointed to as

1

the source of both practical problems in early VARs, including the “price puzzle” of Sims
(1992) (see Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans (1999) for a discussion), and theoretical
problems, such as the specter of noninvertibility (e.g. Lippi and Reichlin (1994)). The
key to addressing these problems is to increase the amount of information in the VAR so
that the innovations span the space of structural disturbances. For example, as recounted
by Sims (1993), disappointing forecasts of inflation from the earliest real-time VAR
forecasting exercises at the Federal Reserve Bank of Minnesota led Robert Litterman to
add the trade-weighted exchange rate, the S&P 500, and a commodity price index to the
original six-variable Minnesota VAR. This line of reasoning has led Sims and coauthors
to consider yet larger VARs, such as the 13- and 18-variable VAR in Leeper, Sims, and
Zha (1996). But increasing the number of variables in a VAR creates technical and
conceptual complications, for the number of unrestricted VAR coefficients increases as
the square of the number of variables in the system.
One approach to handling the resulting proliferation of parameters, spearheaded
by Sims and his students, is to impose Bayesian restrictions and to estimate or calibrate
the hyperparameters, so that the VAR is estimated by (possibly informal) empirical
Bayes methods (see Doan, Litterman, and Sims (1984), Litterman (1986), Sims (1993),
Leeper, Sims, and Zha (1996)). This is not a line of work for the computationally
challenged. More importantly, because of the quadratic increase in complexity it is
unclear that it can be pushed much beyond systems with a score or two of variables
without, in effect, imposing the incredible (now statistical) identifying restrictions that
SVAR analysis was designed to eschew. What if 18 variables are not enough to span the
space of structural shocks? After all, in reality Fed economists track hundreds if not
thousands of variables as they prepare for upcoming meetings of the Open Market
Committee. Unless the staff economists are wasting their time, one must assume that
these hundreds of variables help them isolate the structural shocks currently impacting
the economy.
In this paper, we examine VAR methods that can be used to identify the space of
structural shocks when there are hundreds of economic time series variables that
potentially contain information about these underlying shocks. This alternative approach
is based on dynamic factor analysis, introduced by John Geweke in his Ph.D. thesis

2

(published as Geweke (1977)) under the supervision of Sims. The premise of the
dynamic factor model (DFM) is that there are a small number of unobserved common
dynamic factors that produce the observed comovements of economic time series. These
common dynamic factors are driven by the common structural economic shocks, which
are the relevant shocks that one must identify for the purposes of conducting policy
analysis. Even if the number of common shocks is small, because the dynamic factors
are unobserved this model implies that the innovations from conventional VAR analysis
with a small or moderate number of variables will fail to span the space of the structural
shocks to the dynamic factors. Instead, these shocks are only revealed when one looks at
a very large number of variables and distills from them the small number of common
sources of comovement.
There is a body of empirical evidence that the dynamic factor model, with a small
number of factors, captures the main comovements of postwar U.S. macroeconomic time
series data. Sims and Sargent (1977) examine a small system and conclude that two
dynamic factors can explain 80% or more of the variance of major economic variables,
including the unemployment rate, industrial production growth, employment growth, and
wholesale price inflation; moreover, one of these dynamic factors is primarily associated
with the real variables, while the other is primarily associated with prices. Empirical
work using methods developed for many-variable systems has supported the view that
only a few – perhaps two – dynamic factors explain much of the predictable variation in
major macroeconomic aggregates (e.g. Stock and Watson (1999, 2002a), Giannone,
Reichlin, and Sala (2004)). These new methods for estimating and analyzing dynamic
factor models, combined with the empirical evidence that perhaps only a few dynamic
factors are needed to explain the comovement of macroeconomic variables, has
motivated recent research on how best to integrate factor methods into VAR and SVAR
analysis (Bernanke and Boivin (2003), Bernanke, Boivin, and Eliasz (2005; BBE
hereafter), Favero and Marcellino (2001), Favero, Marcellino, and Neglia (2004),
Giannone, Reichlin, and Sala (2002, 2004), and Forni, Giannone, Lippi, and Reichlin
(2004)); we return to this recent literature in Sections 2 and 5.
This paper has three objectives. The first is to provide a unifying framework that
explicates the implications of DFMs for VAR analysis, both reduced-form (including

3

forecasting applications) and structural. In particular we list a number of testable
overidentifying restrictions that are central to the simplifications provided by introducing
factors into VARs.
Our second objective is to examine empirically these implications of the DFM for
VAR analysis. Is there support for the exact factor model restrictions or, if not, for an
approximate factor model such as that of Chamberlain and Rothschild (1983)? If so, how
many factors are needed: two, as suggested by Sargent and Sims (1977) and more recent
literature, or more? Another implication of the DFM is that, once factors are included in
the VAR, impulse responses with respect to structural shocks should not change upon the
inclusion of additional observable variables; but is this borne out empirically?
Our third objective is to provide a unified framework and some new econometric
methods for structural VAR analysis using dynamic factors. These methods build on the
important initial work by Giannoni, Reichlin, and Sala (2002) and BBE (2005) on the
formulation and estimation of structural VARs using factors obtained from large data
sets, and we adopt BBE’s term and refer to these system as FAVARs (Factor-Augmented
VARs). We consider a variety of identifying schemes, including schemes based on the
timing of shocks (as considered by BBE), on long run restrictions (as considered by
Giannoni, Reichlin, and Sala (2002)), and on restrictions on the factor loading matrices
(as considered by Kose, Otrok and Whiteman (2003), among others). We present
feasible estimation strategies for imposing the potentially numerous overidentifying
restrictions.
We have three main empirical findings, which are based on an updated version of
the Stock-Watson (2002a) data set (the version used here has 132 monthly U.S. variables,
1959 – 2003). First, it appears that the number of dynamic factors present in our data set
exceeds two; we estimate the number to be seven. This estimate is robust to details of the
model specification and estimation method, and it substantially exceeds the estimates
appearing in the earlier literature; we suggest that this estimate is not spurious but rather
reflects the narrow scope of the data sets, combined with methodological limitations, in
the early studies that suggested only one or two factors.
Second, we find that many of the implications of the DFM for the full 132variable VAR are rejected, however these rejections are almost entirely associated with

4

coefficients that are statistically significantly different from zero but are very small in an
economic or practical sense.
Third, we illustrate the structural FAVAR methods by an empirical reexamination
of the BBE identification scheme, using different estimation procedures. We find
generally similar results to BBE, which in many cases accord with standard
macroeconomic theory; but we also find many rejections of the overidentifying
restrictions. These rejections suggest specific ways in which the BBE identifying
assumptions fail, something not possible in exactly identified SVAR analysis.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 lays out the DFM
and its implications for reduced-form VAR analysis. Section 3 provides a treatment of
identification and estimation in structural factor VARs. Sections 4 and 5 examine these
implications empirically using the 132-variable data set, and Section 6 illustrates the
structural FAVAR methods using the BBE identification scheme. Section 7 concludes.

2. The Dynamic Factor Model in VAR Form
This section summarizes the restrictions imposed by the dynamic factor model on
the VAR representation of the variables. We do this by first summarizing the so-called
static representation of the DFM, a representation of interest in its own right because it
leads to estimation of the space spanned by the dynamic factors using principal
components when n is large. The static representation of the DFM is then used to derive
two VAR forms of the DFM, expressed in terms of the (readily estimated) static factors.
2.1 The DFM and Reduced-Form VARs
Let Xt be a n×1 vector of stationary time series variables observed for t = 1,…,T.
The exact dynamic factor model. The exact DFM expresses Xt as a distributed
lag of a small number of unobserved common factors, plus an idiosyncratic disturbance
that itself might be serially correlated:
Xit = λ%i (L)ft + uit, i = 1,…,n,

(1)

uit = δi(L)uit–1 + νit,

(2)

5

where ft is the q×1 vector of unobserved dynamic factors, λ%i (L) is a 1 × q vector lag
polynomial, called the “dynamic factor loadings,” and uit is the idiosyncratic disturbance
which we model as following an autoregression. The factors and idiosyncratic
disturbances are assumed to be uncorrelated at all leads and lags, that is, E(ftuis) = 0 for
all i, t, s. In addition, the idiosyncratic terms are taken to be mutually uncorrelated at all
leads and lags, that is,
E(uitujs) = 0 for all i, j, t, s, i ≠ j

(3)

We briefly digress for a word on terminology. Chamberlain and Rothschild
(1983) introduced a useful distinction between exact and approximate DFMs. The exact
DFM – the version originally developed by Geweke (1977) and Sargent and Sims (1978)
– adopts the strong uncorrelatedness assumption (3). In contrast, the approximate DFM
relaxes this assumption to allow for a limited amount of correlation across the
idiosyncratic terms for different i and j (see the survey by Stock and Watson (2004) for
technical conditions). The focus of this paper is on the implications of the GewekeSargent-Sims exact DFM, and when we refer simply to “the DFM” this should be
understood to mean the exact DFM; when we discuss instead the approximate DFM, we
will make this explicit.
For our purposes it is convenient to work with a DFM in which the idiosyncratic
errors are serially uncorrelated. This is achieved by multiplying both sides of (1) by 1 –

δi(L)L, which yields
Xit = λi(L)ft + δi(L)Xit−1 + νit,

(4)

where λi(L) = (1–δi(L)L) λ%i (L).
The dynamic factor model consists of equation (4) and an equation describing the
evolution of the factors, which we model as following a VAR. Accordingly, the DFM is,

6

The dynamic factor model:
Xt = λ(L)ft + D(L)Xt–1 + vt

(5)

ft = Γ(L)ft–1 + ηt,

(6)

where,
 λ1 (L) 
λ(L) =  M  , D(L) =


 λn (L) 

0 
δ1 (L) L
 M
O
M  , vt =


L δ n (L) 
 0

 v1t 
 M ,
 
 vnt 

(7)

Γ(L) is a matrix lag polynomial, and ηt is a q×1 disturbance vector, where Eηtνis = 0 for
all i, t, s.
The DFM assumptions imply that the spectral density of X has a factor structure:
SX(ω) = λ% (eiω)Sf(ω) λ% (e–iω) + Su(ω),

(8)

where SX(ω), Sf(ω), and Su(ω) are the spectral density matrices of X, f, and u at frequency

ω, Su is diagonal, and λ% (z) = [ λ%1 (z) … λ%n (z)]′.
As written in (5) and (6), λ(L) and ft are not separately identified; an
observationally equivalent model is obtained by inserting a nonsingular q×q matrix and
its inverse H so that λ(L) is replaced by λ(L)H–1 and ft is replaced by Hft. In the
treatment in this section, this ambiguity is handled by adopting an arbitrary statistical
normalization which (implicitly) imposes an arbitrary H. In Section 3, we turn to
structural economic DFMs, in which economic logic is used to identify H, so that H can
be thought of as embodying an economic model.
The unknown coefficients of the DFM (5) and (6) (with additional lag length and
normalization restrictions) can be estimated by Gaussian maximum likelihood using the
Kalman Filter (Engle and Watson (1981), Stock and Watson (1989, 1991), Sargent
(1989), and Quah and Sargent (1993)). When n is very large, however, this method is
computationally burdensome. For this reason, alternative methods for estimation of the

7

factors and DFM coefficients have been developed for large n. One approach is to use
Brillinger’s (1964, 1981) dynamic principal components; the theory of applying this
method when n is large is developed by Forni, Hallin, Lippi, and Reichlin (2000).
However dynamic principal components analysis produces two-sided estimates of the
factors and thus these estimates are not suitable for forecasting or for structural VAR
analysis in which information set timing assumptions are used to identify shocks. This
problem of two-sided estimates of the dynamic factors can be avoided by recasting the
DFM in so-called static form.
The DFM in static form. In the static form of the DFM (Stock and Watson
(2002)), there are r static factors, Ft, that consist of current and (possibly) lagged values
of the q dynamic factors.
Suppose that λ(L) has finite degree p – 1, and let Ft = [ft′ ft–1′ … ft–p+1′]′ or a
subset of these lags of ft if not all dynamic factors appear with p lags. Let the dimension
of Ft be r, where q ≤ r ≤ qp. Then the DFM (5) and (6) can be written,
Static form of the DFM:
Xt = ΛFt + D(L)Xt–1 + νt
Ft = Φ(L)Ft–1 + Gηt,

(9)
(10)

where Λ is a n×r matrix, the ith row of which consists of the coefficients of λi(L), Φ(L)
consists of the coefficients of Γ(L) and zeros, and G is r×q. If the order of Γ(L) is at most
p, then the VAR for Ft has degree one and Φ(L) = Φ. In the terminology of state space
models and Kalman filtering, equation (9) is the measurement equation and equation (10)
is the state equation.
The representation (9) and (10) is called the “static” form of the DFM because Ft
appears in the X equation without any lags, as it does in classical factor analysis in crosssectional data. Note that if there are the same number of static and dynamic factors, that
is, r = q, then it must be the case that λ(L) in (5) has no lag terms, so Ft = ft, G = I, and
there is no difference between the static and dynamic forms.

8

The static form of the DFM implies that the variance of prefiltered Xt has a
conventional factor structure. Let X% it = (1 – δi(L)L)Xit, Λ = [Λ1′ … Λn′]′ be the matrix of
(static) factor loadings, X% t = [ X% 1t … X% nt ]′, νt = [ν1t … νnt]′, and let Σ X% , ΣF, and Σν be
the covariance matrices of X% t , Ft and νt. Then
Σ X% = ΛΣFΛ′ + Σν.

(11)

This is the usual variance decomposition of classical factor analysis.
The DFM in VAR form. The VAR form of the DFM obtains by substituting (10)
into (9) and collecting terms. The equation for Xit in the VAR is,

Xit = ΛiΦ(L)Ft–1 + δi(L)Xit–1 + ε X it

(12)

where ε X it = ΛiGηt + νit and εFt = Gηt. Combining (12) with the factor evolution
equation yields the complete DFM in VAR form:

VAR form of the DFM (FAVAR):
0   Ft −1  ε Ft 
 Ft   Φ (L)
 X  =  ΛΦ (L) D (L)   X  + ε 
  t −1   Xt 
 t 

(13)

ε Ft   I 
0
ε  =  Λ  Gηt + ν 
 Xt   
 t

(14)

where

where εXt = [ ε X1t … ε X nt ]′. The covariance matrix of εt ≡ [εFt′ εXt′]′ is,
GΣη G ' Λ ' 
 GΣη G '
Eεtεt′ ≡ Σε = 

 ΛGΣη G ' ΛGΣη G ' Λ '+ Σν 

9

(15)

where Ση = Eηtηt′.
We have adopted Bernanke, Boivin, and Eliasz’s (2005) terminology in referring
to (13) as a FAVAR; in contrast to their FAVAR, however, (13) incorporates the
exclusion restrictions implied by the DFM.
A disciple of Sims (1980) might quibble with our use of the term “VAR form” for
(13) – (14), for two reasons. First, this form imposes many restrictions on the lag
dynamics and on the structure of the covariance matrix of the one-step ahead forecast
errors; in contrast Sims (1980) introduced VARs as a way to avoid making any such
restrictions and the term “VAR” typically refers to unrestricted structures. This said, the
restrictions studied here are akin to the Bayesian restrictions, developed by Sims and his
students, in which prior parametric restrictions are used to control the proliferation of
parameters in high-dimensional VARs. Second, the Ft variables in the VAR are
unobserved, however because n is large the factors are consistently estimable so we
proceed as if they are observable.
Impulse response functions and variance decompositions. Inverting the VAR
representation (13) – (14) yields the moving average representation for Xt in terms of
current and lagged innovations ηt to the dynamic factors and the idiosyncratic
disturbances νt:

MA form of the DFM:
Xt = B(L)ηt + ut,

(16)

where B(L) = [I – D(L)L]-1Λ[I – Φ(L)L]–1G and ut = [I – D(L)L]-1νt. This moving
average representation delivers impulse response functions and forecast error variance
decompositions for Xt+h as a function of the horizon h.
The impulse responses and variance decompositions based on (16) can be thought
of as the factor version of impulse responses and variance decompositions with respect to
Cholesky factorizations of conventional VAR innovations, in the sense that ηt is
identified using an arbitrary statistical normalization (like that produced by principal
components analysis), not an economic model of structural shocks. Section 3 considers

10

the further step from the moving average representation (16), which is in terms of ηt, to
the structural impulse response function in terms of dynamic factor structural shocks.
2.3 Summary of VAR Restrictions Implied by the DFM
The static form and VAR form of the DFM incorporates several overidentifying
restrictions.
1. Factor structure of Xt. The covariance matrix Σ X% has the factor structure
(11), where the rank of ΛΣFΛ′ is r, the number of static factors. This
restriction (under the weaker conditions of an approximate dynamic factor
model) is used by the Bai-Ng (2002) information criteria methods for
estimation of r.
2. Reduced rank of εFt. The rank of EεFtεFt′ (the (1,1) block of (15)) is q,
the number of dynamic factors. Giannone, Reichlin, and Sala (2004) use
informal methods based on this restriction to make inferences about q.
Bai and Ng (2005b) develop formal procedures for estimating q using this
restriction, and we discuss the Bai-Ng (2005b) approach further below.
3. Factor structure of εXt. The innovations in Xt, εXt′, obey a classical factor
model, that is, they are serially uncorrelated and the (2,2) block of (15) has
a factor structure, where the number of factors is the number of dynamic
factor innovations, q. We discuss below how this restriction can be used
to estimate q.
4. X does not predict F given lagged F. That is, the upper right block in
(13) is zero, a restriction tested in Section 5.
5. Xj does not predict Xi given lagged F. That is, D(L) in (7) is diagonal, so
E(Xit|Ft–1, Ft–2,… Xit–1, Xit–2,…, Xjt–1, Xjt–2,…) = E(Xit|Ft–1, Ft–2,…, Xit–1, Xit–
2,…).

This restriction is tested Section 5.

6. Xj does not explain Xi given current F. That is, Xj does not appear in(9),
so E(Xit|Ft, Xit–1, Xit–2,…, Xjt, Xjt–1,…) = E(Xit|Ft, Xit–1, Xit–2,…). This is a
key implication for SVAR analysis using factors because it says that,
given the factors, the VAR need not include any other X’s except the X of

11

interest, that is, excluding other observable variables from the VAR does
not produce omitted variable bias. This restriction is tested Section 5.
7. Cross-equation restrictions in the X equations. If Φ(L) has degree one
or more, there are overidentifying cross-equation restrictions across the
rows in the lower left block of (13). If however Ft follows a VAR(1) so
Φ(L) = Φ then there are no overidentifying restrictions. Because of the
sensitivity of this restriction to subsidiary lag restrictions we do not
examine this restriction empirically.
2.4 Estimation of Static Factors, Restricted VAR Coefficients, and Dynamic Factor
Innovations
In principle the coefficients of the VAR representation (with additional lag length
restrictions and normalizations) could all be estimated by restricted quasi-maximum
likelihood estimation. However that would be computationally cumbersome and we
instead adopt a stepwise approach that first entails estimation of the static factors, then
estimation of the VAR coefficients, and finally estimation of the dynamic factor
innovations.
Estimation of static factors and the number of static factors. The static factors

Ft can be estimated as the principal components of the filtered observables X% t (where Xt
is standardized to have sample mean zero and unit standard deviation). Specifically the
estimators of {Ft} and Λ solve the minimization problem,
T

min F1 ,..., FT ,Λ ,D ( L ) T −1 ∑ [( I − D ( L) L) X t − ΛFt ]'[ I − D ( L) L) X t − ΛFt ]

(17)

t =1

where D(L) is given in (7). The minimization in (17) is conveniently done iteratively.
Given a preliminary estimator of D(L), {Ft} can be computed as the first r principal
components of (I – D(L)L)Xt; given the estimate of {Ft}, δi(L) and Λ are estimated by n
individual regressions of Xit on (Ft, Xit–1,…, X it −mi +1 ), where mi is the order of δi(L). Each

12

step of this procedure reduces (does not increase) the sum of squares in (17) and the
procedure can be iterated to convergence.1 This produces estimators Fˆt , Λ̂ , and Dˆ (L) .

The number of static factors can be estimated using the Bai-Ng (2002)
information criteria. These can be applied either to the sample covariance matrix of Xt
(the method proposed by Bai and Ng (2002)) or alternatively to the covariance matrix of
(I – Dˆ (L) L)Xt.
Estimation of restricted VAR coefficients. Given the estimates Fˆt , the restricted

VAR coefficients are estimated by first regressing Fˆt onto the desired number of lags to
ˆ (L) , then using Φ
ˆ (L) , Λ̂ , and Dˆ (t ) to construct the
obtain the estimator of Φ(L), Φ
restricted VAR coefficient matrix in (13).
Estimation of the number of dynamic factors. The number of dynamic factors,

q, can be estimated in two ways.

The first method, developed here, exploits restriction #3 in Section 2.3, that
EεXtεXt′ = ΛGΣηG′Λ′ + Σv so that the innovations of Xt have a factor structure. First, the
innovations in Xit, ε X i t , are estimated by εˆX i t , constructed using (13) as the residuals from
the regression of Xit onto lags of Xit and lags of Fˆt . Second, the number of dynamic
factors q is estimated by applying the Bai-Ng (2002) procedure to the sample covariance
matrix of εˆXt , yielding an estimator q̂ .
The second method, developed by Bai and Ng (2005b), exploits restriction #2 in
Section 2.3, that EεFtεFt′ = GΣηG, so that the r×r matrix of innovations of the static
factors has rank q. Their method entails a spectral decomposition on the sample analogue
of EεFtεFt′ and estimating its rank using an information criterion approach.
Estimation of space spanned by dynamic shocks. Given q, there are several

ways to estimate the dynamic factor innovations. The algorithm used here chooses G
such that the innovations are uncorrelated and that they maximize the trace R2 of X,
ordered so that the first dynamic factor makes the largest variance reduction, the second
the second-largest, and so forth. Specifically, write B(L) in equation (16) as B(L) =
1

This estimator modifies the static principal components estimator of Stock and Watson
(2002), in which δi(L) = 0 in the notation here.
13

A(L)G, where A(L) = [I – D(L)L]-1Λ[I – Φ(L)L]–1, and normalize Ση = I; then
trE[(B(L)ηt)(B(L)ηt)′] = trE[(A(L)Gηt)(A(L)Gηt)′] = tr( ∑ j =0 AjGΣη G ' Aj ' ) =
∞

tr( ∑ j =0 AjGG ' Aj ' ) = tr[ G '
∞

(∑

∞
j =1

tr(ΣX) = tr[ G '

)

Aj Aj ' G ]. Then

(∑

∞
j =1

)

Aj Aj ' G ] + tr(Σu)

(18)

so that choosing G to maximize the trace R2 explained by the factors is equivalent to
choosing G to be the eigenvectors of

∑

∞
j =1

Aj Aj ' that correspond to the largest q

eigenvalues. The estimator of G, Ĝ , is the sample analog of this matrix of eigenvectors,
ˆ [I − Φ
ˆ (L)L]−1 .
computed using Aˆ (L) = [ I − Dˆ (L)L]−1 Λ
Another way to estimate the dynamic factor innovations, which we do not use, is
to estimate them as the first q̂ principal components of εˆXt . In this case, the dynamic
factor innovations sequentially maximize the trace R2 of εˆXt .
2.5 Distribution Theory and Inference

The foregoing procedures are justified by a body of distribution theory concerning
the performance of principle components in large panels. Stock and Watson (2002b)
proved consistency of the principle components estimator for the space spanned by the
factors for the approximate DFM for N, T → ∞. Bai (2003) shows the asymptotic
normality of Λˆ i under approximate DFM assumptions and the rate condition N, T → ∞,

T1/2/N → 0. Bai and Ng (2005a) consider the distribution of the coefficients of factoraugmented regressions, in which Xit is regressed against Fˆt and a fixed number of
additional observed stationary regressors, and show that standard T1/2 inference applies if

N, T → ∞, T1/2/N → 0. These final results justify the application of standard testing
methods to regression tests of the FAVAR exclusion restrictions, in which the estimated
factors are treated as if they were known and observed.

14

3. Structural DFMs and Structural FAVARs
Structural VAR analysis requires deducing one or more structural shocks from the
VAR innovations. The same requirement arises in structural DFMs, except that the
innovations and structural shocks are those of the dynamic factors. Let ζt denote the q
structural shocks to the dynamic factors. Analogously to structural VAR analysis, the
dynamic factor structural shocks are assumed to be linearly related to the reduced form
dynamic factor innovations ηt by

ζt = Hηt

(19)

where H is an invertible q×q matrix. In this notation, the task of structural FAVAR
analysis is to identify H or, if one is interested in just one economic shock, a row of H.
Throughout we assume that Eζtζt′ = I, so that HΣηH′ = I.
There are several approaches available for the identification of H in structural
VAR analysis, and these plus more are available for structural FAVAR analysis. This
section begins by laying out the structural DFM and discusses in general identification
and estimation of structural FAVARs. The remaining subsections develop special cases,
several of which provide significant computational gains over the general approach.
These subsections separately consider identification using exclusion restrictions on the
contemporaneous incidence of structural shocks; identification using long-run
restrictions; and identification directly from the factor loadings.
3.1 Identification, Estimation, and Testing in Structural FAVARs

We adopt the notational convention that “*” denotes a parameter in the structural
system, for example λ(L) is the (“reduced-form”) DFM lag polynomial in (5) and λ*(L)
is its counterpart in the structural form of the DFM. Accordingly, the structural form of
the DFM is,

The DFM – structural form:

15

Xt = λ*(L) f t* + D(L)Xt–1 + vt
f t* = Γ*(L) f t* + ζt,

(20)
(21)

where f t* = Hft, λ*(L) = λ(L)H–1, and Γ*(L) = HΓ(L)H–1.
The moving average representation of the structural form is,

The DFM – structural MA form:
Xt = B*(L)ζt + ut,

(22)

where B*(L) = B(L)H–1 = [I – D(L)L]-1Λ[I – Φ(L)L]–1GH–1. The structural moving
average lag polynomial B*(L) is the impulse response function with respect to the
structural shocks ζt; this is the primary object of ultimate interest in structural DFM
analysis.
Identification of H can be achieved by imposing restrictions on B*(L) and/or on

λ*(L). Both these lag polynomial matrices have dimension n×q, so in principle
identification schemes can range from exact identification to identification using very
many overidentifying restrictions, which can be tested.
Without additional structure, there is little that can be said about identification and
estimation. One approach that is always available is to recognize that the system (20) and
(21) comprise a linear state space system with unobserved components f t* . The
parameters can be estimated subject to the identifying (or overidentifying) restrictions by
using the Kalman filter to construct the Gaussian likelihood. In many cases of interest,
however, the computational is greatly reduced using a two-step procedure in which
principal components methods are used in the first step, to estimate the reduced-form
factor model, G, and {ηt} as described in the previous section; in the second step the
estimated factors and factor innovations are treated as data and the identifying restrictions
are used to estimate H, {ζt}, and thus the structural impulse response function B*(L).
These cases are now described for different families of identifying restrictions.
3.2 Contemporaneous Timing Restrictions

16

Timing restrictions typically are exclusion restrictions stating that certain
structural shocks do not affect certain X variables contemporaneously, for example, the
monetary policy shock does not affect output within the month. This approach, which is
standard in the structural VAR literature, here implies that the innovations in some of the

X’s depend on only some of the ζ’s. Specifically, from (22) we have that

εXt = B0* ζt + vt

(23)

where B0* is the coefficient matrix that is the leading (zero-lag) term in B*(L). We
illustrate identification and estimation in three examples of increasing complexity,
beginning with the factor version of the Sims (1980) Wold causal ordering.
Example #1: Exact identification/Cholesky factorization. Suppose the

identification scheme is such that B0* is lower triangular:

 x 0 L 0
 x x O 0


0
x
x
O


B0* = 

 x x L x
M M M M


 x x L x

(24)

where x denotes an unrestricted nonzero element. There are q(q–1)/2 exclusion
restrictions and H is exactly identified.
This example is analogous to achieving exact identification by ordering the
variables in a standard VAR in a particular Wold causal chain, however it is not the same
thing because there is the additional idiosyncratic innovation vt. Identification and
estimation proceeds using a Cholesky factorization of the factor innovation variance
*
denote the q×q matrix of the first q rows of B0* , which
matrix. Specifically, let B0;q

contain all the identifying restrictions, and let B0;q denote the q×q matrix of the first q

17

*
is lower triangular, so
rows of B0. Because B0* ζt = B0ηt, B0;* q B0;* q ' = B0;qΣη B0;q′. But B0;q

it must be the case that
*
B0;q
= Chol(B0;qΣη B0;q′).

(25)

*
= ΛqGH–1, where Λq denotes the
Now B*(L) = [I – D(L)L]–1Λ[I – Φ(L)L]–1GH–1, so B0;q

first q rows of Λ; thus

H = [Chol(B0;qΣη B0;q′)]–1ΛqG.

(26)

The matrices on the right hand side of (26) can all be deduced from the population
DFM parameters, as discussed in Section 2, showing that the lower triangular assumption
(24) exactly identifies H and thus (by (19)) {ζt}.
Estimation of H and of {ζt} proceeds by replacing the population matrices in (26)
with their sample estimates, computed as described in Section 2.4.
Example #2: Partial identification via block lower-triangular exclusion
restrictions. BBE introduce a scheme for identifying a single shock in a structural

FAVAR by adopting a block lower triangular structure for B0* . They partition the
structural shocks and variables into three groups, slow variables, an interest rate, and fast
variables. The economic content of the BBE restrictions is discussed in Section 6.
Denote the three groups of variables “S”, “R,” and “F.” The structural shocks are

ζt = ( ζ tS ,′ ζ tR , ζ tF ′)′, where ζ tS is qS×1, ζ tR is a scalar, and ζ tF is qF×1. The ζ tS shocks
potentially can affect all the variables within a period, ζ tR affects all but nS “slow”
variables within a period, and ζ tF affects only the remaining nF = n – nS – 1 “fast”
variables within the period. The variables can be organized in the ordered groups S, R,
and F, so that B0* has the block lower triangular form,

18

 B0,* SS

B0* =  B0,* RS
 B0,* FS


0
*
0, RR
*
0, FR

B
B

0 

0 
B0,* FF 

(27)

*
*
*
*
*
*
is nS×qS, B0,RS
is 1×qS, B0,RR
is a scalar, and B0,FS
, B0,FR
, and B0,FF
are
where B0,SS

respectively nF×qS, nF×1, and nF×qS.
The block triangular restrictions in (27) identify ζ tR (the shock of interest), the
space spanned by ζ tS , and the space spanned by ζ tF . Because ζ tR is identified, the
column of B*(L) associated with ζ tR is identified and thus the structural impulse
response of Xt with respect to ζ tR is identified. To show this identification algebraically,
partition H conformably with ζt so that (19) becomes
 ζ tS   H S ' 
 R 

 ζ t  =  H R '  η t.
ζ tF   H F ' 
 

(28)

With the notation in (28) and the restrictions in (27), the innovations expression (23)
becomes,

ε XtS = B0,* SS H S 'ηt + vtS
ε XtR = B0,* RS H S 'ηt + B0,* RR H R 'ηt + vtR

(29)

ε XtF = B0,* FS H S 'ηt + B0,* FR H R 'ηt + B0,* FF H F 'ηt + vtF
*
is nS×qS
where ε XtS is the nS×1 vector of innovations in the S variables, etc. Because B0,SS
*
and HS′ is qS×q, the rank of B0,SS
HS′ is qS (assuming nS ≥ qS). Thus the population

projection of ε XtS onto ηt spans a qS-dimensional space, which is the space spanned by
*
ζ tS . Similarly, because B0,RR
HR′ is 1×q, and because the space spanned by ζ tS is now

19

identified, ζ tR is identified (up to scale) as ζ tR = Proj( ε XtR |ηt) – Proj( ε XtR | ζ tS ). The space
spanned by ζ tF is the span of ηt that is orthogonal to ζ tS and ζ tR .
One way to estimate H, which imposes the overidentifying restrictions in (27),
parallels the preceding discussion of identification:
1. Estimate the innovations to Xt and the dynamic factor innovations ηt as
described in Section 2.4; denote these εˆXtS (etc.) and ηˆt .
2. Estimate (or impose based on a-priori grounds) the number of S shocks, qS.
The dimension qS can be estimated using the method described in Section 2.4
for the estimation of q, except applied only to the S variables.
*
and HS by reduced rank regression of εˆXtS onto ηˆt , imposing
3. Estimate B0,SS

the rank qS. This produces ζˆtS .
4. Estimate ζ tR by ζˆtR = Proj( εˆXtR |ηˆt ) – Proj( εˆXtR | ζˆtS ), where the projections are
implemented by OLS regression. The OLS regression of ζˆtR onto ηˆt yields
the estimated coefficients Hˆ R .
This procedure produces the Gaussian maximum likelihood estimator of H based
on the innovations under the assumption that vt is i.i.d. homoskedastic Gaussian with
unknown and unrestricted covariance matrix and ηt are observed regressors. Note that
these are different assumptions than those that underly exact ML estimation of the DFM
using the Kalman filter, in which ηt is treated as unobserved. However, because ηt is
well estimated when n is large, the approximate ML interpretation of the algorithm 1 – 4
suggests that it will produce estimates with good sampling properties.
Example #3: Partial identification via block lower-triangular exclusion
restrictions. The logic of the Wold causal ordering in example #1 could be applied to

groups of similar variables, for example all employment variables could be in the same
group. Let Xt be partitioned into q groups, each with ni elements, where n1 + … + nq = n.
Under this scheme, B0* has the block lower triangular form,

20

*
 B0,11
 *
B
*
B0 =  0,12
 M
 *
 B0,1q

0
*
0,22

B

M
*
B0,2
q

0 

O
0 
,
O
0 

L B0,* qq 
L

(30)

*
in (30) is a ni×1 vector. Let Hi′ denote the ith row of H. Partition εXt
where B0,ij

conformably with B0* . Then the innovations equations corresponding to (30) are,
*
ε 1Xt = B0,11
H1 'ηt + vt1
*
*
ε Xt2 = B0,21
H1 'ηt + B0,22
H 2 'ηt + vt2

M

(31)

ε Xtq = B0,* q1H1 'ηt + B0,* q 2 H 2 'ηt + L + B0,* qq H q 'ηt + vtq
*
Identification of ζ t1 = H1′ηt is achieved (up to scale) by noting that B0,11
H1 ' has

rank 1 so that ζ t1 = Proj( ε 1Xt |ηt). Similarly, ζ t2 is identified (up to scale) as ζ t2 =
Proj( ε Xt2 |ηt) – Proj( ε Xt2 | ζ t1 ). The remaining elements of ζt are identified by extending
this projection argument. This entirely identifies H.
The structural shocks and H can be estimated by an extension of the reduced rank
regression algorithm presented for example #2. Specifically:
1. Estimate εˆXt and ηˆt .
*
and H1 by reduced rank regression of εˆ1Xt onto ηˆt , imposing
2. Estimate B0,11

rank 1. This produces Ĥ1 and ζˆt1 .
3. Construct the q×(q–1) matrix Ĥ1⊥ such that Ĥ1⊥ ′ Ĥ1 = 0 and Ĥ1⊥ ′ Ĥ1⊥ = I,
then estimate the reduced rank regression of εˆXt2 on ζˆt1 and Ĥ1⊥ ′ηˆt . The (q–
1)×1 vector of reduced rank weights on Ĥ1⊥ ′ηˆt from this regression, times
Ĥ1⊥ ′, produces the estimators Ĥ 2 ′ and ζˆt2 = Ĥ 2 ′ηˆt .

4. Repeat this process for each of the remaining blocks, yielding Ĥ .

21

Unlike example #2, this algorithm does not have the interpretation of being Gaussian
maximum likelihood, given ηt (for example, varying H1 affects the fit of the second block
of equations but only the first block of equations is used to estimate H1).
General restrictions. Little can be said about general identification restrictions,

beyond standard rank and order condition requirements from the theory of simultaneous
equations. It is worth noting, however, that working with the innovation equations and
treating ηt as observed still can result in significant computational advantages relative to
full Gaussian ML via the Kalman filter. Specifically, the innovations equations permit a
computationally efficient iterative algorithm for estimation of H subject to general
exclusion restrictions:
1. Estimate εˆXt and ηˆt using all n variables.
2. Use a subset of exactly identifying restrictions to obtain initial estimates of H and

ζt, Ĥ (1) and ζˆt(1) .
3. Regress εˆXt onto ζˆt(1) , imposing all the identifying restrictions on the matrix of
coefficients B0* . If there are no cross-equation restrictions, this can be done either
by restricted least squares, equation by equation, which imposes the exact DFM
restriction that Σv is diagonal, or by SURE, which allows Σv to be unrestricted.
This produces the value of the Gaussian likelihood given Ĥ (1) , L( Ĥ (1) ).
4. Search numerically over H to minimize L(H), subject to HΣηH′ = I.
Testing overidentifying restrictions. In all but example #1, the structural

FAVAR is overidentified, and these overidentifying restrictions are testable.
One approach to testing overidentifying restrictions is to do so equation by
equation. As discussed in Section 2.5, under suitable conditions the estimated factors,
and thus ηˆt , can be treated as observed regressors for the purposes of hypothesis tests on
the coefficients in a single equation. In this case the overidentifying restrictions can be
tested by standard regression methods, treating ζˆtR as observed. For example, in the
BBE identifying scheme, each innovation equation in the S block has qF+1 exclusion
restrictions, that ζ tR and ζ tF not enter that equation. For a given equation, this exclusion
restriction can be testing by regressing the ith estimated innovation, εˆXtS ,i , onto ζˆtS , ζˆtR ,
22

and ζˆtF , then testing using a standard Wald test to the hypothesis that the coefficients on

ζˆtR and ζˆtF are zero. Strictly this test will have an asymptotic χ q2 +1 distribution under
F

the assumptions referred to in Section 2.5 if this ith equation was not used in the
estimation of ζˆtS , ζˆtR , and ζˆtF ; however, if the number of overidentifying restrictions is
very large it might reasonably be assumed that the χ q2F +1 is a useful (possibly
conservative) approximation to the distribution of the Wald statistic.
Another approach to testing the overidentifying restrictions would be to test all
the restrictions simultaneously. In the BBE example, there are (qF+1)(nS –qF/2). Because

ηt is not observed and because nS is large, we would not expect the distribution of the
joint Wald test of these restrictions to be well approximated by a χ (2qF +1)( nS − qF / 2)
distribution. More work on the statistical properties of joint tests of large number of such
restrictions is warranted. Based on existing distribution theory, single-equation tests or
tests of a small number of restrictions seem likely to be more reliable than joint tests of
very many restrictions.
Imposing the overidentifying restrictions on the levels regression. Because B0* =

ΛGH−1, rank restrictions on B0* , such as those in examples 2 and 3, imply rank restrictions
on Λ. These restrictions can be imposed and tested directly on the levels regression (9),
and can be used to estimate H. To implement these restrictions, it is useful to perform an
additional transformation. Let W be the r×r matrix
(G ' G ) −1 G '
W =

⊥
 G ' 

(32)

where G ⊥ ' is (r–q)×q. Let Ct = WFt, and let Ct = [C1t′ C2t′]′, where Ct is partitioned
conformably with W. Then
η 
Ct = Π(L)Ct−1 +  t  .
0

23

(33)

where Π(L) = WΦ(L)W–1. The r–q rotated factors C2t are dynamically redundant, in the
sense that they are predetermined given Ct–1; equivalently, their innovation is zero. Thus
ΛFt = ΛW–1Ct = Λ1C C1t + Λ C2 C2t, so the measurement equation of the static DFM (9) can
be written,
X% t = Λ1C C1t + Λ C2 C2t + νt.

(34)

and B0* = Λ1C H−1. Constraints on B0* are then imposed via reduced rank restrictions on
Λ1C in the regression (34).
For example, the restrictions in example 2 can be imposed using (34) and the
following algorithm:
1. Estimate ηt, Ft, and G as described in Section 2.4, and construct Cˆ t .
2. Estimate (or impose based on a-priori grounds) the number of S shocks, qS.
3. Estimate Λ1C ,S and HS by reduced rank regression (with rank qS) of the slow
moving elements in X% t onto Cˆ1t , including without restrictions the additional
regressor Cˆ 2 t . This produces Hˆ S and ζˆtS .
4. Estimate ζ tR by ζˆtR = Proj( εˆXtR |ηˆt ) – Proj( εˆXtR | ζˆtS ), where the projections are
implemented by OLS regression. The OLS regression of ζˆtR onto ηˆt yields
the estimated coefficients Hˆ R .
5. The overidentifying restrictions imposed in (4) can tested as exclusion
restrictions on the regressors Hˆ S⊥Cˆ1t (equivalently Hˆ R Cˆ1t and Hˆ F Cˆ1t ) in each
of the regressions involving slow-moving variables.
3.3 Identification Using Long-Run Restrictions

A second family of identification methods uses long run restrictions to identify H
(or rows of H). These methods build on the VAR identification schemes of Blanchard
and Quah (1989) and King, Plosser, Stock, and Watson (1991). These restrictions were
24

first used in FAVAR models by Giannone, Reichlin, and Sala (2002), who considered
exactly identified systems and systems with a small number of overidentifying
restrictions by imposing restrictions on only seven of the variables in Xt and leave the
remaining equations unrestricted. Here, we discuss structural FAVARs, both in the case
that the number of identifying conditions is small, and in the case that that the system is
heavily overidentified.
Long run restrictions are restrictions, typically exclusion restrictions, on the longrun effect of individual shocks on groups of Xt variables. These correspond to restrictions
on the cumulative (or long-run) structural moving average coefficients, that is, on B*(1).
The long-run restrictions can be expressed in an innovations representation. Let ωXt be
the innovation in the forecast of the cumulative value of Xt into the infinite future, that is,
let ωXt =

∑

∞
k =0

( X t + k |t − X t + k |t −1 ) . Then it follows from (22) that

ωXt = B*(1)ζt + [I – D(1)]–1vt.

(35)

The forecast innovations ωXt can be constructed from the reduced form MA
representation, specifically, ωXt = B(1)ηt + [I – D(1)]–1vt. Thus in population ωXt can be
treated as observable. Because νt in (35) is serially uncorrelated, the discussion of
identification and estimation in examples 1 – 3 of Section 3.2, as well as the concluding
discussion about general exclusion restrictions and testing the overidentifying
restrictions, applies directly, with ωXt replacing ε Xt and with ωˆ Xt =
Bˆ (1)ηˆt + [ I − Dˆ (1)]−1 vˆt replacing εˆXt . Note that the moments involved in the reduced

rank regression computations can alternatively be computed directly from the estimated
reduced-form DFM moments so that it is not actually necessary to construct ωˆ Xt to
compute the desired projections and reduced rank regression eigenvectors.
3.4 Identification from Factor Loading Restrictions

A different approach is to identify H directly from restrictions on the factor
loadings λ*(L) in the structural DFM (20). This is the approach taken in small systems

25

by Sargent (1989) and Stock and Watson (1991), and it has been extended to large
systems by Kose, Otrok and Whiteman (2003) and by Boivin and Giannoni (2005).
We are not aware of any general method for fast (one-pass) computation of H
under general conditions on λ(L), even if ηt is treated as known based on large-n
asymptotics. In some leading special cases, however, fast computational methods are
available, and we now give two examples.
Example #4. Contemporaneous loadings, block lower triangular structure.

When λ*(L) has no lags, then the static and dynamic models coincide; thus ft = Ft, f t* =
Ft* , and the measurement equation of the structural DFM (20) and (21) becomes,
X% t = Λ* f t* + vt

(36)

where Λ* = λ*. Because f t* = Hft = HFt (the second equality follows because λ*(L) has
no lags), because Ft can be estimated consistently, and because vt is serially uncorrelated,
the system (36) has the same mathematical structure as the innovations representation
(23) studied in Section 3.2, with X% t replacing εXt, f t* replacing ζt, and ft (or Ft) replacing

ηt in Section 3.2. Thus the discussion of identification and estimation in Section 3.2
(examples 1, 2, and 3, also the concluding remarks) extends directly to block lower
triangular exclusion restrictions on the dynamic factor loadings when λ*(L) has no lags.
Example #5: Contemporaneous loadings on distinct blocks of variables. As in

the previous example, suppose that λ*(L) has no lags; in addition, suppose that λ* is
block diagonal:

λ*(L) =diag( λ11* ,…, λqq* )

(37)

where λ11* is a n1×1 vector (etc.), where n1 + … + nq = n. Thus each factor loads only on
subset of variables, which can be thought of as indicators (with measurement error) of an
unobserved economic variable. Sargent (1989) implemented a low-dimensional version

26

of this identification scheme, and Boivin and Giannoni (2005) recently implemented a
high-dimensional version.
Because λ*(L) has no lags, under (37), the DFM and the static form of the DFM
coincide and the measurement equation is given by (36). Substituting (37) into (36), we
have,
X% t1 = λ11* H1 ' Ft + vt1
(38)

M
X% = λ H q ' Ft + v
q
t

*
qq

q
t

The weights H can be estimated using the following algorithm:
1. Estimate Fˆt using all n variables.
2. Regress X% t1 on Fˆt by reduced rank regression with rank 1, yielding Ĥ1 .
3. Repeat step 2 for each block of equations, yielding Ĥ .
4. Ĥ does not satisfy Ĥ Σˆ ηˆ Ĥ ′ = I, however it can serve as the target in method
of moments estimation of H that imposes this restriction.
Instead of step 4, Ĥ from step 3 could be used as a starting value in maximum likelihood
estimation of the restricted DFM using the Kalman filter.
3.5 Other Identification Schemes
Uhlig’s (2005) sign identification scheme. Uhlig (2005) uses an entirely

different approach to identification, in which identification conditions are imposed on the
time path of the impulse response functions, not just the impact or long-run cumulative
effect. For example, one identifying restriction might be that prices cannot rise in
response to a contractionary monetary policy shock. This corresponds to placing sign
restrictions on the coefficients of B*(L). Uhlig (2005) implements this approach by
placing a diffuse prior over (in our notation) B(L) and Ση, drawing realizations of these
from their posterior distribution, and retaining only those realizations that accord with the
sign restrictions. This approach in general yields set identification, and as implemented
yields realizations and a probability distribution over the set of impulse responses that do
27

not violate the sign conditions. This can be implemented here, however as a practical
matter it appears to be inconvenient to compute the posterior distribution of B*(L); a
modification of Uhlig’s (2005) approach would be to compute the set of impulse
responses by drawing only from the posterior of Ση, and computing the non-violating set
for each of those draws. Computationally this is no more difficult than the computations
in Uhlig (2005) because the dimension of Ση (and of H) is comparable to the dimension
of the conventional VARs he considers.
The Favero and Marcellino (2005)/Favero, Marcellino, Neglia (2004)
identification scheme. These authors first estimate the static factors using a large panel

of data, then construct a low-dimensional VAR that includes these static factors and a
small number of observable variables; in Favero, Marcellino, and Neglia (2004), these
additional variables are the output gap, inflation, commodity price inflation, an exchange
rate, and the monetary policy instrument (the short rate). The monetary policy shock is
identified by ordering the interest rate last in a Cholesky decomposition. In terms of
Section 2, this scheme relaxes the DFM implications and is equivalent to allowing the
variables in the VAR to be observable (static) factors. The Favero, Marcellino, and
Neglia (2004) scheme orders both slow- and fast shocks ahead of the monetary policy
shock, and assumes that there is no idiosyncratic or measurement error component ν tR .
This general approach – augmenting a low-dimensional VAR by estimated factors, then
performing standard VAR identification – is inconsistent with the primitives of the DFM
used to compute the factors, and it is unclear how this approach could provide a basis for
compelling structural identification.

4. Empirical Results I: Number of Factors and Reduced-Form
Variance Decompositions
We begin the empirical analysis by estimating the number of factors, the number
of dynamic factors, and the dynamic factor innovations, and by computing forecast error
variance decompositions with respect to the dynamic factor innovations, using the
methods of Section 2.4.

28

4.1 The Data and Transformations

The data set consists of monthly observations on 132 U.S. macroeconomic time
series from 1959:1 through 2003:12. The predictors include series in 14 categories: real
output and income; employment and hours; real retail, manufacturing and trade sales;
consumption; housing starts and sales; real inventories; orders; stock prices; exchange
rates; interest rates and spreads; money and credit quantity aggregates; price indexes;
average hourly earnings; and miscellaneous. The series are transformed by taking
logarithms and/or differencing so that the transformed series are approximately
stationary. In general, first differences of logarithms (growth rates) are used for real
quantity variables, first differences are used for nominal interest rates, and second
differences of logarithms (changes in growth rates) for price series. Specific
transformations and the list of series is given in Appendix A.
Both outlier-adjusted and outlier-unadjusted versions of the series were used. The
outlier adjustment entailed replacing observations of the transformed series with absolute
median deviations larger than 6 times the inter quartile range by with the median value of
the preceding 5 observations. The outlier-adjusted series were used for the estimation of
the number of static and dynamic factors, the estimation of the static factors, and the
estimation of the matrix G relating the dynamic and static factor innovations. All other
analysis (VAR estimation, estimating structural impulse responses, exclusion tests, etc.)
was conducted using the outlier-unadjusted series.
4.2 Number of Static and Dynamic Factors
Number of static factors. The Bai-Ng information criteria ICp1 and ICp2 were

computed both for the sample covariance matrix of Xt and for the sample covariance
matrix of the filtered Xt, [I – Dˆ (L) L]Xt, where the filter was computed using 6 lags for

δi(L) (mi = 6 for all i). When applied to Xt, the Bai-Ng criteria estimated there to be 7
static factors, although the criteria are nearly flat for 6 ≤ q ≤ 10. When applied to the
filtered Xt, the criteria estimate 9 static factors, and again the criterion is nearly flat for 6
≤ q ≤ 10. These results are robust to using 4 lags in D(L) instead of 6. Our interest is in

29

the space of dynamic factors, not the number of static factors, so to be conservative we
choose the larger of these two estimates and adopt q̂ = 9 static factors.
Number of dynamic factors. Following the procedure of Section 2.4, the Bai-Ng

information criteria ICp2 was used to estimated the number of dynamic factors from the
innovation matrix of εˆXt . The results are summarized in Table 1 for the baseline case in
which the Xt are prefiltered, D(L) having degree 5 (m = 6), and in which the factors Ft
follow a VAR(2) (Φ(L) has degree one). For 7 or fewer static factors, the number of
static and dynamic factors are estimated to be the same, however for more than 7 static
factors, the number of dynamic factors is estimated to be 7. These results are robust to
using instead 4 lags for D(L) or a VAR(1) for Ft.
We also estimated the number of static factors using unfiltered data (Xt, not X% t ).
If the number of static factors is taken to be less than or equal to 7, then the number of
dynamic factors is estimated to equal the number of static factors; if the number of static
factors is taken to be 8, 9, or 10, then 7 dynamic factors are estimated. Because the
number of static factors is estimated to be 7 using the unfiltered data, the use of unfiltered
data again result in an estimate of 7 dynamic factors.
In independent work reported contemporaneously with the first draft of this paper,
Bai and Ng (2005b) developed a different estimator of q (described in Section 2.4) and
applied it to a similar, but not identical, large U.S. monthly macro data set. Strikingly,
they also estimated seven dynamic factors. For this draft of this paper, we also
implemented the Bai-Ng (2005b) estimator of q. Using our unfiltered data and the
estimated value of 7 static factors, the Bai-Ng (2005b) method estimates 7 dynamic
factors; using the filtered data and the estimated value of 9 static factors, the Bai-Ng
(2005b) method estimates 9 dynamic factors.
Taken together, these results clearly point to a large number of dynamic factors in
these data, with the modal estimate being 7; none of the estimates produced by any of our
sensitivity checks or by using other methods is less than 7.
4.3. Why So Many Factors?

Our estimates of the number of static and dynamic factors exceeds those typically
found in the literature (discussed in Section 1) and exceeds those we have found when we
30

have focused on forecasting the main macroeconomic aggregates (Stock and Watson
(1999, 2002a)). Is there actually only a few factors but the estimators spuriously indicate
many? If not, are we simply detecting factors that are present in a statistical sense but are
unimportant economically? If not, what are these extra factors doing?
To investigate the first question – the possibility that the estimators are biased
upwards, and/or are quite imprecise –we undertook a Monte Carlo study to examine its
performance. The study was calibrated to the data used in this analysis. In the Monte
Carlo experiment, the estimator correctly estimated the number of dynamic factors with
high probability, typically exceeding 94% and never less than 88%, and the estimate was
within 1 of the true value of q in more than 99% of Monte Carlo realizations. The design
and results are presented in Appendix B. While these results are for just one design and
more work is needed, they suggest that the performance of this estimator is promising
and that the estimate of many factors is not spurious.
This preliminary Monte Carlo evidence suggests that the factors are statistically
meaningful, but are they economically meaningful? To address this question, we
examine the roles played by the various factors in explaining the movement of different
macro variables. We begin by computing variance decompositions with respect to the
different factor innovations. If only two of the factor innovations were important in an
economic sense, the remaining five innovations ought to have a negligible role in
explaining the variation of Xt.
The results are summarized in Table 2. Part A presents a summary of the
cumulative forecast error variance decompositions for the X variables at several horizons,
and part B provides detailed results for the marginal contribution of each factor to each
series at the 24 month horizon (similar results obtain at the 48 month horizon, and for a
bandpass-filtered component over business cycle frequencies). Several features of these
variance decompositions stand out. Although the first two factors explain on average
42% of the variation of these series at the 24 month horizon, the remaining factors
together also explain a great deal of the variation, so that the average cumulative fraction
explained by all seven factors rises to 56%. The percentages at other horizons are
similar. Inspection of part B reveals that the first factor explains nearly all the variation
in the major aggregates measuring production and hours; for example, the first factor

31

explains 93% of the 24-month ahead forecast error variance of total industrial production,
91% of this quantity for capacity utilization, and 94% of this quantity for total
employment. In contrast, this dynamic factor explains very little of the variation in
inflation or stock returns at this horizon. The second factor explains movements in
interest rates, consumption, and stock prices. The variation in inflation is mainly
explained by the second and third factors, which together account for 65% of the forecast
error variance of overall CPI inflation and 56% of the variance of the PCE deflator. The
fourth factor is mainly associated with movements in interest rates. The fifth factor is
associated with swings in long-term unemployment. The sixth and seventh factors mainly
affect exchange rates, stock returns, and average hourly earnings. Although the factors
explain much or most of the forecast error variance of most series, some series appear to
be simply unrelated to these overall economic and financial factors. For example,
employment in mining, medical price inflation, services price inflation, and growth of the
monetary base are in the main unrelated to the overall economic conditions measured by
the seven dynamic factors.
Figure 1 plots, for selected series, the business cycle component (computed using
a bandpass filter with pass band of 24 – 96 months) and that part explained by various
factors. These graphs confirm that the first factor explains most of the medium-run
variation in industrial production, and the second and third factor explain most of the
variation in price inflation. The fourth factor explains much of the variation of the 10year T-bond rate. Taken together, the fifth, sixth, and seventh factors explain much of
the variation in exchange rates and contribute to explaining the largest swings in longterm unemployment.
These results provide a more nuanced view of the general findings, surveyed in
the introduction, that only two or three factors are needed to explain the covariation in
U.S. economic time series. For the leading measures of real economic activity and
prices, this appears to be true. Starting with Sargent and Sims (1977), many of the papers
in this literature have focused on these series. In addition, for the purposes of forecasting
either inflation or output growth, these forecast error variance decompositions suggest
that perhaps only two or three factors are needed, a result consistent with the small
number of factors in Stock and Watson (1999, 2002). The additional dynamic factors

32

account for additional movements of the remaining series, which are mainly financial
series such as interest rates, stock returns, and exchange rates. For the purposes of
forecasting, it may suffice to use a small number of dynamic (and possibly static) factors,
but for the purpose of structural VAR modeling the dimension of the space of dynamic
factor innovations appears to be larger.
For the rest of the empirical analysis, we adopt a baseline specification of 9 static
factors and 7 dynamic factors.

5. Empirical Results II: Testing VAR exclusion restrictions
This section examines empirically the restrictions on the reduced-form factor
VAR summarized in section (2.3): that X does not predict F given lagged F, that Xj does
not predict Xi given lagged F, and that Xj does not explain Xi given current F.
5.1 Restriction #4: X does not predict F given lagged F

We examine this restriction by sequentially including Xj in (10), so that the factor
prediction equation is,
Ft = Φ(L)Ft–1 + Ψj(L)Xjt–1 + εFt,

(39)

where Ψj(L) is a 9×1 vector lag polynomial of degree five (so each row of Ψj(L) has six
unrestricted coefficients). Restriction #4 is that Ψj(L) = 0, j = 1,…, 132. For each of the
nine equations in (39), we computed the six degree-of-freedom heteroskedasticity-robust
chi-squared test of the hypothesis that the relevant row of Ψj(L) is zero, along with the
marginal R2 (the increase in the R2) from including Xjt–1, …, Xjt–6. This yields 9×132 =
1188 separate test statistics and marginal R2s. We do not report p-values for full test of
Ψj(L) = 0 because of doubts about accuracy of large-sample distribution theory in
approximating the distribution of this test, which has 54 degrees of freedom.
The results of these 1188 exclusion tests are summarized in Table 3, which
reports the percentiles of the marginal empirical distribution of these 1188 p-values and
marginal R2s. Under the hypothesis, one would expect 5% of the p-values to be less than
33

.05. Empirically, however, there are many more rejections than would be expected under
the null: 10% of the p-values being less than .004 and 25% being less than .057. But
these rejections are almost entirely associated with economically small improvements in
the ability to predict F, with only one percent of the regressions being associated with
improvements in the R2 by .05 or more; 90% of the regressions have a marginal R2 of.028
or less.
We continue the discussion of these results in Section 5.3, after examining the
other VAR exclusion restrictions.
5.2 Restriction #5: Xj does not predict Xi given lagged F

We examine this restriction by augmenting (12) with lagged values of Xjt:
Xit = ΛiΦ(L)Ft–1 + δi(L)Xit–1 + δij(L)Xjt–1 + εt

(40)

Restriction #5 is that δij(L) = 0, i, j = 1,…, 132, i ≠ j.
We examine this restriction by estimating equation (40) for different dependent
variables where, for each dependent variable, six lags of the remaining 131 X’s were
included sequentially, yielding 131 separate heteroskedasticity-robust chi-squared
statistics and marginal R2s for each dependent variable. The estimation imposes no
restrictions on ΛiΦ(L). Taken across all 132 dependent variables, this produces 132×131
= 17,292 test statistics and marginal R2s.
The results of these tests are reported in row (b) of Table 4(i) and 4(ii), which
respectively presents the marginal distribution of these 17,292 p-values and marginal R2s.
For purposes of comparison, row (a) of the Table presents the corresponding marginal
distributions of p-values and marginal R2s for the regression specification omitting lagged
F (that is, omitting ΛiΦ(L)Ft–1 in (40)). The results indicate that there many more
rejections of the exclusion restriction than would be expected under the null hypothesis:
10% of the p-values are less than .017. The marginal R2s are generally small, with only
5% exceeding .026. Despite this evidence of statistically significant departures from the
null, these departures are estimated to be quantitatively small. Moreover, there is
evidence that including the factors substantially reduces the predictive content of Xj for Xi
34

Inspection of the individual tests (not reported here to save space) revealed only
one systematic pattern of rejections, which occurred when interest rates were used to
predict other interest rates. One interpretation of this finding is that the estimated factors
might not fully capture the dynamics of interest rate spreads. It might be that, consistent
with results in the finance literature, a three-factor model is needed just to explain term
structure dynamics, and our seven dynamic factors do not completely span these factors.
5.3 Restriction #6: Xj does not explain Xi given current F

If this restriction fails, then equation (9) becomes
Xit = Λ ij Ft + δ i j ( L) Xit + αij(L)Xjt + ν itj ,

(41)

where the superscript j distinguishes these coefficients from those in (9) without
Xj. Restriction #6 is that αij(L) = 0, which we examine by computing heteroskedasticityrobust chi-squared tests of the hypothesis that Xjt,.., Xjt–6 do not enter equation (41). The
results are summarized in Table 4, row (d) of panels (i) and (ii). For comparison
purposes, the corresponding results for the specification excluding Ft are presented in row
(c) of each panel. As is the case for the previous tests, there are an excess of rejections of

αij(L) = 0 over what would be expected under the null. At the same time, there are
substantially fewer rejections of the Xj exclusion restrictions, once the factors are
included in the regression. Including the factors produces a very large reduction in the
marginal R2s in these regressions.
The importance of restriction 6 is that if it holds, then the impulse responses with
respect to dynamic factor structural shocks can be computed without including any other
lags of X in the VAR. Restriction 6, however, is sufficient but not necessary to justify the
exclusion of Xjt from (41). The necessary condition is simply that Λ ij = Λi, in which case
the impulse responses and variance decompositions with respect to the dynamic factor
structural shocks will not change upon inclusion of Xjt–1 in the VAR even if αij(L) ≠ 0.
We therefore test directly the hypothesis that Λ ij = Λi for all 17,292 case using a
Hausman test testing for significant changes in the estimated values of Λi when Xjt,.., Xjt–6

35

are included or excluded from the regression. The results are summarized in the final line
of Table 4. There are many fewer excess rejections of this hypothesis than of the
exclusion restriction hypotheses. Thus there is statistically significant evidence that the
Xj exclusion restrictions in the factor equations do not hold, but that these departures from
the exact DFM result in few statistically significant changes in the coefficients on the
factors in these equations; by implication, the impulse response functions with respect to
the dynamic factor structural shocks would not change were Xj to be included in (41).
5.4 Discussion

Taken at face value, the results of this section indicate widespread rejection of the
exclusion restrictions of the DFM, yet at the same time the economic importance of these
violations – as measured by marginal R2s or statistically significant changes in the factor
loadings Λ upon including observable variables in the Xj equations – generally is small.
There are at least three possible sources for these many violations: certain
features of the data might make the exact DFM inapplicable, at least to some series; these
many rejections might be statistical artifacts of the tests rejecting too often under the null;
or the exact DFM might in fact not hold. We consider these possibilities in turn.
The first possibility is that these results reflect weaknesses in the data set. One
specific weakness is that these data contain some series with overlapping coverage, for
example the data set contains some series with several overlapping levels of aggregation
(IP for consumer durables, IP for manufacturing, and Total IP), and mean unemployment
duration is approximately a weighted average of the unemployment rate by length of
spell. In the original units, if the DFM holds at the disaggregated level then the
idiosyncratic disturbance in the aggregate will equal the sum of the idiosyncratic
disturbances in the subaggregates, and the idiosyncratic terms will be correlated across
series with overlapping scope. Thus the exact DFM might hold at a disaggregated level
and we would still expect to see violations of the DFM within blocks of variables in this
data set. For this reason, the approximate DFM might be a better description of these
data than the exact DFM.
The second possibility is that these apparent violations might in fact be statistical
artifacts. There are three reasons to believe that this might be an important issue. First,

36

these regressions all involve estimated factors. Although the factor estimates are
consistent, in finite samples the factors will contain estimation error. Standard errors-invariables reasoning suggests that the estimation of the factors will reduce their predictive
content and as a result the individual variables will retain some predictive content, even if
in population they follow an exact DFM. This interpretation is consistent with the large
fraction of rejections combined with the small marginal R2s when individual X’s are
included in either the F or X static DFM equations.
Second, most of these regressions contain quite a few regressors, which raises
concerns about the applicability of conventional large-sample asymptotic theory.
Third, although some of the predictive relations uncovered by these tests – such as
short rates having additional predictive content for long rates, given the factors – make
economic sense, many do not. For example, residential building permits in the South has
a relatively large marginal R2 for predicting the first factor, but building permits in the
Northeast or the Midwest, or housing starts in the south, do not. Although building
permits in the South might in fact contain special information useful for forecasting this
aggregate real output factor, its relatively high in-sample marginal R2 could just be a
statistical artifact.
The final possibility is that these tests have correctly detected violations of DFM
restrictions. In this regard, we make three comments.
First, if Xjt enters the Ft equation only with a lag (restriction #4 fails), then this can
still be consistent with estimating 9 static factors using the Bai-Ng (2002) criterion.
Specifically, consider the modified model (9) and (39), where εFt = Gηt. Then EFtνt = 0
and the covariance matrix of X% t still has the factor structure (11) and the Bai-Ng (2002)
will estimate the dimension of the factor matrix to be r, the number of static factors.
However, the spectral density matrix of Xt does not have a factor structure (exact or
approximate) at every frequency and in this sense the DFM fails. Moreover, the
covariance matrix of Xt (as opposed to X% t ) does not have a factor structure (exact or
approximate), so the estimated number of factors should differ, possibly substantially,
depending on whether the series are filtered. But our estimates of the number of static
factors are comparable whether the series are filtered or not, in fact the estimate is
slightly less (not more) when the series are unfiltered.
37

Second, if current or lagged Xjt enters the Xit equation after conditioning on Ft
(restriction #5 fails), then neither the covariance matrices of Xt nor that of X% t will have a
factor structure. In this case statistically significant evidence against restriction #5 is
inconsistent with estimation of a handful of factors, at least in large samples. If there are
only a few observable variables that predict Ft, then then those variables would be
observable static factors; however the rejections are widespread, so this interpretation is
not consistent with the empirical evidence.
Third, perhaps the series in fact obey a DFM but the Bai-Ng (2002) procedure has
identified too few static factors. This would be consistent with the widespread rejections,
and would indicate a difference between the Bai-Ng (2002) information criterion
approach to the estimation of the factors and the significance testing approach of this
section. But changing the number of static factors in this analysis does not substantially
change the number of rejections of the DFM restrictions, so this explanation also is not
fully consistent with the empirical results.
Taken together, these considerations and the results of Sections 4 and 5 lead us to
conclude that the exact DFM model is an imperfect description of these data: many of its
restrictions are violated. This said, there is strong evidence that there are a reduced
number of linear combinations of the data – seven factors – that have considerable
explanatory content for all the series. Given the factors, the violations of the exact DFM
are small in an economic and quantitative sense. These findings are consistent with these
series following an approximate DFM, in which there is some small correlation among
the idiosyncratic components, given the factors.
As discussed in Section 2.5, the conceptual basis for the estimation of the factors
and the factor innovations, and the associated distribution theory, has been developed for
the approximate factor model. Moreover, the structural FAVAR innovation identification
schemes and the associated two-step estimates (based on preliminary estimation of the
factor innovations) hold under the approximate DFM, assuming Λi = Λ ij in the notation
of (41), a restriction that we found to be infrequently violated using the Hausman test.
Although there remain some loose ends, such as the substantial rejections of the DFM
restrictions among interest rate equations, we therefore interpret these results as
supporting taking the next step of identifying and estimating structural FAVARs.
38

6. Empirical Results III: The BBE Structural FAVAR
This section illustrates the use of structural FAVARs by adopting the BBE
identification scheme discussed in Section 4.2. We briefly review the economics of the
BBE identification scheme, then turn to the empirical results.
6.1 The BBE Identification Scheme

The purpose of the BBE identification scheme is to identify a single structural
shock, the monetary policy shock. Their scheme entails partitioning the series into three
groups, slow, the interest rate, and fast. The slow moving variables, such as output and
employment, are assumed to be unaffected within the month by the monetary policy
shock or by shocks to financial markets. The qS shocks to the slow variables are the
“slow shocks,” ζ tS . These slow shocks are assumed to be observed by the Fed, so that
the monetary policy instrument (the Federal Funds rate) is a function of ζ tS , the monetary
policy shock ζ tR , and an idiosyncratic disturbance. Finally, the remaining fast variables
– stock returns, other interest rates, exchange rates, etc. – are assumed to be affected by
the slow and monetary policy shocks and, in addition, to qF additional “fast” structural
shocks to financial markets. These assumptions produce the identification scheme
discussed in Section 4.2.2
Although most of this reasoning is conventional, one noteworthy point is that the
Fed Funds specification allows for an idiosyncratic disturbance, a feature not present in a
standard structural VAR implementation. This allows for institutional features that
introduce slippage between monetary policy and monthly movements in the Fed Funds
rate, for example the fact that the Fed Funds rate moves in 25 basis point increments and
the tendency of the Fed to smooth a large interest rate movement over several quarters
rather than to implement a large movement after a single meeting of the FOMC. Whether

2

In a precursor to this large-n approach, Leeper, Sims, and Zha (1996) identify the
monetary policy shock as not affected by a large number of “sluggish” private sector
variables in their 13- and 18-variable VARs.
39

the idiosyncratic disturbance is small or large quantitatively is an empirical matter that
can be determined by applying the BBE identification scheme to the structural FAVAR.
The two differences between our implementation and BBE are differences in the
data (which we believe to be minor) and differences in the estimation method. The
estimation method used here is that described in Section 4.2; for the BBE estimation
method, see their paper.
6.2 Baseline Empirical Results

Following BBE, our slow variables are output, employment, inventories, and
broad-based price indexes (for a total of 67 slow variables) and the fast variables are
interest rates, exchange rates, commodity prices, and stock returns (64 fast variables).
The list is in Appendix A.
The first step is to estimate the number of dynamic factors among the slow
variables, qS. Like the estimation of the total number of dynamic factors (reported in
Table 1), this was done by applying the Bai-Ng (2002) ICp2 criterion to the sample
covariance matrix of the estimated innovations εˆXtS in the slow variables. The results for
the filtered data are summarized in Table 5. If fewer than four static factors are used, qS
is estimated to be the number of static factors; if four or more static factors are used, qS is
estimated to be 4. These estimates were computed for a VAR(2) for F and 6 lags for
D(L), and are robust to using either a VAR(1) for F or 4 lags for D(L). The total number
of possible static factors cannot exceed the total for the full panel, 9, and application of
the Bai-Ng (2002) criterion to only the slow variables yields an estimate of 6 static
factors; these statistics taken together therefore estimate qˆS = 4 dynamic factors among
the slow variables. This said, the Bai-Ng (2004) criterion is fairly flat in the region of 2 ≤
qS ≤ 4 so these results are consistent with the Sims-Sargent (1977) finding of only two
quantitatively important dynamic factors among the slow variables.
As a robustness check, we also estimated the number of dynamic factors using the
unfiltered data. For the unfiltered slow data, the number of static factors is estimated to
be three, and the number of dynamic factors is estimated to be three. If we allow instead
for up to 9 static factors to enter the unfiltered slow variables, the estimate of qS is either
4 or 5, depending on the number of static factors. These results suggest some ambiguity
40

about qS, which is estimated to be between 3 and 5; for the sequel, we adopt the modal
estimate, based on the filtered data, of qˆS = 4; the estimated number of fast shocks
therefore is qˆ F = q̂ – qˆS – 1 = 2.
Empirical results for the structural FAVAR with qS = 4 and qF = 2 are
summarized in Table 6. The first block of columns reports impulse responses to a
monetary policy shock, normalized so to correspond to a 1 percentage point increase in
the Federal Funds rate. The second block of columns reports the fraction of the forecast
error variance explained by the monetary policy shock at different horizons. The next
block of columns examines the overidentifying restrictions, equation by equation. The
final two columns report the fraction of the innovation variance explained by the slow
and fast shocks, respectively. The results in Table 6 were computed using the “levels”
algorithm for the BBE identification scheme of Section 4.3. The overidentifying
restrictions were imposed for identification of the shocks, however the impulse response
functions were not estimated subject to that restriction; that is, the impulse response
ˆ [I − Φ
ˆ ˆ −1 , where all
ˆ (L)L]−1 GH
function was estimated as Bˆ * (L) = [ I − Dˆ (L)L]−1 Λ
matrices except Ĥ were estimated using the methods of Section 2. Thus the first
column, the impact effect of the monetary policy shock, can be estimated to be nonzero
even though the shock is identified by assuming this effect is nonzero. Repeating the
estimation using the “innovations” algorithm of Section 4.3 yielded results similar to
those from the “levels” algorithm, so to save space the discussion here focuses on the
results in Table 6.
Although we use a somewhat different identification strategy and a different
estimation method, the results in Table 6 generally accord with those of BBE and, as do
theirs, with standard theory. A monetary policy shock that initially increases the Fed
Funds rate by 100 basis points is estimated to be highly persistent, with the Fed Funds
rate still elevated by 80 basis points after three years. Output and employment contract,
with total employment falling by 0.5%, and IP falling by 1.0% after one year, relative to
the no-shock benchmark. The contraction is felt more strongly in some sectors, for
example construction and goods-producing sectors, than in others, for example finance
and services. The stock market enters a pronounced decline in response to the

41

contraction, with the S&P500 loosing 11% of its value within 6 months. As in
Eichenbaum and Evans (1995), a contractionary monetary policy shock leads to a large
and persistent appreciation of the dollar relative to other currencies.
On the other hand, there are some curious features of the responses. There
remains some puzzling price behavior: while PCE inflation responds immediately by
falling .2% (annual rate) and continues to fall at the rate of 0.2% per year thereafter, CPI
inflation initially rises by 0.2% and does not appear to fall thereafter. Also, the
contraction is associated with a temporary steepening of the yield curve.
The fraction of the variance explained by the monetary policy shock is estimated
to be small for most of the real quantity variables and for prices. These estimates are
somewhat smaller than results found in conventional (observable variable) SVAR
analysis (see Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans (1999), for example). The monetary
policy shocks are estimated to account for a substantial fraction of the variability of
interest rates and, at horizons of one to three years, for substantial fractions of the
variability of retail sales, residential building permits, and the growth of M2.
The tests of the identifying restrictions in the final columns, along with the
estimated impact effect of the monetary policy shock on the slow variables, provides a
way to assess how well the BBE overidentifying assumptions fit the data. For most of
the slow-moving variables, the assumption that the shock has no immediate effect is not
rejected at the 5% significance level, and the estimated impact effect of the monetary
policy shock is small. Exceptions to this general statement include the NAPM production
and employment indexes and the short-term unemployment rate (but, oddly, not
unemployment insurance claims). Notably, the PCE deflator for durables increases
sharply within the month in response to the monetary policy shock (p-value = .026).
Also, there are widespread rejections of the restriction that the fast shocks not enter the
slow variables. For the slow variables, such as total consumption, retail sales, and IP for
consumer durables, the fast shocks explain nearly 10% or more of the innovation
variance.

7. Summary

42

One of our three main empirical findings is that there seem to be a relatively large
number of dynamic factors that account for the movements in these data: between two
and four that account for the movement in output, employment, and price inflation, and
between 3 and 5 more that account for additional movements in financial variables.
These are many more factors than have been found by previous researchers, starting with
Sims and Sargent (1977). A partial resolution of this conflict is that early researchers,
including Sims and Sargent (1977), mainly focused on output, employment, and inflation,
for which a small number of factors is plausible, but conflicts remain between our results
and those of researchers (e.g. Giannone, Reichlin, and Sala (2004)) who have also used
large data sets with a diverse range of variables.
A second empirical finding is evidence against the VAR restrictions implied by
the exact DFM. Although many of these violations are estimated to be small from an
economic perspective, a few of them are large enough to suggest possible
misspecification in our base model. We interpret these results as suggesting that these
data are well described by an approximate factor model, but not an exact factor model,
however further work along the lines indicated at the end of Section 5 is needed.
Our third main finding is that the support for the BBE identification scheme is
mixed. On the one hand, most of the impulse responses accord with standard
macroeconomic theories. The full set of impulse responses in Table 6 demonstrate, as do
BBE, that these methods can be used to map out the path for many variables after a single
shock, thereby addressing the common criticism of structural VARs that they are silent
about many of the variables of interest to policymakers. On the other hand, many of the
overidentifying restrictions are violated, and some of the estimated impulse responses do
not accord with monetary theory. This situation could be a statistical artifact, it could be
a feature readily addressed by modifying the data set (perhaps changing the composition
of the slow variables), or it might be a fundamental flaw in the recursive identification
scheme. Understanding the source of these rejections is an obvious next step for
structural FAVAR research. From a methodological perspective, finding mixed support
for the BBE identification scheme represents an advance over exactly identified structural
VAR analysis: the structural FAVAR framework permits examination of overidentifying
restrictions and diagnosis of modeling problems.

43

Appendix A: Data

Table A.1 lists the short name of each series, its mnemonic (the series label used
in the source database), the transformation applied to the series, and a brief data
description. All series are from the Global Insights Basic Economics Database, unless the
source is listed (in parentheses) as TCB (The Conference Board’s Indicators Database) or
AC (author’s calculation based on Global Insights or TCB data). In the transformation
column, ln denotes logarithm, ∆ln and ∆2ln denote the first and second difference of the
logarithm, lv denotes the level of the series, and ∆lv denotes the first difference of the
series.
Table A.1 Data sources, transformations, and definitions
Short name
PI
PI less transfers
Consumption
M&T sales
Retail sales
IP: total
IP: products
IP: final prod
IP: cons gds
IP: cons dble
IP: cons nondble
IP: bus eqpt
IP: matls
IP: dble matls
IP: nondble matls
IP: mfg
IP: res util
IP: fuels
NAPM prodn
Cap util
Help wanted indx
Help wanted/emp
Emp CPS total
Emp CPS nonag
U: all
U: mean duration
U < 5 wks
U 5-14 wks
U 15+ wks
U 15-26 wks
U 27+ wks
UI claims
Emp: total
Emp: gds prod
Emp: mining
Emp: const
Emp: mfg
Emp: dble gds

Mnemonic
a0m052
a0m051
a0m224_r
a0m057
a0m059
ips10
ips11
ips299
ips12
ips13
ips18
ips25
ips32
ips34
ips38
ips43
ips307
ips306
pmp
a0m082
lhel
lhelx
lhem
lhnag
lhur
lhu680
lhu5
lhu14
lhu15
lhu26
lhu27
a0m005
ces002
ces003
ces006
ces011
ces015
ces017

Fast
or
Slow?
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S

Tran
∆ln
∆ln
∆ln
∆ln
∆ln
∆ln
∆ln
∆ln
∆ln
∆ln
∆ln
∆ln
∆ln
∆ln
∆ln
∆ln
∆ln
∆ln
lv
∆lv
∆lv
∆lv
∆ln
∆ln
∆lv
∆lv
∆ln
∆ln
∆ln
∆ln
∆ln
∆ln
∆ln
∆ln
∆ln
∆ln
∆ln
∆ln

Description
Personal Income (AR, Bil. Chain 2000 $) (TCB)
Personal Income Less Transfer Payments (AR, Bil. Chain 2000 $) (TCB)
Real Consumption (AC) a0m224/gmdc (a0m224 is from TCB)
Manufacturing And Trade Sales (Mil. Chain 1996 $) (TCB)
Sales Of Retail Stores (Mil. Chain 2000 $) (TCB)
Industrial Production Index - Total Index
Industrial Production Index - Products, Total
Industrial Production Index - Final Products
Industrial Production Index - Consumer Goods
Industrial Production Index - Durable Consumer Goods
Industrial Production Index - Nondurable Consumer Goods
Industrial Production Index - Business Equipment
Industrial Production Index - Materials
Industrial Production Index - Durable Goods Materials
Industrial Production Index - Nondurable Goods Materials
Industrial Production Index - Manufacturing (Sic)
Industrial Production Index - Residential Utilities
Industrial Production Index - Fuels
Napm Production Index (Percent)
Capacity Utilization (Mfg) (TCB)
Index Of Help-Wanted Advertising In Newspapers (1967=100;Sa)
Employment: Ratio; Help-Wanted Ads:No. Unemployed Clf
Civilian Labor Force: Employed, Total (Thous.,Sa)
Civilian Labor Force: Employed, Nonagric.Industries (Thous.,Sa)
Unemployment Rate: All Workers, 16 Years & Over (%,Sa)
Unemploy.By Duration: Average(Mean)Duration In Weeks (Sa)
Unemploy.By Duration: Persons Unempl.Less Than 5 Wks (Thous.,Sa)
Unemploy.By Duration: Persons Unempl.5 To 14 Wks (Thous.,Sa)
Unemploy.By Duration: Persons Unempl.15 Wks + (Thous.,Sa)
Unemploy.By Duration: Persons Unempl.15 To 26 Wks (Thous.,Sa)
Unemploy.By Duration: Persons Unempl.27 Wks + (Thous,Sa)
Average Weekly Initial Claims, Unemploy. Insurance (Thous.) (TCB)
Employees On Nonfarm Payrolls: Total Private
Employees On Nonfarm Payrolls - Goods-Producing
Employees On Nonfarm Payrolls - Mining
Employees On Nonfarm Payrolls - Construction
Employees On Nonfarm Payrolls - Manufacturing
Employees On Nonfarm Payrolls - Durable Goods

44

Emp: nondbles
Emp: services
Emp: TTU
Emp: wholesale
Emp: retail
Emp: FIRE
Emp: Govt
Emp-hrs nonag
Avg hrs

ces033
ces046
ces048
ces049
ces053
ces088
ces140
a0m048
ces151

S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S

∆ln
∆ln
∆ln
∆ln
∆ln
∆ln
∆ln
∆ln
lv

Overtime: mfg

ces155

S

∆lv

Avg hrs: mfg
NAPM empl
Starts: nonfarm
Starts: NE
Starts: MW
Starts: South
Starts: West
BP: total
BP: NE
BP: MW
BP: South
BP: West
PMI
NAPM new ordrs
NAPM vendor del
NAPM Invent
Orders: cons gds
Orders: dble gds
Orders: cap gds
Unf orders: dble
M&T invent
M&T invent/sales
M1
M2

aom001
pmemp
hsfr
hsne
hsmw
hssou
hswst
hsbr
hsbne*
hsbmw*
hsbsou*
hsbwst*
pmi
pmno
pmdel
pmnv
a0m008
a0m007
a0m027
a1m092
a0m070
a0m077
fm1
fm2

S
S
S
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
F

lv
lv
ln
ln
ln
ln
ln
ln
ln
ln
ln
ln
lv
lv
lv
lv
∆ln
∆ln
∆ln
∆ln
∆ln
∆lv
2
∆ ln
2
∆ ln

M3
M2 (real)
MB
Reserves tot
Reserves nonbor
C&I loans
∆C&I loans
Cons credit
Inst cred/PI
S&P 500
S&P: indust
S&P div yield
S&P PE ratio
Fed Funds
Comm paper
3 mo T-bill
6 mo T-bill
1 yr T-bond
5 yr T-bond
10 yr T-bond
Aaa bond
Baa bond
CP-FF spread
3 mo-FF spread
6 mo-FF spread
1 yr-FF spread
5 yr-FF spread
10 yr-FF spread
Aaa-FF spread

fm3
fm2dq
fmfba
fmrra
fmrnba
fclnq
fclbmc
ccinrv
a0m095
fspcom
fspin
fsdxp
fspxe
fyff
cp90
fygm3
fygm6
fygt1
fygt5
fygt10
fyaaac
fybaac
scp90
sfygm3
sfygm6
sfygt1
sfygt5
sfygt10
sfyaaac

F
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
F

∆ ln
∆ln
2
∆ ln
2
∆ ln
2
∆ ln
2
∆ ln
lv
2
∆ ln
∆lv
∆ln
∆ln
∆lv
∆ln
∆lv
∆lv
∆lv
∆lv
∆lv
∆lv
∆lv
∆lv
∆lv
lv
lv
lv
lv
lv
lv
lv

2

Employees On Nonfarm Payrolls - Nondurable Goods
Employees On Nonfarm Payrolls - Service-Providing
Employees On Nonfarm Payrolls - Trade, Transportation, And Utilities
Employees On Nonfarm Payrolls - Wholesale Trade
Employees On Nonfarm Payrolls - Retail Trade
Employees On Nonfarm Payrolls - Financial Activities
Employees On Nonfarm Payrolls - Government
Employee Hours In Nonag. Establishments (AR, Bil. Hours) (TCB)
Avg Weekly Hrs of Prod or Nonsup Workers On Private Nonfarm Payrolls Goods-Producing
Avg Weekly Hrs of Prod or Nonsup Workers On Private Nonfarm Payrolls Mfg Overtime Hours
Average Weekly Hours, Mfg. (Hours) (TCB)
Napm Employment Index (Percent)
Housing Starts:Nonfarm(1947-58);Total Farm&Nonfarm(1959-)(Thous.,Saar)
Housing Starts:Northeast (Thous.U.)S.A.
Housing Starts:Midwest(Thous.U.)S.A.
Housing Starts:South (Thous.U.)S.A.
Housing Starts:West (Thous.U.)S.A.
Housing Authorized: Total New Priv Housing Units (Thous.,Saar)
Houses Authorized By Build. Permits:Northeast(Thou.U.)S.A
Houses Authorized By Build. Permits:Midwest(Thou.U.)S.A.
Houses Authorized By Build. Permits:South(Thou.U.)S.A.
Houses Authorized By Build. Permits:West(Thou.U.)S.A.
Purchasing Managers' Index (Sa)
Napm New Orders Index (Percent)
Napm Vendor Deliveries Index (Percent)
Napm Inventories Index (Percent)
Mfrs' New Orders, Consumer Goods And Materials (Bil. Chain 1982 $) (TCB)
Mfrs' New Orders, Durable Goods Industries (Bil. Chain 2000 $) (TCB)
Mfrs' New Orders, Nondefense Capital Goods (Mil. Chain 1982 $) (TCB)
Mfrs' Unfilled Orders, Durable Goods Indus. (Bil. Chain 2000 $) (TCB)
Manufacturing And Trade Inventories (Bil. Chain 2000 $) (TCB)
Ratio, Mfg. And Trade Inventories To Sales (Based On Chain 2000 $) (TCB)
Money Stock: M1(Curr,Trav.Cks,Dem Dep,Other Ck'able Dep)(Bil$,Sa)
Money Stock:M2(M1+O'nite Rps,Euro$,G/P&B/D Mmmfs&Sav&Sm Time
Dep(Bil$,Sa)
Money Stock: M3(M2+Lg Time Dep,Term Rp's&Inst Only Mmmfs)(Bil$,Sa)
Money Supply - M2 In 1996 Dollars (Bci)
Monetary Base, Adj For Reserve Requirement Changes(Mil$,Sa)
Depository Inst Reserves:Total, Adj For Reserve Req Chgs(Mil$,Sa)
Depository Inst Reserves:Nonborrowed,Adj Res Req Chgs(Mil$,Sa)
Commercial & Industrial Loans Oustanding In 1996 Dollars (Bci)
Wkly Rp Lg Com'l Banks:Net Change Com'l & Indus Loans(Bil$,Saar)
Consumer Credit Outstanding - Nonrevolving(G19)
Ratio, Consumer Installment Credit To Personal Income (Pct.) (TCB)
S&P's Common Stock Price Index: Composite (1941-43=10)
S&P's Common Stock Price Index: Industrials (1941-43=10)
S&P's Composite Common Stock: Dividend Yield (% Per Annum)
S&P's Composite Common Stock: Price-Earnings Ratio (%,Nsa)
Interest Rate: Federal Funds (Effective) (% Per Annum,Nsa)
Cmmercial Paper Rate (AC)
Interest Rate: U.S.Treasury Bills,Sec Mkt,3-Mo.(% Per Ann,Nsa)
Interest Rate: U.S.Treasury Bills,Sec Mkt,6-Mo.(% Per Ann,Nsa)
Interest Rate: U.S.Treasury Const Maturities,1-Yr.(% Per Ann,Nsa)
Interest Rate: U.S.Treasury Const Maturities,5-Yr.(% Per Ann,Nsa)
Interest Rate: U.S.Treasury Const Maturities,10-Yr.(% Per Ann,Nsa)
Bond Yield: Moody's Aaa Corporate (% Per Annum)
Bond Yield: Moody's Baa Corporate (% Per Annum)
cp90-fyff (AC)
fygm3-fyff (AC)
fygm6-fyff (AC)
fygt1-fyff (AC)
fygt5-fyff (AC)
fygt10-fyff (AC)
fyaaac-fyff (AC)

45

Baa-FF spread
Ex rate: avg
Ex rate: Switz
Ex rate: Japan
Ex rate: UK
EX rate: Canada
PPI: fin gds
PPI: cons gds
PPI: int mat’ls
PPI: crude mat’ls
Spot market price
Sens mat’ls price
NAPM com price
CPI-U: all
CPI-U: apparel
CPI-U: transp
CPI-U: medical
CPI-U: comm.
CPI-U: dbles
CPI-U: services
CPI-U: ex food
CPI-U: ex shelter
CPI-U: ex med
PCE defl
PCE defl: dlbes
PCE defl: nondble
PCE defl: service
AHE: goods

sfybaac
exrus
exrsw
exrjan
exruk
exrcan
pwfsa
pwfcsa
pwimsa
pwcmsa
psccom
psm99q
pmcp
punew
pu83
pu84
pu85
puc
pucd
pus
puxf
puxhs
puxm
gmdc
gmdcd
gmdcn
gmdcs
ces275

F
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S

lv
∆ln
∆ln
∆ln
∆ln
∆ln
2
∆ ln
2
∆ ln
2
∆ ln
2
∆ ln
2
∆ ln
2
∆ ln
lv
2
∆ ln
2
∆ ln
2
∆ ln
2
∆ ln
2
∆ ln
2
∆ ln
2
∆ ln
2
∆ ln
2
∆ ln
2
∆ ln
2
∆ ln
2
∆ ln
2
∆ ln
2
∆ ln
2
∆ ln

AHE: const

ces277

S

∆ ln

AHE: mfg

ces278

S

∆ ln

Consumer expect

hhsntn

F

∆lv

2

2

fybaac-fyff (AC)
United States;Effective Exchange Rate(Merm)(Index No.)
Foreign Exchange Rate: Switzerland (Swiss Franc Per U.S.$)
Foreign Exchange Rate: Japan (Yen Per U.S.$)
Foreign Exchange Rate: United Kingdom (Cents Per Pound)
Foreign Exchange Rate: Canada (Canadian $ Per U.S.$)
Producer Price Index: Finished Goods (82=100,Sa)
Producer Price Index: Finished Consumer Goods (82=100,Sa)
Producer Price Index:I ntermed Mat.Supplies & Components(82=100,Sa)
Producer Price Index: Crude Materials (82=100,Sa)
Spot market price index: bls & crb: all commodities(1967=100)
Index Of Sensitive Materials Prices (1990=100)(Bci-99a)
Napm Commodity Prices Index (Percent)
Cpi-U: All Items (82-84=100,Sa)
Cpi-U: Apparel & Upkeep (82-84=100,Sa)
Cpi-U: Transportation (82-84=100,Sa)
Cpi-U: Medical Care (82-84=100,Sa)
Cpi-U: Commodities (82-84=100,Sa)
Cpi-U: Durables (82-84=100,Sa)
Cpi-U: Services (82-84=100,Sa)
Cpi-U: All Items Less Food (82-84=100,Sa)
Cpi-U: All Items Less Shelter (82-84=100,Sa)
Cpi-U: All Items Less Midical Care (82-84=100,Sa)
Pce, Impl Pr Defl:Pce (1987=100)
Pce, Impl Pr Defl:Pce; Durables (1987=100)
Pce, Impl Pr Defl:Pce; Nondurables (1996=100)
Pce, Impl Pr Defl:Pce; Services (1987=100)
Avg Hourly Earnings of Prod or Nonsup Workers On Private Nonfarm
Payrolls - Goods-Producing
Avg Hourly Earnings of Prod or Nonsup Workers On Private Nonfarm
Payrolls - Construction
Avg Hourly Earnings of Prod or Nonsup Workers On Private Nonfarm
Payrolls - Manufacturing
U. Of Mich. Index Of Consumer Expectations(Bcd-83)

46

Appendix B: Monte Carlo Results on the Estimation of q

This Monte Carlo study examines the statistical performance of the new
estimator, described in Section 2.4, of the number of dynamic factors q. The values of T
and N are the same as those in the data (T = 528 [1960:1-2003:12], N = 132). The factor
loadings Λ were set at the fitted values from the data, and D(L) was set at the fitted value.
The static factors Ft were generated by AR(2) with parameter values set to fitted values
from data. The idiosyncratic disturbance follows the process,
vit = σ vi × [0.2×ei−1,t + (0.92)1/2eit + 0.2ei+1,t]
where
eit = σ it1/ 2 ait ; ait iid N(0,1); σit = 0.1 + 0.45×σit−1 + 0.45× eit2−1
where σ vi is the estimated standard deviation of vit in the data. (The parameters are such
that var(eit) = 1 in the simulations.) Note that the unconditional correlation between
adjacent uniquenesses is 0.4, slightly greater than the correlation of 0.3 in the data.
Ten cases were considered, in which the true number of factors was set to r =
1,…,10. The maximum number of dynamic factors considered in each case was 10. The
procedure of Section 2.4 was then applied, in brief: the static factors, filters, and factor
loadings were estimated; the Xt innovations were estimated; and the Bai-Ng (2002) ICp2
procedure was used to estimate q. The number of Monte Carlo replications was 500 (the
slow step in this process is the estimation of the filter D(L)).
The results are summarized in Table B.1. In all cases, the true number of factors
was correctly estimated with high probability.

47

Table B.1 Monte Carlo distribution of the estimated number of dynamic factors

Estimated
Number
of
Factors
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

1

2

3

1.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

0.02
0.98
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00
1.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

True Number of Factors
4
5
6
7
0.00
0.00
0.01
0.99
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.01
0.99
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

48

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.98
0.02
0.00
0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.97
0.03
0.00
0.00

8

9

10

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.96
0.04
0.00

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.88
0.12

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
1.00

References
Bai, J. (2003), “Inferential theory for factor models of large dimensions”, Econometrica
71:135-171.
Bai, J., and S. Ng (2002), “Determining the number of factors in approximate factor
models”, Econometrica 70:191-221.
Bai, J. and S. Ng (2005a), “Confidence intervals for diffusion index forecasts and
inference for factor-augmented regressions,” manuscript, University of Michigan.
Bai, J. and S. Ng (2005b), “Determining the number of primitive shocks in factor
models,” manuscript, University of Michigan.
Bernanke, B.S., and J. Boivin (2003), “Monetary policy in a data-rich environment”,
Journal of Monetary Economics 50:525-546.
Bernanke, B.S., J. Bovian and P. Eliasz (2005), “Measuring the effects of monetary
policy: a factor-augmented vector autoregressive (FAVAR) approach”, Quarterly
Journal of Economics 120:387-422.
Blanchard, O.J., and Quah, D. (1989), "Dynamic Effects of Aggregate Demand and
Supply Disturbances," American Economic Review 79: 655-673.
Blanchard, O.J., and M.W. Watson (1986), “Are Business Cycles All Alike?” in R.J.
Gordon (ed.), The American Business Cycle, University of Chicago Press:
Chicago.
Boivin, J. and M.P. Giannoni (2005), “DSGE Models in a Data-Rich Environment,”
manuscript, Columbia University.
Brillinger, D.R. (1964), “A frequency approach to the techniques of principal
components, factor analysis and canonical variates in the case of stationary time
series”, Invited Paper, Royal Statistical Society Conference, Cardiff Wales.
(Available at http://stat-www.berkeley.edu/users/brill/papers.html)
Brillinger, D.R. (1981), Time Series: Data Analysis and Theory, expanded edition
(Holden-Day, San Francisco).
Chamberlain, G., and M. Rothschild (1983), "Arbitrage factor structure, and meanvariance analysis of large asset markets", Econometrica 51:1281-1304.

49

Christiano, L.J., M. Eichenbaum, and C.L. Evans (1999), “Monetary policy shocks: what
have we learned and to what end?” ch. 2 in J.B. Taylor and M. Woodford (eds.),
The Handbook of Macroeconomics, v. 1a:65-148.
Doan, T., R.B. Litterman, and C.A. Sims (1984), “Forecasting and policy analysis using
realistic prior distributions,” Econometric Reviews 3:1-100.
Eichenbaum, M. and C,L. Evans (1995), “Some Empirical Evidence on the Effects of
Shocks to Monetary Policy on Exchange Rates,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
Vol. 110, No. 4, 975-1009.
Engle, R.F. and M.W. Watson (1981), “A one-factor multivariate time series model of
metropolitan wage rates,” Journal of the American Statistical Association,
76:774-781.
Favero, C.A., and M. Marcellino (2005), “Large datasets, small models and monetary
policy in Europe”, CLM Economia, 249-269.
Favero, C.A., M. Marcellino and F. Neglia (2002), “Principal components at work: the
empirical analysis of monetary policy with large datasets”, IGIER Working Paper
No. 223 (Bocconi University); forthcoming, Journal of Applied Econometrics.
Forni, M., M. Hallin, M. Lippi and L. Reichlin (2000), “The generalized factor model:
identification and estimation”, The Review of Economics and Statistics 82:540–
554.
Geweke, J. (1977), “The Dynamic Factor Analysis of Economic Time Series”, in: D.J.
Aigner and A.S. Goldberger, eds., Latent Variables in Socio-Economic Models,
(North-Holland, Amsterdam).
Giannone, D., L. Reichlin, and L. Sala (2002), “Tracking Greenspan: systematic and
unsystematic monetary policy revisted,” CEPR Working Paper #3550.
Giannoni, D., L. Reichlin and L. Sala (2004), “Monetary Policy in Real Time”,
forthcoming, NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 2004.
King, R., C. Plosser, J.H. Stock, and M.W. Watson (1991), “Stochastic Trends and
Economic Fluctuations,” American Economic Review, 81: 819-840.
Kose, M. Ayhan, Christopher Otrok, and Charles H. Whiteman (2003), “International
Business Cycles: World, Region, and Country-Specific Factors.” American
Economic Review 94:1216-1239.

50

Leeper, E.M., C.A. Sims, and T. Zha (1996), “What does monetary policy do?”
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity: 2, 1-63
Lippi, M. and L. Reichlin (1994), “VAR analysis, non fundamental representation,
Blaschke matrices,” Journal of Econometrics 63:307-325.
Litterman, R.B. (1986), “Forecasting with Bayesian vector autoregressions – five years of
experience,” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 4:25-38.
Quah, D., and T.J. Sargent (1993), “A Dynamic Index Model for Large Cross Sections”,
in: J.H. Stock and M.W. Watson, eds., Business Cycles, Indicators, and
Forecasting (University of Chicago Press for the NBER, Chicago) Ch. 7.
Sargent, T.J. (1989), “Two models of measurements and the investment accelerator”, The
Journal of Political Economy 97:251–287.
Sargent, T.J., and C.A. Sims (1977), "Business cycle modeling without pretending to
have too much a-priori economic theory", in: C. Sims et al., eds., New Methods in
Business Cycle Research (Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, Minneapolis).
Sims, C.A. (1980), “Macroeconomics and Reality,” Econometrica 48:1-48.
Sims, C.A. (1992), “Interpreting the macroeconomic time series facts: the effects of
monetary policy,” European Economic Review 36:975-1000.
Sims, C.A. (1993), “A nine-variable probabilistic macroeconomic forecasting model,” in:
J.H. Stock and M.W. Watson, eds., Business Cycles, Indicators, and Forecasting
(University of Chicago Press for the NBER, Chicago) Ch. 7:179-204.
Stock, J.H., and M.W. Watson (1989), "New indexes of coincident and leading economic
indicators", NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 351-393.
Stock, J.H., and M.W. Watson (1991), “A probability model of the coincident economic
indicators”, in: G. Moore and K. Lahiri, eds., The Leading Economic Indicators:
New Approaches and Forecasting Records (Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge) 63-90.
Stock, J.H., and M.W. Watson (1999), "Forecasting Inflation", Journal of Monetary
Economics 44:293-335.
Stock, J.H., and M.W. Watson (2002a), “Macroeconomic forecasting using diffusion
indexes”, Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 20:147-162.

51

Stock, J.H., and M.W. Watson (2002b), “Forecasting using principal components from a
large number of predictors”, Journal of the American Statistical Association
97:1167–1179.

52

Table 1
Estimation of the Number of Dynamic Factors q
#
dynamic
factors
(q)
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

r=1

r=2

r=3

r=4

r=5

r=6

r=7

r=8

r=9

r = 10

-0.577
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

-0.589
-0.637
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

-0.593
-0.641
-0.676
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

-0.604
-0.649
-0.683
-0.693
.
.
.
.
.
.

-0.615
-0.659
-0.694
-0.704
-0.712
.
.
.
.
.

-0.624
-0.664
-0.699
-0.708
-0.717
-0.719
.
.
.
.

-0.630
-0.668
-0.703
-0.713
-0.722
-0.723
-0.726
.
.
.

-0.637
-0.677
-0.710
-0.720
-0.729
-0.731
-0.734
-0.732
.
.

-0.642
-0.680
-0.714
-0.724
-0.733
-0.735
-0.738
-0.738
-0.734
.

-0.649
-0.686
-0.719
-0.730
-0.739
-0.741
-0.744
-0.743
-0.740
-0.736

Notes: Entries are the Bai-Ng (2002) ICp2 criterion, evaluated using the sample
covariance matrix of the estimated innovations in Xt from the restricted VAR implied by
the DFM. Each entry reports the ICp2 for the number of static factors r given in the
column heading and the number of dynamic factors q given in the row. Estimates of q
given r (the column maximum of ICp2) are presented in bold.

53

Table 2
Forecast Error Variance Decomposition with respect to Factor Innovations
A. Forecast Error Variance Decompositions, Averaged over All Series
Horizon

Idiosyncratic

6 month
12 month
24 month
48 month

0.49
0.45
0.44
0.43

Cumulative fraction of the variance explained by dynamic
factors 1, …, q:
q=1
q=2
q=3
q=4
q=5
q=6
q=7
0.28
0.36
0.40
0.44
0.47
0.49
0.51
0.33
0.40
0.45
0.47
0.51
0.53
0.55
0.35
0.42
0.46
0.49
0.52
0.54
0.56
0.36
0.43
0.47
0.50
0.53
0.55
0.57

Bus cycle
freqs

0.42

0.37

0.44

0.49

0.52

0.55

0.56

0.58

Notes: For the first four rows of the table, the entry in the first numeric column is the
fraction of the variance of the forecast error explained by the idiosyncratic disturbance νit.
The entries in the remaining columns are the cumulative fraction of the variance
explained by the dynamic innovations, up to and including the dynamic innovation in the
column heading. The final row presents analogous results for the business cycle bandpassed series. The seven dynamic factors were computed as described in Section 2.4.

54

Table 2 (Continued)
B. 24 Month Ahead Forecast Error Decompositions for Individual Series
Xi Series
PI
PI less transfers
Consumption
M&T sales
Retail sales
IP: total
IP: products
IP: final prod
IP: cons gds
IP: cons dble
IP:cons nondble
IP:bus eqpt
IP: matls
IP: dble mats
IP:nondble mats
IP: mfg
IP: res util
IP: fuels
NAPM prodn
Cap util
Hlp want. indx
Hlp want./emp
Emp CPS total
Emp CPSnonag
U: all
U: mean dur.
U < 5 wks
U 5-14 wks
U 15+ wks
U 15-26 wks
U 27+ wks
UI claims
Emp: total
Emp: gds prod
Emp: mining
Emp: const
Emp: mfg
Emp: dble gds
Emp: nondbles
Emp: services
Emp: TTU
Emp: wholesale
Emp: retail
Emp: FIRE
Emp: Govt
Emp-hrs nonag
Avg hrs

Idiosyncratic
0.53
0.41
0.32
0.12
0.29
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.07
0.12
0.38
0.15
0.10
0.11
0.24
0.02
0.78
0.88
0.35
0.03
0.30
0.18
0.12
0.12
0.08
0.31
0.49
0.22
0.06
0.15
0.15
0.22
0.04
0.04
0.94
0.24
0.07
0.10
0.19
0.20
0.15
0.23
0.26
0.79
0.90
0.11
0.33

Fraction of variance explained by dynamic factors 1, …, q:
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Total
0.01
0.01
0.00
0.03
0.02
0.00
0.47
0.40
0.00
0.01
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.00
0.59
0.55
0.01
0.00
0.04
0.01
0.01
0.68
0.48
0.14
0.05
0.01
0.00
0.01
0.00
0.00
0.88
0.81
0.01
0.00
0.05
0.00
0.02
0.71
0.47
0.15
0.01
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.00
0.01
0.98
0.93
0.01
0.00
0.02
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.97
0.92
0.01
0.00
0.04
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.96
0.89
0.01
0.01
0.06
0.04
0.03
0.02
0.93
0.76
0.01
0.00
0.05
0.06
0.00
0.04
0.88
0.73
0.01
0.01
0.07
0.02
0.09
0.00
0.62
0.44
0.01
0.00
0.01
0.00
0.00
0.01
0.85
0.82
0.01
0.00
0.01
0.03
0.00
0.01
0.90
0.85
0.00
0.00
0.01
0.03
0.00
0.02
0.89
0.82
0.01
0.01
0.00
0.01
0.00
0.00
0.76
0.74
0.01
0.00
0.01
0.01
0.00
0.01
0.98
0.94
0.00
0.01
0.01
0.04
0.00
0.04
0.22
0.12
0.03
0.00
0.07
0.00
0.01
0.00
0.00
0.12
0.03
0.00
0.02
0.02
0.00
0.01
0.65
0.56
0.00
0.00
0.01
0.03
0.00
0.01
0.97
0.91
0.02
0.00
0.02
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.70
0.65
0.01
0.00
0.01
0.01
0.00
0.01
0.82
0.77
0.01
0.00
0.01
0.06
0.01
0.03
0.88
0.76
0.01
0.00
0.01
0.07
0.00
0.03
0.88
0.76
0.01
0.00
0.00
0.06
0.00
0.00
0.92
0.85
0.01
0.01
0.00
0.01
0.06
0.69
0.31
0.30
0.01
0.00
0.01
0.00
0.00
0.02
0.51
0.46
0.00
0.00
0.01
0.04
0.00
0.00
0.78
0.74
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.02
0.94
0.70
0.21
0.01
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.02
0.85
0.67
0.16
0.00
0.01
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.85
0.58
0.23
0.03
0.01
0.01
0.02
0.00
0.01
0.78
0.71
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.01
0.00
0.01
0.96
0.94
0.01
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.96
0.94
0.03
0.01
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.02
0.06
0.00
0.00
0.01
0.01
0.02
0.06
0.76
0.66
0.01
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.93
0.92
0.01
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.01
0.90
0.88
0.01
0.00
0.00
0.02
0.00
0.01
0.81
0.78
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.01
0.00
0.06
0.80
0.73
0.00
0.00
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.03
0.85
0.79
0.01
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.00
0.01
0.77
0.72
0.00
0.00
0.01
0.00
0.01
0.07
0.74
0.65
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.03
0.21
0.18
0.00
0.01
0.01
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.07
0.10
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.01
0.00
0.03
0.89
0.84
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.00
0.01
0.67
0.62

55

Overtime: mfg
Avg hrs: mfg
NAPM empl
HStarts: Total
HStarts: ne
HStarts: MW
HStarts: South
HStarts: West
BP: total
BP: ne
BP: MW
BP: South
BP: West
PMI
NAPM ordrs
NAPM vend. del
NAPM Invent
Orders: con. gds
Orders: dble gds
Orders: cap gds
Unf orders: dble
MT invent
MT invent/sales
M1
M2
M3
M2 (real)
MB
Reserves tot
Reser. nonbor
C&I loans
C&I loans
Cons credit
Inst cred/PI
S&P 500
S&P: indust
S&P div yield
S&P PE ratio
FedFunds
Commpaper
3 mo T-bill
6 mo T-bill
1 yr T-bond
5 yr T-bond
10 yr T-bond
Aaabond
Baa bond
CP-FF spread
3 mo-FF spread
6 mo-FF spread
1 yr-FF spread
5 yr-FFspread
10yr-FF spread

0.36
0.30
0.28
0.57
0.80
0.72
0.64
0.79
0.63
0.71
0.64
0.74
0.80
0.29
0.37
0.65
0.61
0.12
0.16
0.46
0.52
0.43
0.16
0.80
0.65
0.85
0.52
0.90
0.93
0.83
0.87
0.92
0.78
0.80
0.22
0.22
0.26
0.47
0.29
0.21
0.21
0.14
0.10
0.13
0.18
0.24
0.29
0.71
0.57
0.58
0.63
0.51
0.45

0.61
0.66
0.66
0.21
0.08
0.17
0.18
0.10
0.12
0.19
0.12
0.05
0.06
0.58
0.47
0.31
0.36
0.80
0.78
0.49
0.41
0.39
0.55
0.06
0.12
0.03
0.07
0.01
0.01
0.04
0.10
0.04
0.16
0.06
0.06
0.06
0.02
0.02
0.48
0.42
0.39
0.40
0.38
0.21
0.12
0.06
0.02
0.11
0.24
0.24
0.18
0.34
0.40

0.01
0.01
0.02
0.10
0.03
0.04
0.07
0.05
0.13
0.04
0.10
0.09
0.10
0.03
0.04
0.01
0.01
0.02
0.02
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.12
0.03
0.04
0.01
0.16
0.01
0.02
0.00
0.00
0.01
0.01
0.02
0.42
0.40
0.46
0.29
0.10
0.19
0.16
0.18
0.20
0.22
0.24
0.33
0.35
0.03
0.02
0.01
0.01
0.02
0.03

56

0.00
0.01
0.00
0.03
0.01
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.05
0.02
0.07
0.03
0.01
0.00
0.01
0.00
0.00
0.01
0.01
0.00
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.09
0.00
0.00
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.00
0.00
0.04
0.03
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.09
0.07
0.08
0.10
0.09
0.08
0.08
0.10
0.01
0.01
0.00
0.00
0.01
0.02

0.00
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.01
0.01
0.00
0.01
0.01
0.00
0.03
0.03
0.01
0.01
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.02
0.00
0.01
0.03
0.01
0.06
0.00
0.00
0.03
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.14
0.16
0.11
0.08
0.03
0.08
0.17
0.18
0.21
0.31
0.31
0.22
0.16
0.02
0.05
0.05
0.06
0.01
0.00

0.01
0.01
0.00
0.04
0.03
0.01
0.05
0.01
0.06
0.03
0.03
0.08
0.02
0.03
0.05
0.01
0.01
0.02
0.00
0.02
0.01
0.11
0.13
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.08
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.02
0.03
0.01
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.04
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.10
0.11
0.11
0.11
0.09
0.07

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.02
0.02
0.03
0.01
0.00
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.01
0.00
0.01
0.00
0.00
0.09
0.14
0.09
0.10
0.07
0.03
0.05
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.03
0.12
0.11
0.09
0.07
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.00
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.01
0.01
0.02

0.01
0.00
0.02
0.01
0.03
0.01
0.00
0.01
0.00
0.01
0.01
0.00
0.00
0.03
0.03
0.02
0.00
0.02
0.03
0.01
0.04
0.00
0.01
0.00
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.00
0.00
0.02
0.00
0.00
0.03
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.01
0.01
0.00
0.00
0.00

0.64
0.70
0.72
0.43
0.20
0.28
0.36
0.21
0.37
0.29
0.36
0.26
0.20
0.71
0.63
0.35
0.39
0.88
0.84
0.54
0.48
0.57
0.84
0.20
0.35
0.15
0.48
0.10
0.07
0.17
0.13
0.08
0.22
0.20
0.78
0.78
0.74
0.53
0.71
0.79
0.79
0.86
0.90
0.87
0.82
0.76
0.71
0.29
0.43
0.42
0.37
0.49
0.55

Aaa-FF spread
Baa-FF spread
Ex rate: avg
Ex rate: Switz
Ex rate: Japan
Ex rate: UK
EX rate: Canada
PPI: fin gds
PPI: cons gds
PPI: int mat’ls
PPI: crd mat’ls
Com. spot price
Sen mat’ls price
NAPM com prce
CPI-U: all
CPI-U: apparel
CPI-U: transp
CPI-U: medical
CPI-U: comm.
CPI-U: dbles
CPI-U: services
CPI-U: ex food
CPI-U: ex shltr
CPI-U: ex med
PCE Deflator
PCE D: dlbes
PCE D: nondble
PCE D: services
AHE: goods
AHE: const
AHE: mfg
Cons. expect

0.40
0.35
0.27
0.40
0.55
0.53
0.77
0.56
0.56
0.54
0.77
0.78
0.75
0.56
0.23
0.88
0.44
0.96
0.21
0.90
0.81
0.40
0.23
0.24
0.34
0.91
0.24
0.96
0.82
0.94
0.73
0.68

0.46
0.51
0.00
0.00
0.02
0.00
0.00
0.05
0.03
0.18
0.02
0.10
0.11
0.32
0.09
0.04
0.02
0.02
0.05
0.01
0.12
0.09
0.05
0.09
0.05
0.03
0.05
0.00
0.04
0.01
0.07
0.03

0.03
0.03
0.04
0.01
0.02
0.01
0.07
0.12
0.10
0.07
0.04
0.01
0.03
0.05
0.28
0.03
0.16
0.00
0.25
0.07
0.04
0.24
0.25
0.26
0.19
0.04
0.22
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.02
0.11

0.03
0.03
0.11
0.05
0.09
0.06
0.03
0.23
0.27
0.18
0.16
0.02
0.02
0.04
0.37
0.04
0.36
0.00
0.45
0.01
0.01
0.25
0.43
0.38
0.37
0.01
0.46
0.02
0.00
0.01
0.00
0.01

0.01
0.01
0.00
0.02
0.00
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.01
0.04
0.06
0.01
0.02
0.00
0.01
0.01
0.02
0.01
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.02
0.04
0.02
0.02
0.01
0.00
0.00
0.01
0.06

0.06
0.05
0.11
0.11
0.05
0.07
0.07
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.02
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.01
0.01
0.02
0.04

0.02
0.02
0.18
0.20
0.12
0.12
0.00
0.01
0.01
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.01
0.01
0.00
0.01
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.01
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.01
0.00
0.05

0.00
0.00
0.28
0.19
0.15
0.22
0.06
0.00
0.01
0.00
0.01
0.03
0.01
0.00
0.01
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.01
0.00
0.00
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.00
0.00
0.01
0.00
0.11
0.02
0.16
0.02

0.60
0.65
0.73
0.60
0.45
0.47
0.23
0.44
0.44
0.46
0.23
0.22
0.25
0.44
0.77
0.12
0.56
0.04
0.79
0.10
0.19
0.60
0.77
0.76
0.66
0.09
0.76
0.04
0.18
0.06
0.27
0.32

Notes: Entries are the marginal contribution of each column variable to the 24-month
ahead forecast error variance decomposition of the row variable. Marginal contributions
of individual factors that exceed 0.10 appear in bold.

57

Table 3
Percentiles of p-values and Marginal R2 from X → F Granger Causality Tests
Series
p-value
Marginal R2

0.010
0.000
0.002

0.050
0.001
0.003

0.100
0.004
0.004

0.250
0.057
0.007

Percentile
0.500 0.750
0.252 0.555
0.012 0.018

0.900
0.833
0.028

0.950
0.908
0.036

0.990
0.981
0.050

Notes: The table summarizes results from 1188 Granger-causality tests for each of the
132 X variables as a potential predictor for each of the 9 static factors. The first row of
the table shows the percentiles of the 1188 p-values for the Granger-causality tests. The
final row shows the percentiles for the marginal R2 associated with including lags of Xj in
the forecasting equation for Fk.

58

Table 4
Percentiles for p-values and Marginal R2 from Excluding Xj from Xi Equation

Specifications:
(a) Xit = ΛiΦ(L)Xit–1 + βij(L)Xjt–1 + εt
(b) Xit = ΛiΦ(L)Ft–1 + δi(L)Xit–1 + βij(L)Xjt–1 + εt
(c) Xit = δ i j ( L) Xit + βij(L)Xjt + ν itj
(d) Xit = Λ ij Ft + δ i j ( L) Xit + βij(L)Xjt + ν itj
(e) Xit = ΛiFt + δi(L) Xit + vit
Percentile
0.010 0.050 0.100 0.250 0.500 0.750 0.900 0.950
(i) P-values for testing δij(L) = 0 in specification:
(a)
0.000 0.000 0.000 0.005 0.084 0.364 0.682 0.820
(b)
0.000 0.004 0.017 0.093 0.306 0.603 0.825 0.910
(c)
0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.028 0.247 0.597 0.763
(d)
0.000 0.000 0.001 0.028 0.195 0.497 0.756 0.862
(ii) Marginal R-Squared associated with relaxing constraint that βijk = 0 in
specification:
(a)
0.001 0.002 0.002 0.006 0.013 0.026 0.049 0.069
(b)
0.000 0.001 0.001 0.003 0.007 0.013 0.020 0.026
(c)
0.001 0.002 0.004 0.008 0.018 0.043 0.098 0.163
(d)
0.000 0.001 0.001 0.003 0.005 0.010 0.018 0.027
(ii) Hausman test for λ in specifications (d) versus (e)
0.000 0.003 0.063 0.413 0.780 0.937 0.983 0.992

0.990

0.964
0.980
0.946
0.967

0.120
0.041
0.420
0.088
0.999

Notes: The first two panels of the table summarize results from 17,292
heteroskedasticity-robust exclusion tests for each of the X variables as a potential
predictor of all of the other X variables. The first panel shows the percentiles of the
17,292 p-values for the exclusion tests. The first row of this panel shows results for
specification (a), the next row for specification (b), and so forth. The second panel shows
the percentiles for the marginal R2 associated with including Xj in the equation for Xi for
each of the specifications. All lag polynomials have six lags. The final panel of the table
shows the percentiles for the 17,292 p-values for the Hausman test of equality of Λi and
Λ ij in specifications (d) and (e).

59

Table 5
Estimation of the Number of Dynamic Factors qS among the Slow-Moving Variables
#
dynamic
factors
(q)
1.00
2.00
3.00
4.00
5.00
6.00
7.00
8.00
9.00
10.0

r=1

r=2

r=3

r=4

r=5

r=6

r=7

r=8

r=9

r = 10

-0.555
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

-0.567
-0.625
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

-0.572
-0.630
-0.641
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

-0.580
-0.639
-0.649
-0.651
.
.
.
.
.
.

-0.592
-0.652
-0.666
-0.669
-0.667
.
.
.
.
.

-0.598
-0.658
-0.673
-0.676
-0.674
-0.670
.
.
.
.

-0.602
-0.662
-0.677
-0.681
-0.679
-0.675
-0.672
.
.
.

-0.608
-0.668
-0.683
-0.686
-0.685
-0.681
-0.677
-0.667
.
.

-0.612
-0.671
-0.686
-0.691
-0.690
-0.686
-0.683
-0.673
-0.659
.

-0.620
-0.678
-0.692
-0.698
-0.697
-0.693
-0.690
-0.680
-0.666
-0.654

Notes: Entries are the Bai-Ng (2002) ICp2 information criterion, computed using only the
slow-moving variables. The estimates are based on the filtered data with 6 lags for D(L)
and a VAR(1) for Ft. See the notes to Table 1.

60

Table 6
Summary of Results from BBE SFAVAR Model
Variable

Federal Funds Rate
PI
PI less transfers
Consumption
M&T sales
Retail sales
IP: total
IP: products
IP: final prod
IP: cons gds
IP: cons dble
IP: cons nondble
IP: bus eqpt
IP: matls
IP: dble mats
IP: nondble mats
IP: mfg
IP: res util
IP: fuels
NAPM prodn
Cap util
Help wanted indx
Help wanted/emp
Emp CPS total
Emp CPS nonag
U: all
U: mean duration
U < 5 wks
U 5-14 wks
U 15+ wks
U 15-26 wks
U 27+ wks
UI claims
Emp: total
Emp: gds prod
Emp: mining
Emp: const
Emp: mfg
Emp: dble gds
Emp: nondbles
Emp: services
Emp: TTU
Emp: wholesale
Emp: retail
Emp: FIRE
Emp: Govt
Emp-hrs nonag
Avg hrs
Overtime: mfg
Avg hrs: mfg
NAPM empl
CPI-U: all
CPI-U: apparel
CPI-U: transp

Impulse response to
Fed Funds shock at horizon:

Percentage of variance
explained by Fed Funds shock
at horizon:

0
1.0

6
0.8

12
0.8

24
0.7

36
0.7

0.2
0.2
-0.1
-0.4
-0.3
0.0
-0.1
-0.1
-0.3
-0.5
-0.1
-0.1
0.1
0.0
0.1
-0.1
0.9
-0.9
2.5
-0.1
1.0
0.0
0.1
0.1
-0.1
0.1
-3.0
0.3
1.2
1.7
0.5
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
-0.2
0.1
0.1
0.0
0.0
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.0
0.0
-0.3
-0.1
0.0
-0.1
2.2
0.2
0.4
-0.9

0.0
0.0
-0.8
-1.7
-1.6
-0.6
-0.6
-0.5
-0.8
-2.0
-0.3
-0.5
-0.7
-1.2
-0.6
-0.8
0.6
-1.0
-2.2
-0.7
-2.4
-0.1
-0.1
-0.1
0.1
0.1
0.9
3.6
4.5
4.5
4.3
6.3
-0.2
-0.3
0.6
-0.9
-0.2
-0.2
-0.2
-0.1
-0.2
0.0
-0.2
0.0
0.3
-0.3
-0.1
0.0
-0.1
-1.1
0.0
0.1
-0.9

-0.1
-0.2
-0.8
-1.8
-1.6
-1.0
-0.9
-0.9
-0.9
-2.1
-0.3
-1.3
-1.2
-2.0
-1.0
-1.3
0.7
-1.0
-0.9
-1.1
-3.7
-0.1
-0.2
-0.2
0.2
0.4
1.2
4.8
8.7
7.6
9.4
6.7
-0.5
-0.8
0.4
-1.4
-0.6
-0.7
-0.5
-0.3
-0.4
-0.2
-0.4
-0.1
0.4
-0.5
-0.1
-0.1
-0.1
-0.9
-0.1
0.0
-0.8

-0.1
-0.3
-0.8
-1.8
-1.6
-1.1
-0.9
-0.9
-0.8
-2.0
-0.3
-1.7
-1.2
-2.0
-1.0
-1.3
0.8
-0.9
-0.1
-1.1
-4.0
-0.1
-0.3
-0.3
0.2
0.5
1.1
4.9
9.3
7.9
10.7
6.5
-0.6
-0.9
0.3
-1.5
-0.8
-1.0
-0.5
-0.4
-0.5
-0.4
-0.5
-0.2
0.4
-0.5
-0.1
-0.1
-0.1
-0.2
0.0
0.0
-0.8

-0.1
-0.3
-0.8
-1.8
-1.6
-1.1
-0.9
-0.9
-0.8
-2.0
-0.3
-1.7
-1.2
-2.0
-1.0
-1.3
0.8
-0.9
0.0
-1.1
-4.0
-0.1
-0.3
-0.3
0.2
0.5
1.1
4.9
9.3
7.9
10.7
6.5
-0.6
-0.9
0.3
-1.5
-0.8
-1.0
-0.5
-0.4
-0.5
-0.4
-0.5
-0.3
0.4
-0.5
-0.1
-0.1
-0.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
-0.8

0
6
14.9 16.1
Slow variables
0.7
0.2
0.6
0.2
0.2
6.3
0.6
4.7
0.3
7.7
0.0
0.4
0.0
0.4
0.1
0.4
0.4
0.9
0.2
0.9
0.1
0.3
0.0
0.2
0.0
0.3
0.0
0.3
0.1
0.3
0.0
0.5
0.4
0.9
0.8
1.6
1.8
2.0
0.1
0.6
0.8
1.3
0.2
2.1
1.1
0.3
0.9
0.3
1.4
0.4
0.3
0.3
1.6
0.8
0.0
0.8
0.3
0.7
0.2
0.7
0.0
0.4
0.0
2.5
0.0
0.4
0.0
0.2
0.0
0.3
0.3
1.0
0.1
0.2
0.1
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.0
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.6
0.2
0.6
0.3
0.0
0.0
0.0
1.2
1.0
0.6
1.1
1.2
0.1
0.4
0.5
0.8
2.5
1.2
0.0
0.9
0.0
0.2
0.1
0.4

61

Test of overidentifying
restriction: p-value

Unrestricted
model
fraction of
innovation
variance
explained by

12
10.4

24
7.2

36
6.1

ζR&ζF

ζR

ζF

ζS

ζF

.

.

.

0.090

0.000

0.1
0.2
8.1
6.5
9.9
1.0
1.1
1.0
1.7
1.8
0.6
0.5
0.9
1.0
0.9
1.3
0.9
1.9
2.7
1.4
2.4
3.4
0.7
0.6
1.1
0.6
0.8
1.8
1.8
1.7
1.2
3.9
1.3
0.9
0.3
2.1
0.5
0.4
0.9
0.9
1.0
0.2
0.8
0.1
1.5
1.2
1.7
0.6
1.3
1.5
0.7
0.2
0.4

0.1
0.3
9.1
7.4
11.0
1.5
1.6
1.4
2.1
2.2
0.8
1.0
1.3
1.4
1.3
1.8
1.0
2.1
2.7
2.0
3.2
4.4
1.0
0.9
1.7
1.3
0.7
2.5
2.6
2.5
2.1
4.6
2.1
1.5
0.2
2.9
1.0
0.8
1.6
1.6
1.8
0.6
1.4
0.3
1.5
1.8
2.1
0.7
1.7
1.7
0.4
0.1
0.4

0.1
0.3
9.4
7.7
11.5
1.6
1.7
1.5
2.2
2.3
0.9
1.2
1.4
1.5
1.4
1.9
1.0
2.2
2.7
2.1
3.4
4.6
1.1
1.0
1.8
1.6
0.7
2.7
2.8
2.7
2.3
4.8
2.3
1.7
0.2
3.1
1.2
0.9
1.7
1.9
2.0
0.8
1.6
0.4
1.5
2.0
2.2
0.8
1.8
1.7
0.3
0.1
0.4

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.002
0.000
0.010
0.090
0.000
0.038
0.000
0.000
0.183
0.000
0.001
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.001
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.052
0.109
0.430
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.109
0.013
0.000
0.000
0.075
0.001
0.332
0.020
0.044
0.036
0.001
0.000
0.014
0.116
0.139
0.000
0.087
0.294
0.003

0.024
0.033
0.156
0.001
0.059
0.796
0.243
0.079
0.000
0.025
0.194
0.532
0.500
0.795
0.493
0.189
0.065
0.030
0.000
0.092
0.013
0.179
0.001
0.001
0.000
0.042
0.000
0.729
0.024
0.144
0.616
0.966
0.545
0.928
0.929
0.038
0.304
0.188
0.642
0.604
0.085
0.025
0.028
0.791
0.731
0.006
0.041
0.299
0.183
0.000
0.626
0.632
0.380

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.008
0.000
0.004
0.047
0.000
0.022
0.000
0.000
0.750
0.000
0.002
0.000
0.000
0.009
0.032
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.405
0.196
0.267
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.058
0.154
0.000
0.000
0.037
0.000
0.855
0.158
0.197
0.014
0.000
0.000
0.005
0.086
0.067
0.000
0.037
0.214
0.001

0.233
0.252
0.260
0.518
0.349
0.887
0.842
0.814
0.749
0.628
0.298
0.439
0.596
0.578
0.266
0.879
0.202
0.063
0.174
0.848
0.150
0.219
0.331
0.322
0.424
0.281
0.109
0.162
0.693
0.337
0.418
0.300
0.705
0.645
0.017
0.356
0.538
0.494
0.227
0.334
0.384
0.175
0.330
0.029
0.015
0.420
0.289
0.179
0.290
0.198
0.733
0.074
0.543

0.018
0.017
0.117
0.063
0.124
0.006
0.017
0.023
0.034
0.006
0.095
0.010
0.003
0.023
0.010
0.005
0.032
0.001
0.076
0.003
0.080
0.118
0.008
0.006
0.028
0.021
0.033
0.036
0.001
0.003
0.003
0.065
0.010
0.025
0.010
0.004
0.029
0.034
0.009
0.019
0.000
0.005
0.003
0.015
0.060
0.041
0.016
0.004
0.009
0.063
0.005
0.005
0.010

CPI-U: medical
CPI-U: comm.
CPI-U: dbles
CPI-U: services
CPI-U: ex food
CPI-U: ex shelter
CPI-U: ex med
PCE defl
PCE defl: dlbes
PCE defl: nondble
PCE defl: services
AHE: goods
AHE: const
AHE: mfg

0.3
0.3
2.1
-0.2
0.3
0.1
0.0
-0.2
1.2
-0.4
-0.1
0.9
2.5
1.3

0.1
-0.2
0.6
-0.1
0.0
-0.2
-0.2
-0.2
0.5
-0.6
0.0
0.1
0.5
0.1

0.1
-0.3
0.8
0.0
0.0
-0.2
-0.1
-0.2
0.4
-0.6
0.0
0.1
0.4
0.1

0.1
-0.2
0.9
0.0
0.0
-0.2
-0.1
-0.2
0.4
-0.5
0.0
0.1
0.4
0.2

0.1
-0.2
0.9
0.0
0.0
-0.2
-0.1
-0.2
0.4
-0.5
0.0
0.1
0.4
0.2

HStarts: Total
HStarts: NE
HStarts: MW
HStarts: South
HStarts: West
BP: total
BP: NE
BP: MW
BP: South
BP: West
PMI
NAPM new ordrs
NAPM vendor del
NAPM Invent
Orders: cons gds
Orders: dble gds
Orders: cap gds
Unf orders: dble
M&T invent
M&T invent/sales
M1
M2
M3
M2 (real)
MB
Reserves tot
Reserves nonbor
C&I loans
C&I loans
Cons credit
Inst cred/PI
S&P 500
S&P: indust
S&P div yield
S&P PE ratio
Commpaper
3 mo T-bill
6 mo T-bill
1 yr T-bond
5 yr T-bond
10 yr T-bond
Aaabond
Baa bond
CP-FF spread
3 mo-FF spread
6 mo-FF spread
1 yr-FF spread
5 yr-FFspread
10yr-FF spread
Aaa-FF spread
Baa-FF spread

-3.0
-6.0
-3.8
-1.1
-3.8
-2.8
-2.8
-7.6
-0.5
-2.6
1.9
2.5
1.1
0.6
-0.4
-1.2
-2.1
-0.3
-0.1
0.0
3.2
0.7
0.9
0.1
2.5
14.7
-10.7
6.5
31.2
1.2
0.0
-5.5
-5.1
0.2
-5.6
1.5
1.4
1.5
1.6
1.3
1.1
0.8
0.7
0.5
0.3
0.4
0.6
0.2
0.0
-0.2
-0.3

-7.5
-5.5
-6.8
-6.3
-8.7
-8.8
-6.1
-10.9
-7.0
-9.0
-2.0
-2.5
-1.9
-0.7
-2.7
-3.7
-3.3
-2.4
0.2
0.0
-0.2
-0.5
-0.5
-0.7
0.3
2.2
-3.5
0.5
3.6
-1.2
-0.1
-11.3
-11.2
0.4
-13.2
1.3
1.2
1.3
1.5
1.4
1.2
1.1
1.3
0.2
0.1
0.1
0.1
-0.1
-0.2
-0.2
-0.2

-5.3
-4.4
-5.1
-4.6
-6.5
-6.3
-5.2
-8.2
-5.3
-6.7
-1.2
-1.0
-1.9
-0.9
-2.7
-4.0
-3.7
-4.0
-0.1
0.0
-0.7
-0.7
-0.5
-0.8
0.2
2.0
-4.0
-0.2
-0.1
-1.3
-0.2
-10.9
-10.8
0.4
-12.5
1.2
1.0
1.1
1.3
1.3
1.2
1.1
1.3
0.2
0.1
0.1
0.2
0.1
0.0
-0.1
-0.1

-2.9
-3.3
-2.9
-2.8
-4.0
-3.8
-3.9
-5.1
-3.8
-4.4
-0.3
-0.2
-0.4
-0.2
-2.6
-3.9
-3.7
-5.4
-0.3
0.0
-0.9
-0.8
-0.5
-0.9
0.1
2.1
-4.2
-0.2
-0.2
-1.3
-0.3
-10.7
-10.6
0.4
-12.0
1.2
1.0
1.1
1.3
1.3
1.2
1.1
1.3
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.2
0.1
0.0
0.0
0.0

-1.7
-2.5
-1.7
-1.8
-2.6
-2.5
-3.0
-3.4
-3.0
-3.1
-0.1
0.0
-0.1
0.0
-2.6
-3.9
-3.7
-5.8
-0.3
0.0
-0.9
-0.8
-0.5
-1.0
0.1
2.1
-4.2
-0.2
0.0
-1.3
-0.3
-10.7
-10.6
0.4
-12.0
1.2
1.0
1.1
1.3
1.3
1.2
1.1
1.3
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.0
0.0
0.0

0.1
0.1
0.0
0.5
1.6
2.8
0.0
0.5
0.0
0.8
0.0
0.6
0.0
0.8
0.0
0.5
0.6
0.8
0.0
0.5
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.2
0.6
0.6
0.4
0.4
Fast variables
0.6
6.2
0.5
1.7
0.3
2.7
0.1
3.5
0.4
4.5
0.8
8.5
0.2
2.7
2.0
9.2
0.0
3.7
0.3
5.7
2.6
1.8
1.7
2.6
0.5
0.6
0.2
0.2
0.1
3.3
0.6
3.8
0.4
1.5
0.7
3.4
0.8
0.3
0.3
6.3
1.5
4.8
0.3
5.6
0.4
2.5
0.2
3.0
1.3
1.4
1.1
1.3
0.5
1.7
0.7
0.5
1.1
1.0
0.1
0.7
0.4
2.4
13.4 25.4
10.9 23.2
15.6 28.4
6.5
16.7
40.9 34.7
45.1 32.5
59.6 38.7
69.4 43.1
71.8 48.0
67.4 48.5
62.9 52.5
58.7 55.5
10.0 10.3
3.2
1.8
4.6
2.4
7.7
4.3
0.7
1.1
0.0
2.1
0.8
3.6
1.9
4.0

62

0.1
0.4
2.8
0.4
0.6
0.4
0.6
0.4
0.8
0.6
0.1
0.2
0.6
0.3

0.1
0.3
2.8
0.2
0.4
0.3
0.4
0.4
0.7
0.6
0.1
0.2
0.6
0.3

0.1
0.3
2.8
0.2
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.4
0.6
0.6
0.1
0.2
0.6
0.2

0.238
0.000
0.040
0.882
0.637
0.000
0.026
0.000
0.008
0.000
0.664
0.000
0.098
0.000

0.511
0.500
0.008
0.778
0.440
0.854
0.910
0.516
0.026
0.325
0.771
0.298
0.076
0.147

0.148
0.000
0.776
0.718
0.462
0.000
0.016
0.000
0.038
0.000
0.454
0.000
0.197
0.000

0.010
0.771
0.054
0.049
0.548
0.749
0.715
0.603
0.029
0.747
0.033
0.084
0.045
0.153

0.005
0.014
0.001
0.002
0.002
0.015
0.006
0.027
0.010
0.014
0.005
0.052
0.006
0.056

7.8
2.1
3.6
4.6
5.6
10.0
3.6
10.8
4.4
6.6
2.6
3.1
1.3
0.6
4.7
5.4
2.5
5.0
0.1
8.4
3.9
4.3
2.0
2.3
1.0
1.2
1.5
0.3
0.9
1.0
3.5
26.9
24.8
29.0
16.6
25.4
24.3
29.2
33.3
41.7
44.0
48.9
53.5
10.4
1.5
2.1
3.9
0.7
1.2
2.1
2.3

8.4
2.4
4.0
4.9
6.0
10.3
4.1
11.4
4.3
6.7
2.7
3.2
1.6
0.8
5.5
6.3
3.3
6.2
0.2
9.3
2.9
3.1
1.5
1.6
0.7
1.0
1.3
0.2
0.8
1.2
4.5
27.5
25.4
28.6
15.4
19.9
19.5
23.8
27.7
38.1
41.7
46.9
52.2
10.7
1.5
2.0
3.8
0.6
0.7
1.3
1.5

8.5
2.5
4.1
5.0
6.1
10.4
4.2
11.6
4.3
6.7
2.7
3.2
1.6
0.8
5.7
6.5
3.6
6.6
0.2
9.6
2.4
2.7
1.3
1.3
0.5
0.9
1.2
0.2
0.8
1.3
4.9
27.6
25.6
28.4
14.9
18.1
17.8
21.9
25.8
36.9
41.0
46.2
51.8
10.8
1.5
2.0
3.8
0.5
0.6
1.1
1.3

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

0.201
0.130
0.124
0.145
0.025
0.131
0.111
0.158
0.073
0.028
0.194
0.169
0.048
0.036
0.478
0.374
0.084
0.087
0.086
0.500
0.042
0.095
0.039
0.324
0.009
0.023
0.035
0.031
0.023
0.075
0.108
0.073
0.072
0.063
0.018
0.066
0.049
0.046
0.034
0.006
0.010
0.017
0.021
0.026
0.040
0.044
0.037
0.077
0.090
0.101
0.117

0.027
0.003
0.012
0.029
0.040
0.035
0.004
0.022
0.038
0.032
0.116
0.109
0.028
0.012
0.069
0.094
0.027
0.052
0.050
0.129
0.121
0.180
0.095
0.113
0.091
0.028
0.063
0.004
0.002
0.008
0.050
0.666
0.684
0.551
0.340
0.001
0.039
0.038
0.045
0.059
0.060
0.039
0.023
0.002
0.060
0.045
0.042
0.021
0.014
0.005
0.003

Ex rate: avg
Ex rate: Switz
Ex rate: Japan
Ex rate: UK
EX rate: Canada
PPI: fin gds
PPI: cons gds
PPI: int mat’ls
PPI: crude mat’ls
Commod: spot price
Sens mat’ls price
NAPM com price
Consumer expect

3.8
5.6
4.6
-3.9
1.4
1.1
0.8
1.4
-5.4
5.0
9.4
1.2
1.1

6.8
8.7
7.8
-6.0
2.7
-0.6
-1.1
-1.7
-7.2
-4.3
-4.6
-1.1
-1.6

6.8
9.0
7.7
-6.0
2.8
-0.8
-1.2
-1.9
-7.3
-5.6
-4.4
-1.7
-1.0

6.8
9.0
7.6
-6.0
2.8
-0.8
-1.2
-1.8
-7.2
-6.1
-4.4
-0.7
-0.8

6.8
9.0
7.6
-6.0
2.8
-0.8
-1.2
-1.8
-7.2
-6.1
-4.4
-0.3
-0.8

28.2
20.9
17.2
14.5
7.7
0.2
0.1
0.2
0.1
0.2
1.4
0.3
0.3

33.7
21.5
19.3
15.2
13.8
0.4
0.5
0.8
0.9
1.6
2.9
0.4
0.7

34.5
21.5
20.4
15.3
14.2
0.6
0.8
1.4
1.3
1.9
2.8
0.6
0.7

35.1
21.8
21.1
15.3
14.3
0.8
1.1
1.9
1.8
2.2
2.7
0.8
0.5

35.2
21.9
21.2
15.3
14.4
0.9
1.3
2.1
2.0
2.3
2.6
0.8
0.4

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

0.007
0.008
0.007
0.007
0.029
0.425
0.445
0.341
0.184
0.010
0.031
0.113
0.082

Notes: Estimated using the structural FAVAR with Bernanke-Boivin-Eliasz (2005)
identification of the monetary policy shock. The model has 9 static factors, 7 dynamic
factors, 4 slow-moving dynamic factors, a VAR(2) specification for Ft, and 6 lags in
D(L). The first 6 numerical columns show the impulse responses and fraction of variance
explained by the Federal Funds shock (ζR) over different horizons. The p-value columns
test the hypothesis that ζR and ζF have no contemporaneous effect on each slow series;
that ζR has no contemporaneous effect; and that ζF has no contemporaneous effect,
respectively. The final three columns show the fraction of 1-month ahead forecast error
variance explained by ζS and ζF in a specification that allows all of the shocks to enter the
equation.

63

0.553
0.463
0.332
0.371
0.092
0.024
0.023
0.033
0.036
0.100
0.091
0.026
0.122

Figure 1
Business Cycle Components of Selected Series
and the Part Explained by the Common Dynamic Factors

64

Figure 1 (continued)

65

