NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TAXATION AND THE EVOLUTION OF AGGREGATE
CORPORATE OWNERSHIP CONCENTRATION
Mihir A. Desai
Dhammika Dharmapala
Winnie Fung
Working Paper 11469
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11469
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2005

We would like to thank Alan Auerbach, Steve Bond, Bill Gale, Bill Gentry, Jim Hines, Emmanuel Saez,
Richard Sansing, Gautam Tripathi, our discussants (Jeff Brown and Jeff Strand) and participants at the
OTPR/Burch Center conference on “Taxing Corporate Income in the 21st Century” for valuable comments
and suggestions on an earlier draft of this paper. Desai acknowledges the financial support of the Division
of Research of Harvard Business School. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by Mihir A. Desai, Dhammika Dharmapala, and Winnie Fung. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Taxation and the Evolution of Aggregate Corporate Ownership Concentration
Mihir A. Desai, Dhammika Dharmapala, and Winnie Fung
NBER Working Paper No. 11469
June 2005
JEL No. G30, H24
ABSTRACT
Legal rules, politics and behavioral factors have all been emphasized as explanatory factors in
analyses of the determinants of the concentration of corporate ownership and stock market
participation. An extension of standard tax clientele arguments demonstrates that changes in the
progressivity of taxes can also significantly influence patterns of equity ownership. A novel index
of the concentration of corporate ownership over the twentieth century in the U.S. provides the
opportunity to quantitatively test for the role of taxes in shaping ownership concentration. The index
of ownership concentration is characterized by considerable time series variation, with significant
diffusion of ownership in the post WWII era and reconcentration in the late 1990s. Analysis of this
index indicates that the progressivity of taxation significantly influences corporate ownership
concentration and equity market participation as predicted by the model. This evidence supports the
intuition of Berle and Means (1932) that taxation can significantly influence patterns of equity
ownership .
Mihir A. Desai
Graduate School of Business Administration
Harvard University
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
mdesai@hbs.edu
Dhammika Dharmapala
University of Connecticut
Department of Economics
341 Mansfield Road, Unit 1063
Storrs, CT 06269-1063
dhammika.dharmapala@uconn.edu

Winnie Fung
Kennedy School of Government
Harvard University
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
fung@fas.harvard.edu

1.

Introduction
The extent to which corporate ownership is widely dispersed is an important dimension

of an economy’s corporate governance environment. The mechanisms by which diffuse owners
police managers and the reasons why much of the world does not feature diffuse corporate
ownership are major themes in the corporate governance literature. The comparative strand of
this literature emphasizes legal origins as a critical determinant of the investor rights that
facilitate ownership diffusion (e.g. La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer and Vishny, 1998).
However, subsequent efforts to trace the time-series patterns of governance and ownership
concentration (e.g. Rajan and Zingales, 2003; Franks, Mayer and Rossi, 2003) have questioned
the singular role of legal investor protections, given the diffusion of ownership in the absence of
legal protections at various times in the twentieth century.1 The dispersion of corporate
ownership across households is also closely related to questions surrounding stock market
participation that have attracted considerable interest in the recent literature (e.g. VissingJorgensen, 2002; Griffin, Nardari and Stulz, 2004). As a result, the question of what facilitates
and propels ownership diffusion remains a central research question in corporate finance and
asset pricing.
The role of taxes in retarding or promoting ownership diffusion has largely gone
unexplored. This oversight is particularly surprising, as the seminal contribution that identified
the issue of the separation of ownership and control (Berle and Means, 1932) was motivated by
the observation that high tax rates during World War I marked a major turning point in this
separation in the U.S. Specifically, Warshow (1924) and Means (1930) analyze how these
highly progressive taxes were associated with a sharp increase in the diffusion of ownership.
This paper extends that line of reasoning to analyze how personal taxes have shaped the level of
ownership concentration over the rest of the twentieth century.
The precise mechanism by which individual income taxation might facilitate ownership
diffusion, as suggested originally in Means (1930), is illustrated with a simple extension to the
Miller (1977) model of financial equilibrium. In Miller’s model, firms endogenously issue both
equity and bonds, with the corporate tax preference for debt financing being offset by a personal
1

Roe (2002) also notes that ownership is not diffuse in countries (such as Sweden and Finland) where corporate law
and investor protections appear to be strong. He attributes this to the possibility that political forces would demand
anti-shareholder actions in the absence of large blockholders.

1

tax preference for equity among some investors. In equilibrium, each firm is indifferent about its
debt-equity ratio and investors sort into tax clienteles for stock and bonds. An extension of this
model shows that an increase in the progressivity of the tax schedule leads to an increase in the
fraction of investors holding equity, and thus to a decrease in the concentration of stock
ownership across investors. In essence, increased progressivity leads to a greater relative tax
penalty on corporate bonds. Firms respond with increased equity issuance, and the identity of the
marginal investor shifts to a lower income level, thereby generating a greater diffusion of equity
ownership.
To analyze this hypothesis empirically, this paper develops an index of corporate
ownership concentration at the economy-wide level, following the methodology used to track
income distribution pioneered by Kuznets (1953) and revived by Piketty and Saez (2003). Tax
return data is used to construct a Herfindahl index that summarizes the degree of concentration
of stock ownership across households over the twentieth century. This index is characterized by
significant time-series variation that undercuts the static view of the American example as one
where ownership has long been diffuse due to legal protections or political factors. It differs from
measures used in existing studies of corporate governance (which typically track the ownership
concentration of some sample of large public corporations across countries or through time) and
is especially suited to time-series analysis within countries and for understanding the
determinants of stock market participation across income groups. The advantages and
disadvantages of such an economy-wide measure relative to the firm-specific approach typically
employed are discussed in more detail below.
Time-series analysis of the determinants of this index reveals that increases in the
progressivity of individual income tax rates are associated with statistically significant and
economically meaningful increases in the diffusion of corporate ownership. Controlling for a
variety of factors, a one standard deviation change in the top statutory rate is associated with
close to a one standard deviation shift in the Herfindahl index. Analysis of the patterns of
corporate equity ownership by each quintile of the income distribution confirms the impact of tax
rates. This analysis can also be viewed as providing a new perspective on the determinants of
equity market participation, suggesting that the progressivity of the tax code may be a
contributing factor in stock market participation at lower income levels. This time series analysis
finds only weak evidence for the role of valuation levels on equity market participation.
2

The analysis finds support for the simple intuition that taxation can impact shareholding
patterns and, consequently, levels of ownership concentration and stock market participation.
Specifically, highly progressive rates shift the incentives for equity issuance and the distribution
of ownership shifts across the income distribution in response. The empirical analysis is robust
to controls for a variety of factors including changes in economic conditions, income
distribution, stock valuation, the fraction of households filing tax returns, and other tax rates.
Analysis of various subperiods confirms that these findings do not reflect changing patterns in
reporting or the increase in equity ownership through tax-advantaged accounts. While
suggesting that taxes are an underappreciated determinant of the level of corporate ownership
diffusion, the paper does not claim that taxation alone can explain variations across time and
countries in the level of ownership diffusion. The concluding section of the paper locates these
results within the broader literatures on the determinants of corporate governance and on the
rationales for tax progressivity, and suggests possible avenues for further research.
The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 discusses the links to the relevant
literatures. Section 3 develops a simple model of financial equilibrium and derives implications
for the effects of taxation on ownership concentration. Section 4 develops the measures of
ownership concentration and explains its relative merits and drawbacks. Section 5 presents the
results and Section 6 concludes with avenues for future research.
2.

Related Literature
This paper contributes to, and draws on, several distinct literatures. This section begins

by reviewing historical and qualitative assessments of the interactions between the evolution of
shareholding patterns and the income tax. Next, the more recent literature on the determinants of
corporate governance is reviewed, with a particular emphasis on political interpretations of
corporate governance institutions. Finally, the emerging literatures on the links between taxation
and governance and the reasons for limited equity market participation are also briefly reviewed.
2.1.

The Evolution of the U.S. Income Tax and of Stock Ownership Diffusion
Historical, political and early economic analysis of the evolution of the income

tax place much emphasis on the role of the income tax in determining corporate ownership
patterns. Means (1930), building on the work of Warshaw (1924), provides the classic statement
of this argument. Without modern statistical techniques, Means argues that the dramatic rise in
3

the diffusion of stock ownership from 1916 to 1921 was attributable to sharply progressive tax
changes. Specifically, following Warshaw, Means employs shareholder records for large, public
firms and data compiled from tax records to show that stock ownership diffused sharply during
this period, that other non-tax explanations for this diffusion are insufficient, and that wealthy
individuals shifted toward tax-advantaged assets including tax-exempt bonds, real estate and life
insurance. Means (p. 589) argues that in effect these tax changes made “the rich man not only a
poor market for stocks but an actual seller of stock and the man of moderate income an excellent
buyer.”
Berle and Means (1932) go on to note in their work that “the rise in popularity of
[customer and employee ownership] was undoubtedly due in a considerable measure to the
influence of Federal taxation. Both developed most vigorously during a period in which the
weight of the Federal surtaxes was such as to make the individual with a large income an
extremely poor market for corporate securities. The difficulty of obtaining new capital from the
usual sources was thus increased and a new market for corporate securities was sought in the
man of smaller income...” (p. 59). Such an analysis is an early statement of the tax clientele
argument that is extended in this paper. Means (1930, p. 592) concludes that the World War I
taxes “accelerated that separation of ownership and control which has become a marked feature
of our economy.”
In addition to the portfolio effects emphasized by economists studying the separation of
ownership and control, many early economic analyses of the income tax attributed the
introduction and spread of income taxation in the U.S. and abroad in part to a desire to
redistribute wealth and income.2 Historical and political investigations of the evolution of the
income tax mirror this emphasis on redistributional motives.3 Taken together, these various
qualitative assessments of the motivations and effects of income taxes indicate a plausible role
for income taxation in shaping ownership patterns of corporate stock.
2.2.

Determinants of Corporate Governance Arrangements
As discussed above, the arrangements that govern the relationship between shareholders

and managers have drawn increased attention. Morck and Steier (2005) provide a useful
2

See Seligman (1911), and Musgrave’s (1992) critique of Schumpeter’s views on the evolution of the income tax.
Ratner (1942) and Brownlee (1996) provide detailed discussions of the political motivations for various changes in
the tax code.

3

4

overview of the factors that account for noted cross-country differences – ideology, legal rules,
the role of trust in societies – as well as an overview of various country studies. While taxation
is seldom discussed in these studies, a few exceptions stand out. Morck, Percy, Tian and Yeung
(2004) study the evolution of ownership concentration in Canada and emphasize the role of
estate taxes in determining when families choose to disgorge large shareholdings. Morck (2004)
highlights the role of the double taxation of intercorporate dividends in the United States in
discouraging the formation of business groups through pyramidal ownership structures.
Of course, tax policy reflects political impulses; Roe (1994) argues that the particularly
diffuse nature of ownership in the U.S. was the result of political forces that prevented the
persistence of large shareholders. Specifically, Roe emphasizes antitrust rules and financial
regulation – particularly of banks and mutual funds – as being critical to shaping the diffusion of
ownership concentration. The potential role of taxes in shaping redistributions of corporate
ownership is related to Roe’s emphasis on politics in shaping corporate governance outcomes. It
should be noted, however, that several dramatic tax changes in the U.S. – including the one
emphasized by Berle and Means (1932) – were related to wartime efforts rather than conscious
politically-motivated changes in the tax code.
2.3.

Taxation and Corporate Governance
Studies of taxation and corporate governance have been converging in an emerging

literature. Desai, Dyck and Zingales (2004) note that the corporate tax makes the state the
largest minority shareholder in most corporations. As a consequence, the workings of the
corporate tax may well influence, and be influenced by, the relationship between managers and
outside shareholders. Strong complementarities may exist between tax avoidance and
managerial diversion because concealing income from the tax authorities through complex
transactions reduces the ability of shareholders to monitor manager behavior, thereby making
diversion less costly for managers. Such relationships appear to be operative based on evidence
from Russia and cross-country differences in the way in which corporate tax revenues respond to
corporate tax rate changes. Desai and Dharmapala (2005a, b) investigate the relevance of these
ideas in the U.S. setting by developing a conceptual framework for understanding how changes
in incentive compensation can change corporate tax avoidance activity, and how such activity is
valued by financial markets. Firm-level governance measures are found to be an important

5

determinant of the role of high-powered incentives in changing sheltering decisions and of how
markets value avoidance.
In addition to this work on the role of corporate taxation in influencing corporate
governance outcomes, dividend taxation has also been shown to interact with governance
arrangements. For example, Chetty and Saez (2004) and Brown, Liang and Weisbenner (2004)
both note that managerial compensation patterns were an important determinant of firm
responses to the 2003 dividend tax cut.4 Similarly, Perez-Gonzalez (2003) finds that payout
policy is significantly influenced by the presence of large individual shareholders. Each of these
papers indicates that tax incentives interact with ownership and governance institutions in
important ways.
2.4.

Stock market participation and portfolio allocations
Heterogeneity in stock market participation rates across the income distribution has

generated considerable interest among theorists and empirical researchers. For example,
Haliassos and Bertaut (1995) and Vissing-Jorgensen (2002) argue that transaction costs, either in
the form of explicit trading costs or informal psychic costs of information acquisition, can
explain why many households do not participate in equity markets.5 In one effort to explain these
patterns, Poterba (2001) develops an after-tax capital asset pricing model and argues that tax
rules are a potentially important determinant of household portfolio structure. Of particular note
are the effects of tax incentives in influencing the location of assets across taxable and
nontaxable accounts, as in Shoven and Sialm (2004) and Dammon, Spatt and Zhang (2004).
Their logic on the preferred habitat for assets is extended across the income distribution by the
analysis in this paper. In essence, the nature of tax progressivity, and changes to it, may
constitute an underappreciated reason for heterogeneity in portfolio allocations across income
classes and across time.
3.

Hypothesis Development

4

Chetty and Saez (2004) show that increases in dividend payments in response to the tax cut were most pronounced
among firms with high levels of managerial ownership, as well as those with high levels of institutional ownership.
Managers with large stock option holding, however, were less likely to respond to the tax change (Brown, Liang and
Weisbenner (2004)).
5
Curcuru, Heaton, Lucas and Moore (2004) review this and related literatures.

6

The basic hypothesis developed in this section is that increases in the progressivity of the
personal income tax system lead to a greater diffusion of stock ownership across the income
distribution. This idea is illustrated using a simple extension to the model of financial
equilibrium introduced in Miller (1977) (see also Auerbach (2002, pp. 1271-1273)). In Miller’s
model, firms endogenously issue both equity and bonds. The corporate tax system creates a
preference for debt financing, as interest payments are tax-deductible to the corporation while
payouts to equityholders are not. Miller (1977) argues that this is offset, for some investors, by a
personal tax preference for equity returns because of the lower personal tax rate on capital gains.
This insight leads to the characterization of an equilibrium in which each firm is indifferent
about its debt-equity ratio, and in which investors sort into clienteles for stocks and bonds on the
basis of their tax characteristics. In this section, Miller’s model is extended to consider the
consequences of an increase in the progressivity of the tax schedule for shareholding patterns.
Assume that firms face an exogenously fixed corporate tax rate τ є (0, 1), and can issue
two kinds of assets – bonds and stock. Firms pay interest on the bonds they issue, and pay out a
fraction d є (0, 1) of the returns to equityholders as dividends (with the remaining fraction (1 – d)
being received by stockholders in the form of capital gains). The dividend yield d is assumed to
be fixed, and identical for all firms. There is no uncertainty about the returns from either bonds
or equity. A continuum of investors exists, distinguished by income y є [0, ymax] ⊂ ℜ + . The
distribution of investors over the interval [0, ymax] is represented by the pdf f(y) and the
corresponding cdf F(y). The only restriction placed on this distribution is that the cdf F(y) is
strictly monotonically increasing (i.e. f(y) > 0) over [0, ymax]. Investors are restricted to holding
nonnegative amounts of the two kinds of assets – corporate bonds and equity – issued by firms.6
Investors are assumed to face a zero tax rate on capital gains; a positive tax rate on capital
gains would reduce the extent of the personal tax preference for equity, but (as long as capital

6

Tax-exempt assets (such as municipal bonds) could be introduced into the model without fundamentally affecting
the results. The restriction on short sales is standard in the tax clientele literature, in order to rule out cases where
investors can eliminate all taxes through arbitrage among assets with different tax characteristics. This also
implicitly rules out the “tax irrelevance” view that taxpayers are able to use financial engineering to eliminate taxes
on returns from equity. While doing so may be theoretically feasible, the empirical evidence suggests that taxes are
important. Even in the context of capital gains taxation (where opportunities for avoidance are particularly abundant
because of the realization doctrine), Auerbach, Burman and Siegel (2000) find that most realized capital gains are
not sheltered by losses. Even in their sample of high-income taxpayers (some of whom are “sophisticated” in the
sense that they trade in derivatives) “average effective tax rates on realized capital gains are very close to statutory
rates” (p. 378).

7

gains are tax-favored relative to dividends and interest) would not affect the basic conclusions.
An investor’s tax liability on dividend and interest income is a function of her total pretax
income y, and is determined by the tax schedule t(y). This is assumed to be continuous and
twice-differentiable over the interval (0, ymax], and to be strictly increasing and convex (t′(y) > 0
and t′′(y) > 0) over (0, ymax], with t(0) = t′(0) = 0. As the marginal tax rate t′(y) faced by an
individual with income y is strictly increasing in income, t(y) satisfies a stronger notion of
progressivity (sometimes termed “marginal rate progressivity”) than the standard definition
(which requires only that the average tax rate increases with income). This appears appropriate in
this context, as investors’ portfolio decisions are based on their marginal tax rates. In addition,
further restrictions on t(y) are imposed to ensure that the marginal tax rate is everywhere strictly
less than 100% (i.e. t′(ymax) < 1), and that it is sufficiently large to ensure the existence of an
equilibrium in which investors hold both types of assets (i.e. t′(ymax) >

τ
1 − d (1 − τ )

).

In Miller’s (1977) equilibrium, the relative pretax returns on bonds and stock adjust so
that the return to equity demanded by investors equals the after-tax interest rate (see also
Auerbach, 2002, p. 1271). Given this, a dollar of interest income yields an after-tax amount of
$(1 – t′(y)) to an investor with income y (noting that the interest is deductible to the firm), while a
dollar of equity returns leads to $d of dividends, and so yields an after-tax amount of $(1 – τ)(1 –
dt′(y)) (noting that the firm pays the corporate tax on the income paid out to the investor). Given
the assumptions regarding t(y) made above, an investor with income y = 0 strictly prefers interest
income to equity returns (as 1 > 1 – τ), while an investor with income y = ymax strictly prefers
equity to bonds (as (1 – τ)(1 – dt′(ymax)) > 1 – t′(ymax)). By the continuity of t′(y), there exists a
marginal investor with income y* who is indifferent between holding bonds and equity; y* is
defined by the expression:

1 − t ′( y*) = (1 − τ )(1 − dt ′( y*))

(1)

All other investors strictly prefer either bonds or stock. The degree of preference can be
characterized by the ratio of the after-personal-tax value of $1 of interest income to the afterpersonal-tax value of $1 of equity income, denoted by θ(y):

θ ( y) ≡

1 − t ′( y )
1 − dt ′( y )

8

(2)

As d < 1, θ(y) < 1 for all y > 0. The smaller is θ, the greater is the investor’s tax preference for
equity. It follows straightforwardly from Eq. (2) that θ′(y) < 0, so that the personal tax preference
for equity increases with income.
The corporate tax preference can be analogously represented by (1 – τ); the higher the
corporate tax rate, the greater the corporate tax preference for debt. The expressions (1 – τ) and
θ(y) are depicted graphically in Figure 1. As shown there, they characterize a financial
equilibrium with the following features (Miller, 1977; Auerbach, 2002). All investors with
incomes y < y* hold only debt, as the marginal personal tax rates they face are sufficiently low
that the personal tax preference for equity is outweighed by the corporate tax preference for debt.
In contrast, all investors with incomes y > y* face marginal personal tax rates that are
sufficiently high that the personal tax preference for equity outweighs the corporate tax
preference for debt, and so hold only equity. Firms issue a sufficient quantity of bonds to satisfy
the demand of investors with incomes y < y*, and a sufficient amount of equity to satisfy the
demand of investors with incomes y > y*. The fraction of investors holding equity is (1 – F(y*)).
The aggregate debt-equity ratio for the corporate sector is determined by investors’ demands for
the two types of assets, but each firm is indifferent about its capital structure.
The primary question of interest here is how this equilibrium changes in response to an
increase in the progressivity of the tax schedule t(y). Suppose that the original tax schedule t(y) is
replaced by:7
⎧t ( y )
t + ( y) = ⎨
⎩αt(y)

if y < y0 < y *

(3)

if y ≥ y0

where y0 is some arbitrary level of income chosen so that it is lower than the income of the
marginal investor y*, and where α > 1 (satisfying the constraint that the marginal tax rate is
everywhere below 100% requires that α is also sufficiently close to 1: α <

1
). The new tax
t ( y max )

schedule involves an increase in progressivity in a very general sense. The marginal tax rate
faced by higher-income investors increases (as αt′(y)> t′(y)), while the marginal rate for lowerincome investors stays constant. There is also an increase in the convexity of the tax function for

7

In the theoretical literature, the relative progressivity of different tax schedules is typically analyzed using the
concept of Lorenz dominance (e.g. Kakwani, 1977); however, a simple example comparing two different tax
schedules suffices to illustrate the basic point being made here.

9

higher-income investors (as αt′′(y)> t′′(y)), so that (over the range [y0, ymax]) there is an increase
in the rate at which the marginal tax rate increases with income.
Investors with incomes below y0 are unaffected by the new tax schedule. The personal tax
preference parameter (analogous to Eq. (2)) over [y0, ymax] is now:

θ + ( y) ≡

1 − αt ′( y )
1 − dαt ′( y )

(4)

For small changes in α, θ+ is decreasing in α. Thus, it follows that θ+(y0) < θ(y0) (as shown in
Figure 1), and that the original marginal investor now strictly prefers equity (i.e. θ+(y*) < θ(y*) =
1 – τ). It can also be shown that

∂ 2θ + ( y )
< 0 , so that over the range [y0, ymax] and for α
∂y∂α

sufficiently close to 1, θ+′(y) < θ′(y). Thus, the new tax preference parameter in Eq. (4) has a
more negative slope (i.e. falls more rapidly with income) than does θ, as illustrated in Figure 1.
In essence, all investors with incomes above y0 now have a stronger personal tax preference for
equity, and this preference now increases more rapidly with income. The increased progressivity
of the tax schedule thus entails a greater relative personal tax disadvantage for bonds.
The corporate tax preference (1 – τ) and the new personal tax preference θ+(y)
characterize a new financial equilibrium. If θ+(y0) > 1 – τ, then (as shown in Figure 1) because
θ+(y*) < (1 – τ) and θ+(y) is continuous over the interval (y0, y*], there exists a new marginal
investor with income y** є (y0, y*), defined by the expression:
1 − t + ' ( y * *) = (1 − τ )(1 − dt + ' ( y * *))

(5)

(i.e. θ+(y**) = 1 – τ, with y** < y*). In equilibrium, all investors with income y > y** hold
equity, and all investors with income y < y** hold bonds.
Recalling that the distribution of investors F(y) is strictly monotonically increasing, the
fraction of investors holding equity rises from (1 – F(y*)) (in the old equilibrium) to (1 – F(y**))
(in the new equilibrium). Thus, the increased progressivity of the tax schedule leads to an
increased diffusion of stock ownership, as some lower-income investors (those between y** and
y*) switch from bonds to equity. The aggregate debt-equity ratio falls as firms issue more equity
to satisfy the new demand from investors with incomes between y** and y* who enter the market
for corporate stock.

10

If θ+(y0) ≤ 1 – τ, the continuity argument above does not apply, but the basic conclusion
is unchanged:8 the fraction of investors holding equity increases following an increase in the
progressivity of the tax structure. Of course, this model is highly simplified. For example, it does
not incorporate any uncertainty about asset returns (Auerbach and King, 1983), nor does it allow
firms to respond to tax changes by adjusting their dividend yield. Nonetheless, it illustrates very
simply a basic intuition regarding tax progressivity and financial equilibrium that is likely to be
quite robust across a variety of settings in which investors form tax clienteles for different types
of assets.9
4.

The Index of Aggregate Ownership Concentration

4.1

Data Source
Individual income tax return data are compiled annually by the Statistics of Income

Division (SOI) of the Internal Revenue Service (IRS). They are available in two forms: detailed
statistical tables showing aggregated data by income brackets (for years 1916 to 2004)10 and
micro-files showing disaggregated data by individuals (for years 1960 to 1999).11 The IRS
processes more than 100 million tax returns each year, and the SOI uses about 200,000 returns to
compute its statistics. The 1916-2004 statistical tables include information on the number of tax
returns, the total amounts of income reported, and the income composition for a large number of
income brackets. More than forty income brackets are used, with income defined as adjusted
gross income less deficit (AGI). For each income bracket, the different sources of income are
Suppose that θ+(y0) = 1 – τ; then, the marginal investor has income y0, so that y** = y0 < y*. In equilibrium, all
investors with income y > y0 will hold equity, and all investors with income y < y0 will hold bonds, and the fraction
of investors holding equity rises from (1 – F(y*)) to (1 – F(y0)). If θ+(y0) < 1 – τ, there is no investor who is
indifferent between debt and equity (i.e. a marginal investor does not exist, as t+(y) has a discontinuity at y = y0).
However, all investors with income y ≥ y0 strictly prefer equity, and all investors with income y < y0 strictly prefer
bonds. As investors with income of precisely y** constitute a set of measure zero, the equilibrium does not differ in
any significant way from that when θ+(y0) = 1 – τ; the fraction of investors holding equity rises from (1 – F(y*)) to
(1 – F(y0)).
9
The previous version of this paper emphasized an alternative mechanism by which increased progressivity could
lead to increased diffusion. Specifically, the supply of securities was held fixed, and increased progressivity led to
wealth effects that generated similar results. In contrast, the model here emphasizes supply responses as the
mechanism for the diffusion.
10
In 1913, a constitutional amendment allowed the U.S. government to raise revenue by introducing an individual
income tax. Later, the Revenue Act of 1916 mandated the annual publication of statistics related to internal revenue
laws.
11
These micro-files are made publicly available after identifiable taxpayer information has been deleted to ensure
confidentiality. These 1960-1998 micro-files allow us to check that the method of interpolating data from the pre1960 statistical tables produces accurate results. Note that there are three years during the 1960-1999 period (1961,
1963, and 1965) for which micro-files are not available, so aggregated data in the statistical tables are used instead.
8

11

broken down and reported separately. In particular, the amount of dividend income is reported
for each income bracket.12 Dividend income is used to proxy for stock ownership, and the share
of dividends accruing to each income group is used to measure the distribution of stock
ownership.
Tax return data are in some respects more reliable and accurate than most other field
survey data, since there are penalties for misreporting tax returns (although there are also
incentives for under-reporting, unlike in most field surveys). They also have the advantage of
being available for many years, starting as early as 1916, enabling the analysis of the evolution
of ownership concentration over the past 80 years or more. Although tax laws have changed
over the years, it is quite feasible to track the changes and make necessary adjustments to
preserve year-to-year consistency. Moreover, tax return data cover almost the entire population,
and in particular, all middle and high income individuals. The data also over-sample high
income individuals, thus enabling the breakdown of the top income group into finer fractiles,
which is important because the top income group is very heterogeneous in terms of its income
composition, with capital income being a major source of difference (Piketty and Saez, 2003).
4.2.

Empirical Measures of Ownership Concentration Using Individual Tax Returns
The shares of total stocks owned by different income groups are first estimated and then

used to construct a Herfindahl index of ownership concentration. As there is no data on the
actual amount of stocks owned by individuals, dividend income reported in individual tax returns
is used as a proxy for stock ownership. This is similar to the empirical strategy used by Means
(1930) in his study of the diffusion of stock ownership in the 1920s.
The use of dividend shares as a proxy for stock ownership raises a number of issues.
First, dividend income will be an exact proxy for stock ownership only if all stocks pay out
dividends at the same rate. In practice, not all stocks pay out dividends, and not all stocks that
pay out dividends pay at the same rate. However, this study is only concerned with changes in
the proportions of total dividends received by different income groups. If one assumes that the
propensity of different income groups to invest in stocks with different dividend policies remains
relatively constant over time, then changes in dividend shares can be regarded as a reasonable
12

Dividends are defined by the IRS as “distributions of money, stock, or other property received by taxpayers from
domestic and foreign corporations, either directly or passed through estates, trusts, partnerships, or regulated
investment companies.”

12

proxy for changes in the distribution of stock ownership. It is possible that if firms lower their
dividend payments in response to higher taxes, this methodology may misattribute the decline in
dividend income to a fall in stock ownership. The empirical analysis described below controls
for changes in the average dividend yield and it is well-known that firms are extremely reluctant
to change their dividend policies (see Lintner (1956) and Brav et al., (2005)).
Second, recent studies documenting a decreasing propensity of firms to pay out dividends
(Fama and French, 2001) may raise concerns about the use of dividends to measure corporate
ownership concentration. However, total dividends, as reported on tax returns, increased by
more than threefold from $34 billion to $147 billion from 1916 to 2000 (in year 2000 dollars).
Average dividend income (total dividends received divided by total number of tax units) lay
mostly within the range of $600-$800 for the first half of the century, and then increased to
$800-$1,000 for the second half (in 2000 dollars), suggesting that dividends may provide a
reasonable way to proxy for corporate ownership over the century. An alternative series based
on estate tax returns is also investigated to confirm the reliability of the dividend-based measure
of ownership concentration.13
Finally, dividends received through pension plans and retirement saving accounts are not
reported as dividends on individual income tax returns. The amount of total dividends reported
on individual tax returns has always been less than the amount of dividends paid out by
corporations, as reported in National Income and Product Accounts (NIPA), and the gap between
the two has widened.14 Part of the gap may be explained by dividends paid out to foreigners who
are not required to file income tax returns, but the declining ratio in the 1980s and 1990s is due
mostly to the growth of funded pension plans and retirement saving accounts through which
individuals receive dividends that are never reported on income tax returns. For rich investors,
this additional source of dividends is likely to be very small relative to dividends directly
reported on their tax returns (i.e. dividends from directly owned stocks or dividends received

13

A related issue is that this measure relies on reported dividends received. As such, any observed changes in
ownership shares may merely reflect changes in the reporting of income. A failure to report dividends will have no
effect on this study if all income groups misreport by approximately the same proportion and this pattern is
relatively steady through time. The relevance of underreporting is investigated below by controlling for the share of
filers.
14
The ratio of total dividends reported on tax returns to personal dividends paid out by corporations as reported in
the NIPA has declined continuously over the period 1929 to 2000, starting from a level close to 90% in 1929,
declining slowly to 60% in 1988, and dropping much more rapidly to less than 40% in 2000.

13

through mutual funds). If the dividends received through pension plans and retirement saving
accounts are included in the estimates of dividend shares, then one should expect the middle
income group to experience a greater proportionate increase in dividend income, and therefore a
greater observed shift in stock ownership from the rich to the less-well-off. Investigating
subperiods where these effects are likely to be less relevant permits consideration of the
influence of tax-deferred accounts on the findings in this paper.
The total population is first divided into five income fractiles in such a manner that they
can be consistently compared over time.15 Following the notation used by Piketty and Saez
(2003), the income fractiles are denoted by P0-P20 (the bottom 20% income group, i.e. the
poorest 20% of the population), P20-P40 (the next 20%), P40-P60, P60-P80, and P80-P100 (the
top 20%, i.e. the richest 20% of the population).16 Top income fractiles are further divided into
P90-P100 (top 10%), P99-P100 (top 1%), P99.9-P100 (top 0.1%), and P99.99-P100 (top
0.01%).17 The share of dividend income is then calculated for the different income fractiles by
dividing the amount of dividend income accruing to different income fractiles by the total
amount of dividends reported. This is referred to as the “dividend share,” and the time series as
the “dividend series.” Table 1 shows the dividend share for the different income fractiles from
1916 to 2000.
Next, the dividend shares of the five income fractiles are used to construct a Herfindahl
index of concentration.18 The concentration index for year t, denoted by Ct, is defined as:
5

Ct = ∑ sit2

(6)

i =1

15

The term “income fractiles” is used in a sense distinct from the “income brackets” used by the IRS, which are
problematic in two ways. First, the income bracket of, say, $3,000-$4,000 in 1916 is very different from the $3,000$4,000 income bracket in 2000. Even if one adjusts for inflation, there is still a second problem: the income
brackets do not contain the same proportion of total population. In that case, a change in dividend income reported
by a particular income bracket may simply reflect a change in the number of individuals in that bracket and not a
change in dividend share. A better way to define income groups is to divide the total population into groups with
the same proportion of total population; these groups are referred to here as “income fractiles.”
16
Of course, the income thresholds for the different income fractiles vary over time. For example, in 2000, the
bottom 20% income group earns less than $17,000 a year. The top 20% income group has an income of more than
$70,000, while the top 10% has an income of more than $90,000.
17
Since the top income group holds a majority of total stocks in the economy (the top 10% holds almost 70% of
total stocks), considering only 0.01% of the total population still yields a significant share of stock ownership (for
example, in 2000, the top 0.01% holds 9% of total stocks, which is greater than the share of stocks held by the
bottom 40% income group).
18
Using decile rather than quintile dividend shares (i.e. dividing the total population into ten income fractiles) leads
to a concentration index that is highly consistent, with the same pattern of changes in ownership concentration.

14

where sit is the dividend share of income quintile i in year t. The value of Ct lies between 0.2 and
1. A value of 0.2 indicates that stock ownership is very dispersed across income groups, while a
value of 1 indicates that stock ownership is very concentrated among a particular income group.
Column (6) of Table 1 reports the Herfindahl index from 1916 to 2000, and Figure 2 plots the
index over this time period. This index provides a summary measure of the change in stock
ownership concentration over the past century.

4.3.

The Dynamics of Ownership Concentration
Figure 2 shows that stock ownership experienced dramatic deconcentration over the past

century, going from an index of 0.85 in the late 1910s to below 0.50 in the 1990s. This
deconcentration did not take place as a one-time phenomenon, nor was it a simple monotonic
decline over the century. One can demarcate the twentieth century into five periods with distinct
changes in ownership patterns.
First, the WWI and post-WWI period (1916-1927) featured a concentration and then
sudden diffusion of stock ownership. Stock ownership started out as very concentrated at the
beginning of the century, with an index of 0.75 in 1916. Ownership became even more
concentrated during WWI, with the index rising steadily to its peak of 0.85 in 1920. 1921 saw a
precipitous decline of the index to 0.70, and this sudden great dispersion of stock ownership is
consistent with the findings of Means (1930). Second, the period from 1928 to 1944, featured a
marked diffusion of stock ownership. After 1921, concentration remained relatively steady at
about 0.77 for several years, before dropping to below 0.70 in 1929. In the aftermath of the
Depression, the index fell to 0.62 by 1944. Third, the post-WWII period featured a
concentration of stock ownership with the concentration index jumping from 0.62 to 0.75 in a
relatively short period.19 Fourth, the 1950s to early 1990s constitute an extended period of
ownership diffusion. Gradual diffusion began in the 1950s and then accelerated through the
1980s and early 1990s. More precisely, the index declined from 0.75 in 1946 to 0.60 in 1980.
The 1980s and early 1990s saw a sharp deconcentration of stock ownership from 0.60 to 0.48.
Finally, the late 1990s featured a marked re-concentration of stock ownership. The index of
concentration of corporate ownership increased sharply back to 0.59 in the late 1990s.
19

It is possible that this may be due to the dramatic increase in the fraction of households filing tax returns during
the WWII era. The empirical analysis below controls for this, and also tests the robustness of the results to excluding
the period up to 1945.

15

4.4.

Alternative Measures Using Estate Tax Returns
To test how closely the dividend series approximate actual stockholding behavior, it is

possible to compare it to an “equity series” constructed using estate tax returns. Estate tax
returns data report the actual amount of equity held by the decedent filing estate tax return.
However, there is a major caveat to using estate tax returns data. Due to large tax exemption
levels, less than 5% of the overall U.S. decedent population is required to file estate tax returns.20
Therefore the construction of equity series using estate tax returns data is confined to the top 1%,
top 0.1%, and top 0.01% income fractiles. This is the reason why individual income tax returns
data, which covers the whole population, is chosen instead of estate tax returns data to construct
the time series of ownership concentration.
The equity series for these fractiles is constructed using the estate tax returns data
compiled by Kopczuk and Saez (2004).21 The amount of equity reported by an income fractile is
divided by the total amount of equity in the economy (as estimated by Kopczuk and Saez (2004))
in order to calculate the “equity share” for that income fractile. Figure 3 shows that for most of
the twentieth century the Herfindahl index of concentration based on dividend shares
corresponds closely to the equity series based on estate tax returns. This provides some support
for the claim that changes in dividend shares approximate changes in shares of stock ownership;
however, there are two main caveats.
First, further comparison of ownership shares for the same fractiles reveals that the
dividend series shows smaller fluctuations than the equity series, and the share of stocks implied
by the dividend series is systematically smaller than the actual share of stocks owned. This
evidence suggests that the very rich may prefer to hold stocks that do not pay out dividends.
Such stockholding preference may explain why the dividend series is systematically lower than
the equity series. However, if this stockholding preference of wealthy individuals does not
change over time, then even though the dividend series will underestimate the shares of total
stocks accruing to the high income group, the changes in dividend shares will still reflect
changes in the concentration of stock ownership.
20

For example, in 2000, the estate tax filing threshold was $675,000, and only 4.4% of the overall U.S. decedent
population was required to file estate tax returns.
21
Kopczuk and Saez (2004) use the estate multiplier method first developed by Mallet (1908) to estimate top wealth
shares of the living population over the past century. Their wealth composition series is used here to construct
shares of corporate stocks held by different income groups.

16

Second, the index based on dividend shares and the equity series appear to diverge after
about 1975. This does not necessarily indicate that the dividend series becomes a worse measure
after this time; indeed, it is possible that the problem lies with the estate tax measure. Equity held
at death may not accurately reflect equity ownership during one’s life, for example, because of
the tax incentives to donate appreciated stock late in life. Such issues may have been particularly
important when stocks experienced large capital gains in the 1990’s. Nonetheless, the empirical
analysis in Section 5 below tests for the robustness of the results when the final 25 years of the
sample period are omitted. Despite the divergence between the dividend and equity series over
that period, the results are highly consistent with those from the entire sample period.

4.5.

Comparisons with Measures Employed in Studies of Corporate Governance
While Berle and Means (1932) studied ownership diffusion through the use of both tax

return data and more granular work on the shareholders of large, public firms, the literature since
then has exclusively employed hand-collected data on the shareholders of the largest firms in
order to study corporate governance (e.g. La Porta et al. (1998), Franks, Mayer and Rossi (2003),
Becht and Delong (2004)). Such an approach has some obvious advantages relative to the use of
tax returns. Specifically, such approaches emphasize the experience of large, public firms where
external financing is most important, and also allow for identification of complex shareholding
arrangements. As such, such efforts may capture the central issue underlying agency theory – the
ability and incentives of shareholders to monitor managers – more precisely than can tax return
data.
Nonetheless, the relative absence of studies using tax return data is surprising. Even
though tax return data cannot provide detailed measures of ownership patterns for individual
firms, it can be used to shed light on wider issues of corporate governance, such as the role of
investor protections and other factors related to agency costs in shaping widespread stock
ownership. In addition, tax return data are particularly well-suited to analyzing the relationship
between aggregate patterns of corporate ownership and such factors as tax progressivity. Tax
return data allow for analysis of the economy as a whole, a depiction of the levels of
participation across separate income classes and can provide a summary measure of
concentration across time and countries.
5.

Empirical Specification and Results

17

5.1.

The Empirical Specification
The aim of the empirical analysis is to investigate the effects of changes over time in the

progressivity of personal income tax rates on changes in the concentration index described in
Section 4 above. The analysis seeks to capture changes in progressivity by estimating the effects
of changes in the top statutory personal tax rate, while controlling for changes in personal
income tax rates at lower levels of income. Specifically, these controls are the marginal rates
applicable at incomes of $50,000, $100,000, $250,000 and $500,000 (all in 1999 dollars), as
computed by Sialm (2003). Including these controls also (at least to some extent) holds the
average tax rate constant, thus isolating the portfolio effects analyzed in Section 3 from the
wealth effects of tax changes.
There are of course many factors other than personal tax rates that may influence patterns
of stock ownership. The distribution of ownership could, for instance, be affected by a growth in
stock market participation due to increased financial sophistication among those with lower
incomes. The literature on stock market participation has identified a number of determinants of
the propensity to own corporate equity. For example, Vissing-Jorgensen (2002) finds that
(nonfinancial) income positively affects the likelihood of participation. The effects of income are
controlled for here by including changes in real GDP per capita (obtained from the National
Income and Product Accounts (NIPA) produced by the Bureau of Economic Analysis). In
addition, Griffin, Nardari and Stulz (2004) find that participation tends to increase in response to
strong stock market performance. Thus, changes in the price-earnings (P/E) ratio (obtained from
an updated version of the dataset in Shiller (1989))22 are included as an additional control.
A number of other relevant controls are suggested by the model in Section 3. The
dividend yield was held fixed in the analysis there, but it is possible that firms may respond to
tax changes by adjusting their payout policies. Thus, the dividend yield – also calculated using
the updated version of Shiller’s (1989) dataset, and defined as D/P (the aggregate measure of
dividends, divided by the aggregate stock price measure, for a given year) – is included as a
control variable.23 The corporate tax rate is also held fixed in the model, but an exogenous

22

This is available at: http://www.econ.yale.edu/~shiller/data.htm; see also Shiller (2003).
Stock repurchases are not included in the model. However, estimating the model over the 1929-1975 period, and
hence excluding the years since the early 1980’s when repurchases have become important, leads to consistent
results (see below). Both P/E and D/P are expressed as ratios, and it is possible that their interpretation may be

23

18

increase in this rate would increase the corporate tax preference for debt and lead to an
equilibrium where a smaller fraction of investors hold equity. Thus, the top statutory corporate
tax rate is included as a control.24 The capital gains tax rate is normalized to zero in the model in
Section 3, but increases in this rate would reduce the personal tax preference for equity. Thus,
two measures of the capital gains tax rate – the nominal statutory rate, and the effective statutory
rate (which takes into account interactions with other elements of the tax code, such as the
phaseout of itemized deductions) – are included as controls.25
The Herfindahl index constructed in Section 4 classifies taxpayers into income fractiles
based on the distribution of income across taxpayers, rather than across the entire population (as
the incomes of nonfilers are unobservable when using tax return data). This is unlikely to be a
significant issue for the period since 1945 (over which the fraction of households filing returns
has been large and relatively stable). However, relatively few households filed income tax
returns in the period before WWII so the measure of stock ownership concentration may be
affected by changes in the composition of the population of taxpayers, especially around WWII
when the fraction of filers rose dramatically. This issue is addressed in two ways. First, a control
is included for the fraction of households filing an income tax return, as calculated by Piketty
and Saez (2003). Second, a test for robustness is carried out by omitting all years up to 1945
from the sample period.
The distribution of equity ownership may also be affected by general changes in wealth
and income distribution. Because of a substantial number of missing observations in the
measures of wealth distribution constructed by Kopczuk and Saez (2004) using estate tax return
data, the measures of top income shares constructed by Piketty and Saez (2003) are used as
controls for distribution. These series represent the shares of income received by the top 1%,
0.1% and 0.01% of the income distribution, where income is defined to include capital gains.26

confounded by unrelated changes in the denominator. However, using the unscaled stock price, dividend and
earnings series instead of these ratios leads to generally consistent results.
24
These rates are obtained from U.S. Department of the Treasury (2003, Table 1), and represent the statutory tax
rate on the top bracket of corporate income. Note that in some years, higher corporate tax rates may have applied
inframarginally.
25
These rates are from Burman (1999, Table 2-4, pp. 26-27), and apply to long-term gains. The rates used for 193437 are based on the 70% exclusion for very long-term capital gains.
26
The set of controls described above is not, of course, exhaustive. For example, Hong, Kubik and Stein (2004)
identify social interactions as an important factor in stock market participation decisions. Such variables, however,
are difficult to measure at the aggregate level. Other potentially important factors, such as the growth of financial

19

The empirical specification used to investigate the effects of changes in the top statutory
personal tax rate on changes in stock ownership distribution can be represented as follows:27

∆Ct = β0 + β1(∆TOPTAXt) + ∆Ttβ2 + ∆Ztβ3 + µt

(7)

where:

∆Ct = (Ct - Ct-1) is the first-differenced stock ownership concentration index (i.e. the change in
the concentration index from year (t - 1) to year t)

∆TOPTAXt is the first-differenced top statutory personal tax rate (i.e. the change in the rate from
year (t - 1) to year t)
∆Tt is a vector of changes in other personal tax rates (applicable to incomes of $50,000,
$100,000, $250,000 and $500,000, all in 1999 dollars,)
∆Zt is a vector of changes in the following control variables: real GDP per capita, the P/E ratio,
the dividend yield (D/P), the corporate tax rate, the nominal and effective capital gains tax rates,
the fraction of households filing income tax returns, and the income shares of the top 1%, 0.1%
and 0.01% of the population

µt is the error term (potentially subject to serial correlation and heteroskedasticity)
All variables are first-differenced in this specification, to avoid potential problems
associated with nonstationarity. In particular, unit root tests (such as the modified Dickey-Fuller
test proposed by Elliott, Rothenberg and Stock (1996)) fail to reject nonstationarity for the levels
of the variables in Eq. (7). However, these tests reject the hypothesis of a unit root for each of the
first-differenced variables. In addition (as discussed in Section 4 above), first-differencing
minimizes the measurement problems that may arise from the use of dividends as a proxy for
stock ownership.
A more detailed exploration of the changes in the patterns of stock ownership by different
income categories involves analyzing the effects of the top tax rate on the ownership shares of
particular subsets of the income distribution (in particular, the shares of each quintile of the
sophistication or the gradual diffusion of information about financial and tax innovations (e.g. tax-favored savings
vehicles), are likely to be reflected in an overall time trend. This would primarily affect the level of concentration,
rather than the changes that are examined here.
27
An alternative empirical specification that uses as its independent variable the difference between the top tax rate
and the other tax rates leads to generally consistent results.

20

income distribution, as reported in Table 1). A secondary aim of this analysis is to test the
hypothesis that higher rates of stock market participation are induced by strong market
performance (e.g. Griffin et al., 2004). To this end, the specification includes (in addition to the
top tax rate and the various controls discussed above) both contemporaneous and lagged changes
in the P/E ratio:
∆sit = β0 + β1(∆TOPTAXt) + ∆Ttβ2 + ∆Ztβ3 + β4(∆PEt-1) + µit

(8)

where
∆sit = (sit – si,t-1) is the first-differenced share of corporate equity held by individuals in quintile i
of the income distribution, where i = 1, 2, . . ., 5. The top quintile includes individuals between
the 80th and 100th percentiles; the next includes individuals between the 60th and 80th percentiles,
and the remaining quintiles are defined analogously
∆Tt and ∆Zt are defined as in Eq. (7)
∆PEt-1 is the lagged first-differenced price-earnings ratio
µit is the error term (potentially subject to serial correlation and heteroskedasticity)
While data on the concentration index Ct is available from 1916, GDP data is only
available from 1929.28 In addition, there are some missing observations for Ct in the 1960’s. In
total, there are 68 observations over the period 1929-2000 for which all the variables have nonmissing data; summary statistics calculated for this sample are reported in Table 2. However, all
the regressions reported below use first differences rather than levels. First-differencing
eliminates the first year of the sample, along with some additional years in the 1960’s around the
dates for which Ct is missing. This results in a sample of 63 years over the period 1930-2000 for
which the specifications above can be estimated.
5.2.

Results
The basic strategy for estimating Eq’s (7) and (8) involves using OLS on the first-

differenced variables, as reported in Tables 3 and 5. The procedure proposed by Newey and
West (1987) is used to estimate standard errors that are robust to heteroskedasticity and to
28

While this restriction reduces the sample size, it has some offsetting advantages. First, it eliminates the early
period, when the reported data are arguably least reliable. Second, it excludes the episode of the WWI surtax that
inspired the tax-based explanation of stock ownership dispersion developed by Means (1930); this enables a purely
“out-of-sample” test of Means’ hypothesis.

21

autocorrelation of unknown form. An alternative maximum-likelihood approach that assumes
first-order autocorrelation replicates this analysis in Table 4. Within each table, a base
specification is provided for the whole sample period, along with analyses of subperiods to
investigate the relevance of potentially confounding measurement issues.
The OLS results from the specification in Eq. (7) are presented in Column 1 of Table 3.29
These results indicate that increases in the top personal tax rate have a significant negative effect
on Ct, consistent with the hypothesis from Section 3. The estimated effect of the top tax rate on
stock ownership concentration is of substantial magnitude. The coefficient on the top tax rate in
Column 1 of Table 3 is approximately – 0.16, so that an increase in the top personal tax rate from
its level at the end of the sample period (39.6%) to the highest rate observed over that period
(94%) would result in a fall of about one standard deviation in the concentration index. Of
course, this would represent a very large change in tax policy, but it should be remembered that
there is a range of 70 percentage points (24% to 94%) for the top tax rate in the sample used in
the regression analysis (and a range of 87 percentage points for the entire 1916-2000 period).
Thus, while the estimates suggest a large role for nontax factors, they also indicate that tax policy
plays an important role in determining stock ownership concentration.
An alternative approach to estimating the model in Eq. (7) involves making more specific
assumptions about the behavior of the disturbance term, in particular that µt is characterized by
an AR(1) process:30

µt = ρµt-1 + εt

(9)

where ρ is the first-order autocorrelation parameter, and the error term is εt ~ N(0, σ2). Given the
normality of εt, it is possible to estimate ρ and the coefficients of Eq. (7) simultaneously using
maximum-likelihood estimation. These estimates are presented in Column 1 of Table 4. The
standard errors are calculated from the Hessian of the log-likelihood function. White’s (1980)
correction is used, so the standard errors are robust to symmetric non-normality of the error term

29

The reported results use an autocorrelation structure with one lag, but generally consistent results are obtained
using higher lags.
30
Note that Eq. (9) applies to the residuals of the specification in Eq. (7), where the variables are first-differenced. If
the model were to be specified in terms of levels, Eq. (9) entails that the residual in the levels equation would
essentially follow a random walk, modified by the autocorrelation process. The residual in year t would be a
weighted sum of the contemporaneous εt and all preceding ε’s. This would be consistent with the nonstationarity of
the Herfindahl index in levels (as suggested by the unit root tests discussed above).

22

εt and to heteroskedasticity of unknown form. The effect of the top statutory personal rate on
stock ownership is very similar in magnitude to that estimated in Table 3 using OLS, and is
unchanged in significance. The estimate of ρ indicates a significant degree of negative
autocorrelation (the sign is not surprising, as the data is first-differenced). The basic results are
also robust to alternative specifications of the behavior of the disturbance term, for instance to
adding a second-order autocorrelation term or a moving average term to Eq. (9). Thus, the
findings from this maximum-likelihood approach are highly consistent with the OLS results in
Table 3.
Amongst the other control variables, it is worth noting that the price-earnings ratio has a
negative effect in both Table 3 and Table 4, and is significant in the latter. This may provide
some support for the notion that strong stock market performance induces higher levels of
participation, thereby dispersing stock ownership.31 The main effect emphasized above is robust
to the inclusion of capital gains tax rates and a control for the response of firms through dividend
policy changes. These results rely on changes in statutory tax rates as a source of exogenous
variation, so it does not appear likely that the measured tax rates are endogenous with respect to
the amounts of income reported. Reverse causality (from ownership concentration, and more
generally from changes in the distribution of wealth, to tax rate changes) cannot be completely
ruled out. This would require, however, that decreased levels of ownership concentration lead to
higher tax rates on the wealthy. While it is possible that such a mechanism is operative, it seems
much more reasonable that political pressure for high top tax rates is likely to be greater when
ownership is more concentrated.
Given the reliance on tax return data, it is important to consider the potentially
confounding nature of changes in reporting behavior. The fraction of the population filing
income tax returns has a positive effect, which is significant in Table 4. It would appear that
increases in this fraction have a compositional effect, introducing into the observed population of
taxpayers new households that hold little if any equity. This makes equity ownership appear to
become more concentrated, as happens in the data around WWII (see Table 1). While the basic
results control for changes in the fraction of filers, an alternative test of robustness is to exclude
31

Of course, the result may also reflect reverse causality, with higher levels of participation leading buyers to bid up
the price of stocks. Adding the lagged change in the price-earnings ratio to the model (in order to capture lags in the
participation decision) does not significantly change any of the results, and the lagged term itself is insignificant.
The effect of the price-earnings ratio is discussed in more detail below in the context of the results from Eq. (8).

23

the period up to 1945, when the fraction of filers was much smaller than in the subsequent years.
In addition, this test addresses the concern that the negative relationship between tax
progressivity and ownership concentration may be driven by factors peculiar to the 1930’s. The
results for the 1946-2000 period are reported in Column 2 of Table 3 (using OLS) and Column 2
of Table 4 (using MLE). In Table 3, the coefficient of the top tax rate in Column 2 is virtually
identical in magnitude to that in Column 1; however (perhaps due to reduced sample size), the
standard error is much larger, and the effect is insignificant. In Table 4, on the other hand, the
effect in Column 2 is significant.32 The robustness of these results to controls for filing as well as
this additional analysis suggests that the basic results over the 1929-2000 period are not driven
by the increase in the fraction of the population filing tax returns during WWII, nor by
conditions specific to the 1930’s.
It was noted in Section 4 that the stock ownership concentration index closely tracks a
measure of equity ownership based on estate tax return data until about 1975; however, the two
measures diverge after that point. To test whether the results are driven by possible
mismeasurement of ownership over the period after 1975, these years are omitted from the
sample period. This exclusion also addresses two additional possibly confounding factors. Both
the growth of share repurchases since the early 1980’s (e.g. Dittmar, 2000) and the growth of
tax-favored investment accounts over the same period may affect the results by reducing the tax
burden on equity. The results for the 1929-1975 period are reported in Column 3 of Table 3
(using OLS) and Column 3 of Table 4 (using MLE). The results are highly robust, with the effect
of the top tax rate being negative and significant, and indeed are stronger than over the entire
1929-2000 period.
The results discussed so far show that taxes have a significant impact on the summary
measure of stock ownership concentration. However, this does not in itself shed much light on
which specific income groups change their holdings of corporate equity in response to tax
changes. Addressing this question involves estimating Eq. (8), the results from which (using
OLS with Newey-West standard errors) are shown in Table 5. The analysis focuses on quintiles
of the income distribution and the results reported in Columns 1-5 are ordered from the top to the
bottom of the income distribution. The results here are highly consistent with a tax-based
32

The magnitude is substantially larger than that in Column 1, but the small sample size makes it difficult to
conclude that the effect is necessarily larger over this period.

24

explanation. For the top quintile, there is a negative and significant effect of the top tax rate on
the share of equity ownership. In contrast, this effect is positive for all the other quintiles, and is
significant for the second and third quintiles. The effect is positive but insignificant for the fourth
quintile. Unsurprisingly, the ownership share of the lowest quintile is extremely noisy, and the
regressors are jointly insignificant.
The results from Eq. (8) can also be used to test the hypothesis that stronger stock market
performance leads (possibly with some lag) to increased rates of participation, and hence to
greater dispersion of ownership. The specification in Eq. (8) includes changes in both the current
and lagged P/E ratios as measures of stock market performance. Generally, the effects are
insignificant, and vary in sign. It is worth noting that the effects of the contemporaneous P/E
ratio on the shares of the top and second quintiles are negative and positive, respectively, and are
close to borderline significance. In addition, the positive effect of the lagged change in the P/E
ratio on the ownership share of the fourth quintile is of borderline significance. Combined with
the results for the P/E ratio in Table 4, this suggests a limited role for market performance and
valuation levels in determining participation.
6.

Conclusion
Changes in the progressivity of the U.S. tax system during the twentieth century appear to

have influenced aggregate stock ownership concentration and equity market participation. These
results do not appear to reflect a variety of potentially confounding measurement issues or other
economic mechanisms. The logic of Berle and Means (1932), as embodied in an extension of
Miller (1977), appears to help explain corporate ownership patterns throughout the century.
The finding that tax progressivity influences ownership concentration also links this
paper to the broader literature on the rationales for progressive taxes. Since Mirrlees (1971),
characterizations of optimal income tax schedules that take account of incentive effects on labor
supply generally find that the optimal income tax schedule is close to linear. Slemrod et al.
(1994) analyze a piecewise linear two-bracket tax structure, and find that, under fairly general
conditions, the marginal tax rate is lower in the segment of the tax schedule applicable at higher
incomes (although the optimal tax structure involves progressivity in terms of average tax rates).
Thus, Slemrod (2000, p. 11) concludes that: “In sum, simple models of optimal income taxation
do not necessarily point to sharply progressive tax structures, even if the objective function puts

25

relatively large weight on the welfare of less well-off individuals.” Further analyses could
integrate the influence of taxes on ownership concentration and equity market participation into
an optimal tax framework.
Because this study only analyzes data from one country, it is not necessarily possible to
extrapolate these findings to other contexts. In particular, progressive taxation should not be
considered a sufficient condition for corporate ownership diffusion. Rather, tax progressivity is
likely to interact with investor protections and other factors that affect agency costs. For instance,
a progressive tax structure alone is not likely to lead to diffuse ownership unless investor
protections are strong. Further analysis of time-series properties of ownership concentration in
other countries, along with cross-country studies, could usefully illuminate such links.
The links between taxation and ownership concentration open up several further lines of
inquiry. The analysis above has focused primarily on the aggregate time-series analysis of
changes in the summary measure of ownership concentration. It may be possible to shed more
light on the dynamics of the portfolio reallocations induced by tax changes by constructing a
synthetic panel of income fractiles or by examining specific tax reforms and their effects through
other data sources. This would enable a more precise specification of the tax characteristics of
each fractile in any given year, and reveal how each fractile’s ownership patterns change in
response to changes in the marginal tax rate that it faces. There are also a number of additional
controls – such as measures of financial sophistication and investor protections – that could be
incorporated into the analysis, especially if it were extended to a cross-country setting.

26

References
Auerbach, A. J. (2002) “Taxation and Corporate Financial Policy” in A. J. Auerbach and M.
Feldstein (eds.) Handbook of Public Economics, Vol. 3, Amsterdam: Elsevier, 12511292.
Auerbach, A. J., L. E. Burman and J. M. Siegel (2000) “Capital Gains Taxation and Tax
Avoidance: New Evidence from Panel Data” in J. Slemrod (ed.) Does Atlas Shrug? The
Economic Consequences of Taxing the Rich Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press,
355-388.
Auerbach, A. J. and M. A. King (1983) “Taxation, Portfolio Choice, and Debt-Equity Ratios: A
General Equilibrium Model” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 98, 587-609.
Becht, M. and B. Delong (2004) “Why Has There Been So Little Blockholding in the U.S.?”
Working Paper.
Berle, A. A., Jr., and G. C. Means (1932) The Modern Corporation and Private Property New
York: The Macmillan Company.
Brav, A., J. R. Graham, C. Harvey, and R. Michaely (2005) “Payout Policy in the 21st Century”
Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.
Brown, J. R., N. Liang and S. Weisbenner (2004) “Executive Financial Incentives and Payout
Policy: Firm Responses to the 2003 Dividend Tax Cut” NBER Working Paper #11002.
Brownlee, W. E. (1996) Federal Taxation in America: A Short History New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Burman, L. E. (1999) The Labyrinth of Capital Gains Tax Policy: A Guide for the Perplexed
Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press.
Chetty, R. and E. Saez (2004) “Dividend Taxes and Corporate Behavior: Evidence from the
2003 Dividend Tax Cut” NBER Working Paper #10841.
Curcuru, S., J. Heaton, D. Lucas and D. Moore (2004) “Heterogeneity and Portfolio Choice:
Theory and Evidence” Working Paper, Northwestern University.
Dammon, R. M., C. S. Spatt and H. H. Zhang (2004) “Optimal Asset Location and Allocation
with Taxable and Tax-Deferred Investing” Journal of Finance, 59, 999-1037.
Desai, M. A. and D. Dharmapala (2005a) “Corporate Tax Avoidance and High Powered
Incentives” Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.
Desai, M. A. and D. Dharmapala (2005b) “Corporate Tax Avoidance and Firm Value” NBER
Working Paper #11241.

28

Desai, M. A., A. Dyck, and L. Zingales (2004) “Theft and Taxation” NBER Working Paper
#10978.
Dittmar, A. K. (2000) “Why Do Firms Repurchase Stock?” Journal of Business, 73, 331-355.
Elliott, G., T. Rothenberg and J. H. Stock (1996) “Efficient Tests for an Autoregressive Unit
Root” Econometrica, 64, 813-836.
Fama, E. F. and K. R. French (2001) “Disappearing Dividends: Changing Firm Characteristics or
Lower Propensity to Pay?” Journal of Financial Economics, 60, 3-44.
Franks, J. R., C. Mayer and S. Rossi (2003) “Ownership: Evolution and Regulation” ECGI
Working Paper 09/2003.
Griffin, J. M., F. Nardari and R. M. Stulz (2004) “Stock Market Trading and Market Conditions”
NBER Working Paper #10719.
Haliassos, M. and C. Bertaut (1995) “Why Do So Few Hold Stocks?” Economic Journal, 105,
1110-1129.
Hong, H., J. D. Kubik and J. C. Stein (2004) “Social Interaction and Stock-Market Participation”
Journal of Finance, 59, 137-163.
Kakwani, N. C. (1977) “Applications of Lorenz Curves in Economic Analysis” Econometrica,
45, 719-727.
Kopczuk, W. and E. Saez (2004) “Top Wealth Shares in the United States, 1916-2000: Evidence
from Estate Tax Returns” National Tax Journal, 57, 445-487.
Kuznets, S. (1953) Shares of Upper Income Groups in Income and Savings New York: National
Bureau of Economic Research.
La Porta, R., F. Lopez-de-Silanes, A. Shleifer and R. W. Vishny (1998) “Law and Finance”
Journal of Political Economy, 106, 1113-1155.
Lintner, J. (1956) “Distribution of Incomes of Corporations among Dividends, Retained
Earnings, and Taxes” American Economic Review, 46, 97-113.
Mallet, B. (1908) “A Method of Estimating Capital Wealth from Estate Duty Statistics.” Journal
of the Royal Statistical Society, 71, 65-101.
Means, G. C. (1930) “The Diffusion of Stock Ownership in the United States” Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 44, 561-600.
Miller, M. H. (1977) “Debt and Taxes” Journal of Finance, 32, 261-275.

29

Mirrlees, J. A. (1971) “An Exploration in the Theory of Optimum Income Taxation” Review of
Economic Studies, 38, 175-208.
Morck, R. (2004) “How to Eliminate Pyramidal Business Groups - The Double Taxation of
Inter-Corporate Dividends and Other Incisive Uses of Tax Policy” NBER Working Paper
#10944.
Morck, R., M. Percy, G. Tian and B. Yeung (2004) “The Rise and Fall of the Widely Held Firm:
A History of Corporate Ownership in Canada” NBER Working Paper #10635.
Morck, R. and L. Steier (2005) “The Global History of Corporate Governance – An
Introduction” NBER Working Paper #11062.
Musgrave, R. A. (1992) “Schumpeter’s Crisis of the Tax State: An Essay in Fiscal Sociology”
Journal of Evolutionary Economics, 2, 89-113.
Newey, W. K. and K. West (1987) “A Simple Positive Semi-Definite, Heteroscedasticity and
Autocorrelation Consistent Covariance Matrix” Econometrica, 55, 703-708.
Perez-Gonzales, F. (2003) “Large Shareholders and Dividends: Evidence from U.S. Tax
Reforms” Working paper.
Piketty, T. and E. Saez (2003) “Income Inequality in the United States, 1913-1998” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 118, 1-39.
Poterba, J. (2001) “Taxation and Portfolio Structure: Issues and Implications” NBER Working
Paper #8223.
Rajan R. G. and L. Zingales (2003) “The Great Reversals: The Politics of Financial
Development in the Twentieth Century,” Journal of Financial Economics, 69, 5-50.
Ratner, S. (1942) American Taxation: Its History as a Social Force in Democracy New York:
Norton.
Roe, M. J. (1994) Strong Managers, Weak Owners: The Political Roots of American Corporate
Finance Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.
Roe, M. J. (2002) “Corporate Law’s Limits” Journal of Legal Studies, 31, 233-271.
Seligman, E. R. A. (1911) The Income Tax: A Study of the History, Theory and Practice of
Income Taxation at Home and Abroad New York: The Macmillan Company.
Shiller, R. J. (1989) Market Volatility Cambridge, MA and London: MIT Press.

30

Shiller, R. J. (2003) “From Efficient Markets Theory to Behavioral Finance” Journal of
Economic Perspectives, 17, 83-104.
Shoven, J. B. and C. Sialm (2004) “Asset Location in Tax-Deferred and Conventional Savings
Accounts” Journal of Public Economics, 88, 23-38.
Sialm, C. (2003) “Tax Changes and Asset Returns: An Empirical Investigation” Working paper.
Slemrod, J. (2000) “The Economics of Taxing the Rich” in J. Slemrod (ed.) Does Atlas Shrug?
The Economic Consequences of Taxing the Rich Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press, 3-28.
Slemrod, J., S. Yitzhaki, J. Mayshar and M. Lundholm (1994) “The Optimal Two-Bracket Linear
Income Tax” Journal of Public Economics, 53, 269-90.
U.S. Department of the Treasury, Internal Revenue Service, Statistics of Income: Estate and Gift
Tax Returns, various years.
U.S. Department of the Treasury, Internal Revenue Service, Statistics of Income: Individual
Income Tax Returns, various years.
U.S. Department of the Treasury (2003) “Corporation Income Tax Brackets and Rates, 19092002” Internal Revenue Service, Statistics of Income Bulletin, Fall 2003.
Vissing-Jorgensen, A. (2002) “Towards an Explanation of Household Portfolio Choice
Heterogeneity: Nonfinancial Income and Participation Cost Structures” NBER Working
Paper #8884.
Warshow, H. T. (1924) “The Distribution of Corporate Ownership in the United States”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 39, 15-38.
White, H. (1980) “A Heteroskedasticity-Consistent Covariance Matrix Estimator and a Direct
Test for Heteroskedasticity” Econometrica, 48, 817-830.

31

Figure 1: Changes in Tax Progressivity and Financial Market Equilibrium
Tax
Preference

1

1-τ

θ(y)
θ + (y)
y0

y **

y*

y

Figure 2: Herfindahl Index of the Concentration of U.S. Stock Ownership 1916-2000
0.90
0.85

Herfindahl Index of Concentration

0.80
0.75
0.70
0.65
0.60
0.55
0.50
0.45
0.40
1915

1920

1925

1930

1935

1940

1945

1950

1955

1960

1965

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

Year

Notes: The figure plots the Herfindahl index of corporate ownership that is constructed on the basis of the dividend shares of income
quintiles.

2000

Figure 3: A Comparison of the Estate Tax Equity Series with the Herfindahl Index
of Ownership Concentration 1916-2000
90
80

Percentage of total stocks /
Herfindahl index (multiplied by 100)

70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
1915

1920

1925

1930

1935

1940

1945

1950

Top 0.1% income group (P99.9-P100)

1955

1960

Year

1965

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

Herfindahl index (multiplied by 100)

Notes: The figure compares the Herfindahl index of corporate ownership that is constructed on the basis of the dividend shares of income
quintiles with the equity series for the top 0.1% group based on estate tax return data.

Table 1: Dividend shares for different income fractiles and
the Herfindahl index of concentration of stock ownership 1916-2000

Year
1916
1917
1918
1919
1920
1921
1922
1923
1924
1925
1926
1927
1928
1929
1930
1931
1932
1933
1934
1935
1936
1937
1938
1939
1940
1941
1942
1943
1944
1945
1946
1947
1948
1949
1950
1951
1952
1953
1954
1955
1956
1957
1958
1959
1960
1962

Top 10%

Top 1%

P0-P20

P20-P40

P40-P60

P60-P80

P80-P100

Herfindahl
index

P90-P100

P99-P100

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

1.15
1.12
1.13
0.98
1.08
7.82
4.73
2.19
2.00
1.24
1.28
2.98
2.09
3.02
2.98
4.17
4.82
5.06
4.32
4.23
4.25
3.00
6.38
5.71
6.08
7.12
6.68
6.16
3.77
2.32
1.74
2.16
2.06
2.12
2.49
1.73
2.03
2.50
1.52
1.61
1.43
1.76
1.60
1.89
2.00
2.37

0.95
1.53
1.43
1.24
1.23
1.46
1.23
1.88
1.74
1.90
1.57
2.98
2.09
3.02
2.98
4.17
4.82
5.06
4.32
4.23
4.25
2.31
2.86
3.01
4.56
4.53
4.59
4.25
5.47
4.88
3.23
3.52
3.01
3.68
2.07
3.29
3.61
4.59
3.48
3.17
3.41
4.00
4.03
4.55
5.48
5.53

2.82
2.74
2.18
2.32
2.02
2.23
2.27
2.93
3.08
3.22
3.32
2.98
2.09
3.02
2.98
4.17
4.82
5.06
4.32
4.23
4.25
4.11
6.19
4.88
4.13
4.33
4.26
4.52
5.75
5.29
3.41
3.60
2.99
3.98
3.10
3.69
4.00
4.23
3.48
3.85
3.79
4.13
4.57
4.52
5.04
6.18

8.70
5.85
4.44
4.41
3.73
3.58
3.98
5.64
5.77
5.75
5.98
3.57
3.31
4.21
3.66
4.17
4.82
5.06
4.32
4.23
4.25
5.86
6.92
6.44
5.04
5.64
6.39
4.75
7.14
6.93
5.08
4.58
4.24
5.67
2.38
6.48
5.13
5.63
5.21
5.46
5.76
6.15
6.45
6.97
7.03
7.12

86.38
88.77
89.47
91.04
91.95
83.52
87.78
86.22
87.41
87.90
87.86
87.48
90.43
86.72
87.40
81.98
80.72
79.77
81.74
83.10
82.27
84.23
77.62
79.96
80.07
78.38
78.08
80.32
77.86
80.59
86.54
86.13
87.70
84.55
88.21
84.81
85.23
83.05
86.30
85.91
85.62
83.96
83.35
82.07
80.46
78.81

0.7548
0.7925
0.8032
0.8316
0.8475
0.7056
0.7750
0.7483
0.7691
0.7775
0.7770
0.7693
0.8201
0.7565
0.7678
0.6790
0.6609
0.6465
0.6755
0.6977
0.6840
0.7160
0.6159
0.6500
0.6512
0.6265
0.6221
0.6550
0.6191
0.6599
0.7540
0.7470
0.7732
0.7215
0.7807
0.7262
0.7324
0.6974
0.7502
0.7438
0.7392
0.7123
0.7029
0.6829
0.6582
0.6335

78.53
79.15
82.19
86.02
90.09
78.89
84.94
82.69
86.28
81.22
81.34
82.02
83.23
79.23
77.47
71.74
79.81
79.73
76.45
78.87
80.09
76.54
74.69
76.72
77.70
77.98
75.64
77.34
71.82
74.01
81.90
83.87
82.12
78.31
85.13
80.55
81.56
79.20
83.49
82.01
79.73
78.89
79.38
76.15
75.64
73.04

42.78
41.70
55.59
48.66
50.08
50.68
48.36
45.61
55.80
40.45
41.72
45.03
43.91
47.66
44.84
40.38
51.95
52.87
44.14
49.05
44.23
47.87
44.76
48.13
49.43
39.79
40.79
45.88
46.78
47.80
54.54
56.51
58.73
53.30
62.56
61.38
59.94
56.86
63.79
54.48
56.63
55.38
55.01
57.23
55.30
47.43

Table 1: Dividend shares for different income fractiles and
the Herfindahl index of concentration of stock ownership 1916-2000

Year
1964
1966
1967
1969
1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979
1980
1981
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000

Top 10%

Top 1%

P0-P20

P20-P40

P40-P60

P60-P80

P80-P100

Herfindahl
index

P90-P100

P99-P100

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

2.17
2.45
2.25
2.33
2.38
2.62
2.38
2.50
2.51
2.85
2.24
2.00
2.43
2.23
2.29
2.91
3.28
3.14
3.21
3.53
3.42
3.60
2.86
2.97
3.36
3.62
3.66
3.80
4.27
4.01
3.43
3.04
3.00
2.96
3.05

5.24
4.61
4.66
4.70
6.22
5.71
5.83
4.76
5.10
4.80
4.77
5.05
4.96
4.28
4.21
4.89
4.97
5.21
5.05
5.07
4.36
5.45
5.74
5.29
5.61
5.94
5.75
6.28
7.11
5.99
5.65
4.75
4.52
4.33
4.28

6.12
6.61
6.52
6.22
6.71
4.96
7.71
7.02
6.95
7.16
7.85
7.36
7.43
7.47
6.80
7.85
7.87
8.26
9.47
9.90
9.55
9.96
8.58
8.20
7.92
8.39
8.88
8.89
8.90
7.96
7.36
6.97
6.22
5.98
5.63

6.87
8.85
7.56
10.16
8.44
9.25
8.21
8.36
8.48
9.17
9.31
10.89
9.97
9.81
9.93
11.23
11.82
12.03
11.35
12.32
11.68
14.19
12.37
12.37
12.57
13.12
12.49
13.96
12.99
11.86
12.34
11.14
11.54
12.63
11.77

79.59
77.48
79.00
76.59
76.25
77.45
75.87
77.36
76.96
76.02
75.82
74.70
75.20
76.21
76.77
73.12
72.06
71.36
70.93
69.18
70.99
66.79
70.45
71.17
70.55
68.94
69.23
67.07
66.73
70.19
71.23
74.09
74.73
74.09
75.27

0.6452
0.6153
0.6368
0.6035
0.5975
0.6148
0.5923
0.6133
0.6076
0.5945
0.5925
0.5783
0.5841
0.5984
0.6061
0.5567
0.5430
0.5343
0.5285
0.5074
0.5298
0.4805
0.5230
0.5322
0.5240
0.5044
0.5075
0.4827
0.4770
0.5182
0.5324
0.5694
0.5785
0.5713
0.5864

73.52
71.46
72.36
70.59
70.21
70.02
68.95
70.11
71.64
67.75
67.79
67.96
66.77
68.13
67.97
63.69
63.30
62.05
60.90
59.85
60.97
55.94
60.99
60.66
60.18
57.88
57.68
55.67
56.98
58.52
60.82
63.12
63.18
62.82
69.47

47.39
46.58
46.80
44.33
42.15
42.82
41.45
41.03
41.14
40.70
40.18
40.10
39.35
40.81
39.49
35.57
35.55
35.80
32.97
34.51
35.37
28.40
35.45
33.71
34.21
31.47
31.82
29.54
30.34
31.48
32.70
32.34
34.55
34.30
39.86

Note: The columns provide quintile shares that are summarized in the Herfindahl index. The last two columns provide the share for the top 10%
and top 1%.

Table 2
Summary Statistics

Mean

Standard
Deviation

Number of
Observations

Stock Ownership Concentration Index

0.6266

0.0822

68

Top Statutory Personal Tax Rate

0.6595

0.2205

68

0.4946

0.1806

68

Personal Tax Rate at Income = $250,000 (in
1999 dollars)

0.4003

0.1568

68

Personal Tax Rate at Income = $100,000 (in
1999 dollars)

0.2451

0.1047

68

Personal Tax Rate at Income = $50,000 (in
1999 dollars)

0.1618

0.0749

68

Share of Corporate Equity held by the Top
Quintile

77.9846

5.8116

68

Share of Corporate Equity held by the 2ndHighest Quintile

8.2382

3.1612

68

Share of Corporate Equity held by the 3rdHighest Quintile

5.9779

1.9681

68

Share of Corporate Equity held by the 4thHighest Quintile

4.5750

0.9998

68

Share of Corporate Equity held by the Lowest
Quintile

3.1446

1.3027

68

Personal Tax Rate at Income = $500,000 (in
1999 dollars)

Real GDP per capita (in thousands of 2000
dollars)

17.6321

8.4285

68

Price-Earnings Ratio

14.9237

5.4945

68

Dividend Yield (multiplied by 100)

4.4013

1.4500

68

Corporate Tax Rate

0.3864

0.1266

68

Capital Gains Tax Rate

0.2433

0.0593

68

Effective Capital Gains Tax Rate

0.2588

0.0885

68

Fraction of Households Filing a Tax Return

0.7596

0.3153

68

13.1468

3.3396

68

Income Share of Top 0.1%

4.9491

1.9638

68

Income Share of Top 0.01%

1.8693

0.9452

68

Income Share of Top 1%

Note: The variables are as defined in the text. Note that these summary statistics are for the 68 observations over the period
1929-2000 that are used in the regression analysis reported in Tables 3-5.

Table 3
Taxes and Stock Ownership Concentration: OLS Results with Newey-West Standard Errors
Change in Stock Ownership Concentration Index

Dependent Variable:
(1)

(2)

(3)

Constant

-0.0013
(0.0043)

-0.0011
(0.0045)

0.0016
(0.0058)

Change in Top Statutory Personal
Tax Rate

-0.1617 **
(0.0711)

-0.1751
(0.3620)

-0.2103 **
(0.0877)

Change in real GDP per capita

-0.0064
(0.0090)

-0.0066
(0.0074)

-0.0091
(0.0095)

Change in Price-Earnings Ratio

-0.0016
(0.0014)

-0.0019 *
(0.0011)

-0.0022
(0.0027)

Change in Dividend Yield

-0.0128
(0.0082)

-0.0032
(0.0074)

-0.0194
(0.0136)

Change in Corporate Tax Rate

0.0794
(0.2437)

0.2056
(0.3445)

0.2054
(0.3509)

Change in Capital Gains Tax
Rate

0.4070
(0.2890)

-0.0334
(0.3870)

1.1346
(0.5975)

Change in Effective Capital
Gains Tax Rate

-0.2221 **
(0.1088)

-0.0504
(0.1517)

-0.5693
(0.4582)

Change in Fraction of Filers

0.2088
(0.1821)

Controls for changes in other
personal tax rates and in top
income shares?
Sample Period
No. of Obs.
F-Statistic (p-value in
parantheses)

0.2546
(0.1607)

Y

Y

Y

1929-2000

1946-2000

1929-1975

63

47

38

2.90
(0.0027)

*

***

4.57
(0.0002)

***

4.65
(0.0006)

***

Note: Newey-West standard errors, using 1 lag in the autocorrelation structure, are reported in parantheses; *, ** and *** denote significance at
the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively.

Table 4
Taxes and Stock Ownership Concentration: Maximum-Likelihood AR(1) Results
Dependent Variable:

Change in Stock Ownership Concentration Index
(1)

(2)

(3)

Constant

-0.0006
(0.0028)

-0.0061
(0.0056)

0.0006
(0.0033)

Change in Top Statutory
Personal Tax Rate

-0.1385 **
(0.0614)

-0.6206 **
(0.2905)

-0.1793 ***
(0.0626)

Change in real GDP per capita

-0.0091
(0.0069)

0.0027
(0.0065)

-0.0119 *
(0.0062)

Change in Price-Earnings Ratio

-0.0017 **
(0.0008)

-0.0024 ***
(0.0008)

-0.0022
(0.0014)

Change in Dividend Yield

-0.0104 *
(0.0062)

-0.0062
(0.0055)

Change in Corporate Tax Rate

-0.1116
(0.2061)

0.4984
(0.3033)

0.0898
(0.1696)

Change in Capital Gains Tax
Rate

0.2157
(0.2546)

0.0069
(0.2465)

0.6536
(0.3252)

Change in Effective Capital
Gains Tax Rate

-0.1146
(0.1039)

-0.1929
(0.1577)

-0.2386
(0.2388)

Change in Fraction of Filers

0.2896
(0.1292)

ρ (First-order autocorrelation
parameter)

-0.4270 **
(0.2054)

Controls for changes in other
personal tax rates and in top
income shares?
Sample Period
No. of Obs.
Wald Statistic (p-values in
paratheses)

-0.0160 *
0.0082

0.3959
(0.0900)

**

0.5330
(0.2024)

***

Y

Y

1929-2000

1946-2000

1929-1975

63

47

38

***

304.28
(0.0000)

***

***

-0.6517 ***
(0.1643)

Y

63.91
(0.0000)

**

258.27
(0.0000)

Note: Robust standard errors are reported in parantheses;*, ** and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively.

***

Table 5
Taxes and Stock Ownership by Income Quintiles (OLS Results with Newey-West Standard Errors)

Dependent Variable:

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Share of
Corporate
Equity held
by Top
Quintile

Share of
Corporate
Equity held
by 2nd
Quintile

Share of
Corporate
Equity held
by 3rd
Quintile

Share of
Corporate
Equity held
by 4th
Quintile

Share of
Corporate
Equity held
by Lowest
Quintile

Constant

-0.0598
(0.2899)

0.0151
(0.1536)

-0.0061
(0.0907)

0.0403
(0.1249)

0.0014
(0.0752)

Top Statutory Personal Tax
Rate

-10.4581 **
(4.9523)

6.3099 **
(2.8656)

4.5086 ***
(1.2802)

2.3652
(1.6426)

0.2615
(2.8190)

Change in real GDP per
capita

-0.4264
(0.6072)

0.1136
(0.2947)

0.1800
(0.1928)

-0.0094
(0.2214)

0.0714
(0.1437)

Change in Price-Earnings
Ratio

-0.1330
(0.0859)

0.0702
(0.0440)

0.0215
(0.0344)

0.0322
(0.0280)

-0.0185
(0.0376)

Lagged Change in PriceEarnings Ratio

-0.0412
(0.0673)

0.0186
(0.0400)

-0.0007
(0.0231)

0.0427
(0.0289)

-0.0130
(0.0197)

Change in Dividend Yield

-0.9022
(0.5447)

0.0872
(0.2771)

0.1582
(0.1585)

0.2679
(0.2031)

0.1890
(0.1875)

Change in Corporate Tax
Rate

0.8510
(17.3182)

2.0745
(9.0101)

-4.6501
(5.2537)

-7.9491
(7.0603)

10.4458
(8.8345)

Change in Capital Gains
Tax Rate

25.8286
(21.6814)

-0.2680
(9.2005)

-14.9347 **
(6.9027)

-6.8450
(5.5332)

-7.2466
(9.8933)

0.2997
(4.0679)

7.8035
(5.3334)

5.5314 **
(2.4007)

1.8581
(3.8999)

-4.5488
(6.3079)

-1.9463
(2.4370)

-0.6531
(4.4515)

-4.2661
(3.7229)

Change in Effective Capital
Gains Tax Rate

Change in Fraction of Filers

Controls for changes in
other personal tax rates and
in top income shares?

-13.8747 *
(7.9450)
13.5533
(12.0902)

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

1929-2000

1929-2000

1929-2000

1929-2000

1929-2000

No. of Obs.

63

63

63

63

63

F-Statistic (p-value in
parantheses)

2.79 ***
(0.0033)

2.15 **
(0.0217)

4.96 ***
(0.0000)

2.70 ***
(0.0044)

1.38
(0.1925)

Sample Period

Note: Newey-West standard errors, using 1 lag in the autocorrelation structure, are reported in parantheses; *, ** and *** denote significance at
the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively.

