                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        AFFIRMATIVE ACTION AND ITS MYTHOLOGY

                                           Roland G. Fryer, Jr.
                                            Glenn C. Loury

                                          Working Paper 11464
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w11464


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       June 2005




Roland G. Fryer, Jr. is Junior Fellow, Harvard University Society of Fellows, Harvard University, and Faculty
Research Fellow, National Bureau of Economic Research, both in Cambridge, Massachusetts. Glenn C.
Loury is University Professor, Department of Economics, Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts. Their
e-mail addresses are rfryer@fas.harvard.edu and gloury@bu.edu, respectively. The views expressed herein
are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

©2005 by Roland G. Fryer, Jr. and Glenn C. Loury. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
Affirmative Action and Its Mythology
Roland G. Fryer, Jr. and Glenn C. Loury
NBER Working Paper No. 11464
June 2005
JEL No. J7

                                           ABSTRACT



For more than three decades, critics and supporters of affirmative action have fought for the moral

high ground n through ballot initiatives and lawsuits, in state legislatures, and in varied courts of

public opinion. The goal of this paper is to show the clarifying power of economic reasoning to

dispel some myths and misconceptions in the racial affirmative action debates. We enumerate seven

commonly held (but mistaken) views one often encounters in the folklore about affirmative action

(affirmative action may involve goals and timelines, but definitely not quotas, e.g.). Simple

economic arguments reveal these seven views to be more myth than fact.

Roland G. Fryer, Jr
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer Center, M-7
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
rfryer@fas.harvard.edu

Glenn C. Loury
Institute on Race and Social Division
Boston University
704 Commonwealth Avenue
Boston, MA 02215
gloury@bu.edu
         Affirmative action policy regulates the allocation of scarce positions in education,

employment, or business contracting so as to increase the representation in those positions of

persons belonging to certain population subgroups. Such policies are highly controversial. For

more than three decades, critics and supporters of affirmative action have fought for the moral high

ground – through ballot initiatives and lawsuits, in state legislatures, and in varied courts of public

opinion. The goal of this paper is to show the clarifying power of economic reasoning, when it is

used with a healthy dose of common sense, to dispel some myths and misconceptions in the racial

affirmative action debates.

         The sort of analysis presented in this paper will not change the positions of diehards who

are unalterably committed to supporting or opposing affirmative action, and who view their

positions as required by basic principles of justice. But most Americans do not hold extreme beliefs

about affirmative action; indeed, the American public embraces no coherent conception of what

“affirmative action” actually entails. When President Bill Clinton directed a team of aides to

undertake a comprehensive review of the federal government’s racial preference policies, the

inquiry found that Americans held wide-ranging and conflicting views about what is meant by

“affirmative action.” Investigators concluded that this lack of coherence fostered an atmosphere of

confusion about what these policies aimed to achieve and how they were implemented (Edley,

1996).

         There is a growing literature on the fragility of views regarding affirmative action. Bositis

(2004) asked subjects to respond to the following statement, “We should make every possible

effort to improve the position of blacks and other minorities,” with which 75 percent of blacks, 67

percent of whites, and 80 percent of Hispanics agreed. However, when subjects were asked to




                                                    1
respond to an alternate statement -- “We should make every possible effort to improve the position

of blacks and other minorities, even if it involves preferential treatment” -- only 57 percent of

blacks, 48 percent of Hispanics, and 33 percent of whites agreed. Bositis also found that the

presence of the term “preferential treatment” had its most pronounced negative impact on support

for assisting racial minorities when the context involved race-based preferences in college

admissions. Moreover, and perhaps most disturbingly, Sniderman and Piazza (1993 pp. 102-104)

find that in a comparison of two groups of similar whites, individuals to whom affirmative action

was mentioned showed a significantly higher tendency to affirm negative racial stereotypes about

blacks like “most blacks are lazy” than did those to whom affirmative action was not mentioned at

all. Given this conceptual incoherence, it is hardly surprising that many survey researchers now

avoid using the ambiguous term “affirmative action” altogether, opting instead to describe a

program’s specific content in their questionnaires (for example, Kravitz et al., 1996).

       When concepts are unclear, misunderstandings can easily take root. This paper enumerates

seven commonly held but mistaken views one often encounters in the folklore about affirmative

action. 1) Affirmative action may involve goals and timelines, but definitely not quotas. 2) Color-

blind policies offer an efficient substitute for color-sighted affirmative action. 3) Affirmative action

creates opportunities but does not undercut incentives. 4) Passing equal opportunity laws is enough

to ensure racial equality. 5) The earlier affirmative action is used in education or career

development, the better. 6) Many whites are directly affected by affirmative action policies

designed to increase representation of minorities. 7) Affirmative action always helps its intended

beneficiaries. We discuss each of these beliefs in turn and provide economic arguments that reveal

them to be more myth than fact.




                                                   2
Myth #1: Affirmative Action Can Involve Goals and Timetables while Avoiding Quotas.


        The belief that it is possible to draw a meaningful distinction between “goals” and “quotas”

is found on both sides of the affirmative action debate. Supporters of affirmative action typically

endorse goals, but back away from quotas. Here is President Bill Clinton (1995), defending

affirmative action in his “Mend it Don’t End It” speech: “Since President Nixon was here in my

job, America has used goals and timetables to preserve opportunity and to prevent discrimination,

to urge businesses to set higher expectations, and to realize those expectations. But we did not and

we will not use rigid quotas to mandate outcomes.” Likewise, President George W. Bush (2004)

leaned heavily on this alleged distinction when, in commenting on the Supreme Court’s decision in

the University of Michigan affirmative action cases, he said: “I agreed with the Court … that we

ought to reject quotas. I think quotas are discriminatory by nature... We also agreed with the

finding that, in terms of admissions policy, race-neutral admissions policies ought to be tried. If

they don'
        t work, to achieve an objective which is diversification, race ought to be a factor... I think

it’s very important for all institutions to strive for diversity, and I believe there are ways to do so.”

        Yet this distinction between goals and quotas is dubious, because to implement either a goal

or quota requires that a regulator credibly commit to some (possibly unspoken) schedule of

rewards/penalties for an employer or an education institution, as a function of observable and

verifiable outcomes. The results engendered by either policy depend on how firms or educational

institutions react to these incentives. If the penalty for certain “bad results” is sufficiently severe,

then people will tend to say that a rigid quota had been imposed. If penalties for bad results are

minimal, then the people will tend to say that a flexible goal has been adopted. Clearly, this

difference is one of degree, not of kind.



                                                    3
       For similar reasons, neither can one draw a sharp distinction between the use of numerical

hiring goals on the one hand, and the mere enforcement of a regime of non-racial discrimination,

on the other. When anti-discrimination law enforcement agents are less well informed than are

potentially discriminating employers, any effective enforcement policy will have quota-like effects.

       To see this point, imagine that a government entity is trying to enforce laws against racial

discrimination by auditing employers’ hiring practices. Suppose that employers differ, both in their

proclivities to discriminate and in the fraction of qualified minorities applying for positions in their

firms. Assume that the auditor can perfectly observe neither a firm’s proclivity to discriminate, nor

all of the characteristics of its applicant pool, but that the auditor can observe the rate at which

minorities are actually hired at any firm. Then, the observation of a low hiring rate for minorities is

consistent with two alternative interpretations: either the employer is a discriminator who rejected

qualified minority candidates, or the employer is a non-discriminator who happened to draw a

small fraction of qualified minority applicants. Because an outside law enforcement official can

never perfectly distinguish between these two situations, a vigorous effort to limit discrimination

will on occasion be subject to both type I and type II errors. That is, the employers who did not

discriminate will sometimes be punished, and those who did discriminate will sometimes go

unpunished. As a result, even those employers who do not wish to discriminate for or against

minority workers will nevertheless have an incentive to alter their hiring practices if they happen to

draw an unusually low number of qualified minority applicants, because doing so reduces their risk

of being audited and undeservedly punished.

       In this specific sense, then, given a legal environment that eschews affirmative action and

requires only nondiscrimination, employers will nevertheless behave as if they faced an “implicit

quota” (Fryer, 2004). That is, they will adhere to a self-imposed hiring target which can be




                                                    4
understood as their equilibrium response to incentives created by imperfect auditing. So, a

regulator enforcing anti-discrimination laws, who is less well informed than are employers about

the qualifications of job applicants, will find that an effective enforcement regime must on occasion

induce some departures from race-neutral hiring by the firms being regulated. What is more, these

induced departures from race-neutral hiring will generally favor members of the groups being

protected from discrimination – which is to say, they will be hard to distinguish from racially

preferential affirmative action.

         A similar false distinction often encountered in the affirmative action debate is that between

racial preferences, on the one hand, and the mere enhancement of efforts to attract qualified

minority candidates, on the other. Some opponents of affirmative action reject preferences but

argue that race-targeted recruitment and outreach efforts (as exemplified by the phrase: “please

alert us to qualified minority candidates”) are acceptable, so long as all applicants are judged by a

common, race-independent standard. Likewise, some supporters of affirmative action argue that to

prefer a minority applicant whose qualifications are roughly the same as a non-minority competitor

ought to offend no one.1 Both of these arguments avoid the hard truth that targeted outreach will

generally lead to an equilibrium in which the targeted applicants of a given skill level enjoy wider

job options, more bargaining power and, consequently, greater remuneration than comparable non-

targeted applicants.



Myth #2: Color-Blind Policies Offer an Efficient Substitute for Color-Sighted Affirmative
Action.




1
 Although, as Bositis (2004) points out, roughly half of blacks and whites oppose offering a job to a black candidate
when both she and a white candidate are equally qualified and blacks are underrepresented in the firm.


                                                           5
        The belief that to achieve a color-blind society we are best advised to use color-blind (or, as

they are sometimes called, “race neutral”) means was the driving force behind two ballot initiatives

in California: Proposition 209, which in 1996 successfully banned the use of affirmative action by

state or local government (including state colleges and universities in their admissions decisions);

and, Proposition 54, which unsuccessfully sought in 2003 to ban state and local government from

collecting information that would permit them to categorize students, contractors or workers by

race. The public relations campaign for Prop. 54, led by Ward Connerly, proclaimed (Racial

Privacy Initiative, 2002): “Asking citizens to check a race box on a school or job application form

is demeaning to the growing millions of our citizens who are multiracial and multiethnic. It divides

us as a people and forces Americans to pay more attention to immutable and meaningless

characteristics like skin color and ancestry.”

        Connerly’s view has some superficial plausibility, even if one begins with the assumption

that achieving racial diversity is a compelling government objective. After all, to abide by the

color-blindness constraint in employee or student selection does not rule out the pursuit of greater

representation for a disadvantaged group.2 Group-representation goals can be sought tacitly under

color-blindness: selectors can favor a targeted racial group by over-emphasizing the non-racial

factors that are relatively more likely to be found among members of that group. For example, the

states of California, Florida, and Texas now guarantee admission to their public university systems

for all in-state high school students graduating in the top 4, 20, and 10 percent, respectively, of

their senior classes. Since high schools across these states have different racial populations, this

policy will tend to cause university admissions to mirror more closely the racial composition of the




2
  Chan and Eyster (2003) were the first to make this point. Independently, Fryer, Loury and Yuret (2003) advanced a
related, though more general, analysis.


                                                         6
state. We use the term “color-blind affirmative action” when referring to this kind of implicit racial

preference.3

         Let us consider in more detail how color-blind affirmative action might work. Suppose that

a college has the capacity to admit only a certain fraction of its applicants, and seeks to maximize

the expected performance of those admitted.4 Assume for the sake of this illustration that expected

performance is a linear function of a student’s standardized test scores and that student’s level of

involvement in extracurricular activities. Then the college will admit an applicant if the value of

this function exceeds some suitably chosen threshold. The weight the college gives to

extracurricular activities relative to test scores in this admissions policy function will equal the ratio

of the partial correlations of these variables with post-admissions performance.5

         Now, suppose the college believes that to follow this threshold policy would yield too few

members of some racial group. Imagine that the level of extracurricular activities is distributed

among applicants within racial groups in approximately the same way, but that the within-group

test score distributions differ substantially between the races. Given this setup, a college could

enhance racial diversity in a color-blind manner (although at some cost to expected performance

among those admitted) by placing more weight on extracurricular activities relative to test scores

than is warranted by the correlation of these variables with performance. That is, the college could

practice color-blind affirmative action by valuing an applicant’s traits in the admissions process not

only because a variable might help forecast post-admissions performance, but also because that

3
  Department of Education (2003) provides a range of examples illustrating how race-neutral admissions programs in
higher education might work.
4
  As Sam Bowles has pointed out to us, an equally plausible objective function for colleges – one with quite different
implications for admissions policy – would be to maximize the expected value-added to their students’ overall
academic abilities as a result of being admitted. Moreover, even if this were not a compelling goal for colleges acting
on their own account, it might sbe the most reasonable social objective function. That the interests of individual
institutions may diverge from the interests of society at large is clear, in view of the fact that improving their relative
ranking is a key goal for many colleges and universities, but this consideration may be of much less significance from
the a social point of view.
5
  See Fryer, Loury and Yuret (2003) for a detailed model along these lines, and a formal demonstration of this result.


                                                             7
trait might be associated with an applicant’s membership in the targeted racial group. The practice

in California, Florida, and Texas – which guarantees admission to some students based solely on

their high school class rank – is one way to implement such color-blind policy. Another method,

recently enacted by Mt. Holyoke College, is to make reporting of an applicant’s test scores optional

while committing that some portion of the incoming class will be chosen from among those who

elect not to submit scores. However, even though the targeted group may constitute only a small

fraction of its applicant pool, to practice color-blind affirmative action in this way a college would

need to bias its evaluation of all of its applicants, minorities and non-minorities alike.

         By evaluating applicants in a different manner from that which would maximize expected

post-admission performance, color-blind affirmative action enhances racial diversity at the cost of

lowering selection efficiency. Of course, given a fixed distribution of traits among applicants, any

affirmative action policy – blind or conventional – necessarily lowers the expected performance of

those selected.6 Otherwise, no policy to enhance racial diversity would be necessary. Even so, for

a fixed distribution of traits, any color-blind affirmative action policy is less efficient than the

optimal color-sighted policy calibrated to achieve the same degree of racial diversity (Chan and

Eyster, 2003; Epple, Romano and Sieg, 2003; Fryer, Loury and Yuret, 2003). This result follows

from the fact that, in the absence of affirmative action, efficient selection entails using a universal

threshold policy where all applicants expected to perform above some level are admitted.

Consequently, the use of group-specific thresholds under affirmative action – with everyone being

admitted whose expected performance exceeds a minimal level that is specific to their group –

provides as close an approximation to the efficient policy as is possible, consistent with meeting a

racial representation target. In other words, color-sighted affirmative action uses racially


6
 That this need not be true when the distribution of traits is endogenous is a principle implication of our discussion of
Myth #3 below.


                                                            8
discriminatory means when comparing applicants from different groups, but, unlike color-blind

policy, it makes optimal use of all available, non-racial information when comparing applicants

within groups.

           In the short run, with applicants’ traits given, the efficiency of color-blind affirmative action

depends on how well one can proxy for race by using observable, non-racial characteristics that are

not negatively correlated with a student’s performance. If, for instance, a college could perfectly

forecast an applicant’s race by using some combination of the applicant’s name and date of birth,

then that college could implement an admissions policy which, in effect, set separate thresholds of

expected performance for each racial group, while being able truthfully to maintain that all of its

applicants have been evaluated relative to a common, non-racial standard. At some point, though,

this effort to find perfect proxies for race ceases to be “color-blind” in any meaningful sense. In

practice, since color-blind affirmative action generally shifts weight from academic characteristics

to social characteristics, the policy will concurrently help Hispanics and low-income whites as well

as blacks. 7

           Moreover, as emphasized by Fryer, Loury and Yuret (2003), color-blind affirmative action

is likely to be inefficient over the long run as well. In any proper long run analysis, the distribution

of applicants’ traits must be allowed to shift in response to the incentives created by the colleges’

policies. Because color-blind policy works by biasing the weights put on non-racial traits when

assessing all applicants, the policy creates a situation where the incentive for students to acquire

traits diverges from the relative importance of those traits in a college’s estimate of post-admission

performance. For example, in states using a top-x-percent scheme, students have an incentive to

enroll in high schools (or particular courses within a high school) at which they expect to perform

relatively well. So, “top-x-percent” policies should be expected to alter the way that students and
7
    For plausible estimates of the possible magnitudes, see Fryer, Loury and Yuret (2003).


                                                             9
high schools of varying qualities are matched with one another in equilibrium. There is no reason

to expect that such a shift in resource allocation induced by color-blind affirmative action will

promote efficiency.8 Similarly, a policy that raises the weight on extra-curricular activities relative

to standardized test scores in the admissions process must lower pre-application incentives for

students to acquire skills that enhance performance on such tests. To the extent that such skills also

enhance post-admission performance, shifting from color-sighted to color- blind affirmative action

policies could lead to an overall applicant pool that is less academically promising.9



Myth 3: Affirmative Action Undercuts Investment Incentives.



         It is theoretically possible that the existence of affirmative action could reduce incentives

for effort and skill acquisition in the targeted group, because the policy could make effort and skill

less important for achieving successful outcomes. On the other hand, affirmative action could

enhance incentives for the targeted group by creating a situation where opportunities previously

thought of as out of reach come to be perceived by the applicant as attainable, and thus worth the

expenditure of effort to pursue. Supporters of racial preferences tend to downplay possible adverse




8
  As discussed in note 5 above, the private goals of colleges in the admissions process need not coincide with social
objectives. For instance, society may care about how students of different races and varying abilities are sorted among
the high schools in a state, while this might matter little to a college. To this extent, the bias in colleges’ admissions
policies induced by color-blind affirmative action could, in principle, enhance social efficiency over the long run.
9
  Card and Krueger (2004) have studied the effects of this shift on applicant behavior in California and Texas. Using
data on SAT test takers, they examine how eliminating color-sighted affirmative action in these states has affected the
rate at which minority students send their test scores to selective public universities. They find no change in the SAT-
sending behavior of highly qualified black and Hispanic students. They also find that the shift in policy had no effect
on the number of schools to which these students applied, and did not significantly alter the quality of their fall-back
schools. This evidence is consistent with the hypothesis that the shift from color-sighted to color-blind affirmative
action has had little impact on incentives for highly qualified minority students (which, given they are infra-marginal,
is what one might expect.) A more persuasive test of this hypothesis would examine the impact of affirmative action on
the grades and attendance patterns of high school students. These outcomes are elastic with respect to effort, and are
likely to vary with changes in students’ perceptions of college opportunities.


                                                           10
incentive effects, while critics are dismissive of the prospect that the policy could provide

incentives for better performance in a targeted group.

       Our view is that confident a priori assertions about how affirmative action affects incentives

are unfounded. Indeed, economic theory provides little guidance on what is ultimately a subtle and

context-dependent empirical question. First principles, commonsense intuitions, and anecdotal

evidence are simply inadequate to the task here.

       It is useful in this context to think about affirmative action as a form of market regulation

that induces a shift in demand for the services of persons at various skill levels in affected groups.

For example, in a labor market context, racial preference policies may lead firms to hire or promote

minority applicants at a given skill level, even though similar non-minority applicants would be

rejected. The consequence of such policy for incentives to acquire skills should thus depend on the

relative magnitudes of these demand shifts, and on supply elasticities at the various skill levels. If

regulation causes firms to bid up the rewards to the highly skilled in the targeted group by more

than to the less skilled, then skill-acquisition incentives will be enhanced. Alternatively, given the

relative supplies, if the demand for various skill grades within a preferred group were to rise in

response to affirmative action policy in such a way that the less skilled gain more than the highly

skilled, then skill-acquisition incentives will fall. Thus, economic analysis suggests that the impact

on incentives of preferential policies depends (perhaps in a counterintuitive way) on details of the

specific environments into which they have been introduced.

        Coate and Loury (1993) explore a model of the labor market where workers are minorities

or non-minorities, and are qualified or unqualified. Employers have a taste for discrimination; that

is, they incur a non-economic cost of hiring minority workers which rises as minorities become a

greater share of their workforce. In the unregulated equilibrium of this model, qualified minority




                                                   11
workers are not always hired, even though qualified non-minorities are fully employed, so the

incentive for minorities to become skilled are lower than for non-minorities. Coate and Loury study

how affirmative action policies intended to counter employers’ discriminatory preferences affect

the equilibrium of this model. They show that the impact of affirmative action on the incentives of

minority workers to acquire skills depends critically on the aggressiveness of the plan. Because

employers discriminate, there is a surplus of qualified minorities prior to regulatory intervention –

more minorities invest in skills than find employment. If the affirmative action goal is modest,

employers anticipate meeting the goal by dipping into this surplus of qualified minorities, which in

turn raises the probability of a qualified minority being hired in equilibrium, thereby increasing the

incentive for minority workers to become qualified and further narrowing the skill gap. If, on the

other hand, the affirmative action goal is highly ambitious, then employers will perceive a shortage

of qualified minorities relative to the numbers needed to be in compliance with the regulations, and

so they will be inclined to hire some who are unqualified, thereby lowering the minority incentives

to invest in skills. Coate and Loury call this outcome a patronizing equilibrium.

       This analysis suggests that affirmative action, even when introduced to counter employment

discrimination by race, can embody an awkward trade-off: a highly aggressive plan risks inducing

a patronizing equilibrium, whereas a more modest goal may not fully eliminate discrimination. An

intermediate policy would be to ratchet-up the affirmative action goal over time. If a modest but

not insignificant affirmative action goal is initially enacted in such a way that the first stage of the

plan can be satisfied by drawing only on qualified minority applicants, then as these applicants are

hired the incentive for minorities to acquire skills increases. Then, in a later stage, the affirmative

action goal can be set more ambitiously without moving incentives in the wrong direction;

employers can draw on a larger pool of qualified minority applicants.




                                                   12
Myth #4: Equal Opportunity Is Enough to Ensure Racial Equality.



           Given the unlovely racial history of the United States, are equal opportunity laws enough to

correct for centuries of institutional discrimination and social isolation? Economists have pondered

this question for decades.10 If there had been equality of opportunity for all racial groups from the

very beginning of the United States, then the ongoing enforcement of a non-discrimination regime

might arguably suffice to secure racial equality today. However, given that egregious violations of

racial equality of opportunity are an historical fact, and under the plausible assumption that the

evolution of inter-racial income distributions over the long run depends to some significant extent

on initial conditions, there is a strong case for the view that achieving racial equality requires

something more than the enforcement of non-discrimination from this point forward.

           Consider an environment in which, while job assignments are based solely on an

individual’s productive characteristics, an individual’s acquisition of these characteristics is

favorably influenced by the economic success of his or her parents. Thus, the toxic consequences

of past discrimination for blacks are reflected in the fact that their children have less successful

parents, on average, and therefore less favorable parental influences on their skill acquisition

process. Further, imagine that families are grouped together into communities, and that local public

goods like educational resources that are important for individual productivity are provided

uniformly to children of the same community. In this setting, background influences achievement

on two dimensions. First, less successful parents are not as able to provide important resources that

augment human capital development – such as career information, job referral networks and other



10
     This inquiry began with Loury (1977, 1981a) and has spawned an impressive literature.


                                                           13
forms of social and cultural capital. Second, children with less successful parents will tend to live

in communities with inferior local public goods.

         Now consider the following thought experiment: Assume that all individuals have identical

preferences, and that the distribution of innate abilities characterizing each generation of black and

white children does not differ by race. Assume further that peer effects operating at the

neighborhood level strongly influence the acquisition of skills by the young. Then, supposing that

no anti-black discrimination occurs from a fixed point in time onward, one can ask whether a

competitive market would eventually eliminate any initial differences in the average status of the

two groups.

         Loury (1977) shows that the answer to this query depends on whether only income, or both

income and race, affect the community to which an agent belongs. When community membership

depends only on income, equal opportunity can be shown always to yield a racially equitable long

run outcome. However, if race plays an independent role in sorting families into neighborhoods,

then equal opportunity will generally not be enough to yield racial equity.11 When some racial

segregation exists among communities, the intergenerational status transmission mechanism differs

substantially for the two racial groups. In essence, an intra-group externality is exerted through

local public goods provision, by the lower income of black families who share a community.

Because the racial composition of one’s community depends (in part) on the choices of one’s

neighbors, this effect can not be completely undermined by an individual’s actions. Since social




11
  Sethi and Somanathan (2004) is a recent effort to model endogenous community formation when agents care about
both the income and the racial composition of their neighborhoods. They show that in the extreme case where
communities are segregated by race and income, but where the intra-racial distributions of income among blacks and
whites are nearly identical then, in the unique stable spatial equilibrium, the provision of local public goods in the two
communities will be nearly equal as well. Under such circumstances, equal opportunity alone may suffice. As an
empirical matter, we are unaware of any such environments.


                                                            14
clustering by ethnicity and race is empirically relevant and has been observed since the dawn of its

measurement, equal opportunity from this point forward is unlikely to assure racial equity.

        In the recent U.S. Supreme Court case of Grutter v. Bollinger (02-241 [2003]), involving

the application of affirmative action standard in admissions to the University of Michigan,

Justice Sandra Day O’Connor took an intriguing stand on equal opportunity and racial equity:

“Race-conscious admission policies must be limited in time and the court expects that 25 years

from now, the use of racial preferences will no longer be needed to further the interest approved

today.” A recent paper by Krueger, Rothstein, and Turner (2004) evaluates the plausibility of

O’Connor’s forecast by projecting what the elite college applicant pool can be expected to look like

25 years ahead. Their thought experiment rests on a number of assumptions regarding the rate at

which existing racial gaps in economic circumstances and pre-collegiate educational achievement

will likely close in the future. The analysis is focused on two important margins: changes in the

black-white income distribution and the convergence in test scores among students with similar

family income. They argue that Justice O’Connor was overly optimistic; that is, blacks are

unlikely to witness the dramatic convergence needed to make affirmative action in college

admissions superfluous in 25 years. Theyestimate that, were all affirmative action in college

admissions to be eliminated, then expected minority gains in income and socioeconomic status over

the next quarter century would yield only 42 percent of the current level of racial diversity in

selective institutions.



Myth #5: The Earlier in Education or Career Development Affirmative Action is

Implemented, the Better.




                                                  15
          Critics of racial preferences in higher education often arguethat affirmative action should be

undertaken early in the developmental cycle. However, whether or not affirmative action should be

practiced early or late in a development cycle is a subtle empirical question on which little evidence

exists.

          The trade-offs of early versus late affirmative action can be illustrated with another thought

experiment: Suppose that the higher education establishment wants to increase its share of minority

faculty, and that this goal can be attempted in one of two ways – by lowering hiring standards for

newly minted minority Ph.D. students; or, by changing graduate admissions policies to admit more

minority graduate students. Let there be a cost to making a mistake in each stage – that is,

admitting graduate students who do not do well is costly, as is hiring newly minted Ph.D.s who turn

out to be unqualified. Finally, suppose that hiring an unqualified faculty member is more costly

than admitting an unqualified graduate student. Given this set-up, which approach is preferable?

The answer depends on the empirical details of the case.

          The distinction we are drawing here between early and late affirmative action is similar to

the distinction highlighted in Loury (1997) between developmental and preferential affirmative

action. The benefits from the earlier affirmative action are developmental, in that it enhances the

skills of some minority students. However, to derive the expected cost of affirmative action in this

stage we must consider the proportion of those admitted who will not complete the program, taking

due account of the losses experienced when matriculates do not complete their studies. Hence,

affirmative action in graduate admissions will tend to be a good idea if the early investments pay

off for a substantial group, but will tend to be a bad idea if the resulting attrition rates are too high

and too costly. Focusing affirmative action at the later stage of faculty hiring stage is advantageous

when one wants to narrowly target the preferential treatment to particular individuals within the




                                                    16
preferred group. However, it will be disadvantageous if the costs of hiring some unqualified faculty

are sufficiently high. Fang and Fryer (2004) provide a model based on this intuition which shows

that, when it comes to affirmative action, earlier need not be better.

        This issue is related to the broader question of whether efforts to ameliorate the effects of

racial disparity in socioeconomic background should be undertaken early or later in the life cycle.

Heckman and Krueger (2002) provide a lively discussion of the efficacy of interventions

throughout the life cycle. Early childhood interventions such as the Perry Preschool Project and the

Abcedarian Project seem to have large effects on test scores, schooling attainment, and crime

reduction. The results from adolescent interventions are mixed, which is illustrated in the disparate

results from analysis of the Job Start and Job Corps programs. Job Corps is the nation’s largest and

most comprehensive residential, education and job training program for at-risk youth, ages 16

through 24. It takes the students to (predominantly rural) training centers where they receive free

room and board along with intense training in one of 100 vocational specializations. Conversely,

Job Start uses the same teaching curricula as Job Corps, but the students stay at home and commute

to a local training site. Job Corps seems to increase earnings and reduce crime, whereas, Job Start

has statistically insignificant effects.12

        The disparities between Job Corps and Job Start initiatives suggest that peer group

externalities may be important. Assisting a large fraction of students in a particular neighborhood

could cause positive spillovers, and these spillovers could be self-enforcing. The magnitudes of

these externalities will likely differ across environments, and change in complicated ways as

children age and develop their identities – making a thorough cost-benefit analysis quite difficult.



12
  See <http://www.jobcorps.org> and <http://www.mdrc.org/project_9_60.html> for results on Job Corp and Job Start
programs, respectively.



                                                       17
As such, whether or not affirmative action is better to introduce early or late in the developmental

life cycle remains an open empirical question.



Myth #6: Many Non-minority Citizens are Directly Affected by Affirmative Action.



       Many white Americans hold erroneous perceptions about the costs they incur due to racial

preferences favoring blacks and Hispanics. According to our calculations based on data from the

2000 General Social Survey (GSS), 40 percent of whites over the age of 18 believe it likely that

they or someone they know were rejected from a college due to an unqualified black applicant

being admitted. Yet Kane (1998) has shown that racial preferences in admissions are given only at

the most elite 20 percent of colleges and universities and, even at these colleges, the impact of

racial preferences on the typical white applicant’s admission probability is small. As a back-of-the-

envelope calculation, assume that elite colleges and universities accept 20 percent of their applicant

pool (the true percentage is probably lower) and that 15 percent of their incoming students are

black or Hispanic. If one makes the extreme and clearly incorrect assumption that all admissions

of blacks and Hispanics to elite colleges and universities are a result of affirmative action, then 3

percent of all selective college admissions in a given year would be the result of affirmative action.

Very few of the 80 percent of those rejected by selective colleges could possibly fit into the 3

percent of admissions affected by affirmative action.. Evidently, many rejected white applicants

imagine themselves to have fallen just below the margin of acceptance though, by definition, this

could be true for only a few of them. Such perceptual biases could cause the aggregate subjective

cost of racial affirmative action to far exceed the policy’s objective burden.




                                                  18
       This observation has particular force if we take value-added, not absolute performance, as

the proper outcome measure in a college’s objective function. Indeed, Dale and Krueger (2002)

demonstrate that there is little incremental payoff for individuals from advantaged backgrounds

associated with attending selective colleges, whereas the benefit for disadvantaged students is

substantive. Thus, even if a non-trivial share of advantaged whites were to have been displaced

from elite universities due to the preferential admission of minority candidates – which is not the

case – this would probably have little impact on the lifetime incomes of advantaged whites while,

as Bowen and Bok (1998) have stressed, the benefits for disadvantaged minorities could be

substantial.

       Kane (1998) offers a useful analogy explaining why the perceived costs of race-targeted

policies might exceed the actual cost. Suppose a single unused parking space in front of a popular

restaurant is reserved for disabled drivers. Non-disabled drivers who observe the unused space

while trying to park might resent this policy, imagining that it prolongs their parking search. But

when parking is tight it is likely that, even if the disabled space were not reserved, it would already

have been taken by the time a given driver comes along. When many non-disabled drivers

overestimate their chance of getting the unreserved space, the perceived cost of a policy favoring

the disabled could be large, despite fact that the policy has a negligible effect on the mean duration

of a parking search. So too, it would seem, with racial affirmative action in higher education.



Myth #7: Affirmative Action Always Helps its Beneficiaries.



       Many supporters of affirmative action policy believe that, irrespective of the cost,

affirmative action always helps its beneficiaries. That is, it is better to attend an institution because




                                                   19
of preferential treatment than not to attend. Moreover, supporters of affirmative action argue that

minorities admitted under affirmative action are likely to benefit from the myriad academic, social,

and network externalities that exists at selective institutions.

       A recent controversial paper by Richard Sander (2005) offers the disturbing possibility that,

at least in the context of legal education, affirmative action may actually harm its beneficiaries. The

paper reports some useful and troubling facts. Using data on a national cohort of 27,000 law school

students gathered from 95 percent of accredited law schools in the United States, Sander finds that

the median black student starting law school in 1991 earned first-year grades comparable to those

of a white student at the 7th or 8th percentile of the overall grade distribution. Roughly 52 percent of

black first–year law students fall in the lowest decile of the overall grade distribution; 83 percent

fall in the bottom three deciles. Furthermore, Sander presents evidence that lower first-year grades

are associated with lower rates of law school completion and lower odds of passing the bar exam.

Thus, Sander argues it is theoretically possible (given certain assumptions on the educational

production function and on the determinants of the supply of black lawyers) that even though

eliminating affirmative action would cause fewer blacks to be enrolled at elite law schools, it could

also cause the number of practicing black lawyers to increase. This counter-intuitive result is

possible because, without affirmative action, black students would enroll in greater numbers at less

selective law schools and be more likely to graduate from law school and to pass the bar exam.

       We are not here endorsing (or disputing) the conclusions in Sander (2005), as they rest on a

number of hotly disputed counterfactual hypotheses concerning the behavior of prospective black

law students which are difficult to assess. Moreover, since the cost-benefit analysis of preferential

admissions depends explicitly on the value society places on the production of successful black

lawyers, a social welfare function that puts enough weight on successes relative to non-successes




                                                   20
might continue to favor a preferential admissions policy even when it is known to yields inferior

outcomes for many of its intended beneficiaries. Nevertheless, empirical findings such as this must

give a prudent analyst pause, and strongly suggest that it would be unwise to assume that racial

preferences are always helpful for their intended beneficiaries.



The Clarifying Power of Economic Analysis



        Heated argument over affirmative action will surely continue for years to come. Supporters

of these policies recently won an important victory in the area of education with the Supreme Court

decisions in Gratz v. Bollinger (02-516 [2003]) and Grutter v. Bollinger (02-241 [2003]).13

Although the court issued a split decision, deciding in favor of the University of Michigan Law

school and against the undergraduate college, the two decisions rejected the position that the

Constitution requires race-blind admissions policies at public colleges. As Justice O’Connor

declared in her majority opinion in Grutter: “Student body diversity is a compelling state interest

that can justify using race in university admissions.” Yet the Supreme Court also expressed

ambivalence about race-conscious public policies.

        We believe that economic reasoning can make a contribution to the affirmative action

debate. This paper shows the insights that can be gained when one respects the consistency

requirements of formal definitions, remains mindful of incentives, and recalls that the behaviors of

interacting agents must adjust to be mutually compatible in equilibrium. These are the mainstays




13
  New admissions guidelines for entering freshman at the University of Michigan have been adopted as a result. The
full text of these opinions is available through the U.S. Supreme Court website at
<http://www.supremecourtus.gov/opinions/02slipopinion.html>. Loury et al. (2003) is a legal brief considered by the
Supreme Court in the University of Michigan affirmative action litigation.


                                                         21
of the analytic discipline conveyed by economic reasoning, and we have tried to show how their

consistent application can enrich the study of affirmative action policy.




                                                  22
Acknowledgements


We are grateful to Sam Bowles, Edward Glaeser, and Alan Krueger for helpful discussions and the
editors of this journal for extensive comments that greatly improved this paper, and to Alex
Kaufman for exceptional research assistance.




                                              23
References



Becker, Gary. 1957. The Economics of Discrimination. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Bositis, David. 2004. “Views of the Future: Racial and Ethnic Diversity and Political Perspectives

   on a Rapidly Changing American Society.” Mimeograph. Joint Center for Political and

   Economic Studies.

Bowen, William and Derek Bok. 1998. The Shape of the River: Long-Term Consequences of

   Considering Race in College and University Admissions. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Bush, George W., 2004. “George W. Bush on Civil Rights: August 6, 2004,” at On the Issues:

   Every Political Leader on Every Issue. <www.issues2000.org/News_Affirmative_Action.htm>

Card, David and Alan Krueger. 2004. “Would the Elimination of Affirmative Action Affect Highly

   Qualified Minority Applicants? Evidence from California and Texas.” NBER Working Paper

   No. 10366.

Chan, Jimmy and Eyster, Erik. 2003. “Does Banning Affirmative Action Lower College Student

   Quality?” American Economic Review, 93:2 (June), 858-872.

Clinton, William J. 1995. “The Job of Ending Discrimination in This Country Is Not Over.” July

   16. Available at:

   <http://www.washingtonpost.com/wpsrv/politics/special/affirm/docs/clintonspeech.htm>.

Coate, Stephen. and Glenn C. Loury. 1993. “Antidiscrimination Enforcement and the Problem of

   Patronization” American Economic Review, 83: 2, 92-98.

Edley, Christopher. 1996. Not all Black and White: Affirmative Action and American Values. NY:

   Hill and Wang.




                                                24
Epple, Dennis, Richard Romano and Holger Sieg. 2003, “The Practice and Proscription of

   Affirmative Action in Higher Education: An Equilibrium Analysis,” NBER Working Paper

   #9799.

Fang, Hanming and Fryer, Roland. 2003. “The Optimal Timing of Affirmative Action,” mimeo.

   Yale University.

Fryer, Roland. 2004. “Implicit Quotas.” mimeo. Harvard University.

Fryer, Roland and Loury, Glenn. 2003b. “Categorical Redistribution in Winner-Take-All Markets,”

   NBER WP. No. 10104.

Fryer, Roland G., Glenn C. Loury and Tolga Yuret. 2003. “Color-Blind Affirmative Action,”

   NBER WP. No. 10103.

Kane, Thomas. 1998. “Racial and Ethnic Preferences in College Admissions.” in C. Jecnks and M.

   Phillips, The Black-White Test Score Gap, Washington, D.C., Brookings Institution Press, 431-

   456.

Kravitz et al. 1996. Affirmative Action: A Review of Psychological and Behavioral Research.

   Mimeograph. Prepared by a subcommittee of the Scientific Affairs Committee of the Society for

   Industrial and Organizational Psychology.

Krueger, Alan, Jesse Rothstein, and Sarah Turner. 2004. “Race, Income and College in 25 Years:

   The Continuing Legacy of Segregation and Discrimination.” Working Paper #9, Education

   Research Section, Princeton University.

Loury, Glenn C. 1977. “A Dynamic Theory of Racial Income Differences,” in P. Wallace and A.

   LaMont (eds.) Women, Minorities and Employment Discrimination, Lexington Books, pp. 153-

   186.




                                               25
Loury, Glenn C. 1981a. “Is Equal Opportunity Enough?” American Economic Review Proceedings,

   May, pp. 122-126.

Loury, Glenn C. 1981b. “Intergenerational Transfers and the Distribution of Earnings,”

   Econometrica, Vol. 49, No.4, July: 843-67.

Loury, Glenn C. 1997. “How to Mend Affirmative Action,” The Public Interest 107 (Spring): 33-

   43.

Loury, Glenn C. et al. 2003. Brief Amicus Curiae. Sup. Ct. of the United States. Nos. 02-241 & 02-

   516. (Barbara Grutter v. Lee Bollinger, et al.; Jennifer Gratz and Patrick Hamacher v. Lee

   Bollinger, et al. Brief filed Feb. 15, 2003). Available at

   <http://chronicle.com/indepth/michigan/documents/briefs/respondent/socsci.pdf>.

Racial Privacy Initiative. 2002. “Press Release: California to challenge divisive race boxes.” May

   17. <http://www.racialprivacy.org/content/press/may17_2002.php>.

Sethi, Rajiv and Rohini Somanathan. 2004. “Inequality and Segregation,) Journal of Political

   Economy, Vol. 112, No. 6, December, pp. 1296-1321.

Sniderman, Paul M. and Thomas Piazza, 1993. The Scar of Race, Harvard University Press

U.S. Department of Education. 2003. Race-Neutral Alternatives in Postsecondary Education:

   Innovative Approaches to Diversity, Washington, DC., March.

   http://www.ed.gov/about/offices/list/ocr/edlite-raceneutralreport.html




                                                 26
