                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  PREDICTING THE EQUITY PREMIUM OUT OF SAMPLE:
                   CAN ANYTHING BEAT THE HISTORICAL AVERAGE?

                                          John Y. Campbell
                                         Samuel B. Thompson

                                         Working Paper 11468
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w11468


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       June 2005




Both authors: Department of Economics, Littauer Center, Harvard University, Cambridge MA 02138, USA,
and NBER. Email john_campbell@harvard.edu and sthompson@harvard.edu. We are grateful to Jan Szilagyi
for able research assistance, to Amit Goyal and Ivo Welch for sharing their data, and to Malcolm Baker, Lutz
Kilian, Martin Lettau, Sydney Ludvigson, and Rossen Valkanov for helpful comments on an earlier draft.
This material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant No. 0214061
to Campbell. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by John Y. Campbell and Samuel B. Thompson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Predicting the Equity Premium Out Of Sample: Can Anything Beat the Historical Average?
John Y. Campbell and Samuel B. Thompson
NBER Working Paper No. 11468
June 2005
JEL No. G1

                                           ABSTRACT




A number of variables are correlated with subsequent returns on the aggregate US stock market in

the 20th Century. Some of these variables are stock market valuation ratios, others reflect patterns

in corporate finance or the levels of shortand long-term interest rates. Amit Goyal and Ivo Welch

(2004) have argued that in-sample correlations conceal a systematic failure of these variables out of

sample: None are able to beat a simple forecast based on the historical average stock return. In this

note we show that forecasting variables with significant forecasting power insample generally have

a better out-of-sample performance than a forecast based on the historical average return, once

sensible restrictions are imposed on the signs of coefficients and return forecasts. The out-of-sample

predictive power is small, but we find that it is economically meaningful. We also show that a

variable is quite likely to have poor out-of-sample performance for an extended period of time even

when the variable genuinely predicts returns with a stable coefficient.

John Y. Campbell                                      Samuel B. Thompson
Department of Economics                               Department of Economics
Harvard University                                    Harvard University
Littauer Center 213                                   Littauer Center 125
Cambridge, MA 02138                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER                                              sthompson@harvard.edu
john_campbell@harvard.edu
1    Introduction

Towards the end of the last century, academic finance economists came to take se-
riously the view that aggregate stock returns are predictable. During the 1980’s a
number of papers studied valuation ratios, such as the dividend-price ratio, earnings-
price ratio, or smoothed earnings-price ratio. Value-oriented investors in the tradition
of Graham and Dodd (1934) had always asserted that high valuation ratios are an in-
dication of an undervalued stock market and should predict high subsequent returns,
but these ideas did not carry much weight in the academic literature until authors
such as Rozeﬀ (1984), Fama and French (1988), and Campbell and Shiller (1988a,b)
found that valuation ratios are positively correlated with subsequent returns and that
the implied predictability of returns is substantial at longer horizons. Around the
same time, several papers pointed out that yields on short- and long-term Treasury
and corporate bonds are correlated with subsequent stock returns (Fama and Schwert
1977, Keim and Stambaugh 1986, Campbell 1987, Fama and French 1989).

    During the 1990’s and early 2000’s, research continued on the prediction of stock
returns from valuation ratios (Kothari and Shanken 1997, Pontiﬀ and Schall 1998) and
interest rates (Hodrick 1992). Several papers suggested new predictor variables ex-
ploiting information in corporate payout and financing activity (Lamont 1998, Baker
and Wurgler 2000), the level of consumption in relation to wealth (Lettau and Ludvig-
son 2001), and the relative valuations of high- and low-beta stocks (Polk, Thompson,
and Vuolteenaho 2003). At the same time, several authors expressed concern that
the apparent predictability of stock returns might be spurious. Many of the predictor
variables in the literature are highly persistent, and Stambaugh (1999) pointed out
that persistence leads to biased coeﬃcients in predictive regressions if innovations in
the predictor variable are correlated with returns (as is strongly the case for valuation
ratios, although not for interest rates). Under the same conditions the standard t-
test for predictability has incorrect size (Cavanagh, Elliott, and Stock 1995). These
problems are exacerbated if researchers are data mining, considering large numbers
of variables and reporting only those results that are apparently statistically signif-
icant (Ferson, Sarkissian, and Simin 2003). An active recent literature discusses
alternative econometric methods for correcting the Stambaugh bias and conducting
valid inference (Cavanagh, Elliott, and Stock 1995, Mark 1995, Kilian 1999, Ang and
Bekaert 2003, Jansson and Moreira 2003, Lewellen 2004, Torous, Valkanov, and Yan
2004, Campbell and Yogo 2005, Polk, Thompson, and Vuolteenaho 2005).



                                           1
    A somewhat diﬀerent critique emphasizes that predictive regressions have often
performed poorly out-of-sample (Goyal and Welch 2003, 2004, Butler, Grullon, and
Weston 2004). This critique had particular force during the bull market of the late
1990’s, when low valuation ratios predicted extraordinarily low stock returns that did
not materialize until the early 2000’s (Campbell and Shiller 1998). Goyal and Welch
(2004) argue that the poor out-of-sample performance of predictive regressions is a
systemic problem, not confined to any one decade. They compare predictive regres-
sions with historical average returns and find that historical average returns almost
always generate superior return forecasts. They write: “Our paper has systemati-
cally investigated the empirical real-world out-of-sample performance of plain linear
regressions to predict the equity premium. We find that none of the popular variables
has worked–and not only post-1990... Our profession has yet to find a variable that
has had meaningful robust empirical equity premium forecasting power, at least from
the perspective of a real-world investor.”

    In this note we evaluate the out-of-sample performance of a wide variety of fore-
casting variables and argue that the case for stock return predictability is much
stronger than Goyal and Welch admit. We review the empirical evidence in Sec-
tion 2. We first discuss the mundane but important issues of return measurement
and sample selection, arguing that it is important to evaluate predictive power using
high-quality data on total returns: Price returns, or estimated total returns based
on interpolated dividends, are not an acceptable alternative. For this reason we
use the period since 1927, when CRSP monthly total returns are available, as our
out-of-sample forecast evaluation period.

    Next we compare in-sample and out-of-sample forecast performance. We use the
in-sample t statistic as a measure of the apparent in-sample predictability from a given
variable. We show that many of the variables with particularly poor out-of-sample
performance have low t statistics, so in-sample and out-of-sample forecast evaluation
methods often deliver similar results. We also calculate an out-of-sample R2 statistic
that can be compared with the usual in-sample R2 statistic. Like Goyal and Welch,
we find poor out-of-sample performance for many of the usual linear regressions.

   Goyal and Welch recommend that one should adopt “the perspective of a real-
world investor”. Our next contribution is to argue that a real-world investor would
not mechanically forecast using a linear regression, but would impose some restrictions
on the regression coeﬃcients. We consider two alternative restrictions: first, that the
regression coeﬃcient has the theoretically expected sign; and second, that the fitted


                                           2
value of the equity premium is positive. We impose these restrictions sequentially and
then together, and find that they substantially improve the out-of-sample evidence
for predictability.

    Section 2 shows that several commonly used forecasting variables do have some
ability to predict stock returns out-of-sample. The out-of-sample R2 statistics are
positive, but very small. This raises the question of whether the predictive power
is economically meaningful. In Section 3 we show that even very small R2 statistics
are relevant for investors because they can generate large improvements in portfolio
performance. In a related exercise, we calculate the fees that investors would be
willing to pay to exploit the information in each of our forecasting variables.

    In Section 4 we discuss the interpretation of out-of-sample forecasting results.
Goyal and Welch write as if poor out-of-sample performance is strong evidence against
the view that stock returns are predictable. We show to the contrary, that a predictive
model may have a stable coeﬃcient equal to its in-sample OLS estimate, and with
high probability the model will not beat the historical average return out of sample.
A similar point has been made by Inoue and Kilian (2004), who argue that in-sample
tests of predictability are often more powerful than out-of-sample tests. Section 5
briefly concludes.



2    Empirical results

In this section we conduct an out-of-sample forecasting exercise inspired by Goyal
and Welch (2004), with modifications that reveal the sensitivity of their conclusions.
We use a monthly time horizon and predict simple monthly stock returns. This
immediately creates a tradeoﬀ between the length of the data sample and the quality
of the available data. High-quality total return data are available monthly from
CRSP since 1927, while total monthly returns before that time are constructed by
interpolation of lower-frequency dividend payments and therefore may be suspect.
Accordingly we use the CRSP data period as our out-of-sample forecast evaluation
period, but use earlier data to estimate an initial regression.

   Table 1, whose format is based on the tables in Goyal and Welch, reports the
results. We begin by discussing panel A, and then discuss modifications to the
basic method reported in panels B, C, and D. Each row of the table considers


                                          3
a diﬀerent forecasting variable. The first four rows consider valuation ratios: the
dividend price ratio, earnings price ratio, smoothed earnings price ratio, and book to
market ratio. Each of these ratios has some accounting measure of corporate value
in the numerator, and market value in the denominator. The smoothed earnings
price ratio, proposed by Campbell and Shiller (1988b, 1998) is the ratio of a 10-
year moving average of earnings to current prices. Campbell and Shiller argue that
this ratio should have better forecasting power than the current earnings price ratio
because aggregate corporate earnings display short-run cyclical noise; in particular
earnings drop close to zero in recession years such as 1934 and 1992, creating spikes in
the current earnings price ratio that have nothing to do with stock market valuation
levels.2

    The next seven rows consider nominal interest rates and inflation: the short-term
interest rate, long-term bond yield, lagged long-term bond return, the term spread
between long- and short-term Treasury yields, the default spread between corporate
and Treasury bond yields, the lagged excess return on corporate over Treasury bonds,
and the lagged rate of inflation.

    The last four rows of the table evaluate forecasting variables that have been
proposed more recently: the cross-sectional beta premium of Polk, Thompson, and
Vuolteenaho (2003), the dividend payout ratio proposed by Lamont (1998), the equity
share of new issues proposed by Baker and Wurgler (2000), and the consumption-
wealth ratio of Lettau and Ludvigson (2001). This last variable is based on a coin-
tegrating relationship between consumption, aggregate labor income, and aggregate
financial wealth. Rather than estimate a separate cointegrating regression, we simply
include the three variables directly in the forecasting equation for stock returns.

    The first column of Table 1 reports the first date at which we have data to run
the forecasting regression. For dividends, earnings, and stock returns we have data,
originally assembled by Robert Shiller, back to 1871. Other data series typically
begin shortly after the end of World War I. All data series continue to the end of
2003 as reported in the second column of the table. The third column reports the
date at which we begin the out-of-sample forecast evaluation. This is the beginning
of 1927, when accurate data on total monthly stock returns become available from
   2
    Goyal and Welch consider these variables, and also the ratio of lagged dividends to lagged prices
(the “dividend yield” in Goyal and Welch’s terminology). We drop this variable as there is no
reason to believe that it should predict better than the ratio of lagged dividends to current prices
(the “dividend price ratio”).



                                                 4
CRSP, or 20 years after the date in column 1, whichever comes later.

    The fourth and fifth columns of Table 1 report the full-sample t statistic for the
significance of each variable in forecasting stock returns, and the adjusted R2 statistic
of the full-sample regression.3 It is immediately obvious from the column of t sta-
tistics that many of the valuation ratios and interest-rate variables are statistically
insignificant in predicting stock returns over this long sample period. The most suc-
cessful variables are the two variants of the earnings price ratio, the Treasury bill rate,
and the inflation rate. It may not be surprising that interest-rate variables are weak
predictors over the sample periods used here, as interest-rate behavior changed radi-
cally in the early 1950’s when the modern era of monetary policy began. The three
recently proposed variables are much more successful return predictors in-sample,
with t statistics of at least 2.4.

    The remaining columns of the table evaluate the out-of-sample performance of
these forecasts. The sixth column, labelled “Delta RMSE”, reports the diﬀerence in
the root mean squared error between the predictive regression and a forecast equal
to the historical average return measured at each date (equivalent to a regression
of stock returns onto a constant). When this diﬀerence is negative, the historical
average return beats the predictive regression out of sample.

    The seventh and eighth columns report the mean out-of-sample residual for the
predictive regression and the historical average return forecast. In the first few rows
of the table, which have initial data from the late 19th and early 20th centuries and
an out-of-sample period starting in 1927, these residuals are typically positive. This
reflects the strong performance of the US stock market in the later 20th Century.
In rows corresponding to slowly moving valuation ratios such as the dividend-price
and earnings-price ratios, and also in the cross-sectional premium row, the residuals
are more positive for the predictive regression than for the historical average return,
reflecting the tendency of these variables to generate pessimistic return forecasts to-
wards the end of the 20th Century.

       The last column reports an out-of-sample R2 statistic that can be compared with
   3
    The adjustment of the R2 statistic for degrees of freedom makes only a very small diﬀerence in
samples of the size used here. For a regression from 1871 through 2003, the adjustment is -0.06%,
and it is -0.11% for a regression from 1927 through 2003.




                                                5
the in-sample R2 statistic. This is computed as
                                        PT
                              2               (rt − rbt )2
                            ROS = 1 − PTt=1                ,                         (1)
                                                         2
                                          t=1 (rt − r t )
where rbt is the fitted value from a predictive regression estimated through period
t − 1, and rt is the historical average return estimated through period t − 1. The
out-of-sample R2 has the same sign as the change in the root mean squared error
reported in column 6, but it is measured in the same units as the in-sample R2 in
column 5.

    The out-of-sample performance of the predictor variables is quite mixed. Panel
A of Table 1 shows that only two out of four valuation ratios, three out of seven
interest-rate variables, and two out of four recently proposed variables deliver positive
out-of-sample R2 statistics.

    It is premature, however, to conclude with Goyal and Welch that predictive re-
gressions cannot profitably be used by investors in real time. A regression estimated
over a short sample period can easily generate perverse results, such as a negative
coeﬃcient when theory suggests that the coeﬃcient should be positive. Since out-of-
sample forecast evaluation begins as little as 20 years after the start of the data set,
this can be an important problem in practice. For example, in the early 1930s the
earnings-price ratio was very high, but the coeﬃcient on the predictor was estimated
to be negative. This led to a negative forecast of the equity premium in the early
1930s and subsequent poor forecast performance. In practice, an investor would not
use a perverse coeﬃcient but would likely conclude that the coeﬃcient is zero, in
eﬀect imposing prior knowledge on the output of the regression.

     In panels B, C, and D we explore the impact of imposing sensible restrictions on
the out-of-sample forecasting exercise. In panel B we set the regression coeﬃcient
to zero whenever it has the “wrong” sign (diﬀerent from the theoretically expected
sign estimated over the full sample). In panel C we assume that investors rule out
a negative equity premium, and set the forecast to zero whenever it is negative. We
follow the same procedure for the historical mean forecast, setting it to zero whenever
it is negative. In panel D we impose first the sign restriction on the coeﬃcient, and
then the sign restriction on the forecast.

    These restrictions improve the out-of-sample performance of predictive regressions.
In panel A, as we noted above, only 2 out of 4 valuation ratios have a positive out-of-
sample R2 . In panels B and D this improves to 3 out of 4. Similarly, in panel A only

                                            6
3 out of 7 interest-rate variables have a positive out-of-sample R2 statistic, but this
improves to 4 out of 7 in panels B and C, and 5 out of 7 in panel D. The restriction
that the equity premium be positive helps the performance of the cross-sectional
equity premium and the dividend payout ratio, so that all four recently proposed
variables have positive out-of-sample R2 in panels C and D. Importantly, once we
impose these restrictions the regressions that perform well out-of-sample now tend
to be the ones that also work well in-sample. In fact the out-of-sample R2 in panel
D sometimes exceeds the in-sample R2 . The main exception is the book-to-market
ratio, which generates a negative out-of-sample R2 statistic in all four panels of the
table.

    Figure 1 illustrates the eﬀect of the restrictions for the smoothed earnings-price ra-
tio. The coeﬃcient restriction significantly improves the forecasts in the 1930s, when
the coeﬃcient was estimated to be negative. The forecast restrictions are binding
during the 1960s and 1990s, and improve the forecast performance during the 1990s.
Valuation ratios were unusually low during these periods, leading to unprecedentedly
low forecasts. Campbell and Shiller (2001) also noted the unusually low earnings-
price ratios of the 1990s, and wrote “We do not find this extreme forecast credible;
when the independent variable has moved so far from the historically observed range,
we cannot trust a linear regression line.” Our forecast restriction oﬀers a simple way
to correct for this incredible forecast.

    Looking at the performance of individual variables, it is striking how much better
the earnings-based valuation ratios perform than the dividend-price ratio. This may
well be due to changes in payout policy as firms have shifted from paying dividends to
repurchasing shares. Boudoukh, Michaely, Richardson, and Roberts (2004) empha-
size that in recent years the total payout to price ratio, including share repurchases,
has much stronger predictive power than the dividend-price ratio. Also, short- and
long-term Treasury yields perform reasonably well both in-sample and out-of-sample,
consistent with the conclusion of Ang and Bekaert (2003) that these variables are
robust return predictors. The performance of these variables would be stronger if
we started the sample period later, because the interest-rate process changed dra-
matically at the time of the Federal Reserve-Treasury Accord in 1951. The recently
proposed variables tend to perform well, particularly Lettau and Ludvigson’s combi-
nation of consumption, income, and wealth; however it should be remembered that
these variables may have been selected with the aid of a specification search based
on almost all the data used here, and this may give them an artificial advantage over
predictor variables that were proposed in the late 1980’s or before.


                                            7
    All the regressions we have reported predict simple stock returns rather than log
stock returns. The use of simple returns makes little diﬀerence to the comparison of
predictive regressions with historical mean forecasts, but all forecasts tend to generate
higher mean residuals when log returns are used. The reason for this is that high
stock market volatility in the 1920’s and 1930’s depressed log returns relative to simple
returns in this period. Thus the gap between average stock returns in the late 20th
Century and the early 20th Century is greater when log returns are used.



3         How large an R2 should we expect?

In the previous section we showed that many of the forecasting variables that have
been discussed in the literature do have positive out-of-sample predictive power for
aggregate US stock returns, when reasonable restrictions are imposed on the predic-
tive regression. However the R2 statistics are very small in magnitude. This raises
the important question of whether they are economically meaningful.

        To explore this issue, consider the following example:
                                        rt+1 = µ + xt + εt+1 ,                                        (2)
where rt+1 is the excess simple return on a risky asset over the riskless interest rate, µ
is the unconditional average excess return, xt is a predictor variable with mean zero,
and εt+1 is a random shock with mean zero. For tractability, consider an investor
with a single-period horizon and mean-variance preferences. The investor’s objective
function is expected portfolio return less (γ/2) times portfolio variance, where γ can
be interpreted as the coeﬃcient of relative risk aversion.4 If the investor does not
observe xt , she chooses a portfolio weight in the risky asset
                                        µ ¶µ                ¶
                                          1          µ
                              αt = α =                                                 (3)
                                          γ     σ 2x + σ 2ε
and earns an average excess return of
                              µ ¶µ                ¶
                                1         µ2          S2
                                                    =    ,                                            (4)
                                γ     σ 2x + σ 2ε     γ
    4
     Merton (1969) presents the analogous portfolio solution for the case where the investor has power
utility with relative risk aversion γ, asset returns are lognormally distributed, and the portfolio can be
continuously rebalanced. Campbell and Viceira (2002, Chapter 2) use a discrete-time approximate
version of Merton’s solution.

                                                    8
where S is the unconditional Sharpe ratio of the risky asset.

   If the investor observes xt , she sets
                                       µ ¶µ        ¶
                                          1 µ + xt
                                  αt =               ,                                   (5)
                                          γ   σ 2ε

where the denominator is now σ 2ε rather than σ 2x + σ 2ε because the variation in the
predictor variable xt is now expected and does not contribute to risk. The investor
earns an average excess return of
                        µ ¶µ 2          ¶ µ ¶µ 2            ¶
                          1    µ + σ 2x     1      S + R2
                                         =                    ,                    (6)
                          γ       σ 2ε      γ      1 − R2
where
                                                σ 2x
                                     R2 =                                                (7)
                                            σ 2x + σ 2ε
is the R2 statistic for the regression of excess return on the predictor variable xt .

   The diﬀerence between the two expected returns is
                           µ ¶µ           ¶
                              1      R2
                                            (1 + S 2 )                                   (8)
                              γ    1 − R2

which is always larger than R2 /γ, and is close to R2 /γ when the time interval is short
and R2 and S 2 are both small. The proportional increase in the expected return
from observing xt is            µ         ¶µ          ¶
                                    R2        1 + S2
                                                                                     (9)
                                  1 − R2         S2
which is always larger than R2 /S 2 and is close to R2 /S 2 when the time interval is
short and R2 and S 2 are both small.

    This analysis shows that the right way to judge the magnitude of R2 is to compare
it with the squared Sharpe ratio S 2 . If R2 is large relative to S 2 , then an investor
can use the information in the predictive regression to obtain a large proportional
increase in portfolio return. In our monthly data since 1871, the monthly Sharpe
ratio for stocks is 0.108, corresponding to an annual Sharpe ratio of 0.374. The
squared monthly Sharpe ratio S 2 = 0.012 = 1.2%. This can be compared with the
out-of-sample R2 statistic for, say, the earnings-price ratio of 0.25% in Panel D of
Table 1. A mean-variance investor can use the earnings-price ratio to increase her

                                            9
average monthly portfolio return by a proportional factor of 0.25/1.2 = 21%. The
absolute increase in portfolio return depends on risk aversion, but is about 25 basis
points per month or 3% per year for an investor with unit risk aversion, and about 1%
per year for an investor with a risk aversion coeﬃcient of three. Predictor variables in
Table 1 with higher out-of-sample R2 statistics imply correspondingly larger increases
in return.

    The investor who observes xt gets a higher portfolio return in part by taking on
greater risk. Thus the increase in the average return is not pure welfare gain for
a risk-averse investor. To take account of this, in Table 2 we calculate the welfare
benefits generated by optimally trading on each predictor variable for an investor with
relative risk aversion of three. We impose realistic portfolio constraints, preventing
the investor from shorting stocks or taking more than 50% leverage, that is, confining
the portfolio weight on stocks to lie between 0 and 150%. The investor’s optimal
portfolio depends on her estimate of stock return variance at each point in time, and
we consider two alternative assumptions about how the investor forms this estimate.
In the central panel of the table, the investor estimates variance using all data available
up to the time her investment is made, while in the right hand panel, the investor
estimates variance using a rolling five-year window of monthly data. The latter
approach may be more appropriate if the investor believes that there are short-term
fluctuations in variance. We report the utility level from investing with the historical
mean forecast of the equity premium, and the changes in utility caused by investing
with the unrestricted linear regression of Table 1, Panel A, or the doubly restricted
linear regression of Table 1, Panel D. These utility diﬀerences have the units of
expected return, so they can also be interpreted as the transactions costs or portfolio
management fees that investors would be prepared to pay each month to exploit the
information in the predictor variable.

    In Table 2 the imposition of forecast restrictions makes less diﬀerence than it did
in Table 1. The reason is that we rule out short sales, so investors are unable to act on
negative forecasts of the equity premium even if their predictive regressions generate
such forecasts. The use of time-varying variance forecasts makes little diﬀerence for
valuation ratios or the recently proposed predictor variables, but it generally increases
the utility gain from predicting stock returns with interest rates. Three out of seven
interest rates generate positive utility gains when a constant variance assumption is
used, while six out of seven do so when a time-varying variance estimate is used.

   The predictor variables that generate the highest out-of-sample R2 statistics gen-


                                            10
erally deliver positive utility gains to investors. The main exception to this is the
smoothed earnings-price ratio, which has a positive out-of-sample R2 statistic but a
negative utility gain. This result is driven by volatile monthly returns in the early
1930’s, together with the diminishing marginal utility of risk-averse investors that
downweights portfolio profits relative to losses. The smoothed earnings-price ra-
tio increases utility if the evaluation period excludes the early 1930’s, or if a longer
investment horizon is used as we discuss below.

    The utility gains reported in Table 2 are limited by the leverage constraint, to-
gether with the high average equity premium. Predictable variations in stock returns
do not generate portfolio gains when there is a binding upper limit on equity invest-
ment. Utility gains would be larger if we relaxed the portfolio constraint or included
additional assets, with higher average returns than Treasury bills, in the portfolio
choice problem. On the other hand, Table 2 does not take any account of trans-
actions costs. Modest gains from market timing strategies could be oﬀset by the
additional costs implied by those strategies. Optimal trading strategies in the pres-
ence of transactions costs are complex, and so we do not explore this issue further
here. We note that even the baseline strategy based on a historical-mean forecast
incurs rebalancing costs and that utility gains of 10 basis points per month, or 1.2%
per year, as reported in several rows of Table 2, are suﬃcient to cover substantial
additional costs.

    Since small R2 statistics can generate large benefits for investors, we should expect
predictive regressions to have only modest explanatory power. Regressions with large
R2 statistics would be too profitable to believe. The saying “If you’re so smart,
why aren’t you rich?” applies with great force here, and should lead investors to
suspect that highly successful predictive regressions are spurious. Note, however,
that the squared Sharpe ratio and average real interest rate increase in proportion
with the investment horizon; thus much larger R2 statistics are believable at longer
horizons. Authors such as Fama and French (1988) have found that R2 statistics
increase strongly with the horizon when the predictor variable is persistent, a finding
that is analyzed in Campbell, Lo, and MacKinlay (1997, Chapter 7) and Campbell
(2001). This behavior is completely consistent with our analysis here.

   Table 3 illustrates the eﬀect of increasing the investment horizon on the perfor-
mance of our four valuation ratios. These predictor variables are highly persistent,
so we would expect their explanatory power to increase as we change the horizon
from one month in the top panel, to one quarter in the middle panel, to one year


                                           11
in the bottom panel. Indeed the out-of-sample R2 statistics increase dramatically
for the two earnings-based ratios and become positive for the book-to-market ratio.
However the forecasting performance of the dividend-price ratio does not improve at
longer horizons. The right hand part of Table 3 reports utility gains for these four
ratios implemented at diﬀerent horizons. The earnings-based ratios deliver solid im-
provements when used to invest over one year, as does the dividend-price ratio when
the investor allows for changing volatility of stock returns, but the book-to-market
ratio does not improve utility despite its positive out-of-sample R2 at a one year
horizon.



4     Reconciling in-sample with out-of-sample results

How do we reconcile apparent diﬀerences between in-sample and out-of-sample perfor-
mance of the predictors? We emphasize that the diﬀerences are not typically large: In
Table 1 small in-sample t statistics generally correspond to poor out-of-sample perfor-
mance. However there are predictors, such as the book-to-market ratio, that display
statistically significant t statistics along with inferior out-of-sample performance.

    There are many reasons why out-of-sample evidence can contradict in-sample
results. These include the eﬀects of data mining, structural change, parameter uncer-
tainty, and bad luck. Data mining occurs when a researcher evaluates several diﬀerent
predictors, but only reports those that are significant. This specification search can
lead to spurious evidence of predictability. In principle out-of-sample analysis can
counter data mining, since a spurious predictor should not work out-of-sample. Of
course, the RMSE comparisons reported here and in Goyal and Welch (2004) are not
true out-of-sample statistics. Just like the in-sample t statistics, they are functions of
historical data. To see this point more clearly, suppose that finance academics decided
to evaluate predictive relationships using RMSE comparisons instead of t statistics.
A researcher could evaluate several diﬀerent predictors, then choose to report only
those that show large improvements in out-of-sample RMSE. So it seems unlikely
that data mining explains the diﬀerent results.

    Certain kinds of structural change can lead to spurious findings of in-sample pre-
dictability (Clark and McCracken 2003, Giacomini and White 2003, Paye and Tim-
mermann 2003). Suppose the predictive relationship is strong at the beginning of
the sample but weakens over time. In this case the in-sample t statistic may detect

                                           12
the strong relationship on average. However a market participant might not have
been able to use the forecasting relationship, since at the beginning of the sample it
would be hard to estimate, and toward the end of the sample it would have disap-
peared. While this represents a weakness of in-sample statistics, Inoue and Kilian
(2004) have shown that out-of-sample statistics have the same problems. To continue
the example, if the predictive relationship declines slowly the out-of-sample statistics
will also detect past predictability. Inoue and Kilian (2004) argue that the relative
performance of in-sample and out-of-sample statistics has a great deal to do with the
form of structural change. Without a specific model of structural change, it is diﬃcult
to conclude which statistics are more useful to forecasters.

   Next we turn to the eﬀects of parameter uncertainty. To fix ideas, consider the
predictive regression
                             rt+1 = µ + θxt + εt+1 ,                          (10)
with E εt = 0. rt is the excess return on the S&P 500 and xt is a predictor variable
like the dividend-price ratio. Should a forecaster use the historical mean or the fitted
              b +b
value rbt+1 = µ    θxt ? If θ 6= 0 the historical mean of rt+1 will be a biased predictor,
while rbt+1 will be unbiased so long as the regression estimates are unbiased. On the
other hand, estimation error for θ will increase the variance of rbt+1 over the historical
mean. Thus there is a choice between the unbiased but noisy predictor rbt+1 and the
possibly biased and less-noisy historical mean. If θ = 0, we expect the historical
mean to forecast more accurately since both predictors are unbiased while estimation
error for θ will add noise to the forecast. As θ increases the bias of the historical
mean becomes more important. However, if θ and the sample size are both small,
then the noise from estimating θ may dominate the gains from eliminating the bias.
In light of the bias-variance tradeoﬀ, consider Inoue and Kilian’s (2004) result that
in-sample predictability tests are generally more powerful than out-of-sample tests.
In some situations a powerful in-sample test could correctly detect predictability, but
that predictability could be useless to a market participant who cannot estimate the
predictive coeﬃcient accurately enough to improve her forecast.

    The bias-variance tradeoﬀ becomes more complicated when the regression esti-
mates are biased. This will occur when the predictor variable is persistent and shocks
to the predictor are correlated with shocks to the market return. Following Stam-
baugh (1999), we model the predictor with

                                 xt+1 = ν + ρxt + ut+1                               (11)


                                           13
with E ut+1 = 0. Classical asymptotic theory states that in a large sample the ordinary
least squares estimator for θ is unbiased and has the smallest sampling variability
among unbiased estimators. It is well known, however, that when ρ is close to 1
and Corr (et+1 , ut+1 ) is nonzero, classical asymptotics oﬀers a poor approximation to
the true sampling distribution of the OLS estimator in small samples. For example,
Stambaugh (1999) shows that when x is the dividend yield the OLS estimator and the
in-sample t statistic are biased upward, leading to findings of spurious predictability.

    These concerns about parameter uncertainty led us to impose the forecast restric-
tions in Table 1. We required θ to have the theoretically correct sign, and we also
required the forecasted equity premium to be positive. This solution is not opti-
mal, but there does not appear to exist an optimal forecaster when the predictor is
persistent. An unbiased estimator for θ does not exist, although Stambaugh (1999)
and Amihud and Hurvich (2004) have developed bias corrections. Litterman (1986)
encountered these issues when forecasting macroeconomic series. His solution was
to impose Bayesian prior information on θ. Our forecast restrictions can loosely be
thought of as a uniform prior in a restricted part of the parameter space.

    Finally, we turn to the problem of bad luck. Consider the unrealistic scenario
where θ is known and nonzero. In this case a market participant will use the fore-
casting variable xt since it improves her forecast in expectation. However, in a finite
sample it may still be the case that the historical mean beats the forecasting variable
with known θ. This does not mean that the market participant should not use the
forecasting variable. Rather she made the right decision but was unlucky.

    We carried out a Monte Carlo experiment to assess the eﬀects of parameter uncer-
tainty and bad luck. For each predictor variable, we estimated equations (10) and (11)
by ordinary least squares, and fit a constant-correlation GARCH model (Bollerslev
1990) to the residuals.5 We then simulated 5000 data sets from the estimated mod-
   5
       The error variances follow

                   σ 2e,t = ω 1 + α1 e2t−1 + β 1 σ 2e,t−1 ;        σ 2u,t = ω 2 + α2 u2t−1 + β 2 σ 2u,t−1

with σ 2e,t ≡ Vart−1 (et ) and σ 2u,t ≡ Vart−1 (ut ). The conditional correlations Corrt−1 (et , ut ) are
constant. Let (b     bt ) denote residuals from regressions (10) and (11). We estimate the CC GARCH
                et , u
model by maximum likelihood, assuming the errors (et , ut ) are bivariate normal. Bollerslev and
Wooldridge (1992) have shown that these parameter estimates will be consistent even if the true
errors are not distributed bivariate normal. Our Monte Carlo simulations do not impose normality;
rather they match the empirical distribution of the residuals (b        bt ). Our algorithm for simulating
                                                                   et , u
the j th pair (ej , uj ) follows. We normalize the residuals by their implied variances to obtain the


                                                              14
els, and for each simulated data set compared the out-of-sample forecasting results
from using the historical mean to the results from using the predictor variable. Since
none of the estimated values of θ are zero, all of the data generating processes imply
some degree of predictability. The central panel of Table 4 reports the percentage of
simulated data sets where the predictor variable leads to an inferior mean-squared
error forecast than the historical mean.

    Table 4 shows that parameter uncertainty can have a large eﬀect on out-of-sample
performance. For example, the in-sample R2 statistic for the book-to-market ratio
is 0.677%, yet at those in-sample parameter values the historical mean beats the
unrestricted regression forecast in 35.5% of the simulations. The table also shows
that forecast restrictions lead to significant improvements on average. For prediction
with the inflation rate, the unrestricted regression forecast is inferior to the mean in
54.4% of the draws, but once the restrictions are imposed that drops to 36.3%.

   The table demonstrates that poor out-of-sample performance can also come from
bad luck. The last column of the central panel of Table 4, labelled “known θ”,
reports the infeasible results from using the true value of θ. Even when θ is known,
the historical mean beats the forecasting variable in a surprisingly large number of
cases. For the book-to-market ratio, the historical mean is superior in almost 10% of
the cases. Thus a strong “true” forecasting relationship can be associated with poor
out-of-sample performance.

    The right hand panel of Table 4 conducts a similar exercise for the utility gains
reported in Table 2. The first column in this panel reports the fraction of cases in
which a portfolio, optimally constructed given a restricted linear regression, delivers
lower average utility than a portfolio constructed using the historical equity-premium
forecast. Both portfolios are based on a 5-year rolling variance estimate for stock
returns. The second column reports the fraction of cases in which the investor
underperforms even though she knows the true coeﬃcient of the linear regression.
The results make it clear that prolonged underperformance is quite likely even when
stock returns can be stably predicted using the forecast variables discussed in the
recent finance literature.

   In unreported results we also calculated the percent of simulations where the
out-of-sample R2 was smaller than the actual value in Table 1. Recall that the out-
empirical distribution of draws (b           bt /σ u,t ). We randomly draw a pair from this unit-variance
                                 et /σ e,t , u
distribution, then multiply the elements by the variances implied by the simulated Garch model.



                                                   15
of-sample R2 compares the forecast based on the predictive regression to the forecast
based on the historical mean, so a negative value implies that the historical mean is
superior. If the simulation percentages are very low, then the simulated data tend to
generate out-of-sample statistics which are larger than the ones we see in the data.
This would suggest that the out-of-sample R2 values we see in the data are lower than
what we would expect based on the full sample parameter estimates. The simulation
percentages can be interpreted as p-values for the null hypothesis that the in-sample
and out-of-sample results are consistent with one another.

    We computed 60 p-values, based on 15 predictors and four possible forecast re-
strictions. The median p-value was 46.4%. P -values for the book-to-market ratio
and default yield predictors range from 0.9% to 5.5%. Therefore these two predictors
generate unusually small out-of-sample R2 statistics given the full sample results. For
the rest of the predictors the smallest p-value is 3.7%, for the long-term return with
the forecast restricted to be positive. All of the rest of the p-values are greater than
5%. We conclude that for nearly all the predictors and various forecast restrictions,
the out-of-sample R2 statistics in Table 1 are consistent with the in-sample t statistics
and R2 values.

    These results shed light on an interesting question. Suppose a forecasting variable
has a significant t statistic, but has underperformed the historical mean out-of-sample.
Should an investor use that variable in the future? On the one hand, poor out-of-
sample performance could indicate the presence of structural breaks in the data, or
deleterious eﬀects of parameter uncertainty. These factors suggest that investment
decisions should not be based on this predictor variable. On the other hand, poor
out-of-sample results could be due to bad luck. Also, since more data are available
now, the eﬀects of parameter uncertainty are less serious now than in the past. These
considerations suggest that the investor should use the forecasting variable, relying on
its in-sample predictive power. Without further theory or information this question
does not have a clear answer, but our results in Table 4 suggest that one should not
exaggerate the significance of poor out-of-sample statistics.




                                           16
5    Conclusion

A number of variables are correlated with subsequent returns on the aggregate US
stock market in the 20th Century. Some of these variables are stock market valuation
ratios, others reflect the levels of short- and long-term interest rates, patterns in
corporate finance or the cross-sectional pricing of individual stocks, or the level of
consumption in relation to wealth. Amit Goyal and Ivo Welch (2004) have argued that
in-sample correlations conceal a systematic failure of these variables out of sample:
None are able to beat a simple forecast based on the historical average stock return.

    In this note we have shown that most of these predictor variables, and almost
all that are statistically significant in-sample, perform better out-of-sample than the
historical average return forecast, once sensible restrictions are imposed on the signs
of coeﬃcients and return forecasts. The out-of-sample explanatory power is small,
but nonetheless is economically meaningful for investors. We have also shown that a
variable is quite likely to have poor out-of-sample performance for an extended period
of time even when the variable genuinely predicts returns with a stable coeﬃcient.




                                          17
  References


Amihud, Yakov and Cliﬀord Hurvich, 2004, Predictive regressions: a reduced-bias
   estimation method, forthcoming Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analy-
   sis.

Ang, Andrew and Geert Bekaert, 2003, Stock return predictability: Is it there?,
    unpublished paper, Columbia University.

Baker, Malcolm and Jeﬀrey Wurgler, 2000, The equity share in new issues and
    aggregate stock returns, Journal of Finance 55, 2219—2257.

Bollerslev, Tim, 1990, Modelling the coherence in short-run nominal exchange rates:
     a multivariate generalized ARCH model, Review of Economics and Statistics
     72, 498—505.

Bollerslev, Tim and Jeﬀ Wooldridge 1992, Quasi-maximum likelihood estimation
     and inference in dynamic models with time-varying covariances, Econometric
     Reviews 11, 143—172.

Boudoukh, Jacob, Roni Michaely, Matthew Richardson, and Michael Roberts, 2004,
   On the importance of measuring payout yield: Implications for empirical asset
   pricing, NBER Working Paper 10651.

Butler, Alexander W., Gustavo Grullon, and James P. Weston, 2004, Can managers
    forecast aggregate market returns?, unpublished paper, University of South
    Florida and Rice University.

Campbell, John Y., 1987, Stock returns and the term structure, Journal of Financial
   Economics 18, 373—399.

Campbell, John Y., 2001, Why long horizons? A study of power against persistent
   alternatives, Journal of Empirical Finance 8, 459—491.

Campbell, John Y., Andrew W. Lo, and A. Craig MacKinlay, 1997, The Economet-
   rics of Financial Markets, Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.

Campbell, John Y. and Robert J. Shiller, 1988a, The dividend-price ratio and ex-
   pectations of future dividends and discount factors, Review of Financial Studies
   1, 195—228.


                                       18
Campbell, John Y. and Robert J. Shiller, 1988b, Stock prices, earnings, and expected
   dividends, Journal of Finance 43, 661—676.

Campbell, John Y. and Robert J. Shiller, 1998, Valuation ratios and the long-run
   stock market outlook, Journal of Portfolio Management.

Campbell, John Y. and Robert J. Shiller, 2001, Valuation ratios and the long-run
   stock market outlook: an update, NBER Working Paper 8221.

Campbell, John Y. and Luis M. Viceira, 2002, Strategic Asset Allocation: Portfolio
   Choice for Long-Term Investors, Oxford University Press, New York, NY.

Campbell, John Y. and Motohiro Yogo, 2003, Eﬃcient tests of stock return pre-
   dictability, unpublished paper, Harvard University.

Cavanagh, Christopher L., Graham Elliott, and James H. Stock, 1995, Inference in
    models with nearly integrated regressors, Econometric Theory 11, 1131 —1147.

Clark, Todd E. and Michael W. McCracken, 2003, The power of tests of predictive
    ability in the presence of structural breaks, unpublished paper, Federal Reserve
    Bank of Kansas City and University of Missouri-Columbia.

Fama, Eugene F. and Kenneth R. French, 1988, Dividend yields and expected stock
   returns, Journal of Financial Economics 22, 3—25.

Fama, Eugene F. and Kenneth R. French, 1989, Business conditions and expected
   returns on stocks and bonds, Journal of Financial Economics 25, 23—49.

Fama, Eugene F. and G. William Schwert, 1977, Asset returns and inflation, Journal
   of Financial Economics 5, 115—146.

Ferson, Wayne E., Sergei Sarkissian, and Timothy T. Simin, 2003, Spurious regres-
    sions in financial economics?, Journal of Finance 58, 1393—1413.

Giacomini, Raﬀaella and Halbert White, Tests of conditional predictive ability, un-
    published paper, University of California at Los Angeles and University of Cal-
    ifornia at San Diego.

Goyal, Amit and Ivo Welch, 2003, Predicting the equity premium with dividend
   ratios, Management Science 49, 639—654.



                                        19
Goyal, Amit and Ivo Welch, 2004, A comprehensive look at the empirical perfor-
   mance of equity premium prediction, NBER Working Paper 10483.

Graham, Benjamin and David L. Dodd, 1934, Security Analysis, first edition, Mc-
    Graw Hill, New York, NY.

Hodrick, Robert J., 1992, Dividend yields and expected stock returns: Alternative
   procedures for inference and measurement, Review of Financial Studies 5, 257—
   286.

Inoue, Atsushi and Lutz Kilian, 2004, In-sample or out-of-sample tests of predictabil-
    ity: which one should we use?, forthcoming Econometric Reviews.

Jansson, Michael, and Marcelo J. Moreira, 2003, Optimal inference in regression
    models with nearly integrated regressors, unpublished paper, Harvard Univer-
    sity.

Keim, Donald B. and Robert F. Stambaugh, 1986, Predicting returns in the stock
    and bond markets, Journal of Financial Economics 17, 357—390.

Kilian, Lutz, 1999, Exchange rates and monetary fundamentals: What do we learn
     from long-horizon regressions?, Journal of Applied Econometrics 14, 491—510.

Kothari, S.P. and Jay Shanken, 1997, Book-to-market, dividend yield, and expected
    market returns: A time-series analysis, Journal of Financial Economics 44, 169—
    203.

Lamont, Owen, 1998, Earnings and expected returns, Journal of Finance 53, 1563—
   1587.

Lettau, Martin and Sydney Ludvigson, 2001, Consumption, aggregate wealth, and
    expected stock returns, Journal of Finance 56, 815—849.

Lewellen, Jonathan, 2004, Predicting returns with financial ratios, Journal of Fi-
    nancial Economics 74, 209—235.

Litterman, Robert, 1986, Forecasting with Bayesian vector autoregressions: Five
     years of experience, Journal of Business & Economic Statistics 4, 25—38.

Mark, Nelson C., 1995, Exchange rates and fundamentals: Evidence on long-horizon
   predictability, American Economic Review 85, 201—218.


                                         20
Merton, Robert C., 1969, Lifetime portfolio selection under uncertainty: the contin-
    uous time case, Review of Economics and Statistics 51, 247—257.

Paye, Bradley and Alan Timmermann, 2003, Instability of return prediction models,
    unpublished paper, University of California at San Diego.

Polk, Christopher, Samuel Thompson, and Tuomo Vuolteenaho, 2005, Cross-sectional
    forecasts of the equity premium, forthcoming, Journal of Financial Economics.

Pontiﬀ, Jeﬀrey and Lawrence D. Schall, 1998, Book-to-market ratios as predictors
    of market returns, Journal of Financial Economics 49, 141—160.

Rozeﬀ, Michael S., 1984, Dividend yields are equity risk premiums, Journal of Port-
    folio Management 11(1), 68—75.

Stambaugh, Robert F., 1999, Predictive regressions, Journal of Financial Economics
    54, 375—421.

Torous, Walter, Rossen Valkanov, and Shu Yan, 2004, On predicting stock returns
    with nearly integrated explanatory variables, Journal of Business 77, 937—966.




                                        21
Table 1 - Total returns
This table presents statistics on forecast errors for stock returns at a monthly frequency. We use S&P500 total returns (dividend included) where data prior to January 1927 was obtained
from Robert Shiller's website. Panel A compares forecast error of historical mean vs. the error of the chosen model. Panel B introduces a restriction that the coefficient on model variable
must be of the right sign, otherwise historical mean is used as a predictor instead. Panel C requires that the prediction be positive, otherwise it uses zero as its forecast for that
period. Finally, Panel D uses both restrictions. We report differences in RMSE between the model and historical mean, mean residual over all prediction periods, and the out-of-sample
R squared. Our in-sample statistics are the (heteroskedasticity-robust) t-statistic and adjusted R squared, both coming from the last regression (i.e. over the whole sample period prior
to the last forecast in December 2003). For the consumption-wealth ratio, we report the robust F-statistic that all the slope coefficients are zero.
Panel A                                  Sample                        Forecast      In-Sample                              Out-of-Sample
                                          Begin           End            Begin        t statistic    R squared adj.          Delta RMSE              Mean           Hist. mean           R squared
Dividend Price ratio                     1871m2        2003m12          1927m1            0.98          0.054%                 -0.009%              0.344%            0.194%              -0.331%
Earnings Price ratio                     1871m2        2003m12          1927m1            2.29          0.271%                  0.007%              0.264%            0.194%              0.258%
Smooth Earnings Price ratio              1881m1        2003m12          1927m1            1.78          0.518%                  0.003%              0.461%            0.189%              0.098%
Book-to-Market                           1921m3        2003m12          1941m3            1.39          0.677%                 -0.028%              -0.038%          -0.109%              -1.328%
T-Bill rate                              1920m2        2003m12          1940m2           -1.82          0.273%                  0.007%              0.255%           -0.084%              0.328%
Long Term yield                          1919m1        2003m12          1939m1           -1.38          0.073%                 -0.013%              0.280%           -0.088%              -0.573%
Long Term return                         1926m1        2003m12          1946m1            1.28          0.071%                 -0.015%              -0.180%          -0.127%              -0.693%
Term spread                              1920m2        2003m12          1940m2            1.67          0.186%                  0.008%              -0.156%          -0.084%              0.394%
Default Yield spread                     1919m1        2003m12          1939m1            0.67          0.194%                 -0.013%              0.109%           -0.088%              -0.595%
Default Return spread                    1926m1        2003m12          1946m1            0.41          -0.056%                -0.006%              -0.124%          -0.127%              -0.281%
Inflation                                1919m2        2003m12          1939m2           -1.64          0.305%                  0.015%              -0.016%          -0.079%              0.701%
Cross-sectional premium                  1937m5         2003m1          1957m5            2.64          1.013%                 -0.013%              0.348%           -0.273%              -0.584%
Dividend Payout ratio                   1871m12        2003m12          1927m1           -0.65          0.006%                 -0.008%              0.096%            0.196%              -0.287%
Equity share of new issues              1927m12        2003m12         1947m12            2.43          0.833%                  0.008%              -0.142%          -0.058%              0.392%
Consumption-wealth ratio                 1952m1         2003m3          1972m1           9.58*          3.479%                  0.027%              0.078%           -0.130%              1.152%
Panel B                                  Sample                        Forecast      In-Sample                              Out-of-Sample
                                          Begin           End            Begin        t statistic    R squared adj.          Delta RMSE              Mean           Hist. mean           R squared
Dividend Price ratio                     1871m2        2003m12          1927m1            0.98          0.054%                  0.000%              0.341%            0.194%              0.001%
Earnings Price ratio                     1871m2        2003m12          1927m1            2.29          0.271%                  0.008%              0.264%            0.194%              0.264%
Smooth Earnings Price ratio              1881m1        2003m12          1927m1            1.78          0.518%                  0.007%              0.460%            0.189%              0.236%
Book-to-Market                           1921m3        2003m12          1941m3            1.39          0.677%                 -0.028%              -0.038%          -0.109%              -1.328%
T-Bill rate                              1920m2        2003m12          1940m2           -1.82          0.273%                  0.007%              0.255%           -0.084%              0.328%
Long Term yield                          1919m1        2003m12          1939m1           -1.38          0.073%                 -0.013%              0.280%           -0.088%              -0.573%
Long Term return                         1926m1        2003m12          1946m1            1.28          0.071%                  0.003%              -0.164%          -0.127%              0.149%
Term spread                              1920m2        2003m12          1940m2            1.67          0.186%                  0.008%              -0.156%          -0.084%              0.394%
Default Yield spread                     1919m1        2003m12          1939m1            0.67          0.194%                 -0.013%              0.109%           -0.088%              -0.595%
Default Return spread                    1926m1        2003m12          1946m1            0.41          -0.056%                -0.005%              -0.124%          -0.127%              -0.226%
Inflation                                1919m2        2003m12          1939m2           -1.64          0.305%                  0.015%              -0.016%          -0.079%              0.701%
Cross-sectional premium                  1937m5         2003m1          1957m5            2.64          1.013%                 -0.013%              0.348%           -0.273%              -0.584%
Dividend Payout ratio                   1871m12        2003m12          1927m1           -0.65          0.006%                 -0.008%              0.096%            0.196%              -0.287%
Equity share of new issues              1927m12        2003m12         1947m12            2.43          0.833%                  0.008%              -0.142%          -0.058%              0.392%
Consumption-wealth ratio                 1952m1         2003m3          1972m1           9.58*          3.479%                  0.027%              0.078%           -0.130%              1.152%
Panel C                        Sample             Forecast   In-Sample                       Out-of-Sample
                                Begin      End      Begin     t statistic   R squared adj.    Delta RMSE      Mean     Hist. mean   R squared
Dividend Price ratio           1871m2   2003m12    1927m1         0.98         0.054%           -0.001%      0.339%      0.194%      -0.043%
Earnings Price ratio           1871m2   2003m12    1927m1         2.29         0.271%            0.007%      0.251%      0.194%      0.243%
Smooth Earnings Price ratio    1881m1   2003m12    1927m1         1.78         0.518%            0.014%      0.370%      0.189%      0.501%
Book-to-Market                 1921m3   2003m12    1941m3         1.39         0.677%           -0.021%      -0.072%    -0.109%      -0.988%
T-Bill rate                    1920m2   2003m12    1940m2        -1.82         0.273%            0.011%      0.165%     -0.084%      0.521%
Long Term yield                1919m1   2003m12    1939m1        -1.38         0.073%            0.005%      0.155%     -0.088%      0.211%
Long Term return               1926m1   2003m12    1946m1         1.28         0.071%           -0.013%      -0.186%    -0.127%      -0.607%
Term spread                    1920m2   2003m12    1940m2         1.67         0.186%            0.009%      -0.163%    -0.084%      0.422%
Default Yield spread           1919m1   2003m12    1939m1         0.67         0.194%           -0.012%      0.107%     -0.088%      -0.547%
Default Return spread          1926m1   2003m12    1946m1         0.41         -0.056%          -0.006%      -0.124%    -0.127%      -0.281%
Inflation                      1919m2   2003m12    1939m2        -1.64         0.305%            0.016%      -0.016%    -0.079%      0.709%
Cross-sectional premium        1937m5    2003m1    1957m5         2.64         1.013%            0.008%      0.227%     -0.273%      0.381%
Dividend Payout ratio         1871m12   2003m12    1927m1        -0.65         0.006%            0.000%      0.079%      0.196%      0.008%
Equity share of new issues    1927m12   2003m12   1947m12         2.43         0.833%            0.012%      -0.165%    -0.058%      0.555%
Consumption-wealth ratio       1952m1    2003m3    1972m1        9.58*         3.479%            0.036%      -0.107%    -0.130%      1.549%
Panel D                        Sample             Forecast   In-Sample                       Out-of-Sample
                                Begin      End      Begin     t statistic   R squared adj.    Delta RMSE      Mean     Hist. mean   R squared
Dividend Price ratio           1871m2   2003m12    1927m1         0.98         0.054%            0.000%      0.341%      0.194%      0.001%
Earnings Price ratio           1871m2   2003m12    1927m1         2.29         0.271%            0.007%      0.252%      0.194%      0.249%
Smooth Earnings Price ratio    1881m1   2003m12    1927m1         1.78         0.518%            0.015%      0.369%      0.189%      0.538%
Book-to-Market                 1921m3   2003m12    1941m3         1.39         0.677%           -0.021%      -0.072%    -0.109%      -0.988%
T-Bill rate                    1920m2   2003m12    1940m2        -1.82         0.273%            0.011%      0.165%     -0.084%      0.521%
Long Term yield                1919m1   2003m12    1939m1        -1.38         0.073%            0.005%      0.155%     -0.088%      0.211%
Long Term return               1926m1   2003m12    1946m1         1.28         0.071%            0.005%      -0.170%    -0.127%      0.236%
Term spread                    1920m2   2003m12    1940m2         1.67         0.186%            0.009%      -0.163%    -0.084%      0.422%
Default Yield spread           1919m1   2003m12    1939m1         0.67         0.194%           -0.012%      0.107%     -0.088%      -0.547%
Default Return spread          1926m1   2003m12    1946m1         0.41         -0.056%          -0.005%      -0.124%    -0.127%      -0.226%
Inflation                      1919m2   2003m12    1939m2        -1.64         0.305%            0.016%      -0.016%    -0.079%      0.709%
Cross-sectional premium        1937m5    2003m1    1957m5         2.64         1.013%            0.008%      0.227%     -0.273%      0.381%
Dividend Payout ratio         1871m12   2003m12    1927m1        -0.65         0.006%            0.000%      0.079%      0.196%      0.008%
Equity share of new issues    1927m12   2003m12   1947m12         2.43         0.833%            0.012%      -0.165%    -0.058%      0.555%
Consumption-wealth ratio       1952m1    2003m3    1972m1        9.58*         3.479%            0.036%      -0.107%    -0.130%      1.549%
Table 2 - Portfolio choice
This table presents out-of-sample portfolio choice results at a monthly frequency. "Out-of-Sample R-squared" comes from Panel D of Table 1. "Assume constant variance" results
calculate the variance from the entire available history of excess returns. "Allow changing variance" results calculate the variance from a rolling window of the last 5 years of data.
"Utility level, mean fc" is the average value of the utility from forecasting the market with the historical mean. "Utility change" is the change in average utility from forecasting
the market with the predictor instead of the historical mean. "Free parms" indicates that we used the unconstrained ols predictor of the equity premium (from Panel A of Table 1).
"Constrained" indicates that we constrain the coefficient on the predictor to be the right sign, and we require that the prediction be non-negative (from Panel D of Table 1).
The utility function is E(Rp) - (γ/2)Var(Rp), where Rp is the portfolio return and γ=3.
                                                                                                              Assume constant variance                                 Allow changing variance
                                     Sample                        Forecast       Out-of-Sample        Utility level             Utility change                Utility level            Utility change
                                      Begin            End           Begin         R squared            Mean fc           Free parms Constrained                Mean fc          Free parms Constrained
Dividend Price ratio                 1871m2         2003m12         1927m1            0.001%             0.501%             -0.016%         -0.024%              0.660%            -0.037%         -0.024%
Earnings Price ratio                 1871m2         2003m12         1927m1            0.249%             0.501%              0.048%          0.053%              0.660%             0.017%          0.020%
Smooth Earnings Price ratio          1881m1         2003m12         1927m1            0.538%             0.502%             -0.095%         -0.085%              0.660%            -0.053%         -0.050%
Book-to-Market                       1921m3         2003m12         1941m3           -0.988%             0.667%             -0.063%         -0.063%              0.793%            -0.038%         -0.038%
T-Bill rate                          1920m2         2003m12         1940m2            0.521%             0.639%             -0.008%         -0.008%              0.771%             0.117%          0.117%
Long Term yield                      1919m1         2003m12         1939m1            0.211%             0.626%             -0.021%         -0.021%              0.753%             0.086%          0.086%
Long Term return                     1926m1         2003m12         1946m1            0.236%             0.641%              0.007%          0.040%              0.767%             0.015%          0.060%
Term spread                          1920m2         2003m12         1940m2            0.422%             0.639%              0.088%          0.088%              0.771%             0.131%          0.131%
Default Yield spread                 1919m1         2003m12         1939m1           -0.547%             0.626%             -0.073%         -0.073%              0.753%            -0.075%         -0.075%
Default Return spread                1926m1         2003m12         1946m1           -0.226%             0.641%             -0.014%         -0.009%              0.767%             0.010%          0.013%
Inflation                            1919m2         2003m12         1939m2            0.709%             0.630%              0.051%          0.051%              0.759%             0.108%          0.108%
Cross-sectional premium              1937m5          2003m1         1957m5            0.381%             0.611%              0.010%          0.010%              0.621%             0.057%          0.057%
Dividend Payout ratio               1871m12         2003m12         1927m1            0.008%             0.502%              0.094%          0.094%              0.659%             0.012%          0.012%
Equity share of new issues          1927m12         2003m12        1947m12            0.555%             0.649%              0.102%          0.102%              0.826%             0.128%          0.128%
Consumption-wealth ratio             1952m1          2003m3         1972m1            1.549%             0.533%              0.379%          0.379%              0.655%             0.300%          0.300%
Table 3 - Portfolio choice for the value-predictors only, various forecasting horizons
This table presents out-of-sample portfolio choice results at monthly, quarterly, and annual frequencies. "Out-of-Sample R-squared" imposes the restriction that the coefficient on the predictor
has the right sign, also that the forecast is nonnegative. For further table notes, see Table 2.
                                                                                                          Assume constant variance                               Allow changing variance
                                     Sample                        Forecast      Out-of-Sample      Utility level          Utility change                Utility level          Utility change
                                      Begin           End           Begin         R squared          Mean fc         Free parms Constrained               Mean fc         Free parms Constrained
Monthly results
Dividend Price ratio                 1871m2        2003m12         1927m1             0.001%          0.501%           -0.016%           -0.024%           0.660%           -0.037%           -0.024%
Earnings Price ratio                 1871m2        2003m12         1927m1             0.249%          0.501%            0.048%            0.053%           0.660%            0.017%            0.020%
Smooth Earnings Price ratio          1881m1        2003m12         1927m1             0.538%          0.502%           -0.095%           -0.085%           0.660%           -0.053%           -0.050%
Book-to-Market                       1921m3        2003m12         1941m3            -0.988%          0.667%           -0.063%           -0.063%           0.793%           -0.038%           -0.038%

Quarterly results
Dividend Price ratio                 1871q1         2003q4          1927q1           -0.004%          1.301%           -0.143%           -0.104%           1.786%           -0.145%           -0.092%
Earnings Price ratio                 1871q1         2003q4          1927q1            0.763%          1.301%            0.140%            0.147%           1.786%           -0.007%            0.000%
Smooth Earnings Price ratio          1871q1         2003q4          1927q1            0.613%          1.271%           -0.418%           -0.401%           1.767%           -0.213%           -0.208%
Book-to-Market                       1921q2         2003q4          1941q2           -1.630%          1.622%           -0.035%           -0.035%           2.221%           -0.161%           -0.161%

Yearly results
Dividend Price ratio                   1871           2003           1927            -0.159%          6.323%           -0.474%           -0.474%           5.947%            0.385%            0.385%
Earnings Price ratio                   1871           2003           1927             1.731%          6.323%            0.089%            0.122%           5.947%            0.290%            0.298%
Smooth Earnings Price ratio            1881           2003           1927             6.643%          6.280%            0.170%            0.170%           5.883%            0.648%            0.648%
Book-to-Market                         1922           2003           1942             0.640%          8.155%           -0.256%           -0.256%           7.802%           -0.462%           -0.462%
Table 4 - Monte Carlo Evaluation of Out-of-Sample Forecasts
The table reports results of a Monte Carlo experiment from the model
rt = max(0,µ1 + θ xt-1) + et,   xt = µ2 + ρ xt-1 + ut
with heteroskedastic errors generated by the CC Garch model in footnote 4. For each predictor, we estimate the model over the full sample, then simulate 5000 data sets covering
the same dates as the actual data. "Out-of-sample R squared underperformance" is the percentage of simulated data sets where using the predictor variable leads to an inferior
mean-squared error forecast than the historical mean. "Portfolio underperformance" is the fraction of data sets where using the predictor variable to form portfolios leads to inferior
average utility. The utility function is E(Rp) - γVar(Rp), where Rp is the portfolio return and γ=3. We impose various constraints on the forecast. "none" indicates that the predictor
is the usual ordinary least squares prediction. "coef" introduces a restriction that θ must be of the right sign, othewise the historical mean is used as a predictor. "premium"
requires that the predicted equity premium be positive, otherwise it is set to zero. "both" indicates both the "coef" and "premium" restrictions. "known θ" uses the infeasible
prediction where θ is known. For the consumption-wealth ratio, we simulate from a 4-dimensional vector autoregression. For portfolio formation the standard deviation of excess
returns is computed from a rolling window of the past five years.
                                         In-sample                       Out-of-sample R squared underperformance                                   Portfolio underperformance
                                         R squared          none             coef        premium        both                        known θ            both          known θ
Dividend Price ratio                       0.054%           46.1%           45.3%          43.0%       42.2%                         14.7%            38.9%           16.4%
Earnings Price ratio                       0.271%           23.9%           23.4%          19.7%       19.4%                          9.4%            19.0%           10.4%
Smooth Earnings Price ratio                0.518%           19.7%           19.3%          13.6%       13.4%                          4.9%            11.9%            6.1%
Book-to-Market                             0.677%           35.5%           34.1%          28.5%       27.4%                          9.5%            22.6%           10.9%
T-Bill rate                                0.273%           69.8%           59.9%          61.9%       52.7%                         27.8%            44.9%           30.7%
Long Term yield                            0.073%           76.5%           65.3%          69.2%       58.3%                         32.6%            49.3%           33.7%
Long Term return                           0.071%           58.6%           51.2%          47.2%       40.2%                         22.5%            38.7%           26.2%
Term spread                                0.186%           60.1%           52.7%          48.1%       41.0%                         23.8%            39.9%           27.4%
Default Yield spread                       0.194%           66.8%           59.5%          57.7%       49.7%                         28.0%            46.9%           30.9%
Default Return spread                     -0.056%           76.2%           65.4%          68.2%       57.8%                         34.4%            53.4%           36.2%
Inflation                                  0.305%           54.4%           47.5%          43.2%       36.3%                         21.5%            35.6%           25.6%
Cross-sectional premium                    1.013%           38.9%           36.5%          27.3%       24.7%                         17.7%            27.6%           20.1%
Dividend Payout ratio                      0.006%           76.6%           65.5%          72.9%       62.5%                         38.4%            54.9%           40.2%
Equity share of new issues                 0.833%           25.1%           22.3%          18.7%       16.1%                         11.8%            17.6%           13.9%
Consumption-wealth ratio                   3.479%           39.6%           38.5%          22.2%       21.5%                          7.0%            53.6%           54.4%
                                                          Figure 1, Panel A: Forecasts based on smoothed earnings-price ratio
                                                             ("oos ols" denotes out-of-sample ordinary least squares)
                                    2.5

                                      2
                                                    ols based on full-sample estimates
                                    1.5
                                                                                                                                    oos ols, parameter and
                                      1                                           historical mean                                    forecast constraints


                                    0.5

                                      0

                                                    oos ols, unconstrained




Monthly excess returns (per cent)
                                    -0.5

                                     -1
                                     1920    1930     1940          1950           1960             1970           1980          1990           2000             2010



                                                       Figure 1, Panel B: Cumulative R-squared based on smoothed earnings-price
                                                                  (relative to historical mean)
                                      2
                                                                                                                            ols based on full-sample estimates
                                    1.5

                                      1

                                    0.5

                                      0
                                                                                          oos ols, unconstrained          oos ols, parameter and
                                                                                                                           forecast constraints




R-squared (per cent)
                                    -0.5

                                     -1

                                    -1.5
                                      1920   1930     1940          1950           1960             1970           1980          1990           2000             2010
