NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

EARLY ACADEMIC SCIENCE AND THE BIRTH OF
INDUSTRIAL RESEARCH LABORATORIES IN THE
U.S. PHARMACEUTICAL INDUSTRY
Megan MacGarvie
Jeffrey L. Furman
Working Paper 11470
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11470
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2005

We thank Claudia Goldin for data from the Biennial Survey of Education for 1924 and 1934. We are also
grateful to Henan Cheng for her excellent RA work. Scott Stern provided inspiration for the project and
insightful suggestions throughout; Bronwyn Hall, Zorina Khan, Petra Moser, David Mowery, Toby Stuart,
and Sam Thompson contributed helpful suggestions. We are particularly grateful participants in the NBER
Conference on Academic Entrepreneurship and Innovation, to Adam Jaffe, Josh Lerner, Marie Thursby, Scott
Stern fororganizing the conference, and to Ken Sokoloff for insightful discussant commentary. Megan
MacGarvie gratefully acknowledges support from the Center for Studies in Higher Education and the John
M. Olin Foundation and Jeff Furman gratefully recognizes support from the Boston University Junior Faculty
Research Fund. We would like to note that aspects of the case histories of Sterling and Mulford (Section
III.2) re also described in Furman (2003). The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by Megan MacGarvie and Jeffrey L. Furman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

Early Academic Science and the Birth of Industrial Research Laboratories in the U.S.
Pharmaceutical Industry
Megan MacGarvie and Jeffrey L. Furman
NBER Working Paper No. 11470
June 2005
JEL No. O32, N00
ABSTRACT
The establishment and growth of industrial research laboratories is one of the key organizational
innovations affecting technological progress in the United States in the 20th century. In this paper,
we investigate the rise of industrial research laboratories in the U.S. pharmaceutical industry
between 1927 and 1946. Our evidence suggests that institutional factors, namely the presence of
universities dedicated to research, played a significant role in the establishment and diffusion of
private pharmaceutical research laboratories. Specifically, we document that the growth of industrial
pharmaceutical laboratories between 1927 and 1946 is positively and significantly correlated with
the extent of local university research, after controlling for other observable factors likely to
influence the geographic distribution of industrial research. We supplement our core results with
case histories illustrative of early university-industry interaction and an examination of the
determinants of university-industry research cooperation. Our qualitative historical evidence and
analyses of the birth of chemical engineering programs suggest that industry also played a role in
influencing university research agendas. We correct for feedback effects from industry to
universities using instrumental variables. Overall, our analyses suggest that while the presence of
industrial facilities helped shape the direction of university research programs, there was a
significant, positive, and causal effect running from university research to the growth of
pharmaceutical research laboratories in the first half of the twentieth century in the United States.
Megan MacGarvie
Boston University
School of Management
595 Commonwealth Avenue, Room 522H
Boston, MA 02215
and NBER
mmacgarv@bu.edu

Jeffrey L. Furman
Boston University
School of Management
595 Commonwealth Avenue, Room 522H
Boston, MA 02215
and NBER
furman@bu.edu

I.

Introduction
The establishment and growth of industrial research laboratories is one of the key

organizational innovations affecting technological progress in the United States in the 20th
century (Mowery, 1990).

We investigate in this paper the rise of industrial research

laboratories in the U.S. pharmaceutical industry between 1927 and 1946. Our evidence
suggests that universities played a significant role in the establishment and diffusion of
industrial research laboratories in the U.S. pharmaceutical industry during this period. The
foundation of our quantitative analysis is the demonstration that the emergence and growth
of private pharmaceutical research laboratories depends upon the extent and growth of
nearby academic science. We complement the quantitative results with qualitative evidence
that elucidates some of the mechanisms by which universities and industry interacted during
this period. For example, our qualitative analyses demonstrate evidence of universityindustry collaboration involving prominent academics, considerable academic participation
in industrial patenting, and the staffing of emerging industrial research laboratories with
graduates of nearby university programs. We are also alert to the fact that this relationship
may not have been unidirectional, and devote particular attention to the possibility that the
local industrial base affected the nature of academic science at universities during this
period. Our analyses provide suggestive though not dispositive evidence of the impact of
local firms on university programs.

Even when we correct for this endogeneity bias,

however, the result that laboratory births are positively related to PhD program graduates
remains. We interpret this combination of qualitative and quantitative evidence as support
for the hypothesis that universities played a significant role in the birth of early American
pharmaceutical research laboratories.

Hand-in-glove relationships between firm laboratories and universities in the life
sciences are commonplace in the early 2000s, but were substantially more rare a century
ago. Indeed, many academic scientists and academic bodies viewed industry with extreme
skepticism or overt antipathy. Quoting a 1915 report of the Committee of the Board of
Trustees of the American Medical Association, Parascandola (1985) illustrates the contempt
held by medical scientists for industry: “It is only from laboratories free from any relations
with manufacturers that real advances can be expected.”1 Though a fictional tale, Sinclair
Lewis’s novel Arrowsmith is more severe but also representative of the attitude of the time.
Reacting to the news of famed biology professor Max Gottlieb’s decision to join the
research laboratories of a private firm, colleagues grieved: In one lab, “sorrowing men
wailed, ‘How could old Max have gone over to that damned pill peddler?,’” while in other
places colleagues lamented, “Of all the people in the world! I wouldn’t have believed it!
Max Gottlieb falling for those crooks!,” and “I wish HE hadn’t gone wrong!” (Lewis, 1925,
p. 52).2 It is, then, somewhat surprising that an environment that harbored such scorn for
industry would, ultimately, be actively involved in planting the seed corn for the
development of industrial research laboratories.
History demonstrates, however, that Prof. Gottlieb’s decision to work with the pill
peddlers was emblematic of the growing ties between university scientists and private firms
in the U.S. pharmaceutical and chemical industries during this time period. Indeed, while,
“American drug companies by and large had no interest in research [in the early years of the
20th century,]” (Swann, 1990, p.77), industrial research laboratories grew throughout the

1
2

This quote appears in the Journal of the American Medical Association (1915) “Special Report of the Work
of the Council on Pharmacy and Chemistry,” 65, p. 69.
This quote is used commonly among historians of the U.S. pharmaceutical industry to reflect the attitudes of
the time. See, for example, Parascandola (1985), Swann (1990), and Liebenau et al. (1990).

2

1920s and 1930s such that they were a common organizational form among large
pharmaceutical manufacturers by the time of World War II. The increasing relevance of
academic science for industrial purposes in the late 19th and early 20th centuries appears to
have been a principal underlying force that enabled collaborations between universities and
industry to be ultimately fruitful (Mowery and Rosenberg, 1998; Murmann, 2003). We
argue that the existence of U.S. universities (and their specific form and nature) animated
the potential for interaction between academic scientists and pharmaceutical firms in the
U.S. interwar period.

We examine the early mechanisms through which universities

affected research in the pharmaceutical and chemical industries and devote particular
attention to the labor market for trained researchers, collaborative research and consulting
agreements, and contract research arrangements.3 While our primary aim is to ascertain the
extent and nature of university influence on the development of industrial research
laboratories, we also examine the extent to which university researchers and their
institutions were affected by their interactions with industry. Some qualitative evidence
suggests that large pharmaceutical companies with substantial research needs did, indeed,
influence proximate universities, and our statistical analyses provide some evidence
consistent with this phenomenon.
In our principal analysis, we assesses the relationship between academic science and
the establishment of pharmaceutical research laboratories by estimating the impact of the
presence of universities and the count of PhD graduates on the number of industrial
pharmaceutical laboratories established and number of pharmaceutical R&D workers in
geographically proximate areas.

3

We set the stage for this analysis by reviewing case

The importance of collaborative research between academic scientists and drug makers is of central interest in
the industrial histories of John P. Swann (1988, 1990).

3

histories of early U.S. pharmaceutical firms and describing the nature of relationships
between academic scientists and pharmaceutical firms. The empirical evidence reveals that
pharmaceutical labs were more likely to be located in counties that contained research in
academic chemistry or science. Specifically, the number of pharmaceutical laboratories in a
county in 1938 and 1947 is, across a wide range of specifications, positively and
significantly associated with the initial number of research laboratories and the
contemporaneous count of local science PhD graduates.
Building on the quantitative analyses, we clarify some of the mechanisms by which
universities appear to have influenced the birth of pharmaceutical research laboratories. In
particular, drawing on records from the rosters of Who’s Who in Chemistry (1928), we
demonstrate the involvement of adopting firms in the labor market for graduating PhDs.
Further, we present evidence that collaborative arrangements between academic scientists
and industry and, occasionally, contract research agreements were both important precursors and complements to firms developing their own laboratories. Combining patent data
with data from American Chemical Society membership rosters, we find that a substantial
share of pharmaceutical patents for which we can identify inventor affiliations included
academic inventors.
Overall, our results paint a picture in which the role of universities in the
development of industrial research laboratories is significant and multifarious. In addition to
serving as the launching pad for the careers of individuals who found employment in private
firm laboratories, U.S. universities appear to have played a role in the creation of such
laboratories, via collaborative research and consulting, and in their developing expanded
research capabilities over time. We also cite qualitative evidence of feedback effects from

4

firms to universities.

By both providing financial support for university research

laboratories and a market for future trained labor, firms supported the growth of scientific
capabilities at local universities. The relationships between Merck and Rutgers and Dupont
and the University of Delaware are illustrative of the bi-directional impact of the
relationship between universities and industry.

Our analysis of the birth of chemical

engineering programs provides evidence consistent with these qualitative accounts. Our
core results about the influence of universities on the birth of research laboratories do,
however, hold up, even after correcting for endogeneity using instrumental variables.
The remainder of the paper proceeds in the following way: Section 2 introduces
background research on university-industry interaction and reviews the history of the
pharmaceutical industry in the early 20th century, and the origins of industrial research
laboratories. Section 3 reviews historical interactions between the U.S. pharmaceutical
industry and academic science. Section 4 describes our core dataset. Section 5 evaluates the
importance of universities in influencing the growth of pharmaceutical research laboratories.
Section 6 assesses the mechanisms of interaction between universities and pharmaceutical
firms in greater detail. Section 7 reviews quantitative evidence on the role of industry in
affecting program births in universities. Section 8 discusses our instrumental variables
estimates. Section 9 concludes, discussing the implications of the results and speculating
regarding related, future research.

II.

University-Industry Interaction and the Origin of Industrial Research
Laboratories
In this section, we lay the groundwork for our argument that U.S. universities

contributed to the establishment and growth of industrial research laboratories. In particular,

5

we review research that describes the growth of the U.S. universities in the late 1800s and
early 1900s, suggests the importance of universities to the United States’ emerging industrial
leadership, and suggests that proximity and specific institutional arrangements played an
important role in university-industry interaction.

II.1 The emergence of U.S. universities and the nature of university-industry interaction
Goldin and Katz (1999) identify the period of 1890-1940 as the “formative years” of
American higher education. States dramatically increased their support of higher education
during this period and the U.S. research university emerged in a form similar to that which
exists today. These years were also formative for university-industry collaboration and the
rise of industrial research laboratories in the United States. Figures 1-3 display the number
of public universities, private universities, and industrial research labs by founding date,
beginning in 1830. They reveal that more universities were founded in the late 19th century
than in any other period. In large part, the rise of universities was due to the Morrill Act of
1862, which established the land-grant universities, and the Hatch Act of 1887, which
provided aid for the study of scientific agriculture. The emergence of industrial research
labs came somewhat later, in the 1920s and 1930s.4 The boom during this period was,
however, quite substantial, so substantial in fact that university-industry interaction reached
a high point in the period between World War I and World War II. As Mowery and
Rosenberg (1998) note, “university-industry research linkages… were well-established

4

It should be taken into account that these graphs are snapshots taken at two different points in time: the
university data were compiled in 1924 and the industrial research lab survey was conducted in 1946. As a
result, firms that were founded prior to 1946 but did not survive to that date are not counted.

6

before World War II. Indeed, the share of university research expenditures financed by
industry appears to have declined throughout much of the postwar period” (p. 37).5
Rosenberg, Mowery, Nelson and a number of co-authors have argued that the
research universities that emerged during this period – and, in particular, the aspects of
academic science that responded to the needs of industry – became one of the main drivers
of American technological leadership in the twentieth century.6

These authors note a

number of examples of commercially important early inventions that originated in
universities, including the Babcock test (which improved the way dairy producers tested the
butterfat content of milk); Edwin Armstrong’s research on vacuum tubes at Columbia
University (which influenced the development of radio technology); and the development of
hybrid corn at agricultural experiment stations.7

Noting the important influence on

innovation in the later part of the 20th century, these authors further acknowledge the
seminal contributions of university research on the development of computers and lasers
(Rosenberg and Nelson, 1994; Mowery et al., 2003, p. 1).
The role of proximity in facilitating university-industry linkages is central in our
investigation of the factors that led to the rise of industrial research laboratories. Existing
empirical studies of contemporary university-industry research linkages suggest that
research conducted in universities has a significant and geographically focused effect on
innovation. Jaffe (1989) provides evidence that corporate patenting in certain industries is
5
6
7

Also, Swann (1988) argues that post-war increases in federal funding for university research in the health
sciences reduced collaboration between universities and the pharmaceutical industry.
See Nelson and Wright (1992), Rosenberg and Nelson (1994), Mowery and Rosenberg (1998), Rosenberg
(2000), Mowery, Nelson, Ziedonis and Sampat, (2003).
As another example, the University of Akron supplied local rubber producers with skilled employees, and its
scientists conducted research in the processing of rubber and, later, polymer chemistry (Mowery et al.,
2003), p. 1). Additional examples include the University of Oklahoma’s research in the field of petroleum,
the University of Kentucky’s and the University of North Carolina’s focus on the processing of tobacco, and
the University of Illinois and Purdue University’s work on railroad technologies (Nelson and Rosenberg,
1994).

7

positively associated with state-level spending on university research in related academic
disciplines. Acs, Audretsch and Feldman (1992) substitute innovation counts for patent data
and find even stronger evidence for spillovers from university research. Jaffe, Trajtenberg,
and Henderson (1993) find that knowledge spillovers from university research, as measured
by patent citations, are geographically concentrated.8

In a study of the biotechnology

industry, Zucker, Darby and Brewer (1998) show that biotechnology firms tend to locate
near universities in order to take advantage of the areas’ higher levels of “intellectual
capital”. In both the qualitative and quantitative evidence we review, geographic proximity
plays an important role in facilitating interactions between universities and pharmaceutical
firms.
The nature of university-firm interactions is informed by research that examines the
organizational locus of innovative activity. Specifically, a set of recent papers examine
whether innovative activity takes place in divisions of the corporation or in entrepreneurial
firms that transact in the market for technology. Teece (1988) explains how transaction
costs can dictate the organizational form in which innovation takes place. Arora, Fosfuri
and Gambardella (2001) document the growth in technology trade in the late twentieth
century, led by high-tech industries like software, chemicals, semi-conductors and
electronics. Arora, Fosfuri and Gambardella (2003) model the division of “inventive labor”
under different conditions. Stern and Gans (2003) focus on how several aspects of the
“commercialization environment” affect the innovative start-up’s optimal choice of cooperation or competition with incumbent firms. Peretto (1998) develops a model that
explains the transition from independent inventors to corporate R&D labs in the late
8

Patent citations are references in the patent document to other patented technologies that bear a similarity to
the invention or that influenced the inventor. Note that Adams (2002) also finds evidence of geographicallymediated university spillovers.

8

19th/early 20th centuries as a product of the “interaction of market structure and
technological change.”

II.2

The origins of industrial research
The first organized industrial research laboratories appeared in Germany in the

1870s, in firms that sought to commercialize inventions based on recent breakthroughs in
organic chemistry (Mowery and Rosenberg, 1998, p. 13.). Murmann (2003) describes the
co-evolution of the dye industry and academic research in chemistry in nineteenth-century
Germany, and argues that spillovers from universities to the dye industry and vice versa led
Germany to dominate the international dye industry in the 19th century. Mowery and
Rosenberg argue that it was not scientific developments alone which led to the growth of inhouse research in the United States, but also the strength of U.S. anti-trust policy following
the Sherman Act (which triggered a search for alternative sources of market power through
industrial innovation) and stronger protection of intellectual property rights through the
patent system. However, as Mowery points out, “a weak antitrust climate in other nations,
such as Germany, was associated with growth in industrial research, making it difficult to
assert a direct cause-and-effect relationship between anti-trust policy and the growth of
intrafirm R&D” (Mowery, 1990, p. 346). It could also be argued that the increasing strength
of intellectual property rights in the late 19th and early 20th centuries would seem to promote
greater specialization in innovation and vertical dis-integration rather than a shift in
innovative activity from the realm of the independent inventor to within the boundaries of
the corporation. Indeed, Lamoreaux and Sokoloff (2002) argue that, in the nineteenth
century,

9

“the U.S. patent system created a framework that supported trade in technology,
and that the patent agents and lawyers who serviced this system often took on the
functions of intermediaries, matching inventors seeking capital with investors
seeking profitable outlets for their funds and also inventors seeking to sell new
technological ideas with buyers eager to develop and commercialize them” (p. 56).
Lamoreaux and Sokoloff (1996) document a well-functioning market for technology in the
late nineteenth century United States. In 1870-71, for example, 72% of all patents that were
assigned to a party other than the inventor were assigned after issue. By 1910-11, this
number was halved (36.5%). Fisk (1998) explains that, prior to the 1890s, courts almost
always favored the rights of the inventor in cases where the ownership of an employee’s
invention was contested by an employer.

Starting in the 1890s, Fisk documents the

emergence of the “shop right” patent doctrine, which favored the employer in intellectual
property disputes. This change in intellectual property doctrine no doubt made it much more
attractive for firms to establish in-house research labs.
Mowery and Rosenberg also emphasize the importance to industrial innovation of
science conducted in universities. In this paper, we argue that the unique form taken by
American universities in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries helped promote the
adoption of industrial research laboratories within the boundaries of firms. Whereas during
the nineteenth century, “most industrialists believed the manufacturer’s job was to
manufacture; new ideas to improve manufacturing could be purchased or otherwise
appropriated … managers offered little support for research until they had evidence that a
worker’s results indicated likely commercial application,” (Swann, 1988, p. 13) the
institutionalization of scientific research in universities facilitated the adoption of scientific
research in industry. The scientific research undertaken in universities reduced the cost to
firms of acquiring scientific knowledge, and this led firms located near universities to

10

engage in research. Furthermore, the trend towards specialization and professionalization in
science increased the supply of qualified workers with easily identifiable skills. Once firms
could access a pool of potential research workers whose academic credentials reduced the
uncertainty associated with hiring them, firms could establish labs to engage in long-term
research projects.
Several interrelated historical forces combined to favor the organization of invention
within the firm. Changes in the nature of technology, in the extent to which firms could
claim intellectual property rights over their employees’ inventions, and in the enforcement
of anti-trust rules contributed to firms seeking to adopt of in-house industrial research
facilities. In order for firms to respond to these forces to organize invention within firm
boundaries, they needed skilled R&D workers and scientific expertise.

Universities

provided these inputs to production of new technology through consulting relationships and
by providing certification for the skills of potential R&D employees.

III.

The U.S. Pharmaceutical Industry and Academic Science in the Early 20th
Century

III.1. Research in the pharmaceutical industry in the early 20th century
Although a select number of pharmaceutical firms employed in-house researchers in
the early years of the 20th century, the period between the 1920 and World War II witnessed
a substantial change in the organization and function of U.S. drug makers (Swann, 1988).
Over this period, the industry changed from consisting of nearly entirely manufacturingoriented firms to being largely comprised of firms dedicated to the systematic discovery and
introduction of efficacious medicines. Some of the changes in the industry were preceded or
accompanied by legislative changes, such as the Biologics Control Act of 1902 and Pure

11

Food and Drug Act of 1906 (and 1912 Shirley Amendment), each of which pushed the
industry away from sometimes fraudulently-labeled ‘patent’ medicines towards more
rationalized practices.
In addition to US-based characteristics and policies, Europe played an important role
in aiding American firms in their transition to science-based pharmaceutical research. In the
years prior to World War I, European-trained (mainly German-trained) researchers and
students returned to the United States, often to Philadelphia, New York, and the region inbetween (Feldman and Schreuder, 1996) offering expertise, particularly in biologics, to
pharmaceutical firms, universities, and public health administrations. The development of
research capabilities in U.S. pharmaceutical firms was further accelerated by World War I.
The loss of access to European medicines increased the need for national medicine-making
capabilities, and the ability to develop medicines was enhanced both by European
immigration and by the seizure and auction of German intellectual property by the Office of
the Alien Property Custodian.
These developments were concomitant with an increasing relevance of academic
science for drug-making during late 19th and early 20th centuries, which in the eyes of
Mowery and Rosenberg (1998) and Murmann (2003) helped set the stage for fruitful
collaborations between universities and industry and, as we argue, for the US
pharmaceutical industry to draw on resources in universities to help develop in-house
research facilities.

From the early part of the century, during which research and

development expenditures were minimal, Mahoney (1959, p. 4) reports that research
expenditures increased to $15 million in 1939 and $110 million by 1956. Mahoney claims
that the nature of the pharmaceutical industry changed dramatically during the 1930s and

12

1940s, as a result of increasing average firm size and technical sophistication. For example,
he reports that during the depression years of 1932 and 1934, more than 3,500 firms failed
(p. 4) and that even until the 1940s most firms were quite small: “As late as 1939 no ethical
drug manufacturer in America had a sales volume as large as a department store like Macy’s
in New York” (p. 4).
Although the nature of the industry was already changing by the early 1940s, the
loss, once again, of medicines from Europe and the exigencies of war prompted significantly
increased investment in research during World War II.

For the first time, the U.S.

government became actively involved in promoting drug development and manufacturing.
Two major projects in which the government played a large role were the production of
penicillin and dried plasma. These projects were mainly dedicated towards large-scale
manufacturing, but significant R&D capabilities were a pre-requisite for achieving the
knowledge to effectively produce the products, and those firms that had already achieved
some level of in-house research expertise were at considerable advantage.

III.2. Historical evidence of the influence of early 20th century academic science on
pharmaceutical research
In order to characterize the relationship between academic science and the early
industrial research labs, we exploit the fact that geographic proximity facilitates interaction
between people and organizations. We argue that firms located near research universities
were more likely to adopt in-house R&D facilities because local universities provided both
part-time faculty consultants with highly specialized knowledge and scientifically-trained
university graduates who could be employed as full-time research employees. Because
long-distance collaboration was more difficult in the first half of the twentieth century than

13

it is today, firms were more likely to focus their search for scientific expertise on nearby
institutions. In this section, we discuss histories of a number of early pharmaceutical firms,
including Mulford and Sterling, whose cases appear illustrative of the influence of local
university science on firm-specific investments in innovation.9
III.2.1 Illustrative Cases – Mulford & Sterling at the turn of the 20th century
Founded by two graduates of the Philadelphia College of Pharmacy, the H.K.
Mulford Company commenced operations in Philadelphia in 1891 when H.K. Mulford and
Milton Campbell purchased the “Old Simes” drugstore. After initial successes in improving
pill-making technologies, the founders undertook a more ambitious challenge for which they
themselves were by no means sufficiently trained – the synthesis of diphtheria antitoxin.
Bacteriological illness had become increasingly problematic for urban areas as a result of the
increased density of city life. This problem was of particular concern to the Municipal
Health Department in Philadelphia, which was the third largest city in the country at the
time. Philadelphia’s Health Department, like that of New York, was especially active in
promoting efforts to address bacteriological illnesses.

Long known as the “Cradle of

Pharmacy” (Mahoney, 1959; Feldman and Schreuder, 1996), Philadelphia was the home to
some of the most advanced biomedical research institutions in North America. In addition
to the Philadelphia College of Pharmacy, several other institutions were pursuing
bacteriological research, including the University of Pennsylvania, Medico-Chirurgical
College, and Pepper Clinical Laboratories of the University Hospital. Together with the
Municipal Health Department, these institutions were engaged in research on diphtheria in
response to “public clamor” for a diphtheria antitoxin (Galambos, 1995, p. 13). Galambos
9

Furman (2003) reviews the relationship between local resources and the strategic orientation of Mulford and
Sterling.

14

argues that Mulford “recognized the opportunities embodied in the “clamor” for diphtheria
antitoxin” and set out to produce a commercially viable drug (Galambos, 1995, p. 13). In
1894, the firm hired Dr. Joseph McFarland, who was on faculty at the University of
Pennsylvania’s Medical Department and the Philadelphia Polyclinic and College for
Graduates in Medicine and had trained in bacteriology in Heidelberg and Vienna, and
created for him a laboratory in which he could concentrate on developing diphtheria
antitoxin (Galambos, 1995). In his efforts, McFarland benefited greatly from interactions
with the New York City Health Department and the Laboratory for Hygiene at the
University of Pennsylvania. By 1895, Mulford was able to become the first commercial
provider of a diphtheria anti-toxin. The firm’s success with McFarland then led them to hire
Professor Leonard Pearson from Penn’s Veterinary School and to establish a full-fledged
laboratory in 1896 in Glenoden, PA dedicated to biological, veterinary, and vaccine research
(Galambos, 1995). In the absence of these locally-available academic scientific resources, it
does not appear as if Mulford would have engaged the task of synthesizing diphtheria
antitoxin or, ultimately, of founding a dedicated research laboratory.
The Sterling pharmaceutical company was founded under circumstances similar to
those of Mulford and around the same point in time, yet it pursued a very different trajectory
with respect to research. Upon graduation from the Philadelphia College of Pharmacy, the
same institution attended by the founders of Mulford, William E. Weiss returned to his
hometown of Wheeling, West Virginia and founded the company that became Sterling in
conjunction with his childhood friend Albert Diebold.

Like Mulford, the fledgling

drugmaker met with considerable success; unlike Mulford, however, the firm succeeded at
marketing and distributing patent medicines, products of questionable medical validity

15

which were often alcohol- or narcotic-based. By 1912, it was valued at $4 million (Mann
and Plummer, 1991). In the wake of World War I, Sterling acquired the assets of the Bayer
Company, including all U.S. rights to Bayer Aspirin in the auction of seized German
property rights held by the Office of the Alien Property Custodian. That the fact that
Sterling was able to raise the funds required for this acquisition demonstrates the triumph of
the firm’s marketing and distribution resources. Its technical and research capabilities were
substantially less well-developed, however. Sterling’s drug-making competence was, in
fact, so limited that it was forced to solicit substantial guidance from Bayer in order to have
any chance to manufacture the basic products it won at auction.
Both demand and supply side factors appear to have had an influence on Sterling’s
choice of organizing strategies. Serving the mainly rural populations of West Virginia and
central and western Pennsylvania, Sterling did not face substantial demand for medicines to
fight the bacteriological illnesses towards whose cures academic science had begun to work.
Even if such demand had existed, however, Sterling did not have ready access to trained
individuals who could have contributed to effectively to drug discovery; at the very least, it
seems fair to say that the comparative advantage of Sterling’s West Virginia location was
not based in scientific research.
While stylized, these stories seem to be illustrative rather than unique. The early
history of Detroit’s Parke-Davis, another one of the first chemical firms to establish sciencebased industrial research, resonates with that of Mulford.

Similar to its Philadelphia

counterpart, Parke-Davis began serious research efforts with the aim of making diphtheria
anti-toxin.

To do so, it hired Elijah M. Houghton, a research assistant at the nearby

University of Michigan in 1895 and Charles McClintock, a research assistant in

16

bacteriology, in 1896 (Swann, 1988). Parke-Davis established a research lab in biology, and
succeeded in producing diphtheria anti-toxin within a few months. McClintock then turned
his efforts to other biological research, which dominated the firm until the 1920s when a
separate department for chemical research was established (Swann, 1988).
These early examples of the importance of local labor markets in diffusing
biomedical research knowledge are typical of the experience of U.S. firms in the 1920s and
1930s. Firms located near universities appear to have had greater ease in recruiting scholars
for their research efforts. The differences in the strength and relevance of the science bases
in Philadelphia, PA and Wheeling, WV during the formative years of Mulford and Sterling
are vast. The “Cradle of Pharmacy,” Philadelphia was home to numerous universities with
departments dedicated to biomedical sciences, including the University of Pennsylvania
(which was founded 1740, and offered its first doctorate in 1871), as well as the Philadelphia
College of Pharmacy (founded 1821), the Medical College of Pennsylvania (1850),
Jefferson Medical College (1825), Hahnemann Medical College (1848), Temple University
(1884), and the Drexel Institute of Technology (1892). The University of Pennsylvania was
one of the country’s leading biomedical institutions, and had granted, on its own, 919
doctorates by 1925. By contrast, Sterling’s hometown, Wheeling, WV was 50 miles from
the nearest university. The closest large universities to its home base were in Pittsburgh (59
miles from away), Morgantown, WV (79 miles away), and Penn State (198 miles away).
Though not immediately nearby, Pittsburgh was an emerging center of university life at the
turn of the century, offering the University of Pittsburgh (which was founded in 1786 and
granted its first doctorate in 1886), the Carnegie Institute of Technology (founded 1905),
and Duquesne University (founded 1878). However, even if Sterling had opened facilities

17

in Pittsburgh, these growing universities would not have been able to offer research services
comparable to those of Philadelphia – by 1925, the city’s largest university, the University
of Pittsburgh, had only granted 86 PhDs, and Carnegie and Duquesne did not grant any
PhDs until the 1920s.
III.2.2. Early university-industry interactions - collaborations & local labor markets
In this section we review historical evidence that suggests that university academics
were sought-after collaborators for early research labs, and that suggests that geographic
propinquity played an important role in the ability to collaborate with university-based
researchers.

Both the importance of some academic collaborators and the potentially

prohibitive cost of long-distance collaboration are illustrated by the agreement struck
between Du Pont and consulting chemist Roger Adams, a professor at the University of
Illinois. Du Pont offered Adams $5,000 a year, which was substantially more than half his
university salary, to entice him to make a monthly trip from Urbana to Wilmington, and to
visit for a month or so during the summers. Adams negotiated a deal in which he received
$3,000 annually (plus travel expenses) for a visit every other month, along with $750 for
each summer month spent at Du Pont (Hounshell and Smith, 1988).10 While Du Pont, one
of the first and most successful companies to adopt in-house research, had access to the
funds required to invest in long-distance relationships with consultants (and had little choice,
given the absence of a major research university in the vicinity of Wilmington), younger and
smaller firms did not. Table 1 lists the industrial labs in the National Research Council
(NRC) data that in 1938 listed the names of the universities at which they funded consultants

10

While a consultant for Du Pont, Adams told a colleague, “I feel that I get quite as much out of the contact
from the chemical standpoint as they do” (Ibid, p. 298).

18

or research fellows.11 Local universities, where they exist, predominate. While other more
distant universities were supported by firms with larger research efforts (like Merck, with a
research staff of 111), even these firms continue to be associated with nearby universities.
Universities, in addition to providing consulting services, fed the labs with a supply
of skilled labor. We have seen that Mulford and Parke-Davis both hired graduates of local
universities (the University of Pennsylvania and the University of Michigan, respectively) to
form two of the first in-house research labs in the United States. Looking at a larger sample,
we draw on evidence of the geographic mobility of university graduates from the Chemical
Who’s Who, a directory published in 1928 that contains biographical sketches of executives
and researchers in the chemical industry. For a sample of the thirty largest labs in the
National Research Council (NRC) volume of 1927, we collected information on the
educational background and location of first employment of executives listed in the Who’s
Who. Many of the executives, whether directly involved in research or not, came from
scientific backgrounds, and the biographical information on the location of an individual’s
alma mater and post-graduate employment is instructive whether or not the individual joined
the company immediately upon graduation. The information we collected revealed that the
first employment after graduation from a university was very often in the same city as the
university, and that many firms seemed to hire graduates of nearby universities. While the
extent of this practice varied by firm, the firms that did hire from nearby universities
(“nearby” defined loosely to include universities within 100 or 200 miles of the lab) tended
to hire almost exclusively from those universities. For example, at Sharp and Dohme of
Baltimore, one of the two directors of pharmaceutical research listed in the Who’s Who in

11

In the NRC publication, this is described as “grants to university labs for research projects in support of
program of association.”

19

1928 was J.C. Krantz, a former professor at the University of Maryland and a former
lecturer at Johns Hopkins. The other director of pharmaceutical research graduated from the
Philadelphia College of Pharmacy and had worked at Mulford and Co. in Philadelphia
before joining Sharp and Dohme. One laboratory superintendent (C. Neal) was a graduate
of the University of Maryland department of Pharmacy, and another superintendent (E.
Miller) earned a doctorate from Johns Hopkins. Of the nine employees and executives
whose educational credentials are described in the Who’s Who, six joined after studying or
working at Johns Hopkins or the University of Maryland. Three were graduates of the
Philadelphia College of Pharmacy (two of whom came to Sharp & Dohme after initial
employment at Mulford & Co) and one came to Sharp & Dohme after working as a
professor at the University of Vermont.12
Another example of localization in early research collaborations, Eli Lilly & Co., of
Indianapolis, Indiana, engaged in collaborative research with Purdue University. Lilly hired
Purdue grads, like director of research development H.W. Rhodehamel, chief pharmacist
F.E. Bibbins, and assistant chief engineer J.C. Siegesmund.

Pharmaceutical research

scientist E.H. Stuart was a graduate of Indiana University. The majority of Lilly employees
whose credentials are listed in the Who’s Who were graduates of Indiana universities. Of the
ten listed university-educated employees of Eli Lilly & Co. of Indianapolis, four were
graduates of Purdue University (62 miles away in West Lafayette) who joined Lilly upon
graduation. Two attended other universities in Indiana (DePauw and Indiana University),
one came from the U.S. Industrial Alcohol Co. in New Orleans after graduating from
Louisiana State University, and the others studied at Trinity College and the Philadelphia

12

Sharpe and Dohme acquired Mulford around this time (officially, 1929; Galambos, 1995) , which may
explain the number of Sharpe and Dohme executives that Who’s Who credits with Mulford experience.

20

College of Pharmacy. As we discuss in some more detail below, Lilly also provides an
interesting example of early firms’ abilities to work with distant researchers.
At Abbott Labs of Chicago, the president, Alfred Burdick, was a former professor at
the Illinois Medical College; consulting scientist Roger Adams was chair of the department
of Chemistry at the University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign. Adams’ former student,
Henry Volwiler, chief chemist in 1928 (later president and chairman of the board), was a
graduate of the University of Illinois, as was Floyd Thayer, a former research chemist who
was in 1928 manager of the chemical sales department. Of the eight people listed, six joined
the firm after graduating from or working at an Illinois university. Swann notes that several
of Adams’ students also went on to join Abbott (1988).
In contrast to these examples, there are fifty-five individuals listed as employees of
Du Pont, and the list of universities is almost as long. It is clear that not every firm in the
industry hired graduates of local universities – mainly because it was not always the case
that local universities produced graduates with the skills required during this period.
Although the Who’s Who was published in 1928, most of the individuals who appear in it
had been with the firms for many years, most of them having been hired in the previous
decade or earlier.
The example of Alfred Newton Richards’ work for Merck provides one example
how academics played active roles in the establishment of in-house R&D labs. Richards
essentially acted as a head-hunter and recruiter when Merck set up its in-house facilities
starting in 1930. Richards was professor of pharmacology and vice-president of medical
affairs at the University of Pennsylvania. As Swann notes, “The University of Pennsylvania
was a logical site for Merck to establish connections for biomedical research and clinical

21

investigations of its drugs. Pennsylvania was a major research institution with access to
extensive clinical facilities; the university was conveniently located not far from Rahway;
and most important, Merck had close contact with one of the faculty whom the university
community esteemed – Newton Richards” (Swann, 1988, 74-75). Richards acted as a
liaison between Merck and the academic community, helping not just in recruiting but also
in the organization of collaborative projects. Students and clinicians at Penn carried out the
investigation and testing of methylcholine, a vasodilator eventually marketed by Merck as
Mecholyl Chloride. Pharmacologists at Penn also helped develop Vinethene, an anaesthetic
originally discovered by a pharmacologist at the University of California Medical School.
Merck “did not feel that it would be advantageous to spend a great deal of money for the
pharmacological study of vinyl ether in California. The distance was so great that a true
cooperation could not be obtained.”13 Instead, the work was undertaken by clinical faculty
at the more geographically proximate University of Pennsylvania.
While firms with larger R&D budgets often engaged academic consultants at more
distant universities who were specialists in a specific field, younger and smaller firms appear
to have been more likely to collaborate with local academics.

Starting in 1925,

Northwestern University chemist Arthur Tatum did routine testing a few times a year for the
small Chicago firm Cook Laboratories. Tatum had no unique knowledge of the drugs he
tested, and Swann notes that “Cook probably engaged Tatum simply because of his
proximity to the firm” (Swann, 1988, p. 103). Selman Waksman worked part-time at nearby
Cutter Laboratories while a graduate student at UC Berkeley and at Takamine Labs of New
Jersey while a young assistant professor at Rutgers (Israel, 2004).

13

Letter from Merck scientist R.T. Major to A.N. Richards, quoted to Swann, 1988, p. 77.

22

Geographic proximity appears to matter most for (a) labs at early stages of
development, or (b) relatively informal or occasional consulting contracts on general
scientific matters, but not large-scale research projects requiring specialized scientific
knowledge. For example, Lilly had 4 general consultants at nearby universities by 1943: an
organic chemist from U Chicago ($2000/yr), chemical engineer from Purdue ($600/yr),
biochemist from U Illinois ($600/yr), organic chemist from U Indiana ($2,400/yr) (Swann,
1988, p. 52). However, Lilly’s large-scale collaborative research projects were undertaken
with researchers at more distant universities, for example their collaboration with Banting
and Best’s work on synthesizing insulin at the University of Toronto, and with scientists at
Harvard and the University of Rochester on the treatment of pernicious anemia in the 1920s
(Swann, 1988, Chapter 5).
III.2.3. Some from early university-firm interactions: Data from patents
Some of the fruits of the early collaborations between universities and
pharmaceutical firms can be found in data on firm-level patenting in the 1930s. Combining
data gleaned from original patent documents with the 1930 and 1935 registries of the
American Chemical Society, we have identified the affiliations of many of the inventors
listed on the patents granted to the firms in our sample in 1938. Among the subset of patents
for which we were able to identify at least one inventor’s affiliation, approximately 13%
included at least one academic inventor. (We were able to identify the inventors for 184 of
the 384 patents we examined.) Among prominent pharmaceutical firms Abbott, Lilly, and
Parke-Davis, 50%, 56%, and 67% of patents granted, respectively, included academic
inventors (when the inventor could be identified in the ACS directory). Other well-known
firms with academic inventors include Merck (1 of 8 patents whose inventors could be

23

identified had an academic inventor) and Sharp and Dohme (1 of 1). Some smaller firms,
including Ostro Research Labs Lewis Chemical Co, Sonneborn and Sons, Zonite Products
Corp., and Commercial Solvents Corp. also included academic inventors on their patents, as
did Monsanto (although for only 2 of 21 patents with identifiable inventors). While this
sample is not sufficiently large to derive substantial statistical power, it provides suggestive
evidence of considerable academic involvement in important research-oriented tasks in
some pharmaceutical firms as early as 1938.

III.3. Reciprocal relationships: Historical evidence of the influence of early 20th century
firms on academic science
In addition to the documented episodes of academic researchers’ roles in nurturing
the birth and growth of industrial pharmaceutical research, the historical record suggests that
a number of companies were influential in shaping the evolution of university research
programs. The relationships between Merck and Rutgers University and DuPont and the
University of Delaware appear to be illustrative of this phenomenon.
Merck’s choice of Rahway, NJ as the location for the plant it built in 1899 –
influenced in part by a board member who owned land in the community (Feldman and
Schreuder, 1996, p. 856) – proved propitious for nearby Rutgers University. In the 1930s,
Merck developed a relationship with microbiologist Selman Waksman of the College of
Agriculture at Rutgers. Starting in 1939, Merck agreed to supply assistance for antibiotics
developed by Waksman, who would assign all ensuing patents to Merck in exchange for a
2.5% royalty to be paid to Rutgers. In 1943 Waksman developed streptomycin, a new
blockbuster antibiotic that was less toxic and more effective (particularly in treating
tuberculosis) than existing alternatives. Motivated by fear of a public outcry over the

24

monopolization of such an important drug, Waksman and Rutgers convinced Merck to
relinquish their rights to Waksman’s patents to the Rutgers Research and Endowment Fund,
which licensed the patent to several competing companies. The Fund collected $12 million
in royalties from Waksman’s discoveries over the next forty years.

Swann quotes

Waksman, whose work earned the Nobel Prize for Medicine in 1952, as suggesting that he
owed more to support from Merck than from Rutgers for the discoveries (Swann, 1988).14
The University of Delaware’s relationship with Du Pont proved to be similarly
beneficial to that institution. Established in 1802 on the banks of the Brandywine river, in
part because the location provided easy access to waterpower and an abundant supply of
willow trees (from which charcoal could be produced), Du Pont was founded long before
chemical research was widespread in American universities and, consequently, without
regard to the availability of local academic science.

Nonetheless, Du Pont played an

important role in the subsequent development of scientific research at the University of
Delaware through a number of significant gifts from the Du Pont family and other
individuals associated with Du Pont. In 1924, the first physics professor was brought to
Delaware with the help of Lammot Du Pont, who contributed $2,000 for equipment and
pledged an additional $600 a year for five years, half for research equipment and half to top
off the new professor’s salary (Munroe, 2004, Chapter 9).

The university’s chemical

laboratory was established between 1935 and 1937 with a $300,000 gift from Fletcher
Brown, a former Du Pont Vice President. Brown also made a donation to supplement the
salary of Allan Colburn, a Du Pont engineer who became the first professor of Chemical
Engineering at Delaware in April 1938. Chemical Engineering quickly became the most
14

Waksman stated that, “Without the help…of an industrial organization that took over a major part of the
pharmacological evaluation of the antibiotic [streptomycin] and large-scale production our contribution
would have never attained its goal” (Swann, 1998, p. 90).

25

active field of research at the university, with the possible exception of the agricultural
experiment station (Munroe, 2004, Chapter 10).

IV.

Data on Universities and Pharmaceutical Research Laboratories, 1920-1946
We use the historical and mainly qualitative evidence of the preceding section to

inform and complement a quantitative analysis of the role of academic science in the
establishment of industrial research labs. Our analysis takes advantage of data on the
number of research labs by city over several years from the publication Industrial Research
Laboratories of the United States, collected by the National Research Council. In 1920 the
National Research Council began to circulate surveys inquiring about firms’ industrial
research activities. While the term “industrial research” was interpreted broadly to include
development and product improvement, the term “laboratory” was restricted to apply only to
those departments of companies that had “separate and permanently established research
staff and equipment,” excluding “firms that indicated they only occasionally carry out
research, using teams temporarily recruited for the purpose or assembled from their
operating staffs” (Industrial Research Laboratories of the United States, 1956, Introduction,
p. 2). Government and university laboratories were excluded, as were labs that conducted
testing and analysis but no research.
These publications contain information on the characteristics of industrial research
labs in nineteen years between 1920 and 1985.15 In the earliest years in which the series was
published, these characteristics include the firm’s address, the number of its research
employees, and a brief description of its activities. In later years, the surveys list the labs’

15

The years in which volumes were published are: 1920, 1927, 1931, 1933, 1938, 1940, 1946, 1948, 1950,
1956, 1960, 1965, 1970, 1975, 1977, 1979, 1982, 1983, and 1985.

26

founding dates, number of scientific and other personnel by type (i.e.: biologists, chemists,
etc.), the names of important researchers, scientific journals published by the lab, and their
partners in collaborative research.16
We combine these data with (a) information on American universities drawn from
the Bulletin of the Office of Higher Education (Biennial of Education) and the American
Council on Education’s serial publication American Universities and Colleges17 and (b) data
on county-level population and manufacturing establishments drawn from the US censuses
of population and US censuses of manufacturing, respectively, for the years 1920-1950.18
By including population and manufacturing data in the county-level regressions, we control
for the extent to which the size, magnitude of economic activity, and, to a degree,
urbanization affect the extent of industrial pharmaceutical research in US counties.
Figures 4, 5, and 6 plot the industrial research labs, universities, and manufacturing
establishments, by county on maps of the United States, respectively.19 The figures suggest
that manufacturing and industrial research were more concentrated (particularly in the
manufacturing belt of the Northeast/Midwest) than were population and universities and
colleges. Table 2 provides summary statistics from the dataset. It shows that counties with
more

Ph.D.-granting

universities

tend

to

have

a

much

larger

number

of

chemical/pharmaceutical industrial research labs per capita, in each year of the sample. We
restrict ourselves to data on the number of labs per county in the years 1927, 1938, and
1946.
16

Starting in 1950, the volumes also contain indices of universities that participate in collaborative research,
indicating whether or not the university possesses “facilities for research in practically all fields of science”,
its facilities are limited to specific fields, or it has particular capabilities in certain areas.
17
We thank Claudia Goldin for making the Biennial data available.
18
In matching the county-level manufacturing and population data to the county-level lab data, we were
careful to account for changes over time in county boundaries.
19
Manufacturing and population are plotted only for those counties above the median for the country.

27

V.

Evaluating the Role of Universities as a Determinant of Pharmaceutical
Laboratory Growth
Table 3a contains results from panel regressions in which the dependent variable is

the number of pharmaceutical industrial research labs by county and year. Because our
dependent variables are non-negative integers truncated at zero (i.e., count variables), we
employ Negative Binomial regressions designed to account for these characteristics of the
data. To facilitate the interpretation of the coefficients on the covariates as elasticities, each
of these enters in logs.20 Each regression includes county population and the number of
manufacturing establishments in the county to control for factors associated with county size
and economic composition.

Throughout the Table, we address county-specific

heterogeneity by controlling for the impact of initial conditions (conditions in the county in
1927) on the number of laboratories in subsequent years of the data.
In the first four columns of Table 3a, we model the number of pharmaceutical labs in
a county as a function of county population, county manufacturing establishments, the initial
number of pharmaceutical labs in the county in 1927, and, depending on the column, both
the 1927 count and contemporaneous count of Chemistry or Science-oriented PhDs granted
by universities in the county.21 The initial number of pharmaceutical labs in the county
helps control for county-level heterogeneity, but is also relevant for adjudicating competing
hypotheses regarding the birth of industrial research labs. Specifically, the significance and
direction of the coefficient on initial labs helps evaluate whether their growth is random or
follows a pattern consistent with convergence or divergence. This variable enters positively
and significantly in each of the models.
20
21

That implies that counties with more

In each case, we add 1 to the variable before taking logs.
These variables are expressed in logs to account for heteroskedasticity.

28

pharmaceutical labs in 1927 had faster rates of growth in labs to 1938 and 1946. Controlling
for other relevant factors, this suggests that counties with a larger number of initial
laboratories are more likely to experience laboratory births in the future, a pattern consistent
with the divergence hypothesis. The finding is consistent with the pattern of path dependent
growth evident in Feldman and Schreuder’s study of the early pharmaceutical industry in the
Mid-Atlantic region (1996). Divergence does not appear to be the only significant pattern in
the data, however.
To investigate the hypothesis that universities exerted a significant influence on the
birth of industrial research labs, we employ the number of PhDs awarded in a county as a
proxy for the extent to which local universities engage in relevant research.22 In Columns 1
and 2, we include the number of PhDs awarded in 1927 separately from the number of PhDs
awarded contemporaneously. In both cases, the contemporaneous number of PhDs is
positive and significant at the 1% level. The coefficients in these columns imply that,
holding observable county characteristics constant, an increase of 10% in the number of
Chemistry PhDs or overall Science PhDs is associated with a 4.0% and 3.2% increase in the
number of labs in the county, respectively. Consistent with the fact that there is a great deal
of autocorrelation in the geographic distribution of PhD graduates, the impact of
contemporaneous degrees awarded increases when the controls for initial conditions are
removed in Columns 3 and 4. Although we do not report them here, the results obtained
using county-level data in Table 3a are consistent with estimates we obtained using MSAlevel data. It is also worth noting that these results are not driven by those counties in which

22

We also obtained data on the universities’ research expenditures for certain years. While this variable comes
closer to the effect we are trying to estimate, it is not available for every university in every year. As a result,
we use number of PhD degrees awarded, which is perhaps noisier but we would argue a reasonable proxy for
the research effort of the university.

29

the largest firms (e.g., such as Abbott, Lilly, and Merck) reside. The key results in 3a are
robust to the exclusion of counties that include firms whose R&D employment falls into the
top 10 percent of the distribution. The results are also robust to the exclusion of all counties
in states in New England and the Mid-Atlantic area (i.e., MD, DE, PA, NJ, NY, CT, RI,
MA, VT, NH, and ME).
While we would like to model the growth of pharmaceutical employment in addition
to the number of labs over this period, the NRC data on lab employment are less reliable.
For example, employment data may reflect total firm employment rather than lab-level
employment, and, for about 10% of the observations, no employment data are listed.
Although these data are more noisy, we estimate the correlates of county-level R&D
workers in Table 3b. The pattern of divergence evident in the laboratory models remains in
these models; however, the influence of lagged and contemporaneous PhD graduates is
statistically insignificant in models that include all of the laboratories in the data (Columns
1-3). The number of PhD graduates does enter in a statistically and economically significant
way, however, in certain models that include only the first laboratory listed for each firm.
(As a rule, the first laboratory listed is also the headquarters laboratory for the firm.) In
Columns 5, the number of contemporaneous Science PhDs enters positively and
significantly at the 1% level, although the initial number of county Science PhDs is
statistically insignificant. The coefficient on contemporaneous Science PhDs suggests that
10% higher Science PhD graduates is correlated with 90% more laboratory employment in
the county.

Neither 1927 nor contemporaneous Chemistry PhDs graduates enters

significantly when both are included in models of county R&D employment (in Column 4);
however, when the initial number of Chemistry PhDs is omitted (in Column 6), the

30

contemporaneous count is significant at the 1% level. Considering the noisiness of the lablevel counts of R&D employment, we interpret these results as suggestive of a relationship
between proximate academic science and county R&D employment, at least in the case of
headquarters facilities.
Table 4 contains the results of conditional fixed-effects Negative Binomial
regressions run on all years (1927, 1938, and 1946) and including a county-level fixed effect
to control for time-invariant characteristics of the county that may be associated with both
the location of R&D and academic science. The coefficients in Table 4 are thus identified
by changes over time in the number of PhDs granted and the extent of R&D located in a
county. They continue to exhibit a positive and significant association between academic
research in Chemistry and in science more broadly (with a slightly larger effect coming from
Chemistry) after controlling for unobserved heterogeneity across counties.
In this table, we also present estimates that use a distance-weighted count of PhDs
within a 500 mile radius of the county in which the lab is located.23 These distanceweighted counts are calculated by summing up PhDs granted by all universities within 500
miles, weighted by the distance between the county and the lab. That is, we calculate
PhD _ wtit = ∑ j

PHDs j
1 + d ij

,

where PhD_wt for firm i is the number of PhDs nearby, weighted by the distance between
firm i and university j. Nearby PhDs would get a very high weight (very low inverse
weight), whereas PhD 500 miles away make almost no contribution to the count. We
calculate these variables and estimate the relationship between them and the R&D variables

23

We thank Toby Stuart for suggesting a distance-weighted measure. We modeled our PhD count on the “IPO
concentration” measure found in Stuart and Sorensen (2003).

31

because of concerns about the arbitrary nature of county boundaries. The fact that M.I.T.,
located in Middlesex county, MA, is a stone’s throw from Boston and Suffolk county means
that when we use county boundaries to define the radius within which we expect spillovers
to take place, we will sometimes miss important potential relationships at the boundaries of
counties. We use the distance-weighted counts as a robustness check, and find that similar
results are obtained whether we use county boundaries or a continuous distance-weighted
measure to define the location of “nearby” academic science.
It should be noted here that the data on research labs may not be exhaustive of all the
labs in existence for the early years during which it was collected. The Appendix to this
paper reproduces an excerpt from the introduction to the 1927 edition of the series. It
explains that members of the main scientific and engineering associations were consulted in
order to establish a list of firms known to have in-house research labs, and the published
information is based on surveys were sent to these firms. It is important to determine what
effect this sampling bias might have on the results, that is, whether the correlation between
labs and universities per county could be an artifact of the way the sample was constructed.
If, for example, regional branches of scientific and engineering associations tended to be
located near universities, they may have had more information about research labs in the
surrounding community. To guard against this possibility, we ran regressions that include a
dummy variable equal to 1 if there was a branch of the American Chemical Society (ACS)
located in county i in year t.24 In the event that a bias is introduced by the tendency of ACS
branches to locate near universities, this dummy will correct for that bias. Column 5 of
Table 3a shows that the coefficient in the on the number of chemistry PhDs is slightly
24

These data were obtained from the Directory of Members of the American Chemical Society. Directories
from 1924, 1930, and 1947 listed the locations of branch headquarters and the year in which they were
chartered.

32

reduced, but remains significant at the 5% level. Similar results are obtained for the other
specifications if the ACS branch dummy is included.

VI.

Mechanisms of university-industry interaction: Collaboration
We look more closely at the role played by proximity to academic science in Table

5, in which the firm’s decision to collaborate with academic scientists is modeled as a
function of the extent of research undertaken at nearby universities. The number of PhDs in
science or chemistry awarded by local universities is positively and significantly associated
with the propensity of pharmaceutical firms to engage in collaborative research with
universities. Firms with larger numbers of researchers are significantly more likely to
engage in cooperative research, and older firms are slightly more likely to collaborate with
academic scientists.25 We also estimated specifications including the manufacturing or
population intensities of the county, and these variables were insignificantly associated with
the probability of collaboration.

To test the hypothesis that collaboration with local

academic scientists was more important for firms at different stages of the life cycle, we
include interaction effects of local chemistry research with age and size in columns 4 and 5.
The coefficient on the interaction of age and nearby PhDs in chemistry is insignificant at the
5% level. This is slightly surprising, considering our expectation that younger firms might
be relatively lacking in internal research capabilities and therefore more likely to benefit
from collaboration with local scientists. The effect of local academic chemistry research
does not appear to vary according to firm size, however, since the interaction of firm size
and chemistry PhDs is not significant at the 5% level.

25

When the age variable is included, the number of observations falls because age is only observed in the 1946
sample.

33

VII.

Statistical evidence on the influence of private industry on university programs
Our qualitative evidence suggests that the research needs of large firms played a role

in the evolution of at least a few universities. Our quantitative analysis offers mixed support
for this proposition. Table 6 reports the results of logit regressions at the level of the
university that examine the determinants of the adoption of a chemical engineering program
for the first time between 1937 and 1947. We use the full sample of universities and
colleges drawn from the publication American Colleges and Universities, excluding
religious seminaries, teacher’s colleges, and junior colleges. Data on engineering programs
in American universities are drawn from the United States Office of Education’s Bulletins.26
The dependent variable takes on the value 1 if the university established a department of
chemical engineering for the first time between 1937 and 1947, and 0 if not. Universities
that had already established programs by 1937 are omitted from the analysis. This variable
is regressed on a measure of pharmaceutical research in industry in the county in 1938, the
population and number of manufacturing establishments in the county in 1940 and 1939
respectively, and the growth of population, manufacturing, and industrial research in
pharmaceuticals during the period.27 The results show that universities located in counties
that were centers of research in the pharmaceutical industries in 1938 were significantly
more likely to establish a department of chemical engineering between that year and 1947,
even after controlling for the growth of the industry during that period. This appears to be
evidence of a feedback effect in which the presence nearby firms influenced the programs
offered by universities.

26
27

Such effects were not evident, however, when we looked at

The Bulletins, part of the series “Accredited Higher Institutions” were published in 1938 and 1948.
For universities in cities that fall in multiple counties, we use the average of these variables.

34

universities that began granting Ph.D.s in Chemistry during this period. We were also
unable to find evidence of “anchor” effects in the data (Agrawal and Cockburn, 2003;
Feldman, 2003), in which especially large firms had a particularly large impact on the
growth of local university programs in sciences or chemistry.

VIII. Instrumental Variables Estimates
Preceding sections of this paper document a statistically significant, positive
relationship between the number of pharmaceutical industrial research laboratories in a
county and university research in a county, after controlling for other variables likely to
influence the location decision of R&D labs and including a county-specific fixed effect.
These results imply that growth over time in the amount of university research (as measured
by the number of PhDs granted) in a county was associated with growth over time in
pharmaceutical R&D in a county. However, because university research is also likely to
have been stimulated by nearby industrial research (through consulting contracts, joint
research projects, demand for graduates, etc.), we cannot necessarily infer a causal
interpretation from this relationship. Indeed, the stories of Chemical Engineering at the
University of Delaware and the streptomycin royalties at Rutgers, together with the results
presented in Table 6, illustrate the possibility of “feedback effects” from firms to
universities during this period. As Geiger observes, “but if the universities were dedicated
to science, broadly speaking, by the beginning of the twentieth century, it was not yet
evident that science was or ought to be beholden to universities. Scientific investigation was
undertaken in government bureaus and in semi-independent laboratories… [E]ven by 1920

35

the research universities could not be assured of being the primary locus of basic research”
(Geiger, 1986).
Panel estimates of the relationship between university and industrial research are
likely to be characterized by simultaneity – research universities attracted industrial
laboratories, and the research conducted in these laboratories affected nearby academic
departments. In this section, we use instrumental variables to correct for this simultaneity
bias. The instruments are the amount of money obtained as the proceeds of the sale of land
and scrip granted to the state under the Morrill Act of 1862, and a dummy variable equal to
1 if a university in the county was founded before 1800.
The Morrill Act established the “land-grant” colleges by giving the states public
lands that could be sold and to finance the colleges. A state received 30,000 acres for each
member of its congressional delegation, and since the smallest states had at least two
senators and one representative, the minimum land grant consisted of 90,000 acres. The
Hatch Act of 1887 provided funding for agricultural experiment stations, and a second
Morrill Act in 1890 extended the land grant provisions to southern states.
While the amount of land granted under the Morrill Act was proportional to the size
of the state, the sale price per acre obtained by states varied considerably, and for somewhat
aleatory reasons. Nevins (1963) writes that:
“A great deal of obscurity yet surrounds the precise disposition made by some states of their
share of the Morrill grant…Many university historians tend to pass over the disposition of
the grants hastily…partly because the story has occasional elements of folly and rascality
that make it embarrassing. A number of states let the land scrip slip through their fingers;
fingers loosed by negligent officers, pried apart by speculators, or even greased by
corruptionists” (p. 29).

Rhode Island was granted 120,000 acres, and asked Rev. Horace T. Love (president of
Brown University) to select the land for sale. He went west in the summer of 1863, and

36

came back “to report that the task was impossibly heavy, for it involved choosing lands,
paying taxes, negotiating sales, and defending titles” and a committee of five was appointed
by Love to take charge. The committee then sold the land to Love in 1865 for $50,000 (the
lowest amount received by any state, and the third lowest per acre), accepting payment over
five years with no interest. Nevins is “not astonished to learn that the sale aroused much
criticism.” In Pennsylvania, “Heavy pressure had come from an unholy partnership of land
speculators, anxious to obtain a bargain, and officers of the state college, anxious to get
funds for a new start” Other states in which the sale of Morrill lands was bungled include
New Jersey, New Hampshire, and Connecticut (all quotes from Nevins, 1963, p. 29-31).
In contrast, states like New York managed to turn the grants into more significant
endowments. Faced with a glut of land scrip and depressed land prices following the Act,
Ezra Cornell purchased New York’s scrip and held it until prices rose. When Cornell
returned the land and profits to the university in 1905, the value had risen almost seven-fold,
to $5,460,038. California, Illinois, Iowa, Michigan, Minnesota, and Nebraska, also obtained
higher prices per acre for their scrip. The appendix lists the acreage granted and amount
obtained at sale, by land grant institution.28
The price per acre obtained for Morrill Act land grants had a long-run impact on
university finances. The states that obtained the most for their scrip are the ones that are
even today home to the better-funded public universities. However, because the price per
acre obtained by the states varied substantially for reasons unrelated to the state’s
attractiveness to industrial research labs seventy years hence, it constitutes a valid
instrument.

28

These data come from the U.S. Office of Education’s Biennial of Higher Education, 1928.

37

The instruments vary by county – they equal zero for all counties not containing a
public university. There may be some concern that states placed universities in counties
with heavy manufacturing concentration, and that for this reason the land grant instrument is
correlated with the errors. While it is true that states had a mandate to serve agricultural and
manufacturing interests through public universities, we feel that this concern is misplaced
because any influence the location of manufacturing in the mid- to late-nineteenth century
may have had on the location of public universities is controlled for through the inclusion in
the regression of the number of manufacturing establishments in the county.
Table 7a presents results of a two-stage least squares (2SLS) model in which the
endogenous variable is log of the number of PhDs granted in a county, and the instruments
are the original sale price received by states for land and scrip obtained through the Morrill
Act and the dummy for universities founded before 1800. Two sets of regressions results
are included, one with the log of the number of labs on the left hand side, and another with
the log of R&D employment. We control for manufacturing, population, and year and
region fixed effects (county or state fixed effects could not be included due to collinearity
with the instruments).

The relationship between university research in a county and

pharmaceutical R&D is positive and significant at the 5% level after instrumenting, whether
research is proxied by Chemistry PhDs or Science PhDs. The first-stage F-statistic (from
the regression of the endogenous variable on the instruments) is 64.4 for chemistry and 76.3
for science. These values are well above the “rule-of-thumb” F-statistic of 10 proposed by
Staiger and Stock (1997) as a test for weak instruments.
To be consistent with the rest of the estimates in the paper, which use the Negative
Binomial model to account for the discrete, non-negative nature of the dependent variable,

38

Table 7b presents non-linear two-stage least squares estimates obtained using the
Generalized Method of Moments (GMM).29 The GMM estimates remain positive and
significant at the 5% level when the left-hand-side variable is the number of labs. However,
when we estimate the causal effect of local academic science on R&D employment in the
county, the effect is not significant. We also tried estimating the IV models with distanceweighted PhDs on the right-hand-side, and obtained similar results – a positive, significant
effect of science or chemistry PhDs when the dependent variable is the number of labs, but a
positive, insignificant effect when the dependent variable is lab employment.

The

instruments are also equally valid when we use distance-weighted PhDs.
How do the effects compare to the un-instrumented effects displayed in Table 4? In
the fixed-effects Poisson estimates, the elasticity of the number of labs with respect to the
number of Chemistry PhDs is 0.450, implying that a 10% increase in the number of
Chemistry PhDs awarded in a county is associated with a 4.5% increase in the number of
pharmaceutical research laboratories nearby, controlling for county-specific fixed effects.
After instrumenting, the elasticity of labs with respect to Chemistry PhDs found in the
GMM estimates in Table 7b is 0.325. The elasticity with respect to science PhDs sees a
similar reduction from 0.342 to 0.224.

IX.

Discussion
The 1920s, 30s, and 40s saw the diffusion of an organizational innovation in the

form of the in-house R&D laboratory in the United States. Also during this period, the
modern American research university developed and collaborative linkages emerged

29

See Mullahy (1997) for an example of a GMM model for count data with endogenous regressors.

39

between industrial and academic researchers.

We argue that universities played an

important role in the emergence of industrial research situated within the boundaries of the
firm, and we present evidence that R&D labs located near universities benefited from
increased access to academic scientists and graduates. The results described in this paper
characterize the relationship between universities and the pharmaceutical industry between
1927 and 1946. They demonstrate that industrial and academic research were co-located,
and that proximity to university research was associated with a greater likelihood that firms
adopt industrial research facilities and collaborate with academic scientists.
Our qualitative and quantitative analyses provide evidence consistent with the
possibility of feedback effects, according to which university programs were affected by the
presence of pharmaceutical industry activity. Specifically, our empirical results suggest that
universities located near larger numbers of industrial research labs in chemistry and
pharmaceuticals as of 1938 were more likely to establish new programs of chemical
engineering by 1946.
In an attempt to identify the causal effect of academic science on the growth of
industrial research, we employ an instrumental variables approach to correct for simultaneity
bias in our estimates of the impact of university research on the birth of industrial research
laboratories. In sum, our analyses suggest that while the presence of industrial facilities
helped shape the direction of university research programs, there was a significant, positive,
and causal effect running from university research to the growth of industrial research
laboratories in the first half of the twentieth century in the United States.

40

References
Acs, Z., D. Audretsch, and M. Feldman (1992) “Real Effects of Academic Research:
Comment,” American Economic Review, 82(1), 363-367.
Adams, J. D. (2002) "Comparative Localization of Academic and Industrial Spillovers,"
Journal of Economic Geography, 2(3): 253-278.
Agrawal, A. and I. Cockburn (2003) “The Anchor Tenant Hypothesis: Exploring the Role
of Large, Local, R&D-Intensive Firms in Regional Innovation Systems,”
International Journal of Industrial Organization, 21: 1227-1253.
American Chemical Society (1924, 1930, 1947) Directory of members - American
Chemical Society. Washington, D.C., American Chemical Society.
Arora, A., A. Fosfuri, and A. Gambardella (2001) Markets for Technology: The
Economics of Innovation and Corporate Strategy. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Arora, A., A. Fosfuri, and A. Gambardella (2003) "The Division of Inventive Labor:
Functioning and Policy Implications," working paper, presented at the NBER, Zvi
Griliches Memorial Conference in Paris, FR.
Council on Competitiveness (1996), Endless Frontiers, Limited Resources: U.S. R&D
Policy for Competitiveness, Washington, D.C., Council on Competitiveness.
Fisk, C. (1998) “Removing the 'Fuel of Interest' from the 'Fire of Genius': Law and the
Employee-Inventor, 1830-1930,” University of Chicago Law Review, 65, 1127.
Feldman, M. P. (2003) “The Locational Dynamics of the US Biotech Industry:
Knowledge Externalities and the Anchor Hypothesis,” Industry and Innovation, 10:
311 – 328.
Feldman, M. and Y. Schreuder (1996) “Initial advantage: The origins of geographic
concentration of the pharmaceutical industry in the Mid-Atlantic region,” Industrial
and Corporate Change, Vol. 5, 839-862.
Furman, J. (2003) “Location and Organizing Strategy? Exploring the Influence of
Location on Organization of Pharmaceutical Research,” in Joel A.C. Baum and Olav
Sorenson (ed.), Advances in Strategic Management, 49-88.
Galambos, L. with J. E. Sewell (1995) Networks of Innovation: Vaccine Development at
Merck, Sharp & Dohme, and Mulford, 1985-1995. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press.
Gans, J. and S. Stern (2003) “The Product Market and the Market for Ideas:
Commercialization Strategies for Technology Entrepreneurs,” Research Policy,
32(2), pp. 333-350.
Geiger, R. L., (1986) To Advance Knowledge: The Growth of American Research
Universities, 1900-1940. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Goldin, C. and L. F. Katz (1999) “The Shaping of Higher Education: The Formative
Years in the United States, 1890 to 1940,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, Winter
1999, p. 37-62

41

Hounshell, D. A. and J. K. Smith, Jr. (1988), Science and Corporate Strategy: DuPont
R&D, 1902-1980. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Israel, P. (2004) “Waksman – Biography,”
http://www.scc.rutgers.edu/njh/SciANDTech/Waksman/biog.htm (accessed July 16,
2004).
Jaffe, A. “Real Effects of Academic Research” (1989), American Economic Review, 79
(5), p. 957-70.
Jaffe, A., M. Trajtenberg and R. Henderson (1993) “Geographic Localization of
Knowledge Spillovers as Evidenced by Patent Citations,” The Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 108 (3), p 577-98.
Journal of the American Medical Association (1915) “Special Report of the Work of the
Council on Pharmacy and Chemistry,” 65, p. 69.
Lamoreaux, N. and K. Sokoloff (1996) “Long-term change in the organization of
inventive activity,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 93, 1268612692.
Lamoreaux, N. and K. Sokoloff (2002) “Intermediaries in the U.S. Market for
Technology, 1870-1920”, NBER Working Paper no.9017
Lewis, S. (1925) Arrowsmith. New York, NY: Grosset and Dunlap.
Liebenau, J., Higby, G. J., and E. C. Stroud (1988) Pill Peddlers: Essays on the History
of the Pharmaceutical Industry. Madison, WI: American Institute of the History of
Pharmacy.
Mahoney, T. (1959) The Merchants of Life. New York, NY: Harper Brothers.
Mann, C. C. and M. L. Plummer (1991) The Aspirin Wars. New York, NY: Knopf.
Mowery, D. and N. Rosenberg (1998) Paths of Innovation: Technological Change in
20th-Century America, Cambridge; New York: Cambridge University Press.
Mowery, D. (1983) “Industrial Research and Firm Size, Survival, and Growth in
American Manufacturing, 1921-46: An Assessment”. Journal of Economic History,
43 (4), p. 953-980.
Mowery, D. (1990) “The Development of Industrial Research in U.S. Manufacturing,”
American Economic Review, 80(2), p. 345-349
Mowery, D., R. Nelson, B. Sampat, and A. Ziedonis (2003) “Ivory Tower” and
Industrial Innovation: University-Industry Technology Transfer Before and After the
Bayh-Dole Act in the United States, Manuscript
Mullahy, J. (1997) “Instrumental-Variable Estimation of Count Data Models:
Applications to Models of Cigarette Smoking Behavior,” Review of Economics and
Statistics, 79, 586–593.
Munroe, J. (2004) “The University of Delaware: A History,”
http://www.udel.edu/PR/munroe/ (accessed, July 1-7, 2004)

42

Murmann, J. P. (2003) Knowledge and Competitive Advantage: The Coevolution of
Firms, Technology, and National Institutions. New York, NY: Cambridge
University Press.
National Research Council (1921) Bulletin 16, “Research Laboratories in Industrial
Establishments of the United States, Including Consulting Research Laboratories”,
Washington, D.C.: National Research Council.
National Research Council (1927-85) “Industrial Research Laboratories of the United
States”, Washington, D.C.: National Research Council.
Nelson, R. and N. Rosenberg (1994) “American Universities and Technical Advance in
Industry,” Research Policy, 23, 323-348.
Nelson, R. R. and G. Wright (1992) “The Rise and Fall of American Technological
Leadership,” Journal of Economic Literature, 30(4): 1931-1964.
Nevins, A. (1962) The State Universities and Democracy, Urbana: University of Illinois
Press.
Parascandola, J. (1985) “Industrial Research Comes of Age:
The American
Pharmaceutical Industry, 1920-1940,” Pharmacy in History, 27(1), pp. 12-21.
Peretto, P. (1998). “Technological Change, Market Rivalry, and the Evolution of the
Capitalist Engine of Growth”, Journal of Economic Growth, 3 (1), p. 53-80.
Rosenberg, N. (2000) “America’s
Manuscript, Stanford University.

University/Industry

Interfaces,

1945-2000”,

Staiger, D. and Stock, J. (1997) "Instrumental Variables Regression with Weak
Instruments,” Econometrica, 65(3), May 1997, 557-586.
Stuart, T. and O. Sorensen (2003), “Liquidity Events and the Geographic Distribution of
Entrepreneurial Activity”, Administrative Science Quarterly, 48 (2003): 175-201
Swann, J.P. (1988) Academic Scientists and the Pharmaceutical Industry, Baltimore:
Johns Hopkins University press.
Swann, J.P. (1990) “Universities, Industry, and the Rise of Biomedical Collaboration in
America,” in Liebenau et al. (ed.) Pill Peddlers: Essays on the History of the
Pharmaceutical Industry. Madison, WI: American Institute of the History of
Pharmacy, pp. 73-90.
Teece, D. (1988) “Technological Change and the Nature of the Firm," in G. Dosi, C.
Freeman, R. Nelson, G. Silverberg, and L. Soete (eds.), Technical Change and
Economic Theory. London: Pinter, 256-281.
Haynes, W. (1928) Who’s Who in Chemistry. New Haven, CT: Haynes & George Co.
Zucker, L., M. Brewer, and M. Darby (1998) “Intellectual Capital and the Birth of U.S.
Biotechnology Enterprises,” American Economic Review, vol. 88, no. 1, pp. 290-306

43

Table 1: Pharmaceutical Research Labs and Academic Collaborators, 1938
Laboratory

Location

University

Bauer and Black

Chicago, IL

Northwestern, U Chicago, U Michigan

Breon and Company, Inc.,
George A.

Kansas City, MO

U Nebraska, U Kansas, U Cincinnati

Bristol-Meyers Company

Hillside, NJ

Carnegie Institute Technology, Rutgers,
Stanford

Carbide and Carbon
Chemicals Corporation

South Charleston,
WV

Mellon Institute Industrial Research

Commercial Solvents
Corporation

Terre Haute, IN

Purdue University

Drackett Company

Cincinnati, OH

Ohio State University

Emerson Drug Company

Baltimore, MD

U Maryland; U Illinois; Yale

Endo Products, Inc.

New York, NY

NYU

Harshaw Chemical Company

Cleveland, OH

Western Reserve University

Hynson, Westcott, and
Dunning, Inc.

Baltimore, MD

John Hopkins University, U Maryland

Jergens Company, Andrew

Cincinnati, OH

University Cincinnati

Kessler Chemical Corporation

Philadelphia, PA

Philadelphia College Pharmacy and
Science

LaMotte Chemical Products
Company

Baltimore, MD

Western Reserve University

Merck and Company, Inc

Rahway, NJ

U California; John Hopkins; U
Pennsylvania; Princeton; NYU; Tulane;
MIT; Philadelphia College Pharmacy;
Cornell, Rutgers

Monsanto Chemical
Corporation

St. Louis, MO;
Dayton, OH

U Cincinnati, U Illinois, Michigan U, U
Nevada, U Wisconsin, and Princeton

National Oil Products
Company, Inc.

Harrison, NJ

Harvard Medical School; U Iowa;
Lehigh; Columbia

Sharp and Dohme, Inc

Glenoden, PA and
Baltimore, MD

U Pennsylvania, Bryn Mawr College,
Johns Hopkins Hospital, Philadelphia
College Pharmacy and Science; U
California, Yale, Northwestern,
Rochester

U.S. Industrial Alcohol
Company

Stamford, CT and
Baltimore, MD

Kalamazoo College, Stanford, Temple, U
Connecticut, U Chicago, U Detroit, U
Michigan, U Tennessee

Source: Industrial Research Laboratories of the United States, 1938

44

Table 2a: Descriptive Statistics
Year
County-Level data
County Population
(in hundreds of thousands)
County Manufacturing Establishments
(in hundreds)
Pharma laboratories
R&D personnel
Patents
Cooperative arrangements with
universities
Count of Universities
PhDs granted in Science
(continuous distance measure)
PhDs granted in Chemistry (continuous
distance measure)
PhDs granted in Science in County
PhDs granted in Chemistry in County
Firm-Level data
R&D personnel
Year firm founded
(only available for 1946 data)
Firm Age
(only available for 1946 data)
Patents received
Cooperative Agreement with University
(not available for 1927 data)
University-Level data
Total PhDs granted
PhDs granted in Science
PhDs granted in Chemistry

Obs
9942

Mean
37.02

9304

0.04

9304

Std. Dev.
7.79

Min
27

Max
46.00

0.15

0.000042

4.29

0.72

5.12

0

263.28

9304
9304
9304
9304

0.07
2.20
0.13
0.02

0.60
33.86
4.02
0.43

0
0
0
0

28.00
1712.00
236.00
28.00

9304
9318

0.04
1.58

0.28
2.33

0
0

6.00
40.08

9318

0.58

0.86

0

17.57

9304
9304

0.59
0.21

6.33
2.20

0
0

146.91
44.45

631
39

28.10
1886.03

66.27
31.31

0
1828

825.00
1924.00

631

10.68

19.13

0

118.00

625
392

1.51
0.54

9.88
0.50

0
0

118.00
1.00

342
342
342

16.97
12.58
4.60

29.23
19.92
7.32

0
0
0

171.55
105.91
43.45

Table 2b: Pharmaceutical labs per 100,000 population
Obs
Std. Dev.
Mean
Counties without a PhD-granting university
1927
3048
0.066
0.383
1938
3015
0.033
0.423
1946
2997
0.054
0.672
1927
1938
1946

Counties with a PhD-granting university
59
0.746
1.615
84
0.762
1.986
101
1.040
1.969

Counties with a university granting PhDs in Chemistry
1927
48
0.729
1.647
1938
73
0.836
2.095
1946
90
1.056
1.928

45

Table 3a: Location of pharmaceutical research, 1938-1946
Negative Binomial regressions, controlling for initial conditions
(1)
Chemistry PhDs in county†

0.401
(0.122)***

1927 Chemistry PhDs in county †

0.227
(0.261)

(2)

Science PhDs in county†

0.318
(0.096)***

1927 Science PhDs in county†

0.132
(0.153)

(3)

(4)

(5)

0.555
(0.156)***

0.310
(0.123)**
0.318
(0.219)

0.416
(0.121)***

1927 Pharma Labs in county†

2.307
(0.176)***

2.312
(0.178)***

2.327
(0.181)***

2.327
(0.182)***

Population†

-2.273
(0.578)***

-2.281
(0.573)***

-2.329
(0.574)***

-2.321
(0.577)***

Manufacturing†

0.804
(0.077)***

0.803
(0.077)***

0.809
(0.076)***

0.807
(0.077)***

Year = 1938

-0.947
(0.169)***

-0.949
(0.167)***

-0.941
(0.166)***

-0.935
(0.167)***

Constant

-6.121
(0.297)***

-6.122
(0.295)***

-6.152
(0.292)***

-6.142
(0.294)***

2.177
(0.160)***
-2.458
(0.548)***
0.788
(0.074)***
0.625
(0.205)***
-0.918
(0.157)***
-6.125
(0.264)***

Observations
Log Likelihood

6197
-833.44

6197
-834.48

6197
-835.06

6197
-834.38

6197
-831.95

ACS section

†

in logs

Robust standard errors in parentheses; * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%

46

Table 3b: Location of R&D, dependent variable = laboratory employment in county i in year t
(1)

Chemistry PhDs in county†

-0.578
(0.505)

1927 Chemistry PhDs in county †

1.005
(0.683)

(3)
0.077
(0.214)

-0.087
(0.296)

1927 Science PhDs in county†

0.278
(0.380)

1927 R&D Workers in county†

1.117
(0.159)***

1.114
(0.158)***

1.117
(0.155)***

Population†

0.257
(2.699)

0.211
(2.711)

0.210
(2.722)

Manufacturing†

1.116
(0.206)***

1.118
(0.208)***

1.125
(0.205)***

Year = 1938

-3.782
(0.449)***

-3.772
(0.447)***

-3.771
(0.446)***

Constant

-2.562
(0.774)***

-2.576
(0.778)***

-2.593
(0.766)***

Log Likelihood

(4)

(5)
(6)
Using only first lab listed

0.930
(0.590)
0.630

1.302
(0.406)***

(0.543)

Science PhDs in county†

Observations
†

(2)
Using all labs

6197

6197

6197

-2373.00

-2373.24

-2373.33

1.009
(0.252)***
-2.274
(2.030)
1.615
(0.213)***
-1.848
(0.483)***
-5.922
(0.823)***
6197
-1848.2039

0.919
(0.324)***
-0.090
(0.298)
1.032
(0.249)***
-2.324
(2.027)
1.620
(0.212)***
-1.847
(0.483)***
-5.939
(0.820)***

1.023
(0.247)***
-2.300
(2.023)
1.619
(0.211)***
-1.845
(0.482)***
-5.933
(0.818)***

6197

6197

-1848.32

-1848.48

in logs

Robust standard errors in parentheses
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%

47

Table 4: Conditional Fixed Effects Negative Binomial Regressions, 1927, 1938 and 1946
Dependent variable is either the number of laboratories in county i in year t, or the total employment
of laboratories in the county.
(1)
Laboratories
Science PhDs in
county†

(2)

(3)

Laboratories Laboratories

(4)

(5)

(6)

R&D
Workers

R&D
Workers

R&D
Workers

0.342
(0.150)**
0.450

Chemistry PhDs in
county†

0.145

(0.181)**

(0.104)
0.038

Chemistry PhDs in
county

(0.012)***
0.188

Distance-weighted
Chemistry PhDs
Population†
Manufacturing†
Constant
Observations
Number of groups
(county state)
Log Likelihood

0.186

(0.065)***

(0.053)***

-3.690

-3.617

-2.042

0.624

0.471

0.414

(1.337)***

(1.337)***

(1.566)

(0.607)

(0.623)

(0.630)

0.532

0.529

0.460

0.436

0.446

0.257

(0.272)

(0.272)

(0.270)

2.237

2.121

2.597

(1.702)

(1.690)

(1.789)

788

788

257
-411.70

(0.127)***

(0.127)***

(0.128)***

-5.507

-5.428

-5.261

(0.603)***

(0.600)***

(0.596)***

781

644

644

640

257

255

209

209

208

-411.18

-404.82

-821.30

-817.68

-812.79

†

in logs
Year dummies included
Standard errors in parentheses
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%

48

Table 5 Determinants of Cooperative Research
Logit estimates
Dependent variable: COOP = 1 if firm has cooperative agreement with University
(1)
Science PhDs†

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

0.503

0.652

0.517

0.574

0.376***
(0.061)

Chemistry PhDs†

(0.084)***
R&D staff†

0.186**
(0.082)

0.177
(0.082)**

Age

(0.135)***

(0.221)**

-0.005

-0.005

(0.103)

(0.104)

0.011

0.008

(0.006)*

(0.007)

Age X chemistry PhDs†

(0.235)**
0.181
(0.084)**

0.005
(0.006)

R&D† X chemistry PhDs†

-0.015
(0.045)

Year = 1946
Constant

Observations
Log likelihood

1.495***

1.474

1.485

(0.274)

(0.273)***

-2.158***

-2.090

-0.364

-0.301

-2.115

(0.310)

(0.305)***

(0.358)

(0.378)

(0.322)***

528
-319.17

528
-319.75

(0.276)***

351
-220.11

351
-219.87

528
-319.70

†

in logs
Robust standard errors in parentheses
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%

49

Table 6: New Chemical Engineering programs, 1937-47
Dependent variable = 1 if the university began offering degrees in chemical engineering
between 1937 and 1947

Pharma labs in 1938

(1)

(2)

0.249

0.285

(0.113)**

Population in 1940

(4)

0.008

0.009

(0.115)**

Pharma R&D employment in 1938
Manufacturing in 1939

(3)

(0.004)**

(0.004)**

0.004

-0.273

-0.045

-0.393

(0.460)

(0.514)

(0.469)

(0.536)

-0.187

0.171

-0.023

0.364

(0.609)

(0.643)

(0.604)

(0.651)

Growth of Population, 1940-1950
Growth of Manufacturing, 19391947
Growth of pharma labs, 1938-1946

1.638

1.531

(1.092)

(1.117)

-0.817

-1.044

(0.642)

(0.647)

-0.265
(0.137)*

Growth in R&D employment,
1938-1946

-0.000
(0.002)

Constant

Observations

-1.429

-4.261

-3.005

-5.834

(4.916)

(5.135)

(4.845)

(5.134)

867

867

867

867

Robust standard errors in parentheses
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; * significant at 1%

50

Chemistry PhDs †
Science PhDs †
Population†
Manufacturing†
Constant
Observations
First-stage F stat
Over-id test stat
p-value

Table 7a: 2SLS instrumental variables estimates
(1)
(2)
(3)
R&D
Number of labs† Number of labs†
employment†
0.083
0.162
(0.038)**
(0.110)
0.055
(0.025)**
1.350
1.356
3.339
(0.143)***
(0.142)***
(0.387)***
-0.009
-0.009
-0.009
(0.003)***
(0.003)***
(0.009)
0.037
0.039
0.027
(0.009)***
(0.009)***
(0.031)

(4)
R&D
employment†

0.113
(0.073)
3.340
(0.385)***
-0.009
(0.009)
0.030
(0.031)

9304

9304

9304

9304

64.4
1.458
0.227

76.29
1.613
0.204

64.4
0.006
0.939

76.29
0.000
0.989

Table 7b: GMM (non-linear 2SLS) instrumental variables estimates
R&D
R&D
Number of labs Number of labs
employment
employment
†
Chemistry PhDs
0.326***
0.298
(0.136)
(0.405)
†
Science PhDs
0.225**
0.240
(0.097)
(0.260)
†
0.827***
0.820***
0.830***
0.831***
Manufacturing
(0.097)
(0.096)
(0.155)
(0.151)
†
Population
-0.258
-0.212
-0.479
-0.535
(0.407)
(0.3919)
(0.935)
(0.863)
Constant
-5.776***
-5.733***
-3.483***
-3.481***
(0.460)
(0.454)
(0.774)
(0.755)
Observations
Over-ID test
p-value

9304
0.247
0.619

9304
0.192
0.661

9304
1.461
0.227

9304
1.359
0.244

†

in logs. Year dummies included. Robust standard errors in parentheses
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%

51

Appendix A: Introduction from the 1927 National Research Council survey
“The continued demand for information regarding industrial research laboratories has made
it seem advisable to issue a second revision of the list originally published in Number 2 and
revised in Number 16 of the Bulletin of the National Research Council. The original
publication, compiled in 1920 by Mr. Alfred D. Flinn, Secretary of the Engineering
Foundation, listed about 300 industrial laboratories. The first revision prepared in August
1921, by Miss Ruth Cobb of the Research Information Service, listed 526 laboratories. The
present revision contains data for 1,000 laboratories.
As in the earlier lists, all information given in this publication has been obtained
directly by correspondence and statements are based upon information supplied by
laboratories….In preparing the mailing list of new companies to which questionnaires
should be sent, the Research Information Service sought the cooperation of the secretaries of
the local divisions of the American Chemical Society, the American Institute of Electrical
Engineers, the American Society of Civil Engineers and the American Society of
Mechanical Engineers; most of the secretaries supplied a list of the industrial laboratories in
their community…”

52

Appendix B: Data on Morrill Act land grants
date of state
acceptance
provisions of
Morrill Act

Cornell U
Michigan State
Oklahoma Agr and Mech Coll
U California
Iowa State Coll
U Illinois
U Minnesota
U Nebraska
Montana State Coll
Kansas State Agr Coll
North Dakota Agr Coll
Penn State Coll
U Missouri
Ohio State U
U Wisconsin
Virginia Agr and Mech Coll
U Tennessee
State Coll of Washington
Georgia State Coll Agri
Massachusetts Agr Coll
Alabama Polytechnic
Purdue U
Oregon Agr Coll
Agr Coll Utah
Mississippi Agr & Mech Coll
Colorado Agr College
Louisiana State U
Agr & Mech Coll of Texas
U Kentucky
North Carolina State U
Clemson Agricultural Coll
U Idaho
South Dakota State Coll
U Vermont
U Maine
Rutgers U
U Maryland
U Nevada
West Virginia U
Conn Agr Coll
U Delaware
U Florida
U New Hampshire
U Wyoming
Rhode Island State Coll
Alaska Agr Col & School of Mines
U Arizona
U Arkansas
U Hawaii
MIT
New Mexico Coll of Agr & Mech

number of acres original total sale
of land or scrip price received by
received Under
states for land
Morrill Act
and scrip

1863
1863
1890
1866
1862
1867
1863
1867
1889
1863
1889
1863
1863
1864
1863
1870
1868
1889
1866
1863
1867
1865
1868
1888
1866
1879
1869
1866
1863
1889
1868
1890
1889
1862
1863
1863
1864
1866
1863
1862
1867
1870
1863
1889
1863
1929
1910
1864

990,000
240,000
350,000
150,000
240,000
480,000
120,000
90,800
140,000
97,682
130,000
780,000
330,000
630,000
240,000
300,000
300,000
900,000
270,000
360,000
240,000
390,000
90,000
200,000
210,000
916,000
210,000
180,000
330,000
270,000
180,000
90,000
160,000
150,000
210,000
210,000
210,000
90,000
150,000
90,000
90,000
90,000
150,000
90,000
120,000
336,000
150,000
150,000

1898

250000

1,688,576*
991,673
835,637**
732,233
686,817
648,442
579,430
560,072
533,148
491,746
455,924
439,186
363,441
340,906
303,594
285,000
271,875
247,608
242,202
236,287
216,000
212,238
202,113
194,136
188,028
185,956
182,630
174,000
164,960
135,000
130,500
129,615
128,804
122,626
116,359
115,945
112,504
107,363
90,000
83,000
83,000
80,000
80,000
73,355
50,000

date of
organization of
land-grant
college

date of opening
of land-grant
college to
students

1865
1855
1890
1868
1858
1867
1851
1869
1893
1863
1890
1855
1839
1870
1848
1872
1794
1890
1866
1863
1872
1869
1855
1888
1878
1877
1874
1871
1879
1887
1889
1889
1881
1781
1865
1766
1856
1873
1867
1867
1867
1870
1866
1886
1888
1922
1885
1885
1907
1861
1889

1868
1857
1891
1869
1859
1868
1851
1871
1893
1863
1891
1859
1841
1873
1849
1872
1794
1892
1872
1867
1872
1874
1865
1890
1880
1879
1874
1876
1880
1889
1893
1892
1884
1801
1868
1771
1859
1874
1868
1869
1869
1884
1868
1887
1890
1922
1922
1891
1908
1865
1890

* scrip bought by Mr Cornell yielding later through resale $5460038 for institution
** $103482 cash and $732155 deferred payments on lands sold as of 1916

53

Figure 1: Founding Dates of Public Universities
(using data from 1924 Biennial of Education data Sample)

Founding Dates of Public Universities in
1924 survey

Number of labs

8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
30 8 41 8 50 8 6 3 8 6 9 8 7 7 8 8 5 8 91 9 00 9 09
8
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1

Figure 2: Founding Dates of Private Universities
(using data from 1924 Biennial of Education data Sample)
Founding Dates of Private Universities in 1924 survey
20
18
14
12
10
8
6
4
2

19

13

19

07

19

01

19

95

19

89

18

83

18

77

18

71

18

65

18

59

18

53

18

47

18

41

18

34

18

18

28

0

18

Number of Labs

16

54

Figure 3: Founding Dates of Industrial Research Labs
(using data from 1946 National Research Council data Sample)

Founding Dates of Chem /Pharm a
Labs in 1946 sam ple
10
9
Number of Labs

8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
18

28

18

55

18

88

18

98

19

05

19

13

19

20

19

26

19

33

19

39

19

45

55

Figure 4: The Location of Industrial Research in the United States, 1927
(Sizes of circles indicate the number of labs in the city/town)

Figure 5: PhD-granting institutions, weighted by degrees granted, 1928-37

56

