                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        INFLEXIBLE RELATIVE PRICES AND PRICE LEVEL INERTIA




                       Olivier J. Blanchard




                      Working Paper No. 114T




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge MA 02138


                           June 1983




I thank Andrew Abel, Rudiger Dornbusch, William Nordhaus, John
Taylor, and Jeffrey Sachs for discussions; NSF for financial sup-
port. The research reported here is part of the NBER's research
program in Economic Fluctuations. Any opinions expressed are those
of the author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
                                                NBER Working Paper #1147
                                                       June 1983




             Inflexible Relative Prices and Price Level Inertia



                                  Abstract



       A decrease in aggregate demand at given prices and wages decreases

output and employment. The decrease in employment exerts downward pressure

on real wages. The decrease in production exerts downward pressure on mark

ups. With perfectly synchronized price and wage decisions, nominal wages

and prices decrease instantaneously until equilibrium is re—established

at a lower price level and the initial relative prices. If, however, price

and wage decisions are asynchronized, this process cannot take place

instantaneously but rather takes place over time. If real wages and mark

ups are rather insensitive to shifts in demand, the process of adjustment

is slow, the effects of money on output are strong and lasting.

       The paper formalizes this intuitive argument and characterizes the

implications of asynchronization for the joint behavior of relative and

nominal prices.



                                     Olivier J. Blanchard
                                     Department of Economics
                                     Harvard University
                                     Littauer Center
                                     Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138

                                      (617) 495—2119
         Asynchronization of price decisions is a pervasive   characteristic
of decentralized economies. Macroeconomists have recently concentrated

on a particular set of price decisions, namely contract wage decisions

which are both set in nominal terms for long periods of time arid staggered

over time across contracts (Taylor (1980] for example). Asynchronization

is, however, not limited to contract wages. Most prices, except for those

determined in exchange or asset markets, are set for discrete periods of

time, ranging from a few days to a few months. These price decisions are

not all taken at the same time but spread through time rather uniformly.

         As in the case of imperfect information, we have to decide whether

asynchronization is a deviation from the standard frictionless model

we may safely ignore or a deviation we want to build on to explain fluctua-

tions. In a previous paper •(Blarichard (1983]), I have shown that even if

all price decisions are taken for short periods of time, but if the number
of price decisions is large, asynchronization will lead to substantial
price   level inertia. This suggests that asynchronization may indeed help

explain price level inertia and thus generate macroeconomic fluctuations.

This paper goes further and addresses the following question: In the

presence of asynchronization, how is the degree of price level inertia

related to slopes of demand and supply curves in the various markets? The

paper derives a relation between inflexibility of relative prices and inertia

of nominal prices. More precisely, it argues that the less sensitive relative

prices are to shifts in demand, the more slowly will nominal prices adjust

to   offset aggregate demand disturbances.
        The rest  of the paper is spent deriving, explaining and qualifying
this result.    It is organized in four sections. The first sets up the
model but   maintains   the assumption of synchronization of price decisions.
                                     —2—




The second introduces asynchronization and derives the relation between

relative price inflexibility and price level inertia. The third examines

the relation of the model to both "disequilibrium" models and to the "price

wage mechanism" (Tobin t1970]) which underlies much of the empirical work

on prices and wages. The fourth extends the initial model to allow for a

larger menu of inputs and outputs: its purpose is to characterize the joint

movement of relative and nominal prices in response to nominal disturbances.

Until then, the time structure of price decisions is taken as given. Whether

asynchronization may be stable if price setters are free to choose the timing

of price decisions is discussed in the conclusion.
                                                      —3—




Section   I. A Simple Model

        The simplest model must have one relative price and thus two

nominal prices. Consider the following:



                2.
                     S
                         = b—l (w—p)                        ;   b > 0                                (1)

                         =   c(m—p)                         ;   c   >   0                            (2)

                y        =   ai                             ;   a       [0,1]                        (3)




                             p=w                                 ifa=l
                               =      (a/(l—a))   (p—w)          if a <      1                       (4)


                               =      (11(1-a)) (p-w)            if a < 1                            (5)



        All   variables are           in   logarithms; 2. and y denote labor and            output

respectively; m, w and            p   are nominal money, the nominal wage and the nominal
price   of output respectively. Labor supply is an increasing function of

the real wage, output demand an increasing function of real money balances.

Output is produced from labor with constant or decreasing returns to scale.

The implied notional demand for labor and supply of output are given by (4)

and (5). Constant terms are deleted from all equations for notational

simplicity.

        The competitive equilibrium is simply w = p = m and y = £ = 0.

How is it reached? Asynchronization of price decisions presupposes the

existence of price setters. Thus, before introducing asynchronization,

we must introduce an explicit price setting mechanism:

        The nominal wage is determined in the labor market given the

nominal   price. The nominal price is determined                            in the goods market

given the nominal wage. To avoid issues of monopoly or monopsony power
                                                   —4—




 which    are   inessential to this argument, both wages and            prices   are assumed

 to be set competitively. Thus, although we shall think of workers as

setting nominal wages and firms as setting nominal prices, who actually

 sets them in each market is irrelevant.

          The supply and demand expressed in each market depend on the

constraints perceived by agents in the other markets. It is assumed that

if a market does not clear at the prevailing wage price pair, the outcome

is demand determined; demand is therefore never constrained.

          We can now characterize the wage and price relations, and the

equilibrium. Suppliers of labor choose the nominal wage so that the

supply of labor equals the derived demand for labor by firms:


                (w-p)      =   a1y = a1c (m-p)            >


          w-p    =      a1cb(m-p)        or                                                (6)


          w =        Op   + (l-O)m   ;    0   =   1 -   acb    ,   0 < 1.                  (7)


          The   nominal wage is a linear combination of the price level arid             nominal

money. The effect of the price level is                  a priori ambiguous: an increase in
the   price level decreases aggregate demand and the derived demand for labor,

requiring a decrease in the real wage. The lower real wage and the higher

price level imply that the nominal wage may increase or decrease. 0 is

the first important parameter for what follows. Note that if labor supply

is very elastic, i.e. if b is very small, 0 is close to unity.

          Suppliers of output choose the nominal price of output so that the

supply of output equals the demand for output. As by assumption, they

are never constrained in their demand for labor, output supply is notional

supply:
                                                      —5-.




         (a/ (1-a)) (p-w) =             c (m-p)       >

                           —l
             p-w = ca           (1—a) (in-p)                                                     (8)

             p       w+     (l—G)In       ;          a/(a+(1—a)c) , c    C   (0,1]               (9)


         The price of output is a linear combination of the nominal wage and
nominal money. c           is   the second important parameter in what follows. Note

that if returns to scale are nearly constant, so that notional supply is

very elastic, a is close to unity and so is 0.

         The wage and price loci are drawn in                 Figure 1. The wage      relation

has slope 0, the price relation has slope cY1. Equilibrium requires

that both relations hold, thus that y =                      =0   and w = p = m.     The specific

price setting assumptions may affect the way in which the equilibrium

is attained but do not affect the equilibrium values of quantities

and   prices.      Money is neutral; neutrality clearly does not depend on the

values   of 0 and     0.
         It      is useful for later reference to give a heuristic description

of how this equilibrium may be reached through a tatonnement type                       process.
Suppose that nominal money increases, so that in Figure 1, the initial

equilibrium is at A and             the       new equilibrium at E: At initial values of

w and   p,   aggregate demand increases, increasing output and                   employment.

Workers,     therefore, want a higher real wage. Given p, they want to go
to point B. Firms want a higher mark up; given w, they want to go to
point B'. These two claims, of a higher real wage and of a higher
mark up, are clearly inconsistent. Attempts by both firms and workers
to increase relative prices lead to increases in nominal prices and
wages. This process ends when real money balances are back to their
previous      level: desired real wages and desired mark ups are then consistent
                  —6—




               Figure 1



                                   p (w)

                                               w=p
                                               w (p)
w

                          E
DI




                B




     slope 0




                              In           p
                                       —7-.




arid   equilibrium is reached. A possible path of adjustment in which wages
and prices adjust in turn is ABC.. .E in Figure i..
                                                       —8—




Section II. Asynchronization of Price and Wage Decisions
            Most nominal prices are set for discrete periods of time. For
each such period, price setters prefer the simplicity of a constant nominal
price to a predetermined    but not necessarily constant — price path
or to contingent price paths. Moreover, nominal price changes do not
take place simultaneously but rather take place at a fairly uniform
rate over time.
            We shall for the moment take these facts as given and return later

to what may determine the timing of price decisions by price setters.

We formalize them in the following mechanical but convenient way:

            Price decisions are taken every two periods, at even times. Thus

prices are set at time t for periods t, t+l, and SO Ofl.                    Wage decisions

are taken every two periods, at odd times, thus at t-l for t-l and t,

and so on. Again, the unit period                    should be thought of as fairly short,

of the order of a month, so that after two months all price and wage

decisions have been freely revised.

            Price decisior.s are now given by:


        =   1                               1
p   t       2
                (c w
                       t—l
                             + (1- )m ) +       (a
                                                       t+l It)
                                                     E(w         + (l-)E(m
                                                                          t+l   t))          (10)


            E(.jt) denotes the expectation of a variable conditional on informa-

tion available at time t. Pt denotes the price chosen at t for t and t+1;

similarly w1 denotes the wage chosen at t-l for t-l and t and is therefore

the wage still prevailing at t. Equation (10) is the natural extension of

(9);     it states that the nominal price is a weighted average of its market
clearing value at t, which depends on the current                    nominal wage and money,

and     of its expected market clearing value at t+l which depends on expected
                                  1
nominal     wage and money. Weights are assumed equal for simplicity: discounting
                                             —9-




would not substantially affect the results. Equation (10) implies that for

each interval during which the nominal price is fixed, the expected average

mark up is an increasing function of expected average demand.

         In a similar way, wage decisions are given, at t—l for example, by:


wi =         (0                     + -    (0E(pJt-l)   + (l_®)E(mtlt_l))         (11)



        The nominal wage set at time t-l for t-l and          t is a weighted average
of its market clearing value at t-l and its expected market clearing value

for t. Equation (11) implies that for each interval during which the

nominal wage is fixed, the expected average real wage is an increasing

function of expected average aggregate demand.

        The dynamic behavior of the economy is now characterized by equations

(10) and (11), and a specification of the money process. The system is

solved for a general money process in the appendix; in the text I focus on

the effects of an unanticipated permanent increase in money. It is a

counterfactual experiment but one which shows most clearly the dynamics

of the system.


The Adjustment of the Price Level

         Starting from steady state, nominal money increases at time t = 0,

from zero to unity (by appropriate normalization). This increase is

unanticipated     and permanent. What are the effects on prices over time?
        The answer is     easy   to derive under the assumption of static expecta-
tions   and helps develop the intuition. Using (10) and (11) gives in this

case:

        p0 =      (1-a)
                                                                                  (12)

        Pt = 00 t-2 + (1—a®)           ;
                                            t =   2,4,...
                                             —10—




        At time t =       0,   after the increase in money, wages have not yet

increased: firms         increase   their nominal price only to the extent they

want to increase their mark up to supply the higher level of output.

Under constant returns, there is no increase in prices, as (5 =           1.   At

time t =   1,   wages increase both because prices are higher and because,

unless 0 =   1,   a higher real wage is required to supply a higher level of

labor. Under static expectations, the degree of price inertia is given by

oE and adjustment thus is slower, the more inflexible real wages and mark ups.

        Under rational expectations, the price level path is given instead

by (see appendix):


        p0 = 1       —    (5(1 —   -0(l+X))         ,   0 <p0 <1—A                    (13)



        Pt =      t—2     + (1—A)                   ;
                                                        t =   2,4,...

        where A           (l_(l_G®)l/2)/(l+(l_aG)1/2)

        A<cs0 ;           A=Oifcs0=0 ,          X=lifa0=l
       The initial jump in nominal prices is larger than under static

expectations. The degree of persistence, or inertia, is now given by

A rather than cy0.       A is an increasing function of (50, but smaller than

cr0. That the adjustment should be faster under          rational   expectations is

obvious: at time t = 0 for example, price setters take into account not

only the current increase in demand, but also the forthcoming increase in

nominal wages at t = 1.          Along the path, price and wage setters take account

not only of demand and current wages or prices but also of expected increases

in prices and wages. Although the adjustment is faster under rational

expectations, there is still a direct relation between relative price

inflexibility, measured by           and 0, anc nominal price inertia, measured by A.
                                        —11—




                                      Table 1


        The Effects of An Increase in Money on Relative and    Nominal Prices


     = .99     0 = .99


                                                     Average            Average
Time:                p         w         w-p        Real Wage*         Mark Up**


        0          .133       .0         —.133        — .076
                                                                          .009

        1          .133       .247        .114
                                                       .007
        2          .346       .247       —.100
                                                                          .007
        3          .346       .432        .085         .005

        4          .508       .432       —.076                            .006

        5          .508       .572        .064
                                                       .003
        6          .629       .572       —.057                            .004

        7          .629       .678        .049
                                                       .003
        8          .721       .678       —.043
                                                                          .003

        9          .721       .757        .036
                                                       .002

       10          .790       .757       —.033                            .003

       11          .790       .817        .027
                                                       .001

       12          .842       .817       —.025                            .002

       13          .842       .862        .020
                                                       .000

       14          .881       .862       —.019



*                            average value for the two period interval during
      Average real wage :
             which the nominal wage is fixed.

**
      Average markup:     average value for the two period interval during which
             the nominal price is fixed.
                                        —12—




Pifl   example of a path or adjustment, for    = 0 =   .99 is given in Table 1.

Relative Prices During the Adjustment Process

          We start with a puzzle. After the increase in money, price setters

desire a higher mark up, wage setters a higher real wage. Under static

expectations, both sides fail to take into account future movements in

either prices or wages and are therefore systematically disappointed.

This cannot happen under rational expectations; in particular, as there is

no unanticipated movement in money after t = 0, the rational expectation

path is a perfect foresight path. Thus, as equations (10) and (11) hold

for actual values of wages and prices, workers must, for every interval

during which nominal wages are fixed, obtain a higher real wage; firms

must also, for every interval during which nominal prices are fixed, obtain

a higher mark up. How can these be consistent?

          Table 1 shows that they can indeed be consistent (the algebra is

derived in the appendix). They can be consistent because the two intervals

described above do not coincide but overlap: There is then a path of

increases in nominal prices and wages such that in turn the average mark

up and real wage are higher. This paradoxical path is the result of the

assumption of rational expectations; the relevant result is not this paradox

but the fact that there exists a rational expectation path.

          The other and directly related characteristic of the process of

adjustment is that there is no persistent deviation of the real wage from

its equilibrium value: The real wage simply oscillates around this value

during the path of adjustment.
                                         —13—




        The two paths of adjustment, under static and rational expectations
are represented in Figure 2, the static expectation path by the dotted
line,   the rational expectation path by the thick line. Note that the

average wage (denoted by      )   is always   on the w(p) locus, the average

mark up (p) always on the p(w) locu.s.

        To summarize, movements in money create, at the initial pair

of prices and wages, desired changes in relative prices. After an

increase in money,   both relative prices (the real      wage arid its inverse,

the mark up) are too low; after a decrease in money, they are both too

high. As workers and firms in turn re—establish their desired relative

prices, nominal prices adjust until aggregate demand returns to its

equilibrium   value. If   relative prices are relatively inflexible, the

movement   of nominal prices is slow.
      —14—




     Figure
                                      E
w

                          w3




      (p0,w1)                  ,w1)
Wi




                (p0,w1)




                p0                        p
                                        —15—




Section III. Output Fluctuations and Disequilbriuxn

         The model developed above generates output and employment fluctuations

in response to movements in aggregate demand. Can it be seen as providing

price dynamics for "disequilibrium" models, models in which agents

face sustained quantity constraints (Barro Grossman [1972] for example)?

         Pn obvious but unimportant difference is the assumption of demand

determination used here as opposed to the minimum rule used in these

models. Let's restrict ourselves to the case of a decrease in nominal

money, for which output decreases under either demand determination or

a minimum rule. A major difference still remains. In disequilibrium

models, a decrease in money generates a decrease in output and a regime

of "Keynesian" unemployment (Malinvaud [1977]). As long as this regime

prevails, firms sell less output than they would like at the prevailing

mark up, workers sell less labor than they would like at the prevailing

real wage. There are therefore sustained quantity constraints. This is

not the case, however, in the model developed here. Although a decrease

in money   also decreases output   and employment, relative prices   along the
path of adjustment    were shown in the previous section to be such that

on   average firms do not feel constrained in the amount of output they
sell and workers do not feel constrained in the amount of labor they
supply.2'3    There   is no equivalent in this model of a sustained period
of   "Keynesian" unemployment. Asynchronization of price decisions generates

fluctuations but not "disequilibrium".

        Further deviations from the standard model are needed to obtain

disequilibrium. Suppose for example that the wage, instead of being

determined in a spot market, is given by contracts which specify a constant

real wage at any level of employment, even if spot labor supply is an
                                                     —16--




increasing      function of the real wage. Suppose alternatively that firms

adopt    a price rule which specifies price as a function of standard unit
costs, even if marginal cost is an increasing function of the level of
production.         (Why such rules might be chosen is still the             subject of much
research     and very much an unsettled issue. See for example Azariadis (1975]

and Green-Kahn (1983] for derivations of such real wage employment loci,

Nordhaus [1970] for a discussion of price rules). In the absence of

asynchronization, these rules would clearly not imply nominal price inertia

and would be consistent with neutrality of money. However, in the presence

of asynchronization, they have two implications: the first is that, even

if spot labor and output supply schedules were upward sloping, relative

prices may be inflexible and lead,                 with asynchronization, to substantial
price level inertia. The second is that although on average prices and
wages   will satisfy price and wage rules, firms and workers                 may not be supplying

the    amount they     would like. In         particular, after a decrease in money, firms

will   want to supply more than they can at the prevailing mark up and                 thus

the economy may        be   in a regime similar to a Keynesian regime.
          Thus,    to generate the        phenomena described by disequilibrium models,
we need two sets of assumptions. The first and probably hardest to justify

is that relative prices be more inflexible than would be implied by the

equality of spot supply and demand. The second is the presence of

asynchronization which gives price level inertia as the result of the

rigidity of real wages and mark ups.4
                                                    —l 7—




Section IV. Movements in Relative Prices

       In the above model,            after      an increase in money and at the initial

level of wages and prices, firms want a higher mark                 up,   workers a higher

real wage. Along the path of adjustment the outcome is a draw and the

real wage, except for oscillations, remains constant. Will it remain

the case, when a larger menu of goods is introduced that, except for

oscillations, there are no movements in relative prices, or should we

expect systematic distortions in the structure of relative prices in

response to nominal distuzbances? The answer is interesting both in

itself and because it provides for ways of testing this class of models.

       The initial model can be extended by increasing the number of outputs

and inputs, and by examining the effects of differences in lengths of time

between price decisions across markets. I shall only consider the first

extension, through three examples.

       The first is a model with one output and many inputs. It is characterized

as follows:

              =                p)
                  b1(w1_
        d     =
       y          c(m-p)

       Y      =   lrn
                      1=1

                               n
       =>         p   =     -n.i=l
                                w.1      E   w                                               (14)



                      =
                            (p_wi) + y                                                       (15)


Definitions are the same as before. The supply of an input is an increasing

function of its real price. Output is produced from n inputs according to
                                                 —18—




a Cobb Douglas technology,           under constant returns to scale,      Equations (14)

and (15) give the implications of competition and unconstrained profit

maximization; equation (14) gives the price as a weighted average of input

prices and is implied by the zero profit condition. The level of output

supply is then indeterminate; given any level of output, input demand is

given by (15).        before, input suppliers choose input prices to equalize

input supply and derived input demand:

        s   =    d
                     => b.-l (w.—       p) =      (p-w.)    + c(m—p)


                      >   w. — p       =
                                               (l_O)(m_p)              (l÷b(l—c))/(l+b)

Aggregating over inputs, this gives:

       w - p     =   (1-®)                 S                                         (16)
                             (m-p)
                                                    !®i
and

      w.
       1
         -w      =   (S-S.)(m-p)
                         1
                                                                                     (11)


       Equations (14) and (16) are identical to those used in the previous
section (under constant returns). Thus, when the same structure of a—

synchronization is introduced, similar results arise: The "real wage",

w—p, oscillates around its equilibrium value. From (17), however, this is

not true of "product wages" (wi- p). Inputs for which supply is more

elastic (0. > 0) have a lower relative price during the adjustment process

following an increase in money. There is therefore a systematic distortion

in the structure of relative prices.

       The second example is a model with one input and many outputs.

In addition to generating systematic distortions in the structure of prices,

it also shows what other factors than supply elasticities affect the degree

of inertia of the price level. It is characterized by:
                                                          —19—




               =     nb' (w-p)           ;   p        -       p.      ;     b > 0


               =
                     c(m_P)
                                    -   d(p.-    p)           1=1,... ,n


           y. = a9.                                           i=l,... ,n ;    a   < 1


                >          y    =       (a/(l—a))     (pS— w)             i=l,. ..



                                = (l/(l—a)) (p.-              w)       i=l. ..


           There is a common            labor     market where labor           supply    is a function of

the real wage. The demand for output i is a function of real money balances

and   of   its price relative to the price level. Production of output i is

carried Out under decreasing returns. Notional output supply and labor

demand are functions of product wages.

           Wage setters choose the wage so as to equalize labor supply and

derived labor demands. Thus (ignoring the difference between sum of logs

and log of sums...):


                                =>          b(w-p)        =    a1c(m—p)              c                  (18)




           In turn price setters choose their price so as to equalize notional

supply to demand:


           (a/(l—a))            w)      =                 — d(p.— p)                                    (19)
                                             c(m_p)

Aggregating over outputs gives:

           (a/(l—a)) (p—w) =             c(m—p)                                                        (20)


                p)     =
                               ((l_a)/(a+d(l_a)))(c—               c)(m—p)                             (21)
                                             —20—




           Equations    (18) and (20) are again identical to those used in the

previous section. Thus, with the same structure of asynchronization,

the real wage will remain on average constant following a change in money.

From (21), however, this is not true of relative prices. Outputs with low

demand elasticity with respect to money balances will have a lower relative

price during the process of adjustment to an increase in money.

           As there is no asynchronization between output price decisions

and because of our assumption of perfect competition, the parameter d,

which characterizes the degree of substitutability between outputs,

plays no role in the determination of the path of the price level and the

real wage. To see what asynchronization between price decisions imply,

consider the case where there are two price setters, with prices p1, p2.

From above we can express their price as a function of m, w and the

other price:


                    a     1                            1
              =
                  ( j— + -(d+c.))—l(a      w + c.m +
                                                       -(d—c.)p.   j     1,3   = 1,2

Given   the prices p1 and p2, we can solve for the nominal wage w from (18).
Replacing w in the above equation and rearranging gives:

      p.     =    Op.   + (1—0.)           i,j = 1,2


where   0.         (a—cb+(l—a) (d_c))/(a+cb+ (1_a) (d÷c.))         I = 1,2

           This system in (p1, p2) has the same structure as the original
system in (w, p). Thus given asynchronization of price decisions for
    p2,
        similar results follow and the degree of price level inertia
depends      on 01 and °2     The   parameter d plays an izrortant role. If        a

is   less than unity, then the higher d, the closer            and 02 to unity,
                                                 —21—




the slower the adjustment of nominal prices. (The model presented here

is close to one        developed       by Akerlof (1969].

         The previous two examples show that if demand or supply elasticities

differ across inputs or outputs, relative prices or wages will be distorted

during the process of adjustment. The last example shows that asynchroniza-

tion itself may        create     distortions in the structure of relative prices.

Returning to the initial model, assume that production is now carried out

in n steps, each under constant returns to scale. The model then becomes

(this model is analyzed in detail in Blanchard (1983]):

          s
              =    b
                    —l
                         (p0-    p)
         d    =    c(m-p)

              =
                   y1            i=l,...,n


              r>         p   =    p

        The output of step i is denoted y.. The primary input is denoted

y0,
      final   output y. The supply of primary              input   depends on its price

relative to the price of final output, the price level p. Technology

exhibits constant returns to scale. The implied zero profit condition is

that all prices be equal (up to constants which have been left out). In the

absence of asynchronization, primary input setters choose the input price

such as to equalize supply and derived demand.


        y =        y         >
                                      b1(p0- p) =       c(m_pn)
                                                                                          (22)



Each intermediate input setter in turn chooses its price such that


              =
                   i—l
                                        —22—




         Assume now that the structure of price decisions is asynchronized

 in the following way: input producers with i even take price decisions

at even times, input producers with i odd take price decisions at odd times.

Thus, again, all prices are revised after two periods. Given that structure,

the effect of a permanent, unanticipated increase in money at t = 0, is

particularly easy to trace if bc =    1,   as in this case (22) implies p0 = m.

This case corresponds to 0 = 0, in the model of Section I; in that model,

if 0 =   0,   the price level and nominal wage adjust fully to their new

equilibrium value within two periods. Table 2 gives the cross—section

time series characterization of the effects of money on prices in the

case where n = 20.     Two results emerge which did not in the simpler model:

         The first, which is not the focus of this section, is that the

degree of price level inertia is a function of the number of price

decisions: it takes n periods, where n is the number of price decisions,

for the price level p to reach its new equilibrium value. The second

is that, although each price setter (for i =     1,... ,n)   realizes on average

a zero mark up for each period during which its price is fixed, the

structure of relative prices is distorted. The relative price of inputs

early in the chain of production increases on average compared to the

price level.
                                                   —23--




                                               Table 2

                Structure of Prices After                  an Increase       in Money:



      Time:          0                1            2             3               4            5             6


Prices:

                1.               1.           1.            1.              1.           1.            1.
          p0

                  .0             1.           1.            1.              1.           1.            1.
          p1

                                      5       1.            1.              1.           1.            1.
          p2

                  .0              .75          .75          1.              1.           1.            1.
          p3

                  .375            .375         .875           .875          1.           1.            1.
          p4

                  .0              .625         .625           .937           .937        1.            1.
          p5

                  .312            .312         .782           .782           .968         .968         1.
          p6

                  .273            .273         .711           .711           .929         .929          .992
       p8
           S

                  .246            .246         .656           .656           .890         .890          .977
       p10
           S

                  .225            .225         .612           .612           .853         .853          .959
          p12
           •             S                S            S             •               S            •S            S
           •             S                S            S             S               S                          S


                  .176            .176         .498           .498           .738         .738          .886
          p20



The prices are generated according to:


                                      if t=0 ,              iodd

                             =                     +                     otherwise
                                      i—1,t-1
                                       -24—




Conclusion

        The argument of the paper has been the following: The first effect

of a movement in aggregate demand is to make initial relative prices

mutually inconsistent. After a decrease in money, all relative prices are

"too high"; they are all "too low" after an increase in money. In the

presence   of asynchronization, pressure on relative prices leads to a
decrease of nominal prices in the first case, an increase of nominal prices
in   the second case. If   pressure on relative prices is weak, the return to
equilibrium   is slow.

        We have, however, relied until now on a mechanical asynchronization

structure. Although this may be acceptable to characterize the movement

of prices under a given regime, it prevents us from predicting the

dynamic effects of a change in regime, such as for example a sudden

decelleration of money growth. To do so requires a theory of

asynchronization itself. Even if agents find it optimal to choose a

fixed length   between price decisions (an assumption we shall examine
below), they certainly have the choice as to the    timing of such decisions.

In the examples above, wage setters    probably have an incentive to
synchronize    decisions with price setters by shifting decisions from odd

to even times: the asynchronization is not stable and might well disappear

over time. Can we therefore construct asynchronization structures which

would be stable in this sense? Consider the following two examples:

The first relies on the existence of a large number of price decisions,

the second on the existence of two types of disturbances.

        In the first, suppose there   are many types   — more precisely,
a continuum —    of   outputs, each of them produced from many types — again,

a continuum —    of   inputs. Input price decisions are taken discretely
                                      —25—




and staggered   over time so that the number of price decisions per unit

time   is constant; if input cost shares are equal, output producers who also

take decisions discretely are therefore indifferent to the timing of their

decision. Suppose that output price decisions are also staggered over time

so that the number of output price decisions per unit time is constant.

Thus input price setters, who are also the consumers, are indifferent to

when they take their price decisions. This structure of asynchronization

is stable: given the timing of other agents' decisions, no one has an

incentive to change his own. It is, however, a knife edge stability.

If a firm or a worker changes his timing, then all others have an

incentive to do so until all decisions are synchronized.

        The second example relies on the existence of two types of

disturbances, aggregate and idiosyncratic. Let's first relax the assumption

of a constant time interval between price decisions; the optimal rule is

indeed more likely to be an (s,S) rule rather than a fixed length rule,

implying that the time between decisions is random rather than constant

(Sheshinski and Weiss rl9sl] have looked at pricing decisions in this

context. If price setters follow (s,S) rules, and if disturbances were

only idiosyncratic,   changes in prices would be   independent of each other

and asynchronization would remain. If there are both idiosyncratic and

aggregate disturbances, but if the size of idiosyncratic disturbances

is   large compared to that of aggregate disturbances, the above argument
suggests that some asynchronization may remain. This line of reasoning
is, however, difficult to formalize and is left for future research.
                                                                    6,7
        The other task left for future research is a test of the model;

the approach of the paper is only one of many which attempt to explain

the effects of money on econoinid activity. A stringent test of its
                                       —26—




relevance is a test of its implications for the joint behavior of relative

and   nominal   prices. This will extend work by Fischer [1981], Taylor [1981],

Marquez and Vining [1982] among others.
                                                      —27—




 Appendix. Derivation of Prices and Wages

         I first solve for Pt for a general process for money, and then

 for the path of prices and wages corresponding to the path of money

described in the text.

        Using equation (11) for both t—l and t+l, taking E(wt÷it) using

iterated expectations and replacing in equation (10) gives:


        Pt =            a pt2+E(pt!t_l) +
                                                      Pt   +   E(plt))   +                   (Al)

where       is given by:

                                   +
                                        cJ(l_®)E(mft_1)

                 + 2(1—a)      +
                                       2(l_G)E(m+1!t)

                 +                           +
                     a(l_e)E(m+1Ft)

        Equation (Al) must be solved in two steps. The first is to solve
for E(pt t_i), the second for                        Taking expectations on both sides of

(Al) conditional on information available at t-l and rearranging gives:

        E °t-2 + (2aG_4)p                +
                                             G®p2
                                                           =
                                                               - It-i).                     (A2)

Let A be the smallest root of:


         ox2     + (2a0-4)A + a®         =       0

It is given by:


        A    =       (1 -(l-aG)'2) /

This root is an increasing function of a®, equal to 0 for a® = 0 and to

1 for a® =   1.       Solving equation (A2) by factorization, subject to the

condition that Pt does not explode, gives:
                                                        —28—




        E(pt_l) =                t-2 + (A/aO) AE(+2.                     It-i)                              (Ad)


        The last step is to solve for                              Deriving E(p+2It) from (3)

and   replacing        E(pt+21t) and E(ptjt_l) in (Al) gives




(4_G0(i+A))p =              oO
                                         t2 + t + xA(E(Pt+2. It-i)                     + E(1+2.+2 It))

        I    now consider a specific path for money.                         in   increases      at t = 0

from zero to unity; the increase is unanticipated and permanent.

        To solve for the price level path, note that for t >                                0,   there is

no remaining uncertainty and thus equation (A3) holds for actual values

of p and i       rather     than for their expectations. Noting also that for t >                           0:

                                         =   (1-A)


we have:

                   =          + (1-A)                for t >   0
                        Ap

        This gives in particular, for t=0, p2 as a function of p0. Equation (Al)

in turn, for t=0, gives another relation between p0 and                                     Noting that
                                                                                     p2.
             = 0   and E(p210) = p2,           we have:
E(p01-i)


        (1   —
                   GO)p0
                                 =       GOp2 + (l-) +             G(l-0).

        Solving        the two equations in p0 and p2 gives                    the following characteriza-

tion of the path of the price level:


              = 1
        p0
                        —
                            -o(l -GO(l+X))
                                     —
                                                               ;    0 <p0 <1—A

              =
                   A_2       +a                                      for t =      2,4,...
                                                                                —29—




The Behavior of the Real Wage

Let      be    the real wage at time t; fran equation (11) at t-l and t+l,

and   from    equation (13):

                   E
                         w0—p0
                                                   =
                                                       —p0
                                                                                   <0

                                                       =
        x1 w1 — Pt                                                     ®(l÷X)-1              )
                                                                                                 (p—l)

                             <       1       ==>       ®(l--X)             —   1    <        0        =>            >0

                   —
                                                           =           1                —1
        xt+2            t+l -                 t+2                  t           ®(1+X         )—1


                   From the definition of X:


      (l+A1)       =     1       +       (1+(1-G)'2)/(1-(1-®)2)
                   =     2/(l_(1_®)2)

              ®(l+1) =

         O < 1          => - 0(14-A1)                          >       o0/(1_(l_o®)'2)

         00 =           (1_(1_o®)1/2)                      (1÷(1_o0)2

              0(1+X1) -                  1     > (14-(1_0®)V2) -                         1        =    (l_o®)h/'2    >0
  =>     x          <        0
             t+2
                                          Foothotes


1.   Equation (10)        follows from the assumption that the expected geometric
     average       price over the two periods must be the same under synchroniza-

     tion and asynchronization. A theoretically more appealing assumption

     is that the expected arithmetic average profit must be the same

     under synchronization and asynchronization. This leads, however,

     to a less tractable specification, which differs from the specification

     in the text in three ways:

           As firms are most of the time off their notional supply curve,

     the   price has to be     on average higher than under synchronization

     to   maintain the same level of average profit.
           The weights on    the two periods   may not be equal, but will in

     general       depend on the expected   levels of demand in both periods.
          Finally,    the covariance between wages and nominal money will

     appear in the price equation.

           These three points can be made clearer by deriving the price

     equation which would follow from imposing a zero arithmetic average

     profit condition, in the case of constant returns to scale (cr =             1).
     In   this case (all letters denote levels, not logarithms), Pt would

     be given by:


                                          +
                                                                       E(NtWt+i
          Pt =       (Mt/(Mt+EMt+1))Wt1       (EMt÷1/(Mt+EMt+1))   (




     as opposed to:

               =    1/2   w1 +   1/2 E(w1) in the text.
          Pt
2. The precise statement is that the average supply by workers (firms)

    is   consistent with the average real wage (mark up) where "average"

    is the geometric average over each two period interval during which

    nominal wages (nominal prices) are fixed.

3. This result is similar to that obtained in imperfect information

    models, where money may affect output and     employment but where agents
   execute their desired trades at the perceived relative prices.

4. This suggests that explaining the behavior of relative prices,

   quite apart from nominal rigidities should be high on the research

    agenda. This appears indeed to have been the approach followed in

   the 1960's (as summarized by Tobin [1970)). Research was focused

    on documenting and explaining the inflexibility of mark ups, on

   documenting and     explaining   the slow and small reaction of wages to

   unemployment, the slope of the short-run Phillips curve. Nominal

   price and wage inertia was then obtained not from explicit

    asynchronization, but from assumptions about price and wage expectations.

5. Similar problems of stability of the asynchronization structure

    arise in another class of models. These models characterize the

   effects of money on activity when decisions about when to shift from

    interest bearing assets into money are asynchronized (Rotemberg [19821

    and Grossman and    weiss   [1982]).

6. Two   other   explanations have been suggested for asynchronization.

    The first is that asynchronization allows for a more efficient

    utilization of information in price decisions. The second is that

    asynchronization may be the outcome of a game between price setters;

    it is sontimes used to explain the timing structure of labor contracts.

    These have not, to my knowledge, been formalized.
7. An   interesting   attempt to explain asy2lchronization, which relies

   on   two types of disturbances and a Nash   equilibrium concept has been

   developed   by   Fethke and Policano [1982]. The structure of their

   model is, however, quite different from the one presented in the

   text.
                                      Bibli Ograp

Akerlof, George A. "Relative Wages and the Rate of Inflation." .2 83
        (August,   1969): 353—374.
Azariadis,     Costas. "Implicit Contracts and Unemployment Equilibria."

        JPES3 (December 1975): 1183—1202.

Barro, Robert and H. Grossman.        "A General Disequilibrium Model of Income

        and   Employment." AER 61—1 (March 1971): 81—93.

Blanchard, Olivier. "Price Asynchronization and Price Level Inertia."

        in R. Dornbusch and M. Simonsen (eds.), Indexation, Contracting

        and Debt in an Inflationary World, MIT Press, forthcoming, 1983.

Fethke, Gary and A. Policano. "Determinants and Implications of

        Staggered Wage Contracts." Mimeo, University of Iowa, (October 1982).

Fischer, Stanley. "Relative Shocks, Relative Price Variability, and

        Inflation." BPEA, 1981—2: 381—442.

Gray, Jo Anna. "On Indexation and Contract Length." JPE86 (February 1978):

       1—18.

Green, Jerry and C. Kahn. "Wage Employment Contracts: Global Results."

       Q,      forthcoming,   1983.

Grossman, Sanford and L. Weiss. "A Transactions Eased Model of the

       Monetary Mechanism." Mimeo, NEER Working Paper 973 (October 1982).

Malinvaud, Edznond.       The Theory of Unemployment Reconsidered.   Oxford,

       Basic Blackwell, 1977.

Marquez, John and D. Vining. "Inflation and Relative Price Behavior:           A

       Survey of the Literature." Mimeo (March 1982).
Nordhaus,   William D.     "Recent Developments in Price Dynamics." In The

       Econometrics      of Price Determination, 0. Eckstein, editor (1970).
Roteinberg, Julio. "A Monetary Equilibrium Model with Transactions Costs."

       Mimeo, NBER Working Paper 978 (October 1982).

ieshinski, Eytan and   y.   Weiss. "Optimum      Pricing   Policy under Stochastic

       Inflation." Mimeo     (October   1981).

Taylor, John. "Staggered Wage Setting in a Macro Model." AER69-2

       (May 1979), 108—113.

Taylor, John. "On the Relation Between the Variability of Inflation and

       the   Average Inflation Rate." Carnegie Rochester Conference Series,

      K. Brunner, A. Meltzer, editors, No. 15, 1981: 57—86.

Tobiri, James. "The Wage-Price Mechanism: Overview of the Conference."

       In The Econometrics of price Determination, 0. Eckstein, editor

       (1970).
