                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      UNIVERSITY INVENTION, ENTREPRENEURSHIP,
                                   AND START-UPS

                                          Celestine Chukumba
                                            Richard Jensen

                                         Working Paper 11475
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w11475


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       June 2005




We thank participants in the NBER Summer Institute Pre-Conference and the NBER Conference on
Academic Science and Entrepreneurship: Dual Engines of Growth?, the Notre Dame Economics and
Econometrics Brownbag, and the Fourth REER Conference, B.J. Lee, Josh Lerner, Nelson Mark, Larry
Marsh, Suzanne Scotchmer, Scott Shane, Jim Sullivan, Jerry Thursby, Chris Waller, and Arvids Ziedonis
for helpful comments and discussions. We also thank the TTOs, university administrators, and licensing
consultants whose willingness to talk to us about their licensing experience was helpful in formulating our
theoretical model. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by Celestine Chukumba and Richard Jensen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
University Invention, Entrepreneurship, and Start-Ups
Celestine Chukumba and Richard Jensen
NBER Working Paper No. 11475
July 2005
JEL No. L31, O31, O32

                                            ABSTRACT

This paper develops a game-theoretic model that predicts when a university invention is
commercialized in a start-up firm rather than an established firm. The model predicts that university
inventions are more likely to occur in start-ups when the technology transfer officer’s (TTO’s) search
cost is high, the cost of development or commercialization is lower for a start-up, or the inventor’s
effort cost in development is lower in a start-up. We test the theory using data from the Association
of University Technology Managers, the National Research Council, and the National Venture
Capital Association. Licensing is more likely in general, and especially so in start-ups, by
universities in states with larger levels of venture capital. TTO size has no effect on start-ups, but
does increase licences. Conversely, universities that earn greater licensing royalties have fewer start-
ups but more licenses. The number of start-ups is decreasing in the interest rate, increasing in the
S&P 500, and unaffected by the levels of industrial research funding and the presence of a medical
school. All of these results are consistent with the predictions of our theory.

Celestine Chukumba
Department of Economics and Econometrics
434 Flanner Hall
University of Notre Dame
Notre Dame, IN 46556
celestine.o.chukumba.1@nd.edu

Richard Jensen
Department of Economics and Econometrics
434 Flanner Hall
University of Notre Dame
Notre Dame, IN 46556
rjensen1@nd.edu
1    Introduction
The Bayh-Dole Act of 1980 led to an explosion in the growth of technol-
ogy transfer oﬃces in U.S. universities, as well as a substantial increase in
the commercialization of university inventions and resulting revenue. Gross
license royalties paid to universities in the Association of University Tech-
nology Managers (AUTM) annual surveys for 1993 through 2002 increased
by a remarkable 284%, from roughly $238 million to $915 million. The com-
mercialization of university inventions was dominated by established firms
during this period. On average, each surveyed university annually licensed
25 inventions to established firms, but only 3 inventions to start-up firms.
This ratio has been reasonably constant during this period as well. AUTM
data show that the number of licenses executed with established firms grew
by 90%, while the number of licenses with start-ups grew by 105%. Given
the embryonic nature of most university inventions, it is somewhat surpris-
ing that there has not more commercialization via start-ups. This paper
develops and empirically tests a theory that attempts to explain this by ex-
amining reasons for the commercialization of university inventions through
start-up firms as opposed to established firms.
    Technology transfer oﬃcers (TTOs) are responsible for making good-
faith eﬀorts to commercialize university inventions. This process begins
when a faculty member discloses a potential invention to the TTO, who
then tries to find a partner for commercialization. Typically, if the TTO is
unable to find an established firm willing to acquire a license for this new
technology, then it shelves the invention. That is, the TTO returns it to the
inventor, who may then seek venture capitalists or angel investors to help
fund a start-up firm in order to attempt to commercialize the invention.
In fact, the TTO may even return it to the inventor immediately, without
even trying to find an established firm to license it. In this event, the
TTO may assist the inventor in searching for an investor to fund a start-up,
but typically TTOs focus their eﬀorts on licensing inventions to established
firms.
    We formalize this by developing a game-theoretic model of university
licensing. The model provides two key implications regarding commercial-
ization by start-up firms rather than established firms. First, if the TTO’s
utility cost of searching is the same for both types of firms, then start-ups
occur in equilibrium only if a start-up firm earns greater expected profit,
gross of any license payments, than an established firm, so that the TTO
can earn greater net utility from licensing to a start-up under the optimal
contract. This occurs if a start-up firm has a cost advantage in additional de-

                                      2
velopment or commercialization. For example, venture capitalists routinely
deal with new products and processes, so they may well have better access to
and/or information about the expertise needed to develop and commercial-
ize embryonic inventions, which would provide a start-up firm with a cost
advantage. Similarly, inventor-founded start-ups may well have cost advan-
tages due to the inventor’s superior knowledge of the technology, which can
limit transactional and informational problems (Shane 2002). Also, if there
is a lower opportunity cost of development eﬀort for either the inventor or
firm in a start-up, then either may provide greater eﬀort in the development
stage, which results in a higher probability of success and greater expected
profit for the start-up. The second main implication is that licensing to a
start-up can occur, even if expected profit is the same for both types of firms,
simply because the TTO’s opportunity cost of searching for an established
firm as a licensee is greater. This occurs, for example, if the TTO has a
large pool of higher-quality disclosures available, so less attractive ones are
immediately shelved.
     We summarize the empirical implications of the theory in terms of char-
acteristics of the inventor, the TTO, and the invention, and financial market
conditions. Our empirical analysis uses data from the AUTM surveys for
1993-2002, the 1993 National Research Council’s Survey of Ph.D. Granting
Institutions, and the National Venture Capital Association Yearbook 2004.
We estimate models for the number of licenses to start-ups and the number
of licenses (and options) to established firms per university in each year. In
general, like Di Gregoriao and Shane (2003), our results provide evidence
that universities with higher quality faculty are more likely to license their
inventions to either start-ups or established firms. More importantly, we
find that the quality of the university’s engineering faculty, rather than that
of the science faculty or the entire faculty, is the most significant influence
on the number of licenses.
     We find support that the Bayh-Dole Act has been eﬀective in the sense
that TTOs have significantly influenced university licensing. Our result show
that both the age of the TTO and the number of disclosures made to the
TTO had positive and significant impacts on licensing to either start-ups or
established firms. Gross license royalties also had a positive and significant
impact on licensing to established firms, but not start-ups. Somewhat sur-
prisingly, the size of the TTO did not have a significant eﬀect on licensing
to either type of firm.
     Finally, our results also provide evidence that financial market conditions
matter for licensing via start-ups. We finds that both the rate of return to
venture capital and the interest rate have negative and significant eﬀects

                                       3
on the number of university start-ups, but general market conditions, as
measured by the S&P 500, have a positive and significant eﬀect on start-ups.
Thus, our analysis indicates that one answer to the question of why there
are not more university start-ups is that university inventions are not just
embryonic, but very embryonic. If an established firm is unwilling to take
a license, then it is very diﬃcult to find the funding for a start-up because
even the venture capitalists who specialize in start-ups come to university
inventions only as a last resort, when the returns to venture capital elsewhere
are very low.


2    Literature Review
Our results contribute to the growing theoretical literature on the licens-
ing of university inventions, which has predominantly focused on the eﬀects
of the Bayh-Dole Act, and the behavior of inventors and TTOs: Jensen
and Thursby (2001), Lach and Shankerman (2002), Jensen, Thursby, and
Thursby (2003), Thursby, Thursby, and Decheneaux (2004), Hoppe and Oz-
denoren (2004), Macho-Stadler, Perez-Castrillo, and Veugelers (2004), and
Hellmann (2005). One exception to this is Jensen and Thursby (2004), who
study the eﬀects of increased incentives to commercialize university research
on the trade-oﬀ between applied and basic research, and the quality of edu-
cation. What distinguishes our theoretical model is that all previous eﬀorts
have simply focused on the licensing or commercializing of the invention to
some firm, rather than determining the conditions under which commercial-
ization occurs through a start-up firm instead of an established firm.
    Our results also contribute to the now extensive empirical literature on
the commercialization of university research and start-ups. Much of the lit-
erature on university invention has abstracted from examining the role of
university inventors and TTOs. Exceptions include Bercovitz et al. (2001)
and Siegel et al. (1999), who take an organizational perspective, Thursby
et al. (2001), Thursby and Thursby (2001), Jensen, Thursby, and Thursby
(2003), and Thursby, Thursby, and Decheneaux (2004), who examine the
role of TTOs in structuring license contracts, and Lach and Shankerman
(2002), who study the number and value of inventor disclosures. Our work
adds to this literature by analyzing the eﬀect of both the quality of faculty
and the historical success of the TTO on the choice between commercializa-
tion by established firms and start-ups.
    Shane has examined factors influencing the performance of start-ups us-
ing data on inventions by MIT faculty. He shows that the formation of


                                      4
start-ups is fostered by both recognition of business opportunities by inven-
tors (Shane 2000) and the presence of technological opportunities (Shane
2001). Shane and Stuart (2002) find that start-ups are more likely to suc-
ceed if the founders have relationships with venture capitalists. Di Gregoriao
and Shane (2003) examine start-up formation across US universities, using
AUTM data for the period 1994-1998, and find a positive relationship be-
tween start-up formation and faculty quality, as measured by the Gourman
Report. Our empirical analysis, in part, updates and extends this study. The
latter two studies include financial market factors in the form of availability
of nearby sources of venture capital and IPOs, but do not examine more
general measures of financial market activity, or measures of TTO experi-
ence. Finally, Shane (2002) compares MIT inventions licensed to established
and start-up firms. He finds that licensing to inventor-founded start-ups is
more likely when patents are ineﬀective at preventing information problems
(such as moral hazard and adverse selection), because the inventor’s su-
perior knowledge of the technology precludes such problems in start-ups.
However, he also finds that licenses to start-ups perform poorly compared
to licenses to established firms, and concludes that licensing to start-ups on
a second best solution for TTOs. This supports our assumption that TTOs
generally prefer to license to established firms, and put far less eﬀort into
searching for start-up licensees. Similarly, Lowe and Ziedonis (2004) com-
pare the outcomes of licenses to start-ups with those to established firms
using data from the University of California and find that royalties from
start-ups are higher, on average, but successful commercialization tends to
occur only after acquisition by an established firm.
    Other recent literature has examined start-up firm activity and licensing
in general. Shane and Somaya (2004) use AUTM data and patent litigation
data during 1991-2000 to examine the eﬀects of patent litigation on univer-
sity licensing eﬀorts. Siegel et al. (1999) examine the relationship between
licenses, TTO staﬀ and legal expenditures in their analysis of university
technology transfer. Feldman, Feller, Bercovitz and Burton (2002) find an
increase in the use of cashed-in-equity in licensing agreements. Our analysis
adds depth by examining factors related to commercialization of inventions
in both established and start-up firms.


3    The Theoretical Model
The model is a reasonably straightforward compilation and extension of
those in Jensen and Thursby (2001) and Jensen, Thursby, and Thursby


                                      5
(2003). We model the problem as a multistage game with four players: the
TTO, the inventor, an established firm, and an investor/entrepreneur. The
game begins when the inventor discloses an invention to the TTO, who first
decides either to shelve the invention (i.e., return it to the inventor), or
to search for an established firm to which it oﬀers a license contract. If
a contract is oﬀered, then the firm decides to accept or reject it. If the
firm rejects the contract, then the TTO shelves the invention. If the firm
accepts, it pays a fixed license fee, M ≥ 0, and then a period of further
development follows. This development results in an updated probability
of success, which is common knowledge. The firm then decides whether to
terminate the project, in which case the TTO shelves the invention, or to
expend the additional resources necessary to attempt to commercialize it, in
which case all interested parties learn if the invention is a success or failure.
If it succeeds, the firm produces and pays total royalties of R ≥ 0. If it fails,
the game ends.
     If an established firm acquires a license, then both the inventor and
the licensee may expend further eﬀort eF and EF in development in or-
der to increase the probability of success. We assume these eﬀorts are not
contractible, but instead are chosen at the beginning of the development
period (after the licensing agreement has been made) as the equilibrium
outcomes e∗F ≥ 0 and EF∗ ≥ 0 of a noncooperative subgame. These equi-
librium eﬀorts depend, in general, on the contract, e∗F = e∗F (RF , MF ) and
EF∗ = EF∗ (RF , MF ).
     As is well-known by now, university inventions are typically embryonic.
Their commercial potential is uncertain, and the likelihood of their success
is very small. We assume that the probability of success p(eF , EF ; Q, H)
depends not only on the development eﬀorts, but also on a measure of the
quality of the inventor, Q, and a measure of the historical success of the
TTO, H. We assume that p is increasing in the eﬀorts, inventor quality, and
past TTO success. It is evident that eﬀorts and inventor quality are inputs
in the “production” of a probability of success Including TTO success as
an input as well implies that, ceteris paribus, an invention drawn at random
from a faculty member at a university with a superior track record of success
is more likely to be a success. We also assume that p is jointly concave in
all its arguments, and that p ∈ (0, 1) for all (e, E; Q, H). Finally, we assume
that additional eﬀort by the firm (in the form of more or better equipment,
for example) should increase the marginal impact of inventor eﬀort on the
                           ∂2p
probability of success, ∂e∂E   > 0. That is, inventor and firm eﬀorts are
“complements” in development, in the sense that they complement each


                                       6
other in the production of a positive probability of success.
    If additional development occurs and the invention is a success, then
the firm chooses output to maximize its profit (net of any license fees).
In general, because marginal production cost depends on the royalty rate,
the firm’s maximal output is decreasing in the royalty rate. Denote profit-
maximizing output by x(r) where r ≥ 0 is the royalty rate per unit of
output. Assume that x(0) > 0 and x0 (r) < 0, and that total royalty revenue
R = rx(r) is strictly concave in r and has a unique maximum at a positive,
finite value.1 Because the “eﬀort” provided by the firm can include materiel
and personnel as well as cash grants, denote the cost of its eﬀort by CF (EF ),
which we assume is increasing at an increasing rate: CF (0) = 0, CF0 > 0,
and CF00 > 0. Finally, after development the firm must also pay a lump-sum
cost to attempt to commercialize the invention, KF > 0. Thus, if Π(x(r)) is
the firm’s maximized profit (gross of royalty payments) for any royalty rate
r, then its expected payoﬀ from accepting a contract (RF , MF ) is

 PF (eF , EF ) = p(eF , EF ; Q, H)[Π(x(rF )) − RF ] − MF − CF (EF ) − KF , (1)

where rF is the royalty rate associated with the contract (RF , MF ) (i.e.,
RF = rF x(rF )).The firm accepts this contract and attempts to commercial-
ize the invention (after development) only if PF (eF , EF ) ≥ 0.
    Conversely, suppose that the TTO shelves the invention, which can oc-
cur after the inventor discloses or after a potential licensee rejects a contract
oﬀer.2 This commercialization of the invention occurs only if a venture
capitalist or angel investor can be found to provide the eﬀort required to
create a new, start-up firm based on the invention, as well as to assist in
additional development. TTOs typically expend little, if any, eﬀort in this
search process. The eﬀort expended by the inventor in this case typically in-
cludes both search for investors and additional development, and so exceeds
that when the licensee is an established firm. To economize on notation,
we let eS and ES denote the total eﬀorts expended by the inventor and the
venture capitalist or angel investor.
    Nevertheless, if a start-up is created, then it is still the role of the TTO
to oﬀer a license contract for the use of the invention. We assume it takes
the same form, a combination of royalty and fixed fee, (RS , MS ), where the
   1
      These assumptions on royalty revenue hold for a broad class of new process innovations
licensed to a single firm (including, but not limited to, the case of linear demand and
constant marginal cost).
    2
      The firm could agree to a contract, and then refuse to attempt to commercialize it
after the development period if it is indiﬀerent, PL (RL , ML ) = 0. In this case we assume
the firm attempts the commercialization.


                                             7
royalty rate is rS and total royalties are RS = rS x(rS ). Again we assume
inventor and licensee eﬀorts eS and ES are the equilibrium outcomes of
a noncooperative subgame, and depend in general on the contract, e∗S =
e∗S (RS , MS ) and ES∗ = ES∗ (RS , MS ). The start-up firm’s cost of eﬀort is
CS (ES ), which we again assume satisfies CS (0) = 0, CS0 > 0, and CS00 > 0.
If its lump-sum cost to attempt to commercialize the invention is KS > 0,
then its expected payoﬀ from accepting the contract (RS , MS ) is
  PS (eS , ES ) = p(eS , ES ; Q, H)[Π(x(rS )) − RS ] − MS − CS (ES ) − KS . (2)
The venture capitalist assists in the creation of a start-up firm, which ac-
cepts this contract and attempts to commercialize the invention (after de-
velopment), only if PS (eS , ES ) ≥ 0.
    Assume that, for each j = F, S, Êj is the maximum eﬀort that firm j
can devote to development. The continuity and strict concavity of each Pj
guarantees that it is maximized at some Ej ∈ [0, Êj ], and so there exists
                                                       j j∂P (e ,0)  I j  j    ∂P (e ,Ê )
a firm j best-reply function bj (ej ). Moreover,       ∂Ej     > 0 >  ∂Ej
is suﬃcient to guarantee that Pj has an interior maximum at some Ej ∈
(0, Êj ), in which case the first order necessary condition is:
                    ∂Pj    ∂p
                        =     [Π(x(rj )) − Rj ] − Cj0 (Ej ) = 0.                      (3)
                    ∂Ej   ∂Ej
It is worth noting that the firm expends eﬀort on additional development,
independently of the inventor, only if it can independently increase the prob-
ability of success.
    The inventor’s utility function takes the form UI (YI , ϑ) − VI (e), where
YI is his income and ϑ is an indicator variable that equals 1 if a license is
sold and 0 if not. That is, the inventor gains utility both from income and
the prestige associated with the successful sale of a license (to any firm),3
but suﬀers disutility from eﬀort in further development, VI (e). Naturally
we assume positive but nonincreasing marginal utility from income (so the
inventor can be risk-neutral or risk-averse), positive marginal utility from
sale of a license, and positive and increasing marginal disutility of eﬀort:
∂UI          ∂ 2 UI                            0           00
 ∂YI > 0 ≥ ∂YI2 , UI (YI , 1) > UI (YI , 0), VI > 0, and VI > 0. Thus, if αI is
his share of license income, then for each j = F, S, his expected utility is
          PI (ej , Ej ) = p(ej , Ej ; Q, H)UI (αI (Mj + Rj ), 1) +
                          (1 − p(ej , Ej ; Q, H))UI (αI Mj , 1) − VI (ej ).           (4)
   3
    See Stephan (1996) for a survey of empirical support for the assumption that inventors
also receive utility from nonpecuniary sources, such as seeing an invention licensesd or
patent granted.


                                            8
Now assume that ê is the maximum eﬀort that the inventor can devote to
development. Then for each j = F, S, the continuity and strict concavity of
PI guarantees that it is maximized at some ej ∈ [0, ê], and so there exists an
                                                 ∂P (0,E )          ∂P (ê,E )
inventor best-reply function bI (Ej ). Moreover, I ∂e j > 0 > I ∂e j is
suﬃcient to guarantee that PI has an interior maximum at some ej ∈ (0, ê),
in which case the first order necessary condition is:
        ∂PI   ∂p
            =     [UI (αI (Mj + Rj ), 1) − UI (αI Mj , 1)] − VI0 (ej ) = 0.          (5)
        ∂ej   ∂ej

It is worth noting that, as in Jensen and Thursby (2001), the inventor ex-
pends eﬀort on additional development only if the royalty rate is positive.4

Theorem 1 Under the assumptions on the payoﬀ functions and strategies,
for each j = F, S and given contract (Rj , Mj ), there exists a Nash equi-
librium (e∗j (Rj , Mj ), Ej∗ (Rj , Mj )) for the development subgame between the
firm and inventor. Furthermore, the equilibrium is:
                                            ∂P (0,Ê )       ∂Pj (ê,0)
(i) No development, e∗j = Ej∗ = 0, if I ∂e j < 0 and ∂E            j
                                                                        < 0;
(ii) Both inventor and firm j expend eﬀort in development, e∗j > 0 and
             ∂P (0,0)
Ej∗ > 0, if ∂E
             j
               j
                   > 0 and ∂P∂eI (0,0)
                                  j
                                       > 0; and
(iii) Unique and locally stable if and only if b0I (b0j (e∗j )) < 1.

    Proof. See the appendix.
    Inventor and firm eﬀorts, whenever they are interior, are strategic com-
                                                                       ∂2p
plements because they are complements in development: that is, ∂e∂E        >0
implies b0I (Ej ) > 0 and b0j (ej ) > 0. As long as their best-reply functions
have the appropriate relative slopes, as depicted in figure 1, then there is a
unique and locally stable equilibrium in which development occurs and each
contributes to that development, e∗j (Rj , Mj ) > 0 and Ej∗ (Rj , Mj ) > 0 for
each j.
    The TTO’s utility function is UT (YT , ϑ)−VT j (Q, H), where YT is income.
That is, the TTO also gains utility both from income and the prestige as-
sociated with the successful sale of a license, but suﬀers disutility from the
search for a licensee. Again we assume positive but nonincreasing marginal
utility from income, and positive marginal utility from sale of a license:
∂UT             ∂ 2 UT
 ∂YT > 0 ≥ ∂YT2 and UT (YT , 1) > UT (YT , 0). We also assume that the
utility cost of search depends on the type of licensee, inventor quality, and
   4
    If rj = 0, then ej = 0 because he earns his share of the fixed fee, αI M , whether he
expends any eﬀort or not, and the marginal disutility of eﬀort is positive, VI0 (0) > 0.



                                           9
historical success of the TTO. In particular, the disutility of search is de-
creasing at a nonincreasing rate in inventor quality and past TTO success:
∂VT j       ∂ 2 VT j     ∂VT j           ∂ 2 VT j
 ∂Q < 0, ∂Q2 ≤ 0, ∂H < 0, and ∂H 2 ≤ 0. We further assume, as
indicated above, that the disutility of search is smaller for a start-up firm:
VT F (Q, H) > VT S (Q, H) ≥ 0. Then for j = F, S, the TTO’s expected payoﬀ
from licensing with contract (Rj , Mj ) to firm j is

        PT (Rj , Mj ) = p(e∗j , Ej∗ ; Q, H)UT (αT (Mj + Rj ), 1) +
                        [1 − p(e∗j , Ej∗ ; Q, H)]UT (αT Mj , 1) − VT j (Q, H),            (6)

where αT ∈ (0, 1) is its share of license income and αT + αI ≤ 1.5 If
the inventor finds a potential licensee, then the TTO’s problem for each
j = F, S is to choose a contract to maximize this expected payoﬀ subject to
the licensee’s participation constraint, or

                        max PT (Rj , Mj ) s.t. Pj (e∗j , Ej∗ ) ≥ 0.                       (7)
                      (Rj ,Mj )

We denote these optimal choices by (Rj∗ , Mj∗ ). If a license contract with
positive royalty rate and fixed fee is consummated, then the first order con-
ditions are that the participation constraint holds and
                                       ∂PT        ∂Pj
                                       ∂Rj        ∂Rj
                                       ∂PT
                                             =    ∂Pj
                                                        .                                 (8)
                                       ∂Mj        ∂Mj

The condition in (8), of course, denotes a tangency between the expected-
payoﬀ indiﬀerence curves of the TTO and licensee in (Rj , Mj )-space. An
example of this is depicted in Figure 2.


4       Empirical Implications
Our theory provides two types of empirical implications. First, it provides
predictions regarding factors that increase the likelihood of commercializa-
tion of university inventions via either established firms or start-ups.

Theorem 2 Licensing to either an established firm or a start-up firm is
more likely in the equilibrium of this dynamic licensing and development
game for inventors with higher quality and/or lower disutility from develop-
ment eﬀort, TTOs with greater historical success and/or lower disutility of
    5
     This is generally less than 1 because the university administration also receives a share
of revenue.


                                             10
search for licensees, and inventions with lower costs of development and/or
commercialization for potential licensees.

    Proof. Obvious.
    Next, our theory provides predictions regarding factors that increase the
likelihood of commercialization of university inventions via start-ups. To
derive these implications, we consider those conditions necessary and suﬃ-
cient for commercialization in start-up firms rather than established firms.
Specifically, these are the conditions under which the unique equilibrium is
that the TTO sells a license to a start-up firm.

Theorem 3 Licensing to a start-up firm, instead of an established firm, is
the equilibrium of this dynamic licensing and development game if and only
if either:
(i) PF (e∗F (R∗F , MF∗ ), EF∗ (RF∗ , MF∗ )) < 0 or PT (e∗F (RF∗ , MF∗ ), EF∗ (R∗F , MF∗ )) <
0, PS (e∗S (RS∗ , MS∗ ), ES∗ (R∗S , MS∗ )) ≥ 0, and PT (e∗S (R∗S , MS∗ ), ES∗ (R∗S , MS∗ )) ≥
0; or
(ii)PT (e∗j (Rj∗ , Mj∗ ), Ej∗ (Rj∗ , Mj∗ )) > 0 and PS (e∗j (R∗j , Mj∗ ), Ej∗ (Rj∗ , Mj∗ )) ≥ 0
for j = F, S, and PT (e∗S (RS∗ , MS∗ ), ES∗ (RS∗ , MS∗ )) > PT (e∗F (RF∗ , MF∗ ), EF∗ (RF∗ , MF∗ )).

    Proof. This follows straightforwardly from the definition of the game
and the fact that the TTO and potential licensee payoﬀs in these statements
are evaluated at the equilibrium values of eﬀort that would prevail in the
development subgame if a license were executed.
    We think of the game as unfolding as follows. The TTO, given a dis-
closure, first considers licensing to an established firm. It determines the
solution to (7) for j = F , the contract (R∗F , MF∗ ), conditional on equilib-
rium behavior by the inventor and firm in the development subgame. The
TTO next considers shelving the invention, and providing minimal assis-
tance in searching for an investor in a start-up firm. This yields the contract
(R∗S , MS∗ ) that solves (7) for j = S, conditional on equilibrium behavior by
the inventor and firm in the development subgame. Licensing to this start-
up is the unique equilibrium, therefore, if either a contract can be sold to a
start-up but not an established firm, or if a contract can be sold to either
type of firm, but the TTO earns greater expected net utility the optimal
start-up contract. Thus, we emphasize that our model is consistent not only
with the observation that TTOs may turn to start-ups as a last resort, after
the eﬀort to find an established firm has failed, but also with the observation
that TTOs may immediately shelve a disclosure and let the inventor pursue
a start-up.


                                            11
    If the TTO’s disutility of searching were the same for both types of
licensee, then a license is sold to a start-up only if has greater (positive)
expected profit, gross of license payments, so that the TTO’s net utility
from licensing to that start-up is greater. Although this may seem unlikely,
a priori, it is not. Indeed, three types of eﬃciency can contribute to greater
expected profit for a start-up.
    First, expected profit depends on the firm’s cost of development eﬀort
and the cost of attempting to commercialize the invention. The opportunity
costs of development and commercialization can be greater for established
firms, which typically have alternatives that are more closely related to their
current product line, and so more profitable. Conversely, venture capitalists
routinely deal with inventions that do not fit well in existing product lines,
so they may well have cost advantages from better access to and informa-
tion about the technological expertise needed to develop and commercialize
embryonic inventions. Similarly, start-ups may well have cost advantages
due to the inventor’s superior knowledge of the technology, which can limit
transactional and informational problems.
    Second, expected profit also depends upon the post-development proba-
bility of success. An inventor often has a closer relationship with a start-up,
and may provide greater development eﬀort as a result. A venture capitalist
also may provide more eﬀort (resources) than an established firm. Because
inventor and firm eﬀorts are strategic complements, greater eﬀort by either
induces greater eﬀort by the other, thus further increasing the probability of
success and expected profit. The equilibrium of the development subgame,
therefore, may involve greater inventor and/or firm eﬀort, and greater ex-
pected profit, for start-up.
    Third, licensing to a start-up firm can occur, even if expected profit
is greater for an established firm, because the TTO’s opportunity cost of
searching for an established firm as a licensee is greater. This is an assump-
tion of our model, of course, but it is consistent with the stylized facts. TTOs
tend to focus their limited time on finding established firms as licensees for
their most promising inventions, while essentially ignoring the others, which
then typically are commercialized only if the inventors make the lion’s share
of the eﬀort to find investors to assist them in forming start-ups. This may
well be a more eﬃcient approach for such inventions, because the inventors
have a better understanding of their embryonic nature, and so should be
better able to find potential partners than the TTO.
    We summarize the implications of the theory for our empirical analysis
in terms of characteristics of the inventor, the invention, the TTO, and
financial markets. This approach is arbitrary, but facilitates the discussion.

                                      12
    The primary characteristic of an inventor is his (perceived) quality. Higher
quality inventors disclose inventions which, ceteris paribus, have higher prob-
abilities of success and lower TTO utility costs of searching, and thus are
more likely to be licensed to either established firms or start-ups.
    The nature of the invention is also important, in the sense that inventions
which result from more applied research are “closer” to commercialization.
Such inventions would not only have higher probabilities of success for given
levels of eﬀort, but also lower search costs for the TTO, and thus are more
likely to be licensed to established firms than start-ups.
    TTOs are also an important factor in the commercialization of university
inventions. They rely on their experience and expertise in their search for
firms to serve as partners in commercializing inventions. Those with more
experience and expertise, and with more past success, should be more likely
to sell licenses to either established firms or start-ups. TTOs also play a role
as intermediaries between inventors and licensees, and as such may serve as
guarantors of minimum quality levels (see Hoppe and Ozdenoren 2004 and
Macho-Stadler, Perez-Castrillo, and Veugelers 2004). From this perspective,
we expect relatively more licenses to established firms and fewer start-ups
from more experienced and successful TTOs.
    Finally, our theory predicts that financial market conditions, and the
availability of capital and credit, should be an important factor in deter-
mining whether licensing occurs to start-ups or established firms. These
conditions influence the costs of developing and attempting to commercial-
ize the invention, as well as the TTO’s cost of searching for a licensee and the
probability that the invention will eventually succeed. Venture capitalists
play a significant and unique role in start-up activity and innovation.6 Li-
censing to start-ups, but not established firms, should be positively related
to the general ability of the inventor or TTO to tap into venture capital
funding. Similarly, we expect a positive relationship between start-up ac-
tivity and returns to the S&P 500 because more start-up activity occurs, in
general, when business conditions are favorable. However, we expect both
the rate of return to venture capital and the interest rate to be negatively
related to start-up activity, because higher rates indicate greater opportu-
nity costs of development and commercialization of university start-ups for
venture capitalists, who have other, more profitable opportunities.
  6
    Kortum and Lerner (2000) find that venture capital fund-raising positively eﬀects
patenting rates.




                                         13
5        Data and Methodology
Data on commercialization of university inventions via start-ups and licenses
to established firms were gathered from the AUTM surveys for fiscal years
1993 through 2002. The sample is an unbalanced panel of 110 universities,
including 40 private universities, 67 universities with medical schools, and
31 universities in the five states that received the largest venture capital
investments. To be precise, our data for “start-ups” are companies formed
with the aid of the university technology licensing oﬃce in order to commer-
cialize a faculty invention. The AUTM Licensing Survey 2002 states that
start-up firms “are companies that were dependent upon licensing the insti-
tution’s technology for initiation.”7 Our data for “licenses” are those license
and option agreements executed with established firms. The universities in
our sample generated 3,047 start-ups, 79,579 disclosures and 24,352 licenses
during this time period. Table 1 shows the descriptive statistics for the all
variables we consider in this sample. The average number of start-ups per
university is 3.2 per year, and the average number of licenses is 25.6 per year.
Technology transfer oﬃces received 83.2 new invention disclosures per year,
and had an average of 3.3 full time employees devoted to licensing activity.
    We test our theoretical model using two equations of the form,

                 Yit = αit + β 1 X1i + β 2 X2it + β 3 X3it + β 4 X4it + eit .    (9)

In model 1, the dependent variable is start-ups at university i in year t,
and in model 2, the dependent variable is licenses at university i in year t.
The independent variables include our proxy measures of inventor quality,
X1i ,TTO characteristics, X2it , invention characteristics, X3it and financial
market conditions (including venture capital), X4it . Because the indepen-
dent variables involve count data, and there are many zeros in the start-up
data, our benchmark models 1 and 2 estimate (9) using a negative binomial
model.
    Because our theory predicts that licensing to start-ups or established
firms is positively related to faculty quality, for each university i, we use
three measures of inventor quality, X1it : quality of the graduate faculty,
QUALi ; quality of the engineering faculty, ENGQUALi ; and quality of the
natural sciences faculty, SCIQUALi . Previous studies have used the data
from the 1993 National Research Council’s Survey of Ph.D. Granting In-
stitutions (NRC 1995) to construct a quality measure for each university
by computing the weighted average of the NRC scores for each department
    7
        Association of University Technology Managers Survey FY 2002, page 24.


                                             14
(where the weights are determined by faculty size). This measure is flawed
because it omits faculty without doctoral programs. More importantly, from
our perspective, it is also too coarse a measure because it includes faculty in
the humanities and social sciences, who are not typically the driving forces
behind university licensing and start-up activity. Because most inventions
come from faculty in engineering and natural sciences, we also control for
quality in these disciplines. For each university, we also construct a weighted
average of the NRC quality scores for its engineering departments, and a
weighted average of the NRC quality scores for its natural science depart-
ments.8 The NRC rankings for each department in this survey ranged from
0 to 5, where 5 indicates a distinguished department, so higher values of
QUALi correspond to higher quality of the graduate faculty, higher values
of ENGQUALi correspond to higher quality of the engineering faculty, and
higher values of SCIQUALi correspond to higher of the natural sciences
faculty. Our theory predicts a positive relationship between any measure of
inventor quality and both start-ups and licenses to established firms.
    We also use a dummy variable to denote whether the university is private
or public (P RIV AT Ei = 1 if private, 0 otherwise). Private universities may,
in general, have higher quality faculty, in which case this dummy variable
would be just another proxy for quality. Similarly, private schools may have
more flexibility in research options, which would imply more licensing to
start-ups and established firms. However, private universities may also have
more or better ties to established firms, which would leads us to expect fewer
licenses to start-ups than established firms.
    Because our theory predicts that licensing to start-ups or established
firms depends positively on the TTO’s historical success, we also include
measures of TTO characteristics as independent variables, X2it . For each
university i, in each year t, we use the number of disclosures, DISit , the
age of the technology transfer oﬃce, T T OAGEit , the size of the technology
transfer oﬃce, T T OSIZEit ,and the log of gross royalties, LNGROSSit , as
proxies for TTO success. TTOs who have elicited more disclosures from
their faculty are likely to sell more licenses simply because they have more
new inventions in their portfolio. Similarly, TTOs that are older and larger
have not only more resources, but also more experience and expertise in
evaluating disclosures and in searching for licensees. TTOs with greater
gross royalties have more past success, both in selecting disclosures to pursue
and in finding licensees for them.
    Next, we include two variables as proxies for the characteristics of the
  8
      We thank Jerry Thursby for providing his NRC data.



                                          15
inventions, in terms of their commercial orientation, X3it . We use a dummy
variable to measure the presence of a medical school (MEDi = 1 if medical
school, 0 otherwise). The presence of a medical school suggests the univer-
sity may produce a higher proportion of inventions that are applied, in the
sense that their commercial potential is more obvious. We also include the
ratio of industrial research support to federal research support, INDF EDit ,
as an invention characteristic. Universities with greater relative industrial
funding may also tend to produce a higher proportion of inventions that are
applied in nature, and so more apparently suitable for commercialization.
Such inventions should be characterized, ceteris paribus, by both higher
probabilities of success and lower TTO cost of search for established firms
as licensees. Thus we expect that the presence of a medical school and high
level of relative industrial funding to be positively related to licensing to
established firms, but negatively be related to start-up activity.
    Finally, because our model predicts that university licensing should be
related market conditions and availability of capital and credit, we include
several measures of financial market and general business conditions, X4it ,
as independent variables for the case of start-ups, model 1. First, we use
two proxies to measure the TTO’s general ability to tap into venture cap-
ital funding. These data are obtained from the National Venture Capital
Association Yearbook 2004. First, we use the log of venture capital funding
in each state for each university i in that state for each fiscal year t from
1993 through 2002, V CST AT Eit . We also use a dummy variable to de-
note whether the university is located in one of the six states that received
the most venture capital funding9 (HIGHV CSTit = 1 if located in a high
venture capital state, 0 otherwise). We use state level data because direct
data for the universities in our sample is hard to obtain due to legal issues.
As noted above, our theory predicts a positive relationship between venture
capital spending and licensing to start-ups.
    Next, for each year t in the sample, we include the five year rolling aver-
ages of the Venture Capital Index, RLAV EV Ct and the Standard and Poors
500 Index RLAV ESPt , and the annual percentage change in the Federal Re-
serve’s fed funds rate, INT ERESTt .10 We expect both the average venture
capital index and the interest rate to be negatively related to start-up activ-
ity, as they proxy the opportunity costs of university start-ups for venture
capitalists. However, we expect a positive relationship between start-up ac-
   9
    California, New York, Massachusetts, Connecticut, Maryland, and Texas.
  10
    Interest rate data is compiled from the St. Louis Federal Reserve Database (FREDII)
and the U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics.



                                          16
tivity and returns to the S&P 500, because more start-up activity occurs,
in general, when business conditions are favorable.
    Finally, we do not include these proxies for venture capital activity and
market sentiment in our analysis of licensing to established firms, model 2,
because it seems much more likely that these variables play a significant role
in licensing decisions by established firms. Our robustness checks in Section
7 confirm this.


6    Empirical Results
The results for our benchmark estimations using the negative binomial
model are presented in Table 2. Results for other specifications used as
robustness checks are in Tables 3-7.
    In general, our results provide strong evidence that inventor quality is
positively related to licensing to both start-ups and established firms. The
estimated coeﬃcients for our engineering and science quality variables are
positive in our benchmark regression estimations both for licensing to start-
ups (model 1) and licensing to established firms (model 2). The coeﬃcients
for engineering quality are positive and significant, but the coeﬃcients for
science quality are not. These findings support our theoretical result that
inventions from high-quality faculty are more easily commercialized with
either established or start-up firms. These results are similar to the Di Gre-
goriao and Shane (2003) finding of a positive relationship between start-up
formation and faculty quality, as measured by the Gourman Report, for
the period 1994-1998. They are also consistent with the Shane and Stuart
(2002) finding that intellectual eminence is positively related to start-up ac-
tivity. Moreover, these results are also consistent with the finding of Jensen,
Thursby and Thursby (2003) that higher quality faculty disclose inventions
at earlier stages of development, the findings of Lach and Shankerman (2002)
that higher quality faculty disclose more inventions and higher value inven-
tions, and the finding of Thursby and Thursby (1998) that faculty are critical
in the licensing process. Our results contribute to this literature by eval-
uating faculty quality and start-up activity in the context of licensing, in
general.
    We contribute to this literature by using these more precise measures
of quality. We also analyzed the data using the original, over-all quality
measure from the NRC data that includes all departments. The estimated
coeﬃcients for over-all quality are positive in our benchmark regressions both
for licensing to start-ups (model 3) and established firms (model 4). How-


                                      17
ever, the coeﬃcients for science quality and engineering quality, when added
together, are larger than the coeﬃcient for the over-all quality measure. We
checked this result using several estimation techniques as robustness checks
and found similar results (see Tables 3-5 and 7). Thus, our more detailed
measures for faculty quality have more explanatory power. Interestingly,
these results also suggest that it is the quality of engineering faculty that
is most important to commercialization of university inventions via either
start-ups or established firms.
    We find no evidence that our dummy variable for the whether the uni-
versity is private helped to predict license to start-ups or established firms.
For either dependent variable, the estimated coeﬃcient for this indicator
variable is negative, but not significant. We believe this may indicate that
whether a university is private may simply be a proxy for the quality of
potential inventors at that university.
    As predicted by our theory, the number of invention disclosures to the
TTO is positively and significantly related to licensing to both start-ups
and established firms. In our benchmark regressions, and in virtually all of
our other model specifications, the estimated coeﬃcients for disclosures are
positive and significant. Universities with larger pools of disclosures execute
more licenses to both established firms and start-ups Although a larger pool
of disclosures may increase the TTO’s opportunity cost of searching for a
licensee for any one of them, it also increases the number of commercially vi-
able disclosures and thereby generally results in more licensing. This reflects
the now well-known fact that university technology transfer relies essentially
on the solicitation of disclosures from faculty.
    The estimated coeﬃcients for the log of gross licensing royalties are pos-
itive and significant for licenses to established firms. The coeﬃcient are
positive for start-ups also, but significant only when the single over-all mea-
sure of quality is used (Models 3 and 4). These results are reasonably robust,
holding for the majority of alternative specifications. Our theory predicts
that larger gross licensing royalties, as a measure of greater past TTO suc-
cess, should increase all licensing. Apparently, those universities that are
able to generate many start-ups may not be the same universities that also
have large royalty incomes. This is consistent with the stylized fact that the
majority of “royalty rich” TTOs obtain their revenue from established firms,
and view start-ups as a last resort.
    We also find evidence that the age of the TTO positively aﬀects all licens-
ing. The estimated coeﬃcient is positive and significant in the benchmark
models. As predicted by our theory, older and more experienced TTOs are
more likely to license inventions to both start-ups and established firms.

                                      18
This result is robust for license to established firm in all alternatives, and
for licenses to start-ups in the majority. This is consistent with the results
of Lach and Schankerman (2002), who find that disclosures and their aver-
age values increase with TTO age, and with the results of Franklin, Wright,
and Lockett (2001), who find that older universities are more successful in
launching new startups. Feldman Feller, Bercovitz and Burton (2002) simi-
larly find that the greater the amount of experience with technology transfer,
the more likely the university will accept equity-based technology transfer
mechanisms. Older, experienced TTOs are more eﬀective in commercializ-
ing inventions, in general. Thus, although increases in TTO age increase
both the probability of success of a given disclosure and the cost of TTO
search for an established firm as a partner in our theory, it appears that the
former eﬀect outweighs the latter in this data.
     It is somewhat surprising that the size of the TTO did not have a signif-
icant impact on start-up activity. This coeﬃcient was very small in general,
and not significantly diﬀerent from zero in the benchmark case. Interest-
ingly, this is one result that was not very robust, as TTO size did have
a significant impact on licensing to start-ups and established firms in sev-
eral other specifications. However, these other results were not consistent
in that the significant signs often took opposite signs in alternative spec-
ifications (see Tables 3-7). This suggests that TTO size need not have a
significant or consistent eﬀect on licensing.
     The presence of a medical school also did not seem to significantly af-
fect licensing to either start-ups or established firms. The coeﬃcient for
medical schools is negative but not significant for licenses to start-ups, but
is positive, and still not significant, for licences to established firms. This
may indicate that universities with medical schools generate less start-up
activity, and support our theory that inventors from medical schools may
be more commercially oriented, so it is easier to license their inventions to
established firms. It is also consistent with the finding of Jensen, Thursby
and Thursby (2003) that universities with higher fractions of their inven-
tions from medical schools have more inventions disclosed at an early stage
of development.
     The coeﬃcient for the ratio of industrial to federal research support is
positive and significant for licenses to both start-ups and established firms.
This result was reasonably robust, in that the sign was positive in all specifi-
cations, but not always significant. This is perhaps not surprising as Jensen,
Thursby and Thursby (2003) find this variable does not help to predict the
stage of development at which inventions are disclosed. Following Di Grego-
riao and Shane (2003), we also used the ratio of industrial support to total

                                      19
research support in an attempt to capture the applied nature of research,
but found no significance with this variable either.
    Our results provide evidence that access to venture capital aﬀects start-
up activity. The estimated coeﬃcient for the log of venture capital funding
in the state where the university is located is positive, but not significant.
Similarly, the estimated coeﬃcient for whether the university is located in
one of the six states with the most venture capital funding is usually positive,
but not significant. Given our theory, we anticipated positive, significant
results. Apparently these proxies for the local availability of venture capital
are too broadly defined to capture the expected eﬀect.
    Nevertheless, we do find evidence that the five year rolling average of
returns to venture capital significantly, and negatively, impacts licensing to
start-ups. This result is robust to all specifications. When the rate of return
to venture capital is high, venture capitalists have many opportunities that
are more lucrative than start-ups based on university inventions, and they
obvious pursue these. Alternatively stated, given the embryonic nature of
university inventions, the evidence suggests that venture capitalists turn to
university start-ups as a last resort.
    Finally, we find evidence that interest rate changes significantly impact
start-up activity. The estimated coeﬃcient for interest rate percentage
change is negative and significantly diﬀerent from zero in each regression
specification. As interest rates rise, available capital for start-up formation
decreases. We also find evidence that the rate of growth in the S&P 500
index is positively and significantly related to start-up activity. Increases in
the S&P 500 reflect improvements in overall business sentiment, which leads
to more university start-up activity. These result lend support to our view
that indicators of economics activity and market sentiment positively aﬀect
start-up activity.


7    Robustness Checks
We checked our results using several tests for robustness. First, given con-
cerns about possible endogeneity of some of the TTO characteristics, we also
estimated our benchmark model using both lagged disclosures and lagged
cumulative disclosures, and the lagged log of gross royalties. Our results
remained the same in these specifications. Also, to check whether financial
market variables mattered only for licenses to start-ups, we also estimated
our benchmark model for licenses to established firms including financial
market variables, and none of these coeﬃcients was significant.


                                      20
    Because we began the analysis, as usual, by examining a simple OLS
specification, we also decided to check whether contemporaneous cross-
equation error correlation existed. It is possible that our benchmark model
1 and model 2 are related through the correlation in the error terms. In
Table 7, we show results from the estimation of three seeming unrelated
regressions. We found no correlation in error terms. Estimating these two
equations separately seems to lend greater explanatory power.
    We also empirically tested our theoretical model using random eﬀects
models to account for any unobserved inter-university diﬀerences or clus-
tering eﬀects that may exist. This design allows for additional sources of
variation in the model to examine variance of error terms across universi-
ties for contemporaneous correlation between cross-sections. We estimated
a model using a random eﬀects specification that allowed for in-state depen-
dence between universities but assumed no dependence between universities
across states. These results in Table 5 were largely similar to those in Table
2, our benchmark model and the standard errors were very similar. It does
not appear that university inter-dependence or cross-sectional eﬀects signifi-
cantly impact our findings. Thus, we found no need to conduct cross-section
weighted estimations.
    Finally, we also tested our theory using fixed-eﬀects models. We check
for any unmodeled heterogeneity and assume that individual specific time
invariant eﬀects may exist (see Table 6). We added a time trend to fur-
ther examine the positive relationship between our proxies for cost, ven-
ture capital spending and start-up firm activity and licensing to established
firms. This model excludes our quality measures and indicator variables for
whether the university has a medical school or is public or private. These
results are also still very similar to those in Table 2, our benchmark model.


8    Conclusion
We have developed and empirically tested a theoretical model to explain why
commercialization of university research occurs in start-up firms rather than
established firms. Several empirical implications follow immediately from
the theory. Essentially, we are more likely to observe commercialization of
university inventions by start-up firms in situations in which start-ups are
more likely to have a cost advantage in the development or commercialization
of the invention, or in which the opportunity cost of TTOs in searching for
an established firm as a partner is higher.
    We tested the implications of the model in terms of characteristics of the


                                     21
inventor, the invention, and the TTO, and financial market conditions. We
estimated negative binomial, Poisson, ordinary least squares, fixed eﬀects
and random eﬀects models using the annual number of licenses to start-ups
and licenses to established firms per university. Our results provide evidence
that inventor quality, especially in engineering departments, has a positive
impact on licensing in general. We also find that measures of TTO success,
such as disclosures, the age of the TTO, and gross royalties, have a positive
impact on licensing in general. Financial market variables also matter, as we
find that both the rate of return to venture capital and the interest rate have
negative and significant eﬀects on the number of university start-ups, but
the S&P 500 has a positive and significant eﬀect on start-ups. Our analysis
therefore indicates that university inventions are so embryonic that, if an
established firm is unwilling to take a license, then it is very diﬃcult to fund
a start-up because even venture capitalists come to university inventions
only as a last resort.


9    References
Association of University Technology Managers, 1995, 1996, 1997, 1998,
2000, and 2001, AUTM Licensing Surveys.
    Bercovitz, J., M. Feldman, I. Feller, and R. Burton, 2001, Organizational
Structure as a Determinant of Academic Patent and Licensing Behavior:
An Exploratory Study of Duke, Johns Hopkins, and Pennsylvania State
Universities, Journal of Technology Transfer 26, 21-35.
    Di Gregoriao, D. and S. Shane, 2003, ”Why Do Some Universities Gen-
erate More Start-ups Than Others?,” Research Policy 32, 209-227.
    Feldman, M., I. Feller, J. Bercovitz, and R. Burton, 2002, “Equity and
Technology Transfer Strategies of American Research Universities,” Man-
agement Science 48 , 105-121.
    Hellmann, Thomas, 2005, ”The Role of Patents for Bridging the Science
to Market Gap,” mimeo, University of British Columbia.
    Henderson, Rebecca, Adam Jaﬀe and Trajtenberg, 1998, “Universities
as a Source of Commercial Technology: A Detailed Analysis of University
Patenting, 1965-1988,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 119-127.
    Hoppe, Heidrun C., and Emre Ozdenoren, 2004, Intermediation in Inno-
vation: The role of Technology Transfer Oﬃces,” mimeo, Universitat Ham-
burg.
    Jensen, R., and M. Thursby, 2001, Proofs and Prototypes for Sale: The
Licensing of University Inventions,” American Economic Review 91, 240-


                                      22
259.
    Jensen, R., J. Thursby, and M. Thursby, 2003, “The Disclosure and
Licensing of University Inventions: ‘The Best We Can Do With the S**t
We Get To Work With,” International Journal of Industrial Organization
21, 1271-1300.
    Kortum, S. and J. Lerner, 2000, “Assessing the Contribution of Venture
Capital to Innovation,” Rand Journal of Economics 31, 674-692.
    Lach, S. and M. Shankerman, 2002, “Incentives and Inventive Activity in
Universities,” mimeo, Hebrew University and London School of Economics.
    Lerner, J. 1999, “The Government as a Venture Capitalist: The Long
run impact of the SBIR Program J. Bus. 72 285-318.
    Levin, S. and P. Stephan, 1991, “Research Productivity over the Life
Cycle: Evidence for American Scientists,” American Economic Review 81,
114-132.
    Lewis, K.S., L.M. Jones, M.S. Anderson, D. Blumenthal, and E.G. Camp-
bell, 2001, “Entrepreneurship, Secrecy, and Productivity: A Comparison of
Clinical and Nonclinical Faculty,” Journal of Technology Transfer 26, 233-
245.
    Lowe, R. and A. Ziedonis, 2004, “Start-ups, Established Firms, and the
Commercialization of University Inventions,” mimeo.
    Macho-Stadler, I., D. Perez-Castrillo, and R. Veugelers, 2004, “Licens-
ing of University Innovations: The Role of a Technology Transfer Oﬃce,”
mimeo, Universitat Autonoma de Barcelona and Katholieke Universiteit
Leuven.
    Mowery, D., R. Nelson, B. Sampat and A. Ziedonis, 2001, “The Growth
of Patenting and Licensing by U.S. Universities: An Assessment of the Ef-
fects of the Bayh-Dole Act of 1980,” Research Policy 30, 99-119.
    Mowery, D. and B. Sampat, 2001, “University Patents and Patent Policy
Debates in the USA, 1925-1980,” Industrial and Corporate Change 10, 781-
814.
    Nelson, R. “What is Private and What is Public about Technology?”
1989, Science, Technology and Human Values 14(3), 229-241.
    Owen-Smith, J. and W.W. Powell, 2001, To Patent or Not: Faculty De-
cisions and Institutional Success at Technology Transfer, Journal of Tech-
nology Transfer 26, 99-114.
    Shane, S., 2000, “Prior Knowledge and the Discovery of Entrepreneurial
Opportunities,” Organization Science 11, 448-469.
    Shane, S., 2001, “Technological Opportunities and New Firm Creation,”
Management Science 47, 204-220.


                                    23
    Shane, S., 2002, “Selling University Technology,” Management Science
48, 122-137.
    Shane S. and D. Somaya, 2004, “The Eﬀects of Patent Litigation on
University Licensing Eﬀorts,” mimeo.
    Shane, S. and T. Stuart, 2002, “Organizational Endowments and the
Performance of University Start-ups,” Management Science 48.
    Siegel, D., D. Waldman, and A. Link, 1999, Assessing the Impact of Or-
ganizational Practices on the Productivity of University Technology Transfer
Oﬃces: An Exploratory Study,” NBER Working Paper 7256.
    Stephan, P., 1996, “The Economics of Science,” Journal of Economic
Literature 34(3), 1199-1235.
    Thursby, J., R. Jensen, and M.C. Thursby, 2001, Objectives, Charac-
teristics and Outcomes of University Licensing: A Survey of Major U.S.
Universities, Journal of Technology Transfer 26, 59-72.
    Thursby, J. and S. Kemp, 2002, Growth and Productive Eﬃciency of
University Intellectual Property Licensing,” Research Policy 31, 109-124.
    Thursby, J., and M.C. Thursby, 2002, “Who is Selling the Ivory Tower?
Sources of Growth in University Licensing,” Management Science 48(1),
90-104.
    Thursby, J., and M.C. Thursby, (1998) “Are Faculty Critical? Their
Role in University-Industry Licensing, Contemporary Economic Policy 22,
162-178.
    Thursby, M.C., J. Thursby, and E. Dechaneaux, 2004, “Shirking, Shelv-
ing, and Risk-sharing: The Role of University License Contracts,” mimeo.
    Thursby, J., and M.C. Thursby, 2004, “Patterns of Research and Licens-
ing Activity of Science and Engineering Faculty,” in Ehrenberg, R. and P.
Stephan, eds., Science and the University, Madison: University of Wisconsin
Press (forthcoming).


10       Appendix: Proof of Theorem 1.
Existence of at least one Nash equilibrium follows immediately from the fact
that the payoﬀs are continuous and defined on compact strategy spaces. As
noted in the text, for each j = F, S, the continuity and strict concavity of
PI guarantees that it is maximized at some ej ∈ [0, ê], and so there exists an
                                             ∂PI (0,Êj )                ∂ 2p
inventor best-reply function bI (Ej ). If       ∂ej         ≤ 0, then   ∂e∂E    > 0 implies
∂PI (0,Ej )
   ∂ej        < 0 for all Ej ∈ [0, Êj ), so PI has its maximum at ej = 0, and
bI (Ej ) = 0 for all Ej ∈ [0, Êj ]. Similarly, the continuity and strict concavity


                                        24
of each Pj guarantees that it is maximized at some Ej ∈ [0, Êj ], and so there
                                                ∂Pj (ê,0)            ∂2p
exists a firm j best-reply function bj (ej ). If ∂e  j
                                                           ≤ 0, then ∂e∂E  > 0
         ∂P (e ,0)
            j j
implies ∂E    j
                  < 0 for all ej ∈ [0, ê), so Pj has its maximum at Ej = 0,
and bj (ej ) = 0 for all ej ∈ [0, ê]. This proves statement (i). Conversely, if
∂Pj (0,0)            ∂2p                 ∂Pj (ej ,0)
  ∂Ej     > 0, then ∂e∂E   > 0 implies ∂E      j
                                                     > 0, and so bj (ej ) > 0, for all
                                          2                  ∂P (0,E )
ej > 0; and if ∂P∂e   I (0,0)
                         j
                                         ∂ p
                              > 0, then ∂e∂E > 0 implies I∂ej j > 0, and so
bI (ej ) > 0, for all Ej > 0. This proves statement (ii). Statement (iii) then
follows from the definition of uniqueness and locally stability. Q.E.D.




                                         25
                                                               Table 1. Descriptive Statistics


Variable                                                                          Obs.       Mean     Std. Dev. Min             Max
Start-up Companies Formed                                                                 951 3.203996 5.624048             0          64
Licenses and Options Executed                                                             951 25.60673 35.73951             0         313

Inventor Characteristics
NRC overall Quality Engineering Ranking weighted by department                            830    2.867632   0.817586      1.24 4.631456
NRC overall Quality Sciences Ranking weighted by department                              1080    2.974425   0.832695 0.717059 4.746132
NRC overall Quality Ranking weighted by department                                       1100    2.923386   0.798214 1.203704 4.697401
University is private (yes = 1)                                                          1100    0.355455   0.478869         0        1

TTO Characteristics
Licensing FTE's in Technology Transfer Offices                                            951    3.259474   5.026659         0       62
TTO Age - Program Year Technology Transfer Office Began                                   971    14.19773   12.27503         0       77
Invention Disclosures Received                                                            956    83.24163   100.1542         0      973
Log of Gross License Income Received                                                      950    13.88279   1.977126   6.60665 19.40562

Invention Characteristics
University has Medical School (yes = 1)                                                  1100 0.592727 0.49155              0        1
Industrial/Federal Research Expenditure                                                   951 0.176505 0.182519             0 1.610801

Financial/Market Conditions
Interest Rate Level                                                                      1100 2.073583 1.246248         0.0225 3.753333
Log of Venture Capital Expenditure per State                                             1100 18.87763 2.964445               0 24.4911
University is located in a High Venture Capital Expenditure State (yes = 1)              1100 0.273636 0.446027               0        1
Returns to Venture Capital                                                               1100     27.78 12.47522           11.2     48.6
Returns to the S & P 500 index                                                           1100     13.06 7.591099           -1.9    26.2
Table 2. Negative Binomial Regressions Predicting the Effect of Inventor Quality, TTO Experience and Financial
                   Market Conditions on Start-up Activity and Licensing to Established Firms

                                            Model 1      Model 2     Model 3     Model 4
Dependent Variable                          Start-ups    Licenses    Start-ups   Licenses

Inventor Characteristics
ENGQUAL                                     0.447        0.464
                                            (0.141)**    (0.130)**
SCIQUAL                                     0.063        0.083
                                            (0.155)      (0.136)
QUAL                                                                 0.456       0.471
                                                                     (0.091)**   (0.073)**
PRIVATE                                     -0.11        -0.182      -0.155      -0.11
                                            (0.138)      (0.117)     (0.124)     (0.106)
TTO Characteristics
TTOSIZE                                     0.003        -0.003      0.001       -0.004
                                            (0.008)      (0.004)     (0.008)     (0.004)
TTOAGE                                      0.009        0.014       0.009       0.012
                                            (0.004)*     (0.004)**   (0.004)*    (0.004)**
DIS                                         0.002        0.002       0.002       0.002
                                            (0.001)**    (0.000)**   (0.001)**   (0.000)**
LNGROSS                                     0.058        0.122       0.076       0.136
                                            (0.035)      (0.022)**   (0.030)*    (0.018)**
Invention Characteristics
MED                                         0.171        0.135       -0.12       -0.045
                                            (0.121)      (0.11)      (0.107)     (0.097)
INDFED                                      0.731        0.485       0.463       0.37
                                            (0.257)**    (0.163)**   (0.247)     (0.150)*
Financial/Market Conditions
INTEREST                                    -0.472                  -0.488
                                            (0.034)**               (0.031)**
LNVCSTAT                                    0.028                   0.043
                                            (0.02)                  (0.020)*
HIGHVCST                                    0.13                    -0.06
                                            (0.152)                 (0.134)
RLAVEVC                                     -0.011                  -0.016
                                            (0.003)**               (0.003)**
RLAVESP                                     0.061                   0.064
                                            (0.006)**               (0.006)**
Constant                                    -1.927       -1.918     -2.076    -1.722
                                            (0.544)**    (0.359)**  (0.501)** (0.291)**
Observations                                655          659        845       847
Log likelihood                              -1344.2918   -2355.8865 -1675.3458-2942.4997
Standard errors in parentheses
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%
  Table 3. Poisson Regressions Predicting the Effect of Inventor Quality, TTO Experience and Financial Market
                      Conditions on Start-up Activity and Licensing to Established Firms

                   Model 1          Model 2        Model 3     Model 4
Dependent Variable Start-ups        Licenses       Start-ups   Licenses

Inventor Characteristics
ENGQUAL               0.527         0.341
                      (0.151)**     (0.196)
SCIQUAL               0.066         0.566
                      (0.161)       (0.208)**
QUAL                                               0.573       0.802
                                                   (0.098)**   (0.087)**
PRIVATE               -0.091        -0.452         -0.048      -0.413
                      (0.138)       (0.158)**      (0.134)     (0.132)**
TTO Characteristics
TTOSIZE                 0.001          -0.009      0.005       -0.01
                        (0.007)        (0.002)**   (0.007)     (0.002)**
TTOAGE                  0.008          0.062       0.01        0.054
                        (0.005)        (0.004)**   (0.005)*    (0.003)**
DIS                     0.002          0.001       0.002       0.001
                        (0.000)**      (0.000)**   (0.000)**   (0.000)**
LNGROSS                 0.046          0.052       0.072       0.088
                        (0.035)        (0.013)**   (0.027)**   (0.011)**
Invention Characteristics
MED                     0.192          0.091       -0.107      -0.04
                        (0.124)        (0.161)     (0.117)     (0.128)
INDFED                  0.823          0.583       0.526       0.466
                        (0.197)**      (0.100)**   (0.191)**   (0.093)**
Financial/Market Conditions
INTEREST                -0.53                      -0.538
                        (0.023)**                  (0.021)**
LNVCSTAT                0.031                      0.04
                        (0.015)*                   (0.014)**
HIGHVCST                0.042                      -0.075
                        (0.153)                    (0.146)
RLAVEVC                 -0.014                     -0.017
                        (0.003)**                  (0.003)**
RLAVESP                 0.069                      0.068
                        (0.004)**                  (0.004)**
Constant                -1.995         -1.417      -2.25       -1.45
                        (0.462)**      (0.371)**   (0.429)**   (0.284)**
Observations            655            659         845         847
Log likelihood          -1431.0948 -2821.9427      -1809.517   -3470.515
Standard errors in parentheses
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%
    Table 4 OLS Regressions Predicting the Effect of Inventor Quality, TTO Experience and Financial Market
                     Conditions on Start-up Activity and Licensing to Established Firms

                   Model 1          Model 2      Model 3     Model 4
Dependent Variable Start-ups        Licenses     Start-ups   Licenses

Inventor Characteristics
ENGQUAL               1.018         8.673
                      (0.477)*      (2.511)**
SCIQUAL               0.088         1.116
                      (0.497)       (2.614)
QUAL                                             0.819       6.038
                                                 (0.292)**   (1.377)**
PRIVATE                0.111        -2.831       0.126       -3.46
                       (0.464)      (2.245)      (0.392)     (1.783)
TTO Characteristics
TTOSIZE                 -0.054       2.454       0.042       2.031
                        (0.058)      (0.307)**   (0.014)**   (0.261)**
TTOAGE                  0.044        0.767       -0.036      0.718
                        (0.014)** (0.076)**      (0.054)     (0.067)**
DIS                     0.025        0.08        0.024       0.114
                        (0.003)** (0.018)**      (0.003)**   (0.015)**
LNGROSS                 -0.03        1.474       0.042       1.629
                        (0.136)      (0.708)*    (0.108)     (0.518)**
Invention Characteristics
MED                     -0.314       0.93        -0.813      -2.782
                        (0.405)      (2.096)     (0.338)*    (1.637)
INDFED                  2.191        3.899       1.353       0.171
                        (1.064)*     (5.587)     (0.945)     (4.606)
Financial/Market Conditions
INTEREST                -2.465                   -2.351
                        (0.218)**                (0.195)**
LNVCSTAT                0.011                    0.049
                        (0.074)                  (0.062)
HIGHVCST                0.26                     0.262
                        (0.539)                  (0.442)
RLAVEVC                 -0.085                   -0.087
                        (0.018)**                (0.016)**
RLAVESP                 0.343                    0.314
                        (0.039)**                (0.035)**
Constant                0.478        -48.271     0.252       -38.293
                        (1.898)      (8.862)**   (1.59)      (6.674)**
Observations            655          659         845         847
R-squared               0.46         0.67        0.4191      0.67
Standard errors in parentheses
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%
 Table 5. Random Effects Regressions Predicting the Effect of Inventor Quality, TTO Experience and Financial
                 Market Conditions on Start-up Activity and Licensing to Established Firms

                         Model 1      Model 2        Model 3     Model 4
Dependent Variable       Start-ups    Licenses       Start-ups   Licenses
Inventor Characteristics
ENGQUAL                  1.149        5.095
                         (0.646)      (5.088)
SCIQUAL                  0.06         2.67
                         (0.681)      (5.358)
QUAL                                                 0.859       5.976
                                                     (0.348)*    (2.429)*
PRIVATE                   0.215       -4.287         0.174       -4.374
                          (0.637)     (4.46)         (0.48)      (3.568)
TTO Characteristics
TTOSIZE                    0.015        0.334        0.013       0.224
                           (0.068)      (0.34)       (0.06)      (0.29)
TTOAGE                     0.047        0.763        0.044       0.731
                           (0.020)*     (0.144)**    (0.017)**   (0.124)**
DIS                        0.021        0.183        0.022       0.189
                           (0.004)** (0.020)**       (0.003)**   (0.017)**
LNGROSS                    -0.049       1.016        0.028       1.011
                           (0.166)      (0.855)      (0.123)     (0.624)
Invention Characteristics
MED                        -0.262       1.553        -0.802      -0.726
                           (0.552)      (4.214)      (0.411)     (3.276)
INDFED                     1.913        8.571        1.14        6.721
                           (1.171)      (5.387)      (1.018)     (4.496)
Financial/Market Conditions
INTEREST                   -2.472                    -2.36
                           (0.205)**                 (0.187)**
LNVCSTAT                   0.031                     0.053
                           (0.078)                   (0.066)
HIGHVCST                   0.087                     0.127
                           (0.715)                   (0.531)
RLAVEVC                    -0.086                    -0.088
                           (0.017)**                 (0.015)**
RLAVESP                    0.348                     0.318
                           (0.037)**                 (0.034)**
Constant                   0.183        -38.883      0.316       -31.691
                           (2.268)      (12.558)**   (1.769)     (9.327)**
sigma_u                    1.506104 15.64351         1.1167678   14.251912
sigma_e                    4.036787 16.05907         4.0828955   14.671985
rho                        0.122191 0.486894         0.0696074   0.4854797
R-sq: within               0.2218       0.2468       0.1969      0.247
R-sq: between              0.723        0.7354       0.7052      0.7411
R-sq: overall              0.4536       0.641        0.4184      0.6467
Observations               655          659          845         847
Standard errors in parentheses
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%
Table 6. Fixed Effects Regressions Predicting the Effect of TTO Experience and Financial Market Conditions on
                             Start-up Activity and Licensing to Established Firms

                        Model 1.    Model 2
Dependent Variable      Start-ups   Licenses

TTO Characteristics
TTOSIZE                 0.239       -0.638
                        (0.095)*    (0.335)
TTOAGE                  -0.124      1.303
                        (0.123)     (0.251)**
DIS                     0.015       0.191
                        (0.005)**   (0.019)**
LNGROSS                 0.06        0.264
                        (0.215)     (0.215)
Invention Characteristics

INDFED                 0.556        8.888
                       (1.329)      (4.736)
Financial/Market Conditions
INTEREST               -2.325
                       (0.189)**
LNVCSTAT               0.06
                       (0.081)
RLAVEVC                -0.06
                       (0.029)*
RLAVESP                0.297
                       (0.042)**
LNCAINE

Constant                  3.685        -11.564
                          (3.014)      (9.41)
sigma_u                   3.194713 19.47604
sigma_e                   4.089992 14.69187
rho                       0.37893 0.637327
R-sq: within              0.2058       0.253
Observations              845          847
Standard errors in parentheses
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%
      Table 7. Seemingly Unrelated Regressions Predicting the Effect of Inventor Quality, TTO Experience and
                Financial Market Conditions on Start-up Activity and Licensing to Established Firms

                                        Model 1                   Model 2                  Model 3
Dependent Variable                      Start-ups     Licenses    Start-ups   Licenses     Start-ups   Licenses
Inventor Characteristics
ENGQUAL                                 1.018         9.507       0.985                                8.627
                                        (0.472)*      (2.506)**   (0.471)*                             (2.498)**
SCIQUAL                                 0.088         1.036       0.107                                0.898
                                        (0.491)       (2.609)     (0.491)                              (2.605)
QUAL                                                                          9.145        0.987
                                                                              (1.818)**    (0.340)**
PRIVATE                                 0.111         -1.157      0.113       -0.964       0.112       -2.629
                                        (0.458)       (2.436)     (0.458)     (2.421)      (0.453)     (2.234)
TTO Characteristics
TTOSIZE                                 -0.054        2.542       -0.055      2.441        -0.064      2.454
                                        (0.058)       (0.306)**   (0.058)     (0.307)**    (0.057)     (0.304)**
TTOAGE                                  0.044         0.762       0.044       0.738        0.042       0.771
                                        (0.014)**     (0.076)**   (0.014)**   (0.076)**    (0.014)**   (0.075)**
DIS                                     0.025         0.081       0.025       0.093        0.026       0.08
                                        (0.003)**     (0.018)**   (0.003)**   (0.018)**    (0.003)**   (0.018)**
LNGROSS                                 -0.03         1.174       -0.028      1.439        -0.004      1.458
                                        (0.135)       (0.717)     (0.135)     (0.702)*     (0.131)     (0.707)*
Invention Characteristics
MED                                     -0.314        1.085       -0.323      -2.384       -0.685      0.755
                                        (0.4)         (2.127)     (0.4)       (2.018)      (0.378)     (2.085)
INDFED                                  2.191         3.247       2.182       0.268        1.901       3.836
                                        (1.052)*      (5.588)     (1.052)*    (5.526)      (1.035)     (5.539)
Financial/Market Conditions
INTEREST                                -2.465        1.296       -2.466      1.222        -2.48
                                        (0.216)**     (1.146)     (0.216)**   (1.154)      (0.216)**
LNVCSTAT                                0.011         -0.406      0.011       -0.241       0.03
                                        (0.073)       (0.39)      (0.073)     (0.39)       (0.073)
HIGHVCST                                0.26          -2.922      0.26        -3.617       0.199
                                        (0.532)       (2.828)     (0.532)     (2.857)      (0.535)
RLAVEVC                                 -0.085        0.149       -0.085      0.126        -0.088
                                        (0.017)**     (0.093)     (0.017)**   (0.093)      (0.017)**
RLAVESP                                 0.343         0.04                    0.044        0.343
                                        (0.039)**     (0.206)     (0.039)**   (0.207)      (0.039)**
Constant                                0.478         -46.355                 -46.912      0.387       -47.382
                                        (1.876)       (9.966)**   (1.876)     (10.087)**   (1.888)     (8.861)**
Observations                            655           655         655         655          655         655
R-squared                               0.4551        0.6742      0.4551      0.6693

Standard errors in parentheses
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%

Breusch-Pagan test of
independence: chi2(1) =                     0.682, Pr = 0.4091    0.594, Pr = 0.4411        0.648, Pr = 0.4209
