NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE EMPIRICAL RISK-RETURN RELATION:
A FACTOR ANALYSIS APPROACH
Syndey C. Ludvigson
Serena Ng
Working Paper 11477
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11477
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2005

Ludvigson: Department of Economics, New York University, 269 Mercer Street, 7th Floor, New York, NY
10003; Email: sydney.ludvigson@nyu.edu; Tel: (212) 998-8927; Fax: (212) 995-4186;
http://www.econ.nyu.edu/user/ludvigsons. Ng: Department of Economics, University of Michigan, 317
Lorch Hall, Ann Arbor, MI 48109; Email: serena.ng@umich.edu; Tel: (734) 763-3496; Fax: (734) 764-2769.
Ludvigson acknowledges financial support from the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation and the CV Starr Center at
NYU. Ng acknowledges financial support from the National Science Foundation (SES-0345237). We thank
Kenneth French for providing the portfolio data and Massimiliano Croce for excellent research assistance.
Any erros or omissions are the responsibility of the authors. The views expressed herein are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by Syndey C. Ludvigson and Serena Ng. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

The Empirical Risk-Return Relation: A Factor Analysis Approach
Sydney C. Ludvigson and Serena Ng
NBER Working Paper No. 11477
July 2005
JEL No. G12, G10
ABSTRACT
A key criticism of the existing empirical literature on the risk-return relation relates to the relatively
small amount of conditioning information used to model the conditional mean and conditional
volatility ox excess stock market returns. To the extent that financial market participants have
information not reflected in the chosen conditioning variables, measures of conditional mean and
conditional volatility - and ultimately the risk-return relation itself - will be misspecified and
possibly highly misleading. We consider one remedy to these problems using the methodology of
dynamic factor analysis for large datasets, whereby a large amount of economic information can b
summarized by a few estimated factors. We find that three new factors, a “volatility”, “risk
premium”, and “real” factor, contain important information about one-quarter ahead excess returns
and volatility that is not contained on commonly used predictor variables. Moreover, the factoraugmented specifications we examine predict and unusual 16-20 percent of the one-quarter ahead
variation in excess stock market returns, and exhibit remarkably stable and strongly statistically
significant out-of-sample forecasting power. Finally, in contrast to several pre-existing studies that
rely on a small number of conditioning variables, we find a positive conditional correlation between
risk and return that is strongly statistically significant, whereas the unconditional correlation is
weakly negative and statistically insignificant.
Sydney C. Ludvigson
Department of Economics
New York University
269 Mercer Street, 7th Floor
New York, NY 10003
and NBER
sydney.ludvigson@nyu.edu

Serena Ng
Department of Economics
University of Michigan
371 Lorch Hall
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
serena.ng@umich.edu

1

Introduction

Financial economists have long been interested in the empirical relation between the conditional mean and conditional volatility of excess stock market returns, often referred to as the
risk-return relation. The risk-return relation is an important ingredient in optimal portfolio
choice, and is central to the development of theoretical models aimed at explaining observed
patterns of stock market predictability and volatility. Among those theoretical models that
have become standard-bearers in …nance, a positive risk-return relation is the benchmark
prediction, so that times of predictably higher risk coincide with times of predictably higher
excess returns, and vice versa. Unfortunately, the body of empirical evidence on the riskreturn relation is mixed and inconclusive. Some evidence supports the theoretical prediction
of a positive risk-return tradeo¤, but other evidence suggests a strong negative relation. Yet
a third strand of the literature …nds that the relation is unstable and varies substantially
through time. (We summarize the existing evidence below.)
Several criticisms of the existing empirical literature relate to the relatively small amount
of conditioning information used to model the conditional mean and conditional volatility of
excess stock market returns. First, the conditional expectations underlying the conditional
mean and conditional volatility are typically measured as projections onto predetermined
conditioning variables; but, as Harvey (2001) points out, the decision of which predetermined conditioning variables to use in the econometric analysis can in‡uence the estimated
risk-return relation. In practice, researchers are forced to choose among a few conditioning
variables because conventional statistical analyses are quickly overwhelmed by degrees-offreedom problems as the number rises. Such practical constraints introduce an element
of arbitrariness into the econometric modeling of expectations and may lead to omittedinformation estimation bias, since a small number of conditioning variables is unlikely to
span the information sets of …nancial market participants. If investors have information
not re‡ected in the chosen conditioning variables used to model market expectations, measures of conditional mean and conditional volatility will be misspeci…ed and possibly highly
misleading.1
A second and related criticism of the existing empirical literature is that the estimated
relation between the conditional mean and conditional volatility of excess returns often depends on the parametric model of volatility, e.g., GARCH, EGARCH, stochastic volatility, or
kernel density estimation (Harvey (2001)). Such procedures may impose potentially restrictive parametric assumptions and they often su¤er from a curse-of-dimensionality problem
that constrains their ability to entertain large datasets of conditioning information.
1

This point was made forcibly by Hansen and Richard (1987) in the context of estimating and testing
dynamic asset pricing models.

1

Finally, the reliance on a small number of conditioning variables exposes existing analyses
to problems of temporal instability in the underlying forecasting relations being modeled.
For example, it is commonplace to model market expectations of future stock returns using
the …tted values from a forecasting regression of returns on to a measure of the marketwide dividend-price ratio. A di¢ culty with this approach is that the predictive power of
the dividend-price ratio for excess stock market returns is unstable and exhibits statistical
evidence of a structural break in the mid-1990s (Lettau, Ludvigson, and Wachter (2004)).
In this paper we consider one remedy to these problems using the methodology of dynamic
factor analysis for large datasets. Recent research on dynamic factor models …nds that the
information in a large number of economic time series can be e¤ectively summarized by a
relatively small number of estimated factors, a¤ording the opportunity to exploit a much
richer information base than what has been possible in prior empirical study of the risk-return
relation. In this methodology, “a large number”can mean hundreds or, perhaps, even more
than one thousand economic time series. By summarizing the information from a large
number of series in a few estimated factors, we eliminate the arbitrary reliance on a small
number of exogenous predictors to estimate the conditional mean and conditional volatility
of stock returns, and make feasible the use of a vast set of economic variables that are more
likely to span the unobservable information sets of …nancial market participants. In the words
of Stock and Watson (2004), dynamic factor analysis permits us to turn dimensionality from
a curse into a blessing.
Dynamic factor analysis allows us to escape the limitations of existing empirical analyses
discussed above, on several fronts. First, if a large amount of information can be e¤ectively
summarized by a relatively few common factors, then a natural remedy to the omitted information problem is to augment …tted conditional moments with estimated factors. We
do so here by including estimated factors in the construction of …tted mean and volatility.
Second, by combining dynamic factor analysis with a nonparametric approach to modeling
volatility— an approach referred to hereafter as realized volatility— we avoid relying on potentially restrictive parametric structures while at the same time insuring that our measure
of conditional volatility e¤ectively summarizes a large amount of information that may be
important for predicting the variance of the stock market. Third, there is some evidence
(discussed below) that dynamic factor analysis provides robustness against the temporal
instability that often plagues low-dimensional forecasting regressions. Indeed, our application appears supportive of this evidence, since the factor-augmented predictive relations we
employ are remarkably stable over time, despite the observed temporal instability of many
commonly used predictor variables over the sample period we study.
An important question of our study is the degree to which estimated common factors add
information about the conditional mean and conditional volatility of stock returns that is not
2

already contained in commonly used predictor variables. If, on the one hand, we …nd that the
factors provide new information, then we have evidence that previous estimates of conditional
moments are misspeci…ed and the estimated risk-return relation potentially contaminated.
On the other hand, if we …nd that the information provided by the factors is largely contained
in commonly used predictor variables, then we have evidence that previous estimates are
likely to be well speci…ed. Either way, our study contributes to the empirical literature on
the risk-return relation by evaluating both the potential role of omitted information in the
estimated risk-return relation, as well as the robustness of previous results to conditioning
on richer information sets.
We estimate common factors from two quarterly post-war datasets of economic activity
using the method of principal components. The …rst dataset is comprised of 209 primarily
macroeconomic indicators; the second dataset is comprised of 172 …nancial indictors. As a
result of investigating these data, we …nd a number of results particularly interesting.
First, in modeling the conditional mean of excess stock market returns, we introduce two
new …nancial factors that are particularly important for forecasting quarterly excess returns
on the aggregate stock market. In doing so, we contribute to the continuing debate over the
predictability of stock market returns.2 The …rst …nancial factor is the square of the …rst
common factor of the dataset comprised of …nancial indicators. This factor explains almost
80 percent of the contemporaneous variation in squared stock market returns, so we label it
a “volatility factor.”The second …nancial factor is the third common factor from the dataset
comprised of …nancial indicators and is highly correlated with a linear combination of three
state variables widely used in the empirical asset pricing literature to explain cross-sectional
variation in risk premia. These state variables are the Fama-French factors SM Bt ; HM Lt ,
and the market return (Fama and French (1993)). Thus, our second factor connects the
time series with the cross-section of expected excess stock market returns. For this reason,
we call this second factor a “risk premium factor.” When the volatility and risk premium
factors are included with the consumption-wealth variable cayt ; found elsewhere to predict
quarterly stock returns (Lettau and Ludvigson (2001a)), the statistical model predicts an
unusually high 16 percent of the variation in one-quarter ahead excess returns. Moreover,
the two factors on their own exhibit remarkably stable, strongly statistically signi…cant outof-sample forecasting power for quarterly excess returns that is found to be strongest in data
after 1995, a period in which the predictive power of many traditional forecasting variables
was exceptionally poor.
Second, in modeling the conditional volatility of excess stock market returns, we …nd
2

See for example, Campbell and Yogo (2002), Campbell and Thompson (2004), Goyal and Welch (2004),
Lewellen (2004).

3

one macroeconomic factor that, when combined with other predictor variables, is especially
useful for forecasting stock market volatility. This factor is the …rst common factor from
the macroeconomic dataset, known to be a “real factor,” since it is highly correlated with
measures of real output and employment but not highly correlated with prices (Stock and
Watson (2002b)).
Third, we …nd that distinguishing between the conditional correlation (conditional on
lagged mean and lagged volatility) and unconditional correlation between the conditional
mean stock return and its conditional volatility is crucial for understanding the empirical
risk-return relation. This …nding is consistent with that of Brandt and Kang (2004) who
argue that the distinction may explain the disagreement in the literature about the contemporaneous correlation between risk and return. In contrast to some previous studies,
however, (e.g., Brandt and Kang (2004), Lettau and Ludvigson (2003)) we …nd a positive
conditional correlation that is strongly statistically signi…cant, whereas the unconditional
correlation is weakly negative and statistically insigni…cant. We show here that the …ndings
in Lettau and Ludvigson (2003) can be attributed to the omission of the volatility and risk
premium factors, which contain important information about one-quarter ahead returns.
Finally, our results imply that the conditional Sharpe ratio has an unmistakable countercyclical pattern, increasing sharply in recessions and declining at the onset of expansions.
These …ndings are consistent with those in Brandt and Kang (2004) and Lettau and Ludvigson (2003).
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In the next section we brie‡y review related
literature. Section 3 lays out the econometric framework, discusses the use of principal
components analysis to estimate common factors, and explains how factors are chosen for
modeling the conditional mean and conditional volatility of stock returns. Section 4 explains
the empirical implementation and describes the data. We move on in Section 5 to present
our empirical …ndings, including the results of one quarter ahead predictive relations, and
our results for the estimated risk-return relation. Two additional analyses are performed
as robustness checks: out-of-sample investigations, and small-sample inference. Section 6
concludes.

2

Related Literature

Our empirical investigation is related to several disparate strands of economic literature.
On the methodology side, our use of dynamic factor analysis is an application of statistical
procedures developed elsewhere for the case where both the number of economic time series
used to construct common factors, N , and the number of time periods, T , are large and

4

converge to in…nity.3 The presumption of the dynamic factor model is that the covariation
among economic time series is captured by a few unobserved common factors. Stock and
Watson (2002b) show that consistent estimates of the space spanned by the common factors
may be constructed by principal components analysis. Bai and Ng (2005) show that the
p
least squares estimates from factor-augmented forecasting regressions are T consistent and
asymptotically normal, and that pre-estimation of the factors does not a¤ect the consistency
of the second-stage parameter estimates or their standard errors. Stock and Watson (2002b)
and Stock and Watson (2004) …nd that predictions of real economic activity and in‡ation are
greatly improved relative to low-dimensional forecasting regressions when the forecasts are
based on the estimated factors of large datasets. An added bene…t of this approach, mentioned above, is that the use of common factors can provide robustness against the structural
instability that plagues low-dimensional forecasting regressions. Stock and Watson (2002a)
provide both theoretical arguments and empirical evidence that the principal components
factor estimates are consistent even in the face of temporal instability in the individual time
series used to construct the factors. The reason is that such instabilities may “average out”
in the construction of common factors if the instability is su¢ ciently dissimilar from one
series to the next.
Our use of realized volatility to model return volatility is motivated by recent …ndings in
the volatility modeling literature. Andersen, Bollerslev, and Diebold (2002) and Andersen,
Bollerslev, Diebold, and Labys (2003) argue that nonparametric volatility measures such
as realized volatility bene…t from being free of tightly parametric functional form assumptions and provide a consistent estimate of ex-post return variability. Realized volatility, in
turn, permits the use of traditional time-series methods for modeling and forecasting, making possible the employment of estimated common factors from large datasets to measure
conditional, or expected, volatility. Earlier studies of realized stock market volatility include
French, Schwert, and Stambaugh (1987) and Schwert (1989).
Finally, our work is connected to a large literature examining the empirical relation
between the conditional mean and conditional volatility of excess stock market returns.
Bollerslev, Engle, and Wooldridge (1988), Harvey (1989), Campbell and Hentschel (1992)
and Ghysels, Santa-Clara, and Valkanov (2005) …nd a positive risk-return relation, while
Campbell (1987), Breen, Glosten, and Jagannathan (1989), Pagan and Hong (1991), Glosten,
Jagannathan, and Runkle (1993), Whitelaw (1994), Lettau and Ludvigson (2003) and Brandt
and Kang (2004) …nd a negative relation. French, Schwert, and Stambaugh (1987) …nd a
negative relation between returns and the unpredictable component of volatility, a result they
3

Dynamic factor analysis with large N is preceded by a literature studying classical factor analysis for
the case where N is relatively small and …xed. See for example, Sargent and Sims (1977); Sargent (1989),
and Stock and Watson (1989, 1991).

5

interpret as indirect evidence that ex ante volatility is positively related to ex ante excess
returns. Campbell (1987), Harvey (1989) and Kandel and Stambaugh (1990) argue that the
relation between the conditional mean and conditional volatility varies over time. Yet, most
of these studies use a small number of predetermined conditioning variables to form estimates
of the conditional mean and the conditional volatility, potentially subjecting the …ndings to
the omitted information problems emphasized by Hansen and Richard (1987) and Harvey
(2001). One study that does not rely on predetermined conditioning variables is Brandt
and Kang (2004) who model the conditional mean and conditional volatility as latent state
variables identi…ed only from the history of return data. An advantage of this approach is
that it eliminates the reliance on a few arbitrary conditioning variables in forming estimates of
conditional moments. A corresponding disadvantage is that potentially useful information
is discarded. Perhaps more important, even the latent state variable methodology is not
immune to the general criticism of omitted information, since the latent variables must
in practice be modeled as following low-order, linear time series representations of known
probability distribution. For example, Brandt and Kang assume the conditional mean and
conditional volatility evolve according to …rst-order Gaussian vector autoregressive processes.
If the true representation is of higher order, nonlinear, or non-Gaussian, we again face an
omitted information problem.

3

Econometric Framework

In this section we describe our econometric framework, which involves estimating common
factors from large datasets of macroeconomic and …nancial information. Such estimation is
carried out using principal component analysis, a procedure that has been described and
implemented elsewhere for forecasting measures of macroeconomic activity and in‡ation
(e.g., Stock and Watson (2002b), Stock and Watson (2002a), Stock and Watson (2004)). We
refer the reader to those papers for a detailed description of this procedure; here we only
outline how the implementation relates to our application.
The goal of our procedure is to estimate the conditional mean and conditional volatility
of excess stock market returns and, ultimately, the relation between these two variables.
For t = 1; : : : T , let mt+1 denote continuously compounded excess returns in period t + 1
and let V OLt+1 be an estimate of their volatility. The objective is to estimate Et mt+1 ,
the conditional mean of mt+1 , and conditional volatility Et V OLt+1 , using information up to
time t. We con…ne ourselves to estimation of Et mt+1 and Et V OLt+1 using linear parametric
models.
First consider estimation of the conditional mean Et mt+1 . A standard approach is to

6

select a set of K predetermined conditioning variables at time t, given by the K

1 vector

Zt , and then estimate
mt+1 =

0

Zt +

(1)

t+1

by least squares. The estimated conditional mean is then the …tted value from this regression,
0
m
b t+1jt = ^ Zt . The issue at hand is whether we can go beyond (1) to make use of the

substantially more information that is available to market participants. That is, suppose we
observe a T

N panel of data with elements xit ; i = 1; : : : N , t = 1; :::; T , where the cross-

sectional dimension, N , is large, and possibly larger than the number of time periods, T . How
to use this information is not immediately obvious because, unless we have a way of ordering
the importance of the N series in forming conditional expectations (as in an autoregression),
there are potentially 2N possible combinations to consider. Furthermore, letting xt denote
the N

1 vector of panel observations at time t, estimates from the regression
mt+1 =

0

xt +

0

Zt +

t+h

quickly run into degrees-of-freedom problems as the dimension of xt increases, and estimation
is not even feasible when N + K > T .
The approach we consider is to posit that xit has a factor structure taking the form
0
i ft

xit =
where ft is a r

(2)

+ eit ;

1 vector of latent common factors,

i

is a corresponding r

1 vector of

latent factor loadings, and eit is a vector of idiosyncratic errors.4 The crucial point here is
that r << N , so that substantial dimension reduction can be achieved by considering the
regression
mt+1 =
where Ft

0

Ft +

0

Zt +

t+1 ;

(3)

ft . Equation (1) is nested within the factor-augmented regression, making (3)

a convenient framework to assess the importance of xit via Ft , even in the presence of Zt .
But the distinction between Ft and ft is important, because factors that are pervasive for
the panel of data xit need not be important for predicting mt+1 .
As common factors are not observed, we replace ft by fbt , estimates that, when N; T ! 1,

span the same space as ft . (Since ft and

i

cannot be separately identi…ed, the factors are

4

We consider an approximate dynamic factor structure, in which the idiosyncratic errors eit are permitted
to have a limited amount of cross-sectional correlation. The speci…cation limits the contribution of the
idiosyncratic covariances to the total variance of x as N gets large:
N

1

N X
N
X
i=1 j=1

jE (eit ejt )j

7

M:

only identi…able up to an r r matrix.) In practice, ft are estimated by principal components
0

be the N r matrix de…ned as
( 01 ; :::; 0N ) : Intuitively,
the estimated time t factors fbt are linear combinations of each element of the N 1 vector

analysis (PCA).5 Let the

xt = (x1t ; :::; xN t )0 , where the linear combination is chosen optimally to minimize the sum of
squared residuals xt

ft .

To determine the composition of Fbt , we form di¤erent subsets of fbt , and/or functions of
2
fbt (such as fb1t
). For each candidate set of factors, Fbt , we regress mt+1 on Fbt and Zt and

evaluate the corresponding BIC and R2 . Following Stock and Watson (2002b), minimizing
the BIC yields the preferred set of factors Fbt . The …nal model for returns is based on Zt plus

this optimal Fbt . That is,

mt+1 =

0

Fbt +

0

Zt +

t+1 :

(4)

To conserve notation, we use Fbt to denote the factors used in the …nal model, but it should
be understood that the components of Fbt are selected using formal statistical procedures. In
what follows, we denote the …tted conditional mean
t

0

m
b t+1jt = b 0 Fbt + b Zt :

p
Under the assumption that N; T ! 1 with T =N ! 0, Bai and Ng (2005) showed that
p
(i) (^ ; ^ ) obtained from least squares estimation of (4) are T consistent and asymptotically
normal, and the asymptotic variance is such that inference can proceed as though ft is
p p
observed, (ii) the estimated conditional mean, t = Fbt0 ^ + Zt0 ^ is min[ N ; T ] consistent
and asymptotically normal, and (iii) the h period forecast error mt+h

mt+hjt from (4) is

dominated in large samples by the variance of the error term, just as if ft is observed. The
importance of a large N must be stressed, however, as without it, the factor space cannot
be consistently estimated however large T becomes.
Given a measure, V OLt , of the volatility of excess returns at time t, estimation of conditional volatility is carried out in the same way as estimation of the conditional mean, and the
same asymptotic results for conducting inference apply. That is, we estimate a …nal model
for volatility based on based on Zt plus an optimally chosen (by the BIC criterion) set of
factors Fbt ,
V OLt+1 = a0 Fbt + b0 Zt + ut+1 ;

(5)

p
To be precise, the T r matrix fb is T times the r eigenvectors corresponding to the r largest eigenvalues
0
of the T T matrix xx0 =(T N ) in decreasing order. Let be the N r matrix of factor loadings 01 ; :::; 0N :
and f are not separately identi…able, so the normalization f 0 f =T = Ir is imposed, where Ir is the r0
dimensional identity matrix. With this normalization, we can additionally obtain b = x0 fb=T , and b it = bi fbt
denotes the estimated common component in series i at time t. The number of common factors, r is
determined by the panel information criteria developed in Bai and Ng (2002).
5

8

where it should be noted that the variables in Fbt and Zt may di¤er from those in (4). In
what follows, we denote the …tted conditional volatility
t

V[
OLt+1jt = b
a0 Fbt + bb0 Zt :

Our analysis is based on quarterly data. To obtain a measure of quarterly volatility for
excess returns, we follow French, Schwert, and Stambaugh (1987) and Schwert (1989) and
use the time-series variation of daily returns:
sX
V OLt =
(Rsk

Rs )2 ;

(6)

k2t

where V OLt is the sample volatility of the market return in quarter t, Rsk is the daily
return minus the implied daily yield on the three-month Treasury bill rate, Rs is the mean
of Rsk over the whole sample, and k represents a day. Following Andersen, Bollerslev, and
Diebold (2002) and Andersen, Bollerslev, Diebold, and Labys (2003) we call this measure
realized volatility. Andersen, Bollerslev, Diebold, and Labys (2003) demonstrate, using the
theory of quadratic variation, that realized volatility is an unbiased estimator of actual
volatility, and often performs better than parametric GARCH or stochastic volatility models
at capturing volatility. Most important for our application, realized volatility permits us
to use the estimated common factors from large datasets to model conditional volatility, by
constructing these estimates as …tted values from statistical models of the form (5).
The …nal aspect of our econometric framework is a reduced-form linear equation for the
conditional mean as a function of the contemporaneous conditional volatility and lags of the
two:
t

= +

1 t

+

2 t 1

+

t 1

(7)

+ "t :

This is a generalization of the more common volatility-in-mean model that relates the conditional mean to the conditional volatility of returns. Here, we follow Whitelaw (1994) and
Brandt and Kang (2004) and include lags of

t

and

t

in modeling the risk-return relation.

Both Whitelaw and Brandt and Kang …nd important lead-lag interactions between conditional mean and conditional volatility. Since Whitelaw uses a small number of exogenous
predictors to model these moments, an important question is whether his results are speci…c
to the exogenous predictors he used. The results of Brandt and Kang, which do not rely
on exogenous predictors, suggest that this may not be the case, since some of their …ndings
are similar. Our application provides further evidence on this question, by exploiting a vast
database of information in forming conditional moments. The coe¢ cient
volatility-in-mean e¤ect; the coe¢ cient
6

2

= +

1 t

+

measures the

measures the lag-volatility-in-mean e¤ect.6

We have also studied an analogous mean-in-volatility equation taking the form
t

1

2 t 1

9

+

t 1

+

t+1 :

Notice also that the procedure described above explicitly recognizes the possibility that
the conditional mean may not be proportional to conditional volatility. If they were proportional, as in the capital asset pricing model of Sharpe (1964) and Lintner (1965), then
any and all variation in the conditional mean excess return would be driven by variation in
the conditional variance of the excess return. In this case the risk-return relation could be
estimated by regressing ex post excess returns on a measure of ex ante volatility. But in more
general models that produce countercyclical variation in the conditional Sharpe ratio

t= t,

7

the conditional mean is not perfectly correlated with conditional volatility. This motivates
our search for possibly distinct state variables to forecast mean and volatility, as well as our
use of ex ante rather than ex post excess returns on the left-hand-side of (7). Below, we
estimate equations of the form (7) using either ordinary least squares (OLS) or two-stage
least squares (2SLS), where in the latter we instrument for
t

4

t

with variables known at time

1.

Empirical Implementation and Data

A detailed description of the data and our sources is given in the Appendix. We study
quarterly data spanning the period 1960:1 to 2002:4. The continuously compounded excess
return mt+1 is the log return on the Center for Research in Security Prices (CRSP) valueweighted price index, in excess of three month Treasury bill rate. Our measure of volatility,
V OLt , (6), uses the daily CRSP return minus the implied daily yield on the three-month
Treasury bill rate.
We estimate two sets of factors from two quarterly post-war datasets, one comprising of
209 series of macroeconomic indicators, and one comprising of 172 series …nancial indicators,
both spanning the period 1960:1 to 2002:4. Following Stock and Watson (2002b) and Stock
and Watson (2004), the macro series were selected to represent broad categories of macroeconomic time series: real output and income, employment and hours, real retail, manufacturing
and trade sales, consumer spending, housing starts, inventories and inventory sales ratios,
orders and un…lled orders, compensation and labor costs, capacity utilization measures, price
indexes, and foreign exchange measures. The …nancial database consist of a broad number
of indicators measuring the aggregate time-series behavior of the stock market as well as the
behavior of a broad cross-section of asset returns. The data include valuation ratios such as
The empirical results lead to the same conclusions about the risk-return relation as the volatility-in-mean
equation (7). We therefore omit those results to conserve space.
7
The conditional Sharpe ratio varies over time if changing risk or risk aversion provide good descriptions
of dynamic asset market behavior (e.g., Constantinides (1990), Constantinides and Du¢ e (1996), Campbell
and Cochrane (1999), Chang and Sundaresan (1999)).

10

the dividend-price ratio and earnings-price ratio, growth rates of aggregate dividends and
prices, default and term spreads, yields on corporate bonds of di¤erent ratings grades, yields
on Treasuries and yield spreads, a broad cross-section of industry equity returns, following Fama and French (1992), returns on 100 portfolios of equities sorted into 10 size and
10 book-market categories, and a group of variables we call “risk-factors,” since they have
been used in cross-sectional or time-series studies to uncover variation in the market riskpremium. These risk-factors include the three Fama and French (1993) risk factors, namely
the excess return on the market M KTt , the “small-minus-big” (SM Bt ) and “high-minuslow” (HM Lt ) portfolio returns,8 the momentum factor U M Dt ,9 the consumption-wealth
variable cayt of Lettau and Ludvigson (2001a),10 , the bond risk premia factor of Cochrane
and Piazzesi (2005),11 and the small stock value spread R15

R1112 . We also include the

small-stock value spread as a risk-factor in the …nancial dataset, the di¤erence between returns in the smallest size/highest book-market quintile and returns in the smallest size/lowest
book-market quintile. Campbell and Voulteenaho (2005) use the small stock value spread to
predict monthly stock market returns. The complete list of series is given in the Appendix,
where for the macro variables a coding system indicates how the data were transformed so
as to insure stationarity. All of the raw data in xt are standardized prior to estimation.
Since we decompose our time-series information into two panel datasets, we postulate
two factor structures of the form (2) above. For the macro dataset, we follow the notation
introduced above. That is, denote the estimated factors formed from the macro dataset
as fbit , i = 1; :::; rf , where rf is the number of common factors for the macro dataset and
fbt is a rf 1 vector of these latent common factors. The subset Fbt
fbt comprises those

estimated factors from the macro dataset that are used in modeling …tted mean and …tted
8

SM B is the di¤erence between the returns on small and big stock portfolios with the same weight-average
book-to-market equity. HM L is the di¤erence between returns on high and low book-equity/market-equity
portfolios with the same weighted-average size. Further details on these variables can be found in Fama and
French (1993).
9
This factor is available from Kenneth French’s Dartmouth web page. It is created from portfolios, formed
monthly, that are the intersections of 2 portfolios formed on size (market equity) and 3 portfolios formed
on prior (2-12 month) return. UMD (Up Minus Down) is the average return on the two high prior return
portfolios minus the average return on the two low prior return portfolios
10
The variable cayt is measured as a cointegrating residual between log consumption, log asset wealth, and
log labor income, all in real per capita terms. The presence of labor income accounts for the role of human
capital in aggregate wealth; see Lettau and Ludvigson (2001a) for details.
11
The bond risk factor is a linear combination of forward rates of di¤erent maturities, here measured as
the quarterly average of monthly data.
12
This variable is created from 25 size and book-market sorted portfolio returns taken from Kenneth
French’s Dartmouth web site, by subtracting the portfolio return in the smallest size and lowest book to
market category (R11), from the return in the smallest size and highest book-market category (R15).

11

volatility. To distinguish the factors estimated from the …nancial dataset from these macro
factors, we introduce a new notation for …nancial factors that is directly analogous to the
notation for macro factors. Denote the estimated factors formed from the …nancial dataset
gbit ; i = 1; :::; rg , where rg is the number of common factors for the …nancial dataset and gbt is
bt gbt comprises those estimated
a rg 1 vector of these latent common factors. The subset G
factors from the …nancial dataset that are used in modeling …tted mean and …tted volatility.

We then form estimates of the conditional mean and conditional volatility by computing the
…tted values from regressions of mean and volatility on both sets of factors:
mt+1 =
and

0 b
1 Ft

+

0 b
2 Gt

+

0

Zt +

(8)

t+1 ;

bt + b0 Zt + ut+1 ;
V OLt+1 = a01 Fbt + a02 G

(9)

where, as described above, minimizing the BIC over models with di¤erent combinations of
bt ; and Zt yields the preferred speci…cation. Notice that, in using the
the variables in Fbt ; G

BIC criterion to choose the best model, we include many of the predictors used elsewhere to
bt ,
forecast returns or volatility both in the set of …nancial data used to estimate the factors G

and in the set of possible independent predictors, Zt . This permits us to assess the extent

to which the factors contain information independent of that contained in commonly used
predictive variables.
In estimating the time-t common factors, we face a decision over how much of the timeseries dimension of the panel to use. We use the full sample of time-series information
to estimate the common factors at each date t, instead of using data only up to date t
(recursive estimates). This approach can be thought of as providing smoothed estimates of
the latent factors, and ultimately smoothed estimates of
13

(2004).

t

and

t,

as in Brandt and Kang

The advantage of this approach over recursive information is that estimates of ft

are available for the entire sample t = 1; :::T .14 More important, smoothed estimates of the
latent factors, ft , are the most e¢ cient means of summarizing the covariation in the data x
because the estimates use do not discard information in the sample. Exploiting this e¢ ciency
is appropriate for our application, since we are not interested in real-time forecasting per se,
13

In addition, the same smoothed estimate approach is taken in Bernanke, Boivin, and Eliasz (2005), who
use common factor analysis to summarize the information in the Federal Reserve’s time-t policy reaction
function.
14
Recursive estimates would signi…cantly restrict the sample over which we could obtain observations on t
and t . Recursive estimation requires estimation of (8) and (9) over some initial number, R, of observations
of our full data set, with …tted values formed over the remaining T R observations, using one-step-ahead
recursive regressions. Thus, observations on t and t would be available only over the last T R periods
of our sample rather than over the full sample.

12

but rather in an accurate estimate of the population risk-return relation. We do, however,
assess the robustness of our forecasting results to an out-of-sample investigation in which
the predictor factors are reestimated recursively each period using data only up to time t.
A description of this procedure is given below.
In estimating (8) and (9), a question also arises as to what variables should be included
in Zt . The empirical asset pricing literature has uncovered a number of variables that have
been shown, in one sample or another, to contain predictive power for excess stock returns.
Shiller (1981), Fama and French (1988), Campbell and Shiller (1989), Campbell (1991), and
Hodrick (1992) …nd that the ratios of price to dividends or earnings have predictive power
for U.S. excess returns, and Harvey (1991) …nds that similar …nancial ratios predict stock
returns in many di¤erent countries. Thus we often include the dividend-price ratio in Zt
(results using the earnings-price ratio are similar). Campbell (1991) and Hodrick (1992)
…nd that the relative T-bill rate (the 30-day T-bill rate minus its 12-month moving average)
predicts returns, thus we often include a quarterly version of it (the three-month Treasury
bill rate minus its 4 quarter moving average) in Zt . We denote this variable RRELt . Fama
and French (1988) study the forecasting power of the term spread (the 10-year Treasury
bond yield minus the one-year Treasury bond yield) and the default spread (the di¤erence
between the BAA and AAA corporate bond rates). Thus, we also consider speci…cations in
which these variables, denoted T RMt , and DEFt respectively, are part of Zt . Lettau and
Ludvigson (2001a) …nd that the consumption-wealth variable cayt is a strong predictor of
quarterly excess returns, and Lettau and Ludvigson (2001b) …nd that it is a predictor of
portfolio returns, therefore we include this variable in some speci…cations of Zt . Finally, in
addition to several of the variables already discussed, Whitelaw (1994) …nds that the one year
Treasury yield, Y IELDt , has predictive power for volatility at both monthly and quarterly
horizons.

5

Empirical Results

Table 1 presents summary statistics for our estimated factors fbt and gbt : The number of

factors, rf , and rg , are determined by the information criteria developed in Bai and Ng
(2002). The criteria indicate that the factor structures of both datasets are well described
by 8 common factors. The …rst factor explains the largest fraction of the total variation in
the panel of data x, where total variation is measured as the sum of the variances of the
individual xit . The second factor explains the largest fraction of variation in x, controlling
for the …rst factor, and so on, where recall that the estimated factors are mutually orthogonal
by construction. Table 1 reports the fraction of variation in the data explained by factors 1

13

to i.15 Table 1 shows that a small number of factors account for much of the variance in the
two panel datasets we explore. The …rst …ve common factors of the macro dataset account
for almost 60 percent of the variation in the macroeconomic series, and the …rst …ve factors
of the …nancial dataset account for almost 80 percent of the variability in the …nancial series.
To get an idea of the persistence of the estimated factors, Table 1 also displays the …rstorder autoregressive (AR(1)) coe¢ cient for each factor. None of the factors have a persistence
greater than 0.85, but there is considerable heterogeneity across estimated factors, with
coe¢ cients ranging from slightly negative (…rst factor of the …nancial dataset), to positive
in excess of 0.8 (the second factor of both datasets).
As mentioned, we formally choose among a range of possible speci…cations for the conditional mean and conditional volatility using these variables and the estimated common
factors (and possibly nonlinear functions of those factors such as fb2 ) using the BIC crite1t

rion. Given the large number of possible speci…cations, we report only the subset of those
speci…cations analyzed that are most interesting.16 We present those results next.

5.1

One-quarter Ahead Predictive Regressions

Tables 2 and 3 present results from estimating various speci…cations for the models (8) and
(9). For each speci…cation, the regression coe¢ cient, heteroskedasticity and serial-correlation
robust t statistics, adjusted R2 statistic, and BIC criterion are reported.
We begin with the results in Table 2, predictive regressions for excess returns. As benchmarks, columns a through d of Table 2 report the results of speci…cations for forecasting
one-quarter ahead excess returns, without including any estimated factors. Column a shows
that cayt is a strong predictor of quarterly excess returns, explaining eight percent of the
variation in one-quarter ahead returns with a t statistics in excess of four. These results
are essentially the same as those reported in Lettau and Ludvigson (2001a). Unlike studies
using older data, however, the dividend-price ratio displays little predictive ability for future
returns in this sample (column b). It is well known that data from the 1990s have substantially weakened the forecasting power of the dividend-price ratio for returns. Columns c and
d include lagged realized volatility V OLt as an additional predictor, along with cayt and
RRELt : All three variables have marginal predictive power and together explain 12 percent
of variation in next quarter’s return. This is consistent with the …ndings of Guo (2005), who
reports that predictive regressions that include cayt along with a measure of aggregate stock
15

This is given as the the sum of the …rst i largest eigenvalues of the matrix xx0 divided by the sum of all
eigenvalues.
16
Speci…cations that include lagged values of the factors beyond the …rst were also examined, but additional
lags were found to contain very little information for either returns or volatility that was not already contained
in the one-period lag speci…cations.

14

market volatility as predictor variables exhibit strong out-of-sample forecasting power for
quarterly excess returns. However, there is little evidence that either the term spread T RMt
or the default spread, DEFt have important predictive power for returns, as studies using
previous samples of data have found.
The remaining columns of Table 2 include estimated common factors as predictive variables, in addition to several of the exogenous predictors discussed above. Column e shows
that several factors have marginal predictive power for returns when included without nonfactor predictor variables, for example, factors 2 and 5 from the macro dataset and factors
3 and 6 from the …nancial dataset. But much of the information about future returns that
is contained in those factors is subsumed by cayt and V OLt (column f ). The exception is
b3t , which has statistically signi…cant predictive power beyond that contained in cayt and
G
V OLt .

A number of speci…cations using various polynomial bases of the estimated factors were

also considered. Two factors in particular stand out as containing important information
about future returns that is not already contained in commonly used predictor variables.
b21t , and
These are, the square of the …rst estimated factor from the …nancial database, G

b3t from the …nancial database. Column g shows that these two
the third estimated factor G

factors alone explain an unusual 9 percent of next quarter’s excess return, and they retain
their marginal predictive power no matter what other commonly used predictor variables
are included in the regression. The information in these two factors is largely independent of
that in the consumption-wealth variable cayt . Thus, when combined with cayt , the regression
model explains 16 percent of one-quarter ahead excess stock market returns, achieving the
lowest BIC criterion of all the models studied. In addition to these two factors, the product
of the third and fourth estimated factors from the …nancial database, and the product of
the third and sixth estimated factors from the macro database, contain information about
b2 , G
b3t , RRELt or cayt (column l).
future returns that is not already contained in any of G
1t

This statistical model explains a striking 19 percent of one-quarter ahead excess returns,

but the BIC criterion gives a higher penalty for the additional variables. As a consequence,

the model ranks lower than the more parsimonious three-factor speci…cation that includes
b2 , and G
b3t . By contrast, a four-factor speci…cation that includes cayt , G
b2 ,
only cayt , G
1t

1t

b3t and the product Fb3t Fb6t has a BIC statistic that is almost as small as the three-factor
G
2

speci…cation (-2.10 versus -2.11) but has an R that is slightly higher (0.17 versus 0.16), thus
we consider both statistical models of future returns when forming estimates of

t

below.

A similar analysis is conducted for stock market volatility, with results reported in Table
3. Column a of Table 3 shows that cayt has predictive power for quarterly volatility, as found
in Lettau and Ludvigson (2003), explaining about 8 percent of one–quarter ahead volatility.
The dividend price ratio also has predictive power for future volatility, explaining 10 percent
15

of one-quarter ahead volatility. The predictive coe¢ cients in the volatility equation are both
negative for cayt and dt

pt . Since these variables are positively related with future returns,

the …nding that they are negatively related with future volatility may at …rst suggest that
the conditional mean is negatively correlated with conditional volatility. However, as we
shall see, such a conclusion ignores the information contained in the estimated factors for
future returns and future volatility. We show below that this information is important for
properly identifying the risk-return relation.
Table 3 shows that a number of estimated common factors contain information about
future volatility. The factors Fb1t , Fb6t and Fb7t together explain about 11 percent of oneb1t , G
b6t and G
b7t explain about 18 percent of
quarter ahead volatility (column c), and the G

one-quarter ahead volatility (column d). All six together explain 25 percent of one-quarter
ahead volatility. Of course, stock market volatility is known to be persistent, and its lags
explain a large fraction of the future volatility. This can be seen in the results reported
in columns f through n where one- and sometimes two-period lagged volatility is shown
to be strongly statistically signi…cant and their inclusion increases the adjusted R-squared
statistic considerably. Columns h and i include the estimated common factors of columns
c and d, respectively, along with a number of other variables used elsewhere to predict
b1t , G
b6t
volatility: cayt ; dt pt , DEFt , Y IELDt , and lagged volatility. The estimated factors G

b7t appear to contain much of the same information contained in these other predictor
and G
variables, as they no longer have marginal predictive power when included along with the
other predictors. cayt ; DEFt and Y IELDt are also driven out of the regression that includes

all the variables mentioned above, including the factors. By contrast, the factors constructed
from the macro dataset Fb1t , Fb6t and Fb7t retain marginal predictive power, while cayt and

DEFt are never important once these factors and the dividend-price ratio are included.

The last six columns of Table 3 show that a number of nonlinear functions of estimated

factors also contain information about future volatility. But, in some cases, the information
is largely common to that in the dividend-yield or one-year Treasury bill (T-bill) rate, and
the best speci…cations according to the BIC criterion contain just Fb1t and Fb6t , along with
pt , Y IELDt and V OLt : This model explains almost 40 percent of one-quarter ahead
volatility. But a model containing just Fb1t , dt pt , Y IELDt and V OLt , performs equally
dt

well, so we often use this more parsimonious statistical model when forming estimates of
(The conclusions are unchanged if we include Fb6t .)

t.

In summary, the results reported in Tables 2 and 3 indicate that good forecasts of returns

and volatility can be made with only a few factors, and that the best forecasts often contain
combinations of factors and commonly used conditioning variables. It is reassuring that
many of estimated factors are found to contain information that is largely common to that
in many predictor variables that have long served as conditioning variables in asset pricing
16

applications, suggesting that the standard variables do indeed summarize a large body of
information about economic and …nancial activity. At the same time, however, the evidence
in Tables 2 and 3 suggests that the information in commonly used predictors is still incomplete, because a few factors contain important information about future returns and future
volatility that is not contained in these other variables.
Can we given an economic interpretation to the common factors? Because the factors
are only identi…able up to a r

r matrix, a detailed interpretation of the individual factors

is inappropriate. Nonetheless, it is useful to brie‡y characterize the factors that emerge
from our our formally chosen speci…cation procedure that are most important for forecasting
returns and volatility. For forecasting returns, the results above indicate that two …nancial
b2 and G
b3t . G
b2 explains almost 80 percent of the contemporaneous
factors standard out, G
1t

1t

variation in squared stock market returns, so we label this factor a “volatility factor.” We
adopt this naming convention even though the factor is more highly correlated with squared
b2 is still relatively highly correlated with V OLt ,
returns than realized volatility V OLt . G
1t

b3t , is highly
explaining 40 percent of its quarterly variation. The second important factor, G

correlated with a linear combination of three state variables used in the empirical asset
b3t is regressed
pricing literature to explain cross-sectional variation in risk premia. When G

on the three Fama-French cross-sectional risk factors, M KT; SM Bt ; and HM Lt , we …nd the
following results (heteroskedasticity and serial correlation robust t-statistics in parentheses):
b3t = 0:212 + 0:052 M KTt
G
(3:87)

(4:26)

0:322 SM Bt

( 17:39)

0:404 HM Lt + ut ;

( 23:27)

2

R = 86%:

In addition, if the three-month Treasury bill rate, RFt , is included as an explanatory variable,
b3t in our sample:
the four variables together explain 96% of the variation in the factor G
b3t =
G

0:460 +0:062 M KTt

( 8:19)

(7:07)

0:320 SM Bt

( 29:65)

0:403 HM Lt + 1:41 RFt +ut ;

( 33:65)

(12:50)

2

R = 96%:

The factor loads heavily on cross-sectional asset pricing factors, and therefore connects the
time-series and the cross-section of expected stock returns. It is of interest that this factor
is so well explained by time-variation in well-established cross-sectional risk factors, since
factors that spuriously explain the cross-section are unlikely to also spuriously explain the
time-series. Thus, we call this second factor a “risk premium factor.”
For forecasting volatility, the results above indicate that at least one macroeconomic
factor is a useful predictor when it is combined with other predictor variables, such as the
dividend-yield, the one-year Treasury yield, and lagged volatility. This factor, F1t , is the
…rst common factor from the dataset comprised of macroeconomic indicators. (Stock and
Watson (2002b)) formed factors from similar datasets of monthly data, and found that the
…rst common factor is a “real factor,”that is highly correlated with measure of real output
17

and employment but not highly correlated with prices. This is also the case in our application
using quarterly data, where the …rst macro factor explains 73 percent of the contemporaneous
variation in an index of manufacturing output. Thus, we follow this naming convention and
call Fb1t a “real factor.”

5.2

The Empirical Risk-Return Relation

We now turn our attention to the estimated risk-return relation, modeling the conditional
mean and conditional volatility using the state variables chosen with the BIC criterion, as
described above. Based on the BIC criterion, the conditional mean is measured by …tted
values from a regressions of excess returns on the state variables in M OD1 and conditional
volatility by …tted values from a regression of realized volatility on the state variables in
SP EC1. We also consider two alternative models of the conditional mean and conditional
volatility, denoted M OD2 and SP EC2, respectively. M OD2 uses the three state variables
b2 and G
b3t ), but adds the product of two estimated macro factors
used in M OD1, (cayt , G
1t
Fb3t Fb6t (column o of Table 2). SP EC2 uses the same state variables used in SP EC1,

pt ; Y IELDt , Fb1t , and V OLt ), but omits the real factor Fb1t : Econometric models of the

(dt

form (7) are used to evaluate the empirical risk-return relation. In addition to (7), we follow
Ghysels, Santa-Clara, and Valkanov (2005) and consider regressions of the form
t

= +

1 t

+

2 t 1

+

t 1

+ mt

1

+ "t+1 ;

(10)

where the lagged excess return is included as an additional explanatory variable.
The conditional correlation between the conditional mean and conditional volatility is
positive in all cases. Table 4 shows that, conditional on lagged volatility and lagged mean,
the coe¢ cient on contemporaneous volatility is positive and strongly statistically signi…cant
regardless of which speci…cation is used to model mean or volatility. Moreover, the t-statistics
for

1

are all in excess of 4. This positive contemporaneous trade-o¤ between risk and

return is consistent with the results of French, Schwert, and Stambaugh (1987), Bollerslev,
Engle, and Wooldridge (1988), Harvey (1989), Campbell and Hentschel (1992) and Ghysels,
Santa-Clara, and Valkanov (2005) but not those of Campbell (1987), Breen, Glosten, and
Jagannathan (1989), Pagan and Hong (1991), Glosten, Jagannathan, and Runkle (1993),
Whitelaw (1994), Lettau and Ludvigson (2003) and Brandt and Kang (2004). The coe¢ cient
on mt
mt

1

1

in (10) is also strongly statistically signi…cant and negative, but the inclusion of

does not alter the strong positive contemporaneous relation between conditional mean

and conditional volatility. Thus, we …nd a strong positive volatility-in-mean e¤ect for all
speci…cations. By contrast, the lag-volatility-in-mean e¤ect is strongly negative. Both lagged
volatility and lagged mean are important explanatory variables for the conditional mean,
18

and all the same conclusions arise if

t

is used as the left-hand-side variable instead of

t.

The conditional correlation points to signi…cant lead-lag interactions in the relation between
conditional mean and conditional volatility, again consistent with Brandt and Kang (2004)
and also Whitelaw (1994), and suggests that

t

and

t

are highly persistent.

Although we both emphasize the importance of lead-lag interactions in the risk-return
relation, our results on the sign of the contemporaneous relation between

t

and

t

contrast

with those of Brandt and Kang (2004) and also Lettau and Ludvigson (2003), who report a
negative correlation between conditional mean and conditional volatility. Moreover, although
Brandt and Kang …nd a negative conditional correlation between

t

and

t

(conditional on

lagged mean and volatility), they …nd a positive unconditional correlation between

t

and

t.

These results are the opposite of those reported in Table 4, where the conditional correlation
is positive and the unconditional correlation (omitting lags of

t

and

t)

is negative. Thus,

somewhat ironically, like Brandt and Kang (2004), we …nd that distinguishing between the
conditional (on lagged mean and lagged volatility) and unconditional correlation between
the conditional mean stock return and its conditional volatility is crucial for understanding
the empirical risk-return relation.
There are a number of possible reasons why our results di¤er from those of Brandt and
Kang. First, as mentioned, the econometric methodologies di¤er. Brandt and Kang use
a latent VAR approach to model the conditional mean and conditional volatility, assuming
that these variables follow …rst-order, linear, Gaussian processes. This approach relies on the
history of returns to infer

t

and

t

and does not condition upon the vast set of exogenous

conditioning variables we employ in this study. Second, Brandt and Kang model the log moments, whereas we follow the bulk of the literature and model the relation between the mean
and volatility in levels.17 Third, our sample size and data frequency di¤er: Brandt and Kang
studied monthly data from January 1946 through December 1998, while we study quarterly
data from the …rst quarter of 1960 to the second quarter of 2003. Several variables that
are important for predicting returns and volatility (e.g., cayt ) are only available at quarterly
frequency and the predictable dynamics may vary from monthly to quarterly horizons.
Our econometric approach is more closely related to that of Lettau and Ludvigson (2003),
who consider a wide range of commonly used predictor variables for returns and volatility
in modeling the risk-return relation. Yet, unlike Lettau and Ludvigson, we …nd a strong
positive conditional correlation between

t

and

t,

whereas they report a negative relation.

Since Lettau and Ludvigson survey a broad range of models studied in the literature (distin17

Brandt and Kang use their assumption that the log moments are bivariate normally distributed to infer
the relation between the level moments, which, under this assumption must be bivariate log-normally distributed. With this distributional assumption, they approximate the correlation between the level moments
and conclude that the level moments also display a negative conditional correlation.

19

guished by the particular conditioning variables used to measure conditional moments), the
di¤erences in our results suggest that the conditioning information introduced by our estimated factors may be especially important for properly measuring the risk-return relation
in methodologies that rely on exogenous predictors.
To illustrate this point, Table 5, presents the results from estimating the risk-return relation using the best …tting speci…cations (according to the BIC criterion) omitting estimated
factors. The table shows that the …ndings in Lettau and Ludvigson (2003) can be largely
b2 and G
b3t , which
attributed to the omission of the volatility and risk premium factors G
1t

contain important information about one-quarter ahead returns. First, consider rows 3 and
4, which report the relation between

and

t

t:

These rows reproduce the qualitative …nd-

ings of Lettau and Ludvigson (2003), who focused on the unconditional contemporaneous
correlation: the coe¢ cient in a regression of

t

on

t

is negative and statistically di¤erent

from zero. This result holds any time the estimated volatility and combination factors are
omitted when modeling

and t . By contrast, the results in Table 4, based on models that
b2 and G
b3t , show that the contemporaneous relation is slightly
make use of information in G
1t
t

negative but not statistically di¤erent from zero. Instead, in Table 4, it is the conditional

correlation between the mean and volatility that is strongly statistically signi…cant, but this
correlation is not negative but positive. Interestingly, row 1 of Table 5 shows that this posi-

tive conditional correlation carries over to the case where the estimated factors are omitted
in modeling

t

and

t,

but di¤ers from the case where estimated factors are employed in that

this result is not robust to the inclusion of lagged returns mt as a right-hand-side variable.
These results suggest that the factor-augmented speci…cations of

t

and

t

are important

for properly identifying the empirical risk-return relation.
The results discussed so far are all based on OLS estimation. We also estimated the
speci…cations (7) and (10) using two-stage least squares, instrumenting for
variables as instruments:

t 1;

t 2;

t 1;

t 2 ; mt 1 ; V

t

using lagged

OLt 1 . Because the results from 2SLS

estimation are very similar to those using OLS estimation, we present only one set of …ndings
from 2SLS estimation in Table 4, reported in row 13. As with the OLS estimation, the
conditional correlation between

t

and

t

is found to be strongly statistically signi…cant and

positive, indicating a positive volatility-in-mean relationship. By contrast, the lag-volatilityin-mean relation is also strongly negative, again the same …nding using OLS estimation.
Figure 1 depicts graphically over time variation in the conditional mean, based on the
factor-augmented speci…cation M OD1, along with 95% con…dence intervals formed from
10,000 bootstrapped observations on our exogenous predictors and factors. The conditional
mean rises in all seven of the NBER recession periods in our sample. This countercyclical
pattern in the conditional mean is consistent with …ndings in Fama and French (1989), Lettau and Ludvigson (2003) and Brandt and Kang (2004). The conditional mean itself varies
20

between -0.04 and 0.08 over most of the sample, and there are a number of negative observations. As one would expect, negative observations on the conditional mean are common
in linear empirical models (e.g., Harvey (2001), Lettau and Ludvigson (2001b), Lettau and
Ludvigson (2003)). One might be more comfortable with fewer negative observations, but
it should be noted that an occasional negative risk premium on stock market wealth is not
necessarily inconsistent with equilibrium asset pricing models (Boudoukh, Richardson, and
Whitelaw (1997); Whitelaw (2000)).
The dynamics of conditional volatility, based on SP EC1, are displayed in Figure 2. In
most recessions, conditional volatility tends to be high and increasing, consistent with the
results of Schwert (1989) and Schwert (1990). But there are a few recessions for which this
is not the case using our measure of

t,

notably the recessions of early 1960 and 2001. The

cyclical movements in conditional volatility are, however, swamped by large, low-frequency
‡uctuations. This feature likely contributes to the weak unconditional risk-return relation
in our sample, since the conditional mean appears far less persistent. Figure 3 plots the
conditional volatility and conditional mean on the same graph, displaying the weak negative
contemporaneous correlation in our sample. Interestingly, the negative correlation appears
largely attributable to the period between 1995 and 2000, when conditional mean trended
up and conditional volatility trended down. The countercyclical variation in volatility is not
as distinct as that in the conditional mean; as a result, the conditional Sharpe ratio (the
ratio of conditional mean to conditional volatility) is distinctly countercyclical (Figure 4).
In particular, the Sharpe ratio rises sharply in every recession, with noticeable spikes in the
1970-71 and 1990-91 recessions. Such countercyclical variation in the Sharpe ratio arises
naturally in models with countercyclical risk or risk aversion.
In summary, we …nd a strongly positive linear relation between conditional mean and
conditional volatility, once empirically important lags of these variables are controlled for in
the regression analysis. These …ndings support the theoretical prediction of a positive riskreturn tradeo¤, but also indicate a negative relation between mean and lagged volatility.
Our next two subsections present additional results that pertain to the robustness of our
underlying forecasting relations: out-of-sample analysis and small-sample inference.

5.3

Out-of-Sample Analysis

In the analysis above, we formally selected models for estimating the conditional mean and
conditional volatility of stock returns using the BIC criterion from predictive regressions
over the full sample. In this section we report results on the out-of-sample forecasting power
of our formally selected models. This procedure involves fully recursive factor estimation
and parameter estimation using data only through time t for forecasting at time t + 1.
21

For forecasting excess returns, we focus on the predictive power of the volatility and riskpremium factors in isolation, since the out-of-sample forecasting power of cayt has been
studied elsewhere (see Lettau and Ludvigson (2001a); Guo (2005)). The results from this
two-factor model are compared to a constant expected returns benchmark. For forecasting
volatility, we focus on the predictive power of one of our formally chosen speci…cations that
includes the real factor along with other predictor variables. The real factor alone is not a
signi…cant predictor of volatility, but is when combined with the variables in column m of
Table 3. Since volatility is known to be persistent, this model is compared with a …rst-order
autoregressive benchmark.
Table 6 reports results from one-quarter-ahead out-of-sample forecast comparisons of log
excess returns, mt+1 and volatility, V OLt+1 . For the purpose of this out-of-sample analysis,
the factors G21t and G3t are formed recursively from the …nancial dataset omitting cayt . Since
the cointegrating coe¢ cients in cayt are estimated over the full sample, omitting cayt insures
that the time-t factors used to forecast returns at time t + 1 are formed using data only up
to time t. SP EC1 denotes a forecasting model for volatility that uses the following variables
as predictors: the CRSP log dividend-price ratio dt pt ; the one year Treasury bill yield
Y IELDt , the real factor Fb1t , and lagged volatility V OLt . This corresponds to the model
in column m of Table 3. For each forecast, M SEu denotes the mean-squared forecasting

error of the unrestricted model including predictor factors; M SEr denotes the mean-squared
forecasting error of the restricted benchmark model that excludes additional forecasting
variables. In the column labeled “M SEu =M SEr ”, a number less than one indicates that
the models that uses the additional forecasting variables have lower forecast error than the
benchmark to which it is compared.
Results for three forecast samples are reported: 1975:1-2003:2; 1985:1-2003:2; 1995:12003:2. The results for the …rst forecast sample are reported in Rows 1 and 4. Here the
parameters and factors were estimated recursively, with the initial estimation period using
only data available from 1960:1 through 1975:1. Next, the forecasting regressions were run
over the period t =1960:1,...,1975:1, and the values of the regressors at t =1975:1 were used to
forecast m1975:2 (row 1) or V OL1975:2 . All parameters and factors are then reestimated from
1960:1 through 1975:2, and forecasts were recomputed for m1975:3 and V OL1975:3 , and so on,
until the …nal out-of-sample forecast is made for m2003:2 and V OL2003:2 : The same procedure
is used to compute results reported in rows 2, 3, 5, and 6 where the initial estimation period
is either t =1960:1,...,1985:1 (rows 2 and 5) or t =1960:1,...,1995:1 (rows 3 and 6). The
column labeled “Test Statistic” in Table 6 reports the ENC-NEW test statistic of Clark
and McCracken (2001) for the null hypothesis that the benchmark model encompasses the
unrestricted model with additional predictors. The alternative is that the unrestricted model
contains information that could be used to improve the benchmark model’s forecast. “95%
22

Asympt. CV”gives the 95th percentile of the asymptotic distribution of the ENC-NEW test
statistic.
Consider the forecasts of excess returns in rows 1 through 3 of Table 6. The two-factor
model that uses only G21t and G3t as predictors improves substantially over the constant
expected returns benchmark. These models have a forecast error variance that is 92 and 91
percent of the constant expected returns benchmark for the forecast periods 1975:1-2003:2
and 1985:1-2003:2, respectively. For the period 1995:1-2003:2 the model has a forecast error variance that is only 79 percent of the constant expected returns benchmark. This is
rather surprising, since it implies that the two-factor model exhibits the greatest relative
improvement over the benchmark during a period in which the forecasting power of many
conventional predictor variables breaks down. No matter what subperiod the model is evaluated over, the ENC-NEW test statistic always indicates that the improvement in forecast
power is strongly statistically signi…cant, at the one percent or better level. These results
show that relative forecast improvement a¤orded by the estimated factors is stable over time
and both statistically and economically signi…cant. Figure 5 gives a graphical impression of
the predictive power of these two factors by plotting the forecasted value of excess returns
along with the actual value over the period 1975:1-2003:2. Naturally the …tted value is less
volatile than actual value, but the …gure shows that the estimated factors do a remarkable
job of forecasting the increase in excess returns in the late 1990s and the decline in early
2000 through 2002.
Rows 4 through 6 report the result of out-of-sample volatility forecasts. As for excess
returns, there is substantial improvement in forecasting power relative to the autoregressive
benchmark that is strongly statistically signi…cant. Interestingly, as for returns, the model
outperforms the benchmark by the largest margin in the period 1995:1-2003:2, displaying a
forecast error variance that is just 70 percent of the benchmark. These results are displayed
graphically in Figure 6. The model does an excellent job of capturing the low-frequency shift
upward in volatility over the period 1995-2003.

5.4

Small Sample Inference

According to the asymptotic theory for PCA estimation discussed in Section 2, heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation consistent standard errors can be used to obtain robust t statistics
that are asymptotically N (0; 1). To guard against inadequacy of the asymptotic approximation in …nite samples, we also consider bootstrap inference for two of our formally chosen
speci…cations, those in column p of Table 2 (returns) and column m of Table 3 (volatility).
b2 and G
b3t as state variables for estimating
The model in column p of Table 2 uses cayt , G
1t

the conditional mean; we refer to this model as M OD1 for conditional expected returns.
23

The volatility model in column m of Table 3 uses dt

pt ; Y IELDt , Fb1t , and V OLt as state

variables for estimating conditional volatility; we refer to this speci…cation as SP EC1 for
conditional volatility. Small sample inference is especially important when the right-hand-

side variables are highly persistent (e.g., Ferson, Sarkissian, and Simin (2003)) but, as Table
1 demonstrates, none of the factors from our preferred speci…cations are highly persistent.
Nevertheless, we proceed with a bootstrap analysis as a robustness check, by generating
bootstrap samples of the exogenous predictors Zt , as well as of the estimated factors Fbt and

bt :
G

We consider two bootstrap procedures. First, we take the factors as given and generate
bt from univariate …rst-order autoregressive models. This
bootstrap samples of Zt , Fbt and G

allows us to isolate the potential role of persistence in contaminating inference. Bootstrap
samples of mt+1 are obtained in two ways, …rst by imposing the null hypothesis of no pre-

dictability, (i.e.

1,

2

and

in (8) are zero vectors and residuals from regression on a

constant are resampled), and second, without imposing the null by resampling the residuals
of (8). A regression using the bootstrap data gives new estimates of

1;

2,

and , and new

R2 statistics. A directly analogous investigation is conducted for the volatility equation (9).
This is repeated B = 10; 000 times. The results are reported in Table 7.
In the second procedure, we take into account the pre-estimation of the factors by resampling the T

N panel of data, xit . This creates bootstrapped samples of the factors

themselves. For each i, least squares estimation of ebit = i ebit 1 + vit yields the estimates bi
0
and vbit ; t = 2; : : : T , where recall that ebit = xit b fbt . Then vbit is re-sampled (while preserving
i

the cross-section correlation structure) to yield bootstrap samples of ebit . In turn, bootstrap
values of xit are constructed by adding the bootstrap estimates of the idiosyncratic errors,
0
ebit , to bi Fbt . Estimation by the method of principal components on the bootstrapped data

then yields a new set of estimated factors. Together with bootstrap samples of Zt (based
on AR(1) models as above), this delivers a set of bootstrap regressors. Samples of mt+1 are
again obtained in two ways, either by imposing or not imposing the null of no predictability,
and bootstrap R2 and t statistics are obtained by performing a regression on the bootstrap
data. Bootstrap con…dence intervals for the parameter estimates and R2 statistics can be
calculated from B = 10; 000 replications. A directly analogous investigation is conducted for
the volatility equation (9). These results are reported in Table 8.
Both Tables 7 and 8 indicate that the results based on bootstrap inference are consistent
with those based on asymptotic inference. Using either procedure, the coe¢ cients on the
exogenous predictors and estimated factors are statistically di¤erent from zero at the 95%
level and are well outside the 95% con…dence interval under the no-predictability null. The
three factor model for returns generates an adjusted R-squared statistic of 16% in historical
data; by contrast, using bootstrapped data, the 95% bootstrapped con…dence interval for
24

this statistic under the no-predictability null ranges from just -2% to 4%. Similarly, the
four factor model for volatility generates an adjusted R-squared statistic of 37% in historical
data; by contrast, using bootstrapped data, the 95% bootstrapped con…dence interval for
this statistic under the no-predictability null ranges from just -2.1% to 4.4%. In short,
the magnitude of predictability found in historical data is too large to be accounted for by
sampling error in samples of the size we have.
Finally, the top panel of Tables 7 and 8 reports a 95% bootstrapped con…dence interval
of a

2

(2) statistic for the null hypothesis that the estimated volatility and combination

factors are jointly equal to zero. The corresponding

2

(2) estimate from historical data of

16.87 is well outside the 95% con…dence interval of (0:52; 7:65) under the no-predictability
null. The statistical relation of these factors to future returns is strong, even accounting for
the small sample distribution of standard test statistics.

6

Conclusion

A large and growing body of empirical work is devoted to estimating the relation between risk
and return in the U.S. stock market. Although theory typically predicts a positive relation,
empirical …ndings are mixed and often suggest a negative relation. An important limitation
of existing empirical work, however, pertains to the relatively small amount of conditioning
information used to estimate the conditional mean and conditional volatility of excess stock
market returns. In turn, the use of such sparse information sets in the construction of …tted
moments can translate into omitted information bias in the estimated risk-return relation.
In this paper, we consider one approach to this omitted information problem by employing
a methodology for incorporating a large amount of conditioning information in our estimates
of the conditional mean and conditional volatility of excess stock market returns. Recent
research on dynamic factor models …nds that the information in a large number of economic
time series can be e¤ectively summarized by a relatively small number of estimated factors,
a¤ording the opportunity to exploit a rich base of information more likely to span the
information sets of …nancial market participants than in previous analyses. In doing so, our
study contributes to the empirical literature by evaluating both the potential role of omitted
information in the estimated risk-return relation, as well as the robustness of previous results
to conditioning on richer information sets.
Some of our results support the …ndings of pre-existing studies. For example, we …nd
that the conditional mean return and conditional Sharpe ratio are strongly countercyclical,
and that lead-lag dynamics are important elements of the risk-return relation. But other
key aspects of our results di¤er from previous work, suggesting that the factor-augmented

25

approach is important for properly identifying the empirical risk-return relation. In particular, we introduce several new factors that contain signi…cant information about either future
returns or future volatility. Two factors stand out as particularly important for quarterly
excess returns: a volatility factor that is highly correlated with squared returns, and a riskpremium factor that is highly correlated with well-established risk factors for explaining the
cross-section of expected returns. Using the information contained in these estimated factors,
we …nd that the contemporaneous relation between the conditional mean and conditional
volatility is strongly positive, once we control for lags of these variables. Our …ndings therefore support the standard theoretical prediction of a positive volatility-in-mean e¤ect. We
also …nd a strongly negative lag-volatility-in-mean e¤ect, about which there is much less theoretical precedent. Finally, we …nd that the improvement in out-of-sample forecasting power
a¤orded by our estimated factors is strongly statistically signi…cant and remarkably stable
over time, even though the relationship between many commonly used predictors and future
returns is unstable over our sample period, especially during the last half of the 1990s. This
evidence reinforces the notion that dynamic factor analysis can provide robustness against
the temporal instability that plagues low-dimensional forecasting regressions.
There are several possible directions for future work. The investigation here could be
extended to study the potential role of nonlinearities in the risk-return relation (e.g., Harvey
(2001)), or to assess the degree of time variation in the risk-return relation (e.g., Campbell
(1987), Harvey (1989)). In addition, the approach taken here— in which common factors from
large datasets are combined with measures of realized volatility— could be extended to model
conditional covariances, or conditional betas, as in the work of Andersen, Bollerslev, Diebold,
and Wu (2005b) and Andersen, Bollerslev, Diebold, and Wu (2005a). All of these issues lend
themselves well to study using large datasets of conditioning information, summarized by a
few estimated factors.

26

Data Appendix
This appendix describes our data. The data are quarterly and span 1960:1 to 2002:4.
Macro Data
Below we list the data used to construct the macro factors. The format is, series number, series
mneonic; transformation code and brief series description. All macro data are from DRI-Global
Insight, Basic Economics Database. The data transformation (DT) codes are, 1=no transformation; 2
= first difference; 4 = log; 5 = log first difference. GY = national income.
Category

DT

Description

FX (FX)
1

BPAUS

2

U.S. ASSETS ABROAD (NET)

2

BPB

2

BAL OF P'MENT:BALANCE ON MERCHANDISE TRADE,MIL.$ SA

3

GDFXFC

5

CHAIN-TYPE QUANTITY INDEX - EXPORTS OF GOODS AND SERVICES

4

GNET

2

NET EXPORTS OF GOODS AND SERVICES

5

GRFIW

5

RECEIPT FACTOR INCOME FROM REST OF WORLD(BIL.$,SAAR)(T1.9)

6

GXIM

1

% CHG FRM PRECEDING PERIOD: IMPORTS (CURRENT$)

7

GXMDQF

5

EXPORTS-DURABLE GOODS,SRC:BEA,BIL OF 1996 DOLLARS

8

GXMNQF

5

EXPORTS-NONDURABLE GOODS,SRC:BEA,BIL OF 1996 DOLLARS

9

GXMQF

5

EXPORTS-GOODS(FIXED),SRC:BEA,BIL OF 1996 DOLLARS

10

GDFMFC

5

CHAIN-TYPE QUANTITY INDEX - IMPORTS OF GOODS AND SERVICES

5

CHAIN-TYPE QUANTITY INDEX - PCE, DURABLE GOODS

Consumption (Cons)
11

GDFCDC

12

GXDAQF

5

AUTO OUTPUT-EXPORTS,SRC:BEA,BIL OF 1996 DOLLARS

13

GXPC

1

% CHG FROM PRECEDING PERIOD:PERSONAL CONSUMPTION EXPENDS.(CURR.$)

14

GDFCFC

5

CHAIN-TYPE QUANTITY INDEX - PERSONAL CONSUMPTION EXPENDITURES

Prices (Pri)
15

EXRJAN

5

FOREIGN EXCHANGE RATE: JAPAN (YEN PER U.S.$)

16

EXRUK

5

FOREIGN EXCHANGE RATE: UNITED KINGDOM (CENTS PER POUND)

17

EXRUS

5

UNITED STATES;EFFECTIVE EXCHANGE RATE(MERM)(INDEX NO.)

18

GD

5

IMPLICIT PR DEFLATOR: GROSS NATIONAL PRODUCT

19

GDC

5

IMPLICIT PR DEFLATOR: PERSONAL CONSUMPTION EXPENDITURES

20

GDCD

5

IMPLICIT PR DEFLATOR: DURABLE GOODS,PCE

21

GDCN

5

IMPLICIT PR DEFLATOR: NONDURABLE GOODS,PCE

22

GDCS

5

IMPLICIT PR DEFLATOR: SERVICES, PCE

23

GDEX

5

IMPLICIT PR DEFLATOR: EXPORTS OF GDS & SER

24

GDEXIM

5

TERMS OF TRADE

25

GDFCC

5

CHAIN-TYPE PRICE INDEX - PERSONAL CONSUMPTION EXPENDITURES

26

GDFCNC

5

CHAIN-TYPE PRICE INDEX - PCE, NONDURABLE GOODS

27

GDFCSC

5

CHAIN-TYPE PRICE INDEX - PCE, SERVICES

28

GDFDCF

5

CHAIN-TYPE PRICE INDEX - NATL DEFENSE EXPENDITURES & GROSS INVESTM

29

GDFDFC

5

CHAIN-TYPE PRICE INDEX - PCE, DURABLE GOODS

30

GDFDPC

5

CHAIN-TYPE PRICE INDEX- PRODUCERS' DURABLE EQUIPMENT

31

GDFEXC

5

CHAIN-TYPE PRICE INDEX - EXPORTS OF GOODS AND SERVICES

32

GDFGEC

5

CHAIN-TYPE PRICE INDEX - GOVT CONSUMPTION EXPENDITURES & GROSS INV

33

GDFGFC

5

CHAIN-TYPE PRICE INDEX - FED CONSUMPTION EXPEND & GROSS INVESTMENT

34

GDFGOC

5

CHAIN-TYPE PRICE INDEX - NONDEF CONS EXPENDITURES & GROSS INVESTME

35

GDFGSC

5

CHAIN-TYPE PRICE INDEX - S&L CONSUMPTION EXPEND & GROSS INVESTMENT

36

GDFICF

5

CHAIN-TYPE PRICE INDEX - PRIVATE FIXED INVESTMENT

37

GDFIMC

5

CHAIN-TYPE PRICE INDEX - IMPORTS OF GOODS AND SERVICES

38

GDFIRC

5

CHAIN-TYPE PRICE INDEX - RESIDENTIAL

39

GDFISC

5

CHAIN-TYPE PRICE INDEX - NONRESIDENTIAL STRUCTURES

40

GDFNRC

5

CHAIN-TYPE PRICE INDEX - NONRESIDENTIAL

41

GDGF

5

IMPLICIT PR DEFLATOR: FED GOV'T PURCH OF GDS & SER

42

GDIS

5

IMPLICIT PR DEFLATOR: PRIVATE NONRESINDENTIAL STRUCTURES

43

LBGDPU

5

IMPLICIT PRICE DEFLATOR: NONFARM BUSINESS (1982=100,SA)

44

PMCP

5

NAPM COMMODITY PRICES INDEX (PERCENT)

45

PSCCOM

5

SPOT MARKET PRICE INDEX:BLS & CRB: ALL COMMODITIES(1967=100)

46

PSCFOO

5

SPOT MARKET PRICE INDEX:BLS & CRB: FOODSTUFFS (67=100,NSA)

47

PSCMAT

5

SPOT MARKET PRICE INDEX:BLS & CRB: RAW INDUSTRIALS(67=100,NSA)

48

PUCX

5

CPI-U: COMMODITIES LESS FOOD (82-84=100,SA)

49

PUCXX

5

CPI-U:COMMODITIES LESS FOOD AND ENERGY (82-84=100,SA)

50

PUHS

5

CPI-U: SHELTER (82-84=100,SA)

51

PUNEW

5

CPI-U: ALL ITEMS (82-84=100,SA)

52

PUXF

5

CPI-U: ALL ITEMS LESS FOOD (82-84=100,SA)

53

PUXHS

5

CPI-U: ALL ITEMS LESS SHELTER (82-84=100,SA)

54

PUXM

5

CPI-U: ALL ITEMS LESS MIDICAL CARE (82-84=100,SA)

55

PUXX

5

CPI-U: ALL ITEMS LESS FOOD AND ENERGY (82-84=100,SA)

56

PWFCSA

5

PRODUCER PRICE INDEX:FINISHED CONSUMER GOODS (82=100,SA)

57

PWFPSA

5

PRODUCER PRICE INDEX:CAPITAL EQUIPMENT (82=100,SA)

58

PWFSA

5

PRODUCER PRICE INDEX: FINISHED GOODS (82=100,SA)

59

PWIMSA

5

PRODUCER PRICE INDEX:INTERMED MAT.SUPPLIES & COMPONENTS(82=100,SA)

60

PWMND

5

PRODUCER PRICE INDEX: TOTAL NONDURABLE GOODS (82=100,NSA)

61

PWSA2X

5

PRODUCER PRICE INDEX:INTERMED MAT.LESS FOODS & FEEDS(82=100,SA)

62

PWSA3X

5

PRODUCER PRICE INDEX:FINISHED CONSUMER GODS EXCL FOODS(82=100,SA)

63

PWSA4

5

PRODUCER PRICE INDEX:CONSUM NOND GODS LESS FOOD(82=100,SA)

64

PWSA5

5

PRODUCER PRICE INDEX:CONSUMER DURABLE GOODS (82=100,SA)

Fixed Investment (Inv)
65

GFINO

5

FIXED INVEST:PRODUCER DURABLE EQUIP. OTHER(BIL$SAAR)(T5.4)

66

GIFQF

5

FIXED INVEST, TOTAL(FIXED), SRC:BEA, BIL OF 1996 DOLLARS

67

GINQF

5

FIXED INVEST, NONRESIDENTIAL(FIXED), SRC:BEA, BIL OF 1996 DOLLARS

68

GIRQF

5

FIXED INVEST, RESIDENTIAL(FIXED), SRC:BEA, BIL OF 1996 DOLLARS

69

GISQF

5

PUR OF NONRES STRUCT-TOTAL, SRC:BEA, BIL OF 1996 DOLLARS

70

GPIQF

5

GROSS PRIV DOMESTIC INVEST(FIXED),SRC:BEA,BIL OF 1996 DOLLLARS

71

GXIFN

1

% CHG FRM PRECEDING PERIOD:NONRESIDENTIAL FIXED INVEST.(CURR.$)

72

GXIFR

1

% CHG FRM PRECEDING PERIOD:RESIDENTIAL FIXED INVESTMENT(CURR$)

73

GXIPD

1

% CHG FRM PRECEDING PERIOD: NONRESID.PRODUCERS'DUR.EQUIP(CURR$)

74

GXIS

1

% CHG FRM PRECEDING PERIOD: NONRESIDENTIAL STRUCTURES (CURRENT$)

75

GXPI

1

% CHG FRM PRECEDING PERIOD:GROSS PRIV.DOM.INVESTMNT(CURR.$)

76

GDFFIC

5

CHAIN-TYPE QUANTITY INDEX - PRIVATE FIXED INVESTMENT

77

GDFIFC

5

CHAIN-TYPE QUANTITY INDEX - GROSS PRIVATE DOMESTIC INVESTMENT

Output & Income (Out)
78

GDFDEC

5

CHAIN-TYPE QUANTITY INDEX - NATL DEF EXPENDITURES & GROSS INVESTME

79

GDFEOC

5

CHAIN-TYPE QUANTITY INDEX - NONDEF CONS EXPEND & GROSS INVESTMENTS

80

GDFFGC

5

CHAIN-TYPE QUANTITY INDEX - FED CONSUMPTION EXPEND & GROSS INVESTM

81

GDFGGC

5

CHAIN-TYPE QUANTITY INDEX - GOVT CONSUMPTION EXPENDITURES & GROSS

82

GDFGLC

5

CHAIN-TYPE QUANTITY INDEX - S&L CONSUMPTION EXPEND & GROSS INVESTM

83

GDFINC

5

CHAIN-TYPE QUANTITY INDEX - NONRESIDENTIAL

84

GDFNFC

5

CHAIN-TYPE QUANTITY INDEX - PCE, NONDURABLE GOODS

85

GDFPDC

5

CHAIN-TYPE QUANTITY INDEX - PRODUCERS' DURABLE EQUIPMENT

86

GDFRFC

5

CHAIN-TYPE QUANTITY INDEX - RESIDENTIAL

87

GDFSFC

5

CHAIN-TYPE QUANTITY INDEX - PCE, SERVICES

88

GDFSTC

5

CHAIN-TYPE QUANTITY INDEX - NONRESIDENTIAL STRUCTURES

89

GDPQF

5

GDP (FIXED),SRC:BEA,BIL OF 1996 DOLLARS

90

GPBQF

5

GDP-BUS,SRC:BEA,BIL OF 1996 DOLLARS

91

GPY

5

PERSONAL INCOME, TOTAL

92

GWY

5

NAT'L INCOME: WAGES AND SALARIES

93

GXNP

1

% CHANGE FROM PRECEDING PERIOD, GNP CURRENT $

94

GXSAV

5

PERSN'L INCOME: PERS SAVING RATE, GPSAV AS % OF GYD

95

GXYD

1

% CHG FRM PRECEDING PERIOD: DISP. PERSONAL INCOME (CURRENT $)

96

GYDPCQ

5

DISPOSABLE PERSONAL INCOME PER CAPITA IN CHAINED (1996) DOLLARS

97

GYFIR

5

GY BY IND DIV: FINANCE, INSUR AND REAL ESTATE

98

GYGGE

5

GY BY IND DIV: GOV'T AND GOV'T ENTERPRISES

99

GYM

5

GY BY IND DIV: MANUFACTURING INDUSTRY

100

GYMD

5

GY BY IND DIV: DURABLE GOODS MANUFACTURING INDUSTRY

101

GYMN

5

GY BY IND DIV: NONDURABLE GOODS MANUFACTURING INDUSTRY

102

GYS

5

GY BY IND DIV: SERVICE INDUSTRIES

103

GYT

5

GY BY IND DIV: TRANSPORTATION INDUSTRY

104

GYUT

5

GY BY IND DIV: ELECTRIC, GAS AND SANITARY SEW INDUSTRY

105

LIPM

5

OUTPUT INDEX - MANUFACTURING (PC) (INDEX,92=100,SA)

106

LIPMD

5

OUTPUT INDEX - DURABLE MANUFACTURING (PC) (INDEX,92=100,SA)

107

LIPMN

5

OUTPUT INDEX - NONDURABLE MANUFACTURING (PC) (INDEX,92=100,SA)

108

LOUTM

5

OUTPUT PER HOUR OF ALL PERSONS, INDEX - MANUFACTURING (PC) (INDEX,92=100,SA)

109

LOUTMD

5

OUTPUT PER HOUR OF ALL PERSONS, INDEX - DURABLE MANUFACTURING (PC) (INDEX,92=1

110

LOUTMN

5

OUTPUT PER HOUR OF ALL PERSONS, INDEX, NONDURABLES;INDEX: 1992=100,SA;SRC: BLS

Sales, Ortders, Purchases (SOP)
111

GNSAQF

5

AUTO OUTPUT-FINAL SALES,SRC:BEA,BIL OF 1996 DOLLARS

112

GNSQF

5

FINAL SALES OF DOMESTIC PRODUCT (BILL 1996 $, SAAR)

113

GNSQF

5

FINAL SALES OF DOMESTIC PRODUCT (BILL 1996 $, SAAR)

114

GODSQF

5

FINAL SALES OF DURABLES,SRC:BEA,BIL OF 1996 DOLLARS

115

GONSQF

5

FINAL SALES OF NONDURABLES,SRC:BEA,BIL OF 1996 DOLLARS

116

GXNPD

1

GROSS DOM PURCH:CURRENT DOLLARS(%,CHANGE)(T8.1)

117

GXNS

1

FINAL SALES OF DOM PROD:CURRENT DOLLARS(%,CHANGE)(T8.1)

118

GXNSD

1

FINAL SALE TO DOM PURCH:CURRENT DOLLARS(%,CHANGE)(T8.1)

119

MOCMQ

5

NEW ORDERS (NET) - CONSUMER GOODS & MATERIALS, 1996 DOLLARS (BCI)

120

MSONDQ

5

NEW ORDERS, NONDEFENSE CAPITAL GOODS, IN 1996 DOLLARS (BCI)

121

MTQ

5

SALES - MANUFACTURING & TRADE, CHAINED 1996 DOLLARS (BCI)

122

PMNO

5

NAPM NEW ORDERS INDEX (PERCENT)

123

RISMAT

1

Real Inventory-Sales Ratios - Manufacturing and trade industries, Ratio, SAAR

124

RZTRU

5

RETAIL SALES: NEW MOTOR TRUCKS, TOTAL (# OF UNITS,NSA)

125

SMB

5

SHIPMENTS - ALL MANUFACTURING INDUSTRIES NAICS (M3)

126

SMU

5

SHIPMENTS - ALL MANUFACTURING INDUSTRIES NAICS (M3)

127

LBOUT

5

OUTPUT PER HOUR ALL PERSONS: BUSINESS SEC(1982=100,SA)

128

LBOUTU

5

OUTPUT PER HOUR ALL PERSONS: NONFARM BUSINESS(82=100,SA)

Employment and Hours (EMP)
129

LBMN

2

HOURS OF ALL PERSONS: BUSINESS SECTOR (1982=100,SA)

130

LBMNU

2

HOURS OF ALL PERSONS: NONFARM BUSINESS SEC (1982=100,SA)

131

LHEL

2

INDEX OF HELP-WANTED ADVERTISING IN NEWSPAPERS (1967=100;SA)

132

LHEM

5

CIVILIAN LABOR FORCE: EMPLOYED, TOTAL (THOUS.,SA)

133

LHEMF

5

CIVILIAN LABOR FORCE: EMPLOYED, WOMEN, 16 YEARS + (THOUS.,SA)

134

LHEMM

5

CIVILIAN LABOR FORCE: EMPLOYED, MEN, 16 YEARS + (THOUS.,SA)

135

LHEMPA

5

RATIO, CIV.EMPLOYMNT/TOTAL NONINST.POPUL.,INC.ARMED FORCES(SA)

136

LHME25

2

EMPLOYED PERSONS: MALES, 25 TO 54 YEARS (THOUS.,SA)

137

LHMP20

2

LABOR FORCE PARTICIPATION RATE: MEN, 20 YRS.+ (%,SA)

138

LHMU25

2

UNEMPLOYMENT RATE: MEN, 25 TO 54 YEARS (%,SA)

139

LHMUR

2

UNEMPLOYMENT RATE: MEN, 20 YEARS & OVER (%,SA)

140

LHTPTA

2

LABOR FORCE PARTICIPATION RATE: BOTH SEXES,16-19 YRS.(%,SA)

141

LHTUR

2

UNEMPLOYMENT RATE: BOTH SEXES, 16-19 YEARS (%,SA)

142

LHU14

2

UNEMPLOY.BY DURATION: PERSONS UNEMPL.5 TO 14 WKS (THOUS.,SA)

143

LHU15

2

UNEMPLOY.BY DURATION: PERSONS UNEMPL.15 WKS + (THOUS.,SA)

144

LHU26

2

UNEMPLOY.BY DURATION: PERSONS UNEMPL.15 TO 26 WKS (THOUS.,SA)

145

LHU27

2

UNEMPLOY.BY DURATION: PERSONS UNEMPL.27 WKS + (THOUS,SA)

146

LHU5

2

UNEMPLOY.BY DURATION: PERSONS UNEMPL.LESS THAN 5 WKS (THOUS.,SA)

147

LHU680

2

UNEMPLOY.BY DURATION: AVERAGE(MEAN)DURATION IN WEEKS (SA)

148

LHUFR

2

UNEMPLOYMENT RATE: WOMEN, 16 YEARS AND OVER (%,SA)

149

LHUMR

2

UNEMPLOYMENT RATE: MEN, 16 YEARS AND OVER (%,SA)

150

LHUR

2

UNEMPLOYMENT RATE: ALL WORKERS, 16 YEARS & OVER (%,SA)

151

LHURM

2

UNEMPLOYMENT RATE: MARRIED MEN, SPOUSE PRESENT (%,SA)

152

LHURMF

2

UNEMPLOYMENT RATE: MARRIED WOMEN, SPOUSE PRESENT (%,SA)

153

LLCPB

5

UNIT LABOR COST: NONFINANCIAL CORP (1982=100,SA)

154

LMNM

2

HOURS OF ALL PERSONS, INDEX - MANUFACTURING (PC) (INDEX,92=100,SA)

155

LMNMD

2

HOURS OF ALL PERSONS, INDEX - DURABLE MANUFACTURING (PC) (INDEX,92=100,SA)

156

LMNMN

2

HOURS OF ALL PERSONS, INDEX - NONDURABLE MANUFACTURING (PC) (INDEX,92=100,SA)

157

LUINC

2

AVG WKLY INITIAL CLAIMS,STATE UNEMPLOY.INS.,EXC P.RICO(THOUS;SA)

158

LURSP

2

INSURED UNEMPLOYMENT AS % COVERED EMPLOY.,EXC P.RICO(%,SA)

159

LZHUR

2

UNEMPLOYMENT RATE: TOTAL, 16 YRS AND OVER (%,NSA)

Compensation and labor cost per hour (CHI)
160

LBCP

5

COMPENSATION PER HOUR: BUSINESS SECTOR (1982=100,SA)

161

LBCPU

5

COMPENSATION PER HOUR: NONFARM BUSINESS SEC(1982=100,SA)

162

LBLCP

5

UNIT LABOR COST: BUSINESS SECTOR (1982=100,SA)

163

LBLCPU

5

UNIT LABOR COST: NONFARM BUSINESS SEC (1982=100,SA)

164

LCPM

5

COMPENSATION PER HOUR INDEX - MANUFACTURING (PC) (INDEX,92=100,SA)

165

LCPM7

5

COMPENSATION PER HOUR (REAL), INDEX-MANUFACTURING (PC) (INDEX,92=100,SA)

166

LCPMD

5

COMPENSATION PER HOUR INDEX - DURABLE MANUFACTURING (PC) (INDEX,92=100,SA)

167

LCPMD7

5

COMPENSATION PER HOUR (REAL), INDEX - DURABLE MANUFACTURING (PC) (INDEX,92=100

168

LCPMN

5

COMPENSATION PER HOUR INDEX - NONDURABLE MANUFACTURING (PC) (INDEX,92=100,SA)

169

LCPMN7

5

COMPENSATION PER HOUR (REAL), INDEX - NONDURABLE MANUFACTURING (PC) (INDEX,92=

170

LLCPM

5

UNIT LABOR COSTS INDEX-MANUFACTURING (PC) (INDEX,92=100,SA)

171

LLCPMD

5

UNIT LABOR COSTS INDEX - NONDURABLE MANUFACTURING (PC) (INDEX,92=100,SA)

172

LLCPMN

5

UNIT LABOR COSTS INDEX, NONDURABLES;INDEX: 1992=100, SA;SRC: BLS

Capacity Utilization (Util)
173

UTL11

2

CAPACITY UTILIZATION - MANUFACTURING (SIC)

174

UTL15

2

CAPACITY UTILIZATION - NONMETALLIC MINERAL PRODUCT NAICS=327

175

UTL17

2

CAPACITY UTILIZATION - FABRICATED METAL PRODUCT NAICS=332

176

UTL21

2

CAPACITY UTILIZATION - MOTOR VEHICLES AND PARTS NAICS=3361-3

177

UTL22

2

CAPACITY UTILIZATION - AEROSPACE AND MISCELLANEOUS TRANSPORTATION EQ.

178

UTL29

2

CAPACITY UTILIZATION - PAPER NAICS=322

179

UTL31

2

CAPACITY UTILIZATION - PETROLEUM AND COAL PRODUCTS NAICS=324

180

UTL32

2

CAPACITY UTILIZATION - CHEMICAL NAICS=325

181

UTL33

2

CAPACITY UTILIZATION - PLASTICS AND RUBBER PRODUCTS NAICS=326

182

UTL44

2

CAPACITY UTILIZATION - PRIMARY & SEMIFINISHED PROCESSING (CAPACITY)

183

UTL45

2

CAPACITY UTILIZATION - FINISHED PROCESSING (CAPACITY)

Housing (Hous)
184

GSVNT

5

PRIVATE CONSTRUCTION:NONRESIDENTIAL TOTAL(BIL$,SAAR)

185

HS6FR

4

HOUSING STARTS: TOTAL NEW PRIV HOUSING UNITS (THOUS.,NSA)

186

HSMW

5

HOUSING STARTS:MIDWEST(THOUS.U.)S.A.

187

HSNE

5

HOUSING STARTS:NORTHEAST (THOUS.U.)S.A.

188

HSSOU

5

HOUSING STARTS:SOUTH (THOUS.U.)S.A.

189

HSWST

5

HOUSING STARTS:WEST (THOUS.U.)S.A.

5

COMPOSITE INDEX OF 4 COINCIDENT INDICATORS(87=100,SA)

Indexes (Ind)
190

DCOINC

191

DLAGG

5

COMPOSITE INDEX OF 7 LAGGING INDICATORS(87=100,SA)

192

DLDF1P

1

DIFFUSION INDEX:12 LEAD INDICATOR COMPONENT(% RISING +1-MO SPAN)

193

DLDF6P

1

DIFFUSION INDEX:12 LEAD INDICATOR COMPONENT(% RISING +6-MO SPAN)

194

DLEAD

2

COMPOSITE INDEX OF 11 LEADING INDICATORS(87=100,SA)

195

DRATE

2

RATIO, COINCIDENT INDEX TO LAGGING INDEX(87=100,SA)

196

HHSNTN

5

U. OF MICH. INDEX OF CONSUMER EXPECTATIONS(BCD-83)

197

PMDEL

5

NAPM VENDOR DELIVERIES INDEX (PERCENT)

198

PMEMP

5

NAPM EMPLOYMENT INDEX (PERCENT)

199

PMI

5

PURCHASING MANAGERS' INDEX (SA)

200

PMP

5

NAPM PRODUCTION INDEX (PERCENT)

Other (Other)
201

CCIPY

2

RATIO, CONSUMER INSTAL CREDIT TO PERSONAL INCOME (%,SA)(BCD-95)

202

FDLALT

5

DELINQ.RATE 1-4 U.RESID.MTGE:ALL LOAN;TOTAL PAST DUE(%,SA)

203

FMD

5

MORTGAGE DEBT OUTST'G:ALL PROPERTIES (MIL$,EOQ,NSA)

204

GGOFS

2

GOVT CURRENT SURPLUS/DEFICIT-OTHER,SRC:BEA,BILLIONS OF 1992 DOLLARS

205

GJJPAT

5

CORP PROFIT AFTER TAXES WITH IVA & CCA (BCD 79)

206

GJPATX

5

RATIO,PROFITS(AFT TAXES)WITH IVA&CCA/CORP DOMES.INCOME(SA)(BCD81)

207

LBPB

5

UNIT PROFITS: NONFINANCIAL CORP (1982=100,SA)

208

PMNV

5

NAPM INVENTORIES INDEX (PERCENT)

209

PZRP67

5

PURCH POWER CONSUMER $,URBAN WAGE EARNERS,CLER WKRS(67=$1,NSA)

Financial Data
We list the financial data used to construct factors, the endogenous variables, and other conditioning
variables used to predict returns or volatility. The format is, series number, mnumonic, source, and
brief description. CRSP = Center for Research in Security Prices, University of Chicago; FED =
Federal Reserve Board; Shiller = Robert Shiller's Yale web page
http://www.econ.yale.edu/~shiller/data/ie_data.xls; French = Kenneth French's Dartmouth web page
http://mba.tuck.dartmouth.edu/pages/faculty/ken.french/; LL = Sydney Ludvigson's NYU web page
http://www.econ.nyu.edu/user/ludvigsons/; CP = John Cochrane and Monika Piazzesi, University of
Chicago GSB. At the bottom we list portfolios of equity returns sorted into size (market capitalization)
and book-market categories. Portfolios with missing data during the sample 1960:1-2002:4 are
omitted from the analysis.
Category

Source Description

Prices, Yield, Dividends (PYD)
1

D_log(DIV)

CRSP

Log difference of the sum of the dividends in the last 4 quarters (divs are not reivested)

2

D_log(P)

CRSP

Log difference of the CRSP portfolio price when dividends are not reinvested

3

D_DIVreinveste CRSP

Log difference of the sum of the dividends in the last 4 quarters (divs are reinvested)

4

D_Preinveste

CRSP

Log difference of the CRSP portfolio price when dividends are reinvested

5

d-p

CRSP

DIVreinveste - Preinveste = log(DIV) - log(P)

6

P/E

Shiller

Price/earnings ratio

Interest rates and Spread (IRS)
7

RREL

FED

Difference b/w Risk free and its last 4 quarters average

8

Yield10y

FED

9

TRM10y-3m

FED

Quarterly yield of bonds with maturity 10 years
Difference b/w 10yTbonds rate and the risk free rate

10

Yield1y

FED

Yield from a t-bond with maturity one year (secondary mkt, nominal)

11

TRM10y-1y

FED

Term spread b/w 10years and 1 year t-bonds.

12

AAA

FED

AAA corporate bonds yield (Moody's seasoned)

13

BAA

FED

BAA corporate bonds yield (Moody's seasoned)

14

DEF

FED

AAA-BAA yield: risk default spread

15

RF

French One-month Treasury bill rate from French dataset

Risk Factors (RiF)
16

R15-R11

17

factor

French Small stock value spread constructed from French database
CP

Piazzesi-Cochrane risk factor, quarterly average (Cochrane and Piazzesi, 2005)

18

CAY

LL

Lettau-Ludvigson risk factor (Lettau and Ludvigson 2001a)

19

Mkt-RF

French Fama-French market risk factor (Fama and French, 1993)

20

SMB

French Fama-French risk factor (Fama and French, 1993)

21

HML

French Fama-French risk factor (Fama and French, 1993)

22

UMD

French Momentum risk factor, French data set

Industries

(Industry Returns 4 digit SIC codes, French data set)

23

Agric

French

24

Food

French

25

Soda

French

26

Beer

French

27

Smoke

French

28

Toys

French

29

Fun

French

30

Books

French

31

Hshld

French

32

Clths

French

33

MedEq

French

34

Drugs

French

35

Chems

French

36

Rubbr

French

37

Txtls

French

38

BldMt

French

39

Cnstr

French

40

Steel

French

41

Mach

French

42

ElcEq

French

43

Autos

French

44

Aero

French

45

Ships

French

46

Mines

French

47

Coal

French

48

Oil

French

49

Util

French

50

Telcm

French

51

PerSv

French

52

BusSv

French

53

Comps

French

54

Chips

French

55

LabEq

French

56

Paper

French

57

Boxes

French

58

Trans

French

59

Whlsl

French

60

Rtail

French

61

Meals

French

62

Banks

French

63

Insur

French

64

RlEst

French

65

Fin

French

66

Other

French

Size/BM

(Returns on stock portfolios sorted by size and book-to-market ratio, French dataset)

67

1_2

French

68

1_4

French

69

1_5

French

70

1_6

French

71

1_7

French

72

1_8

French

73

1_9

French

74

1_High

French

75

2_Low

French

76

2_2

French

77

2_3

French

78

2_4

French

79

2_5

French

80

2_6

French

81

2_7

French

82

2_8

French

83

2_9

French

84

2_High

French

85

3_Low

French

86

3_2

French

87

3_3

French

88

3_4

French

89

3_5

French

90

3_6

French

91

3_7

French

92

3_8

French

93

3_9

French

94

3_High

French

95

4_Low

French

96

4_2

French

97

4_3

French

98

4_4

French

99

4_5

French

100

4_6

French

101

4_7

French

102

4_8

French

103

4_9

French

104

4_High

French

105

5_Low

French

106

5_2

French

107

5_3

French

108

5_4

French

109

5_5

French

110

5_6

French

111

5_7

French

112

5_8

French

113

5_9

French

114

5_High

French

115

6_Low

French

116

6_2

French

117

6_3

French

118

6_4

French

119

6_5

French

120

6_6

French

121

6_7

French

122

6_8

French

123

6_9

French

124

6_High

French

125

7_Low

French

126

7_2

French

127

7_3

French

128

7_4

French

129

7_5

French

130

7_6

French

131

7_7

French

132

7_8

French

133

7_9

French

134

8_Low

French

135

8_2

French

136

8_3

French

137

8_4

French

138

8_5

French

139

8_6

French

140

8_7

French

141

8_8

French

142

8_9

French

143

8_High

French

144

9_Low

French

145

9_2

French

146

9_3

French

147

9_4

French

148

9_5

French

149

9_6

French

150

9_7

French

151

9_8

French

152

9_High

French

153

10_Low

French

154

10_2

French

155

10_3

French

156

10_4

French

157

10_5

French

158

10_6

French

159

10_7

French

References
Andersen, T. G., T. Bollerslev, and F. X. Diebold (2002): “Parametric and Nonparametric Volatility Measurement,”Unpublished paper, University of Pennsylvania.
Andersen, T. G., T. Bollerslev, F. X. Diebold, and P. Labys (2003): “Modeling
and Forecasting Realized Volatility,”Econometrica, 71, 579–626.
Andersen, T. G., T. Bollerslev, F. X. Diebold, and J. Wu (2005a): “Betas and
the Macroeconomy,”Unpublished paper, University of Pennsylvania.
(2005b): “A Framework for Exploring the Macroeconomic Determinants of Systematic Risk,”Unpublished paper, University of Pennsylvania.
Bai, J., and S. Ng (2002): “Determining the Number of Factors in Approximate Factor
Models,”Econometrica, 70(1), 191–221.
(2005): “Con…dence Intervals for Di¤usion Index Forecasts and Inference for FactorAugmented Regressions,”Unpublished paper, New York University.
Bernanke, B. S., J. Boivin, and P. Eliasz (2005): “Should Central Banks Respond to
Movements in Asset Prices?,”Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120(1).
Bollerslev, T., R. Engle, and J. Wooldridge (1988): “A Capital Asset Pricing
Model with Time-Varying Covariances,”Journal of Political Economy, 96, 116–131.
Boudoukh, J., M. Richardson, and R. F. Whitelaw (1997): “Nonlinearities in the
Relation between the Equity Risk Premium and the Term Structure,” Management Science, 43(3), 371–385.
Brandt, M. W., and Q. Kang (2004): “On the Relation Between the Conditional Mean
and Volatility of Stock Returns: A Latent VAR Approach,” Journal of Financial Economics, 72, 217–257.
Breen, W., L. R. Glosten, and R. Jagannathan (1989): “Economic Signi…cance of
Predictable Variations in Stock Index Returns,”Journal of Finance, 44(5), 1177–89.
Campbell, J. Y. (1987): “Stock Returns and the Term Structure,” Journal of Financial
Economics, 18, 373–399.

(1991): “A Variance Decomposition for Stock Returns,” Economic Journal, 101,
157–179.
Campbell, J. Y., and J. H. Cochrane (1999): “By Force of Habit: A ConsumptionBased Explanation of Aggregate Stock Market Behavior,” Journal of Political Economy,
107, 205–251.
Campbell, J. Y., and L. Hentschel (1992): “An Asymmetric Model of Changing Volatility in Stock Returns,”Journal of Financial Economics, 31, 281–318.
Campbell, J. Y., and R. J. Shiller (1989): “The Dividend-Price Ratio and Expectations
of Future Dividends and Discount Factors,”Review of Financial Studies, 1(3), 195–228.
Campbell, J. Y., and S. Thompson (2004): “Predicting the Equity Premium Out of
Sample: Can Anything Beat the Historical Average?,” Unpublished paper, Harvard University.
Campbell, J. Y., and T. Voulteenaho (2005): “Good Beta, Bad Beta,” American
Economic Review, forthcoming, 94(5), 1249–1275.
Campbell, J. Y., and M. Yogo (2002): “E¢ cient Tests of Stock Return Predictability,”
Unpublished paper, Harvard University.
Chang, G., and S. M. Sundaresan (1999): “Asset Prices and Default-Free Term Structure in an Equilibrium Model of Default,”Unpublished paper, Columbia University.
Clark, T., and M. McCracken (2001): “Tests of Equal Forecast Accuracy and Encompassing for Nested Models,”Journal of Econometrics, 105, 85–110.
Cochrane, J. H., and M. Piazzesi (2005): “Bond Risk Premia,”The American Economic
Review, forthcoming.
Constantinides, G. M. (1990): “Habit-formation: A Resolution of the Equity Premium
Puzzle,”Journal of Political Economy, 98, 519–543.
Constantinides, G. M., and D. Duffie (1996): “Asset Pricing With Heterogeneous
Consumers,”Journal of Political Economy, 104, 219–40.
Fama, E. F., and K. R. French (1988): “Dividend Yields and Expected Stock Returns,”
Journal of Financial Economics, 22, 3–27.
(1989): “Business Conditions and Expected Returns on Stocks and Bonds,”Journal
of Financial Economics, 25, 23–49.

(1992): “The Cross-Section of Expected Returns,”Journal of Finance, 47, 427–465.
(1993): “Common Risk Factors in the Returns on Stocks and Bonds,” Journal of
Financial Economics, 33, 3–56.
Ferson, W. E., S. Sarkissian, and T. T. Simin (2003): “Spurious regressions in …nancial
economics?,”Journal of Finance, 58(4), 1393–1413.
French, K., G. W. Schwert, and R. F. Stambaugh (1987): “Expected Stock Returns
and Volatility,”Journal of Financial Economics, 19, 3–30.
Ghysels, E., P. Santa-Clara, and R. Valkanov (2005): “There is a Risk-Return
Tradeo¤ After All!,”Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.
Glosten, L. R., R. Jagannathan, and D. E. Runkle (1993): “On the Relation between
the Expected Value and the Volatility of the Nominal Excess Return on Stocks,”Journal
of Finance, 48(5), 1779–1801.
Goyal, A., and I. Welch (2004): “A Comprehensive Look at the Empirical Performance
of Equity Premium Prediction,”NBER Working Paper No. 10483.
Guo, H. (2005): “On the Out-of-Sample Predictability of Stock Market Returns,” Journal
of Business, forthcoming.
Hansen, L. P., and S. F. Richard (1987): “The Role of Condioning Information in
Deducing Testable Restrictions Implied by Dynamic Asset Pricing Models,”Econometrica,
55, 587–614.
Harvey, C. R. (1989): “Time-Varying Conditional Covariances in Tests of Asset Pricing
Models,”Journal of Financial Economics, 24, 289–371.
(1991): “The World Price of Covariance Risk,”Journal of Finance, 46, 111–117.
(2001): “The Speci…cation of Conditional Expectations,” Journal of Empirical
Finance, 8(5), 573–638.
Hodrick, R. (1992): “Dividend Yields and Expected Stock Returns: Alternative Procedures for Inference and Measurement,”Review of Financial Studies, 5, 357–386.
Kandel, S., and R. F. Stambaugh (1990): “Expectations and Volatility of Consumption
and Asset Returns,”Review of Financial Studies, 3, 207–232.
Lettau, M., and S. C. Ludvigson (2001a): “Consumption, Aggregate Wealth and Expected Stock Returns,”Journal of Finance, 56(3), 815–849.

(2001b): “Resurrecting the (C)CAPM: A Cross-Sectional Test When Risk Premia
are Time-Varying,”Journal of Political Economy, 109(6), 1238–1287.
(2003): “Measuring and Modeling Variation in the Risk-Return Tradeo¤,”Unpublished paper, New York University.
Lettau, M., S. C. Ludvigson, and J. A. Wachter (2004): “The Declining Equity
Premium: What Role Does Macroeconomic Risk Play?,” Unpublished paper, New York
University.
Lewellen, J. W. (2004): “Predicting Returns With Financial Ratios,”Journal of Financial Economics, 74, 209–235.
Lintner, J. (1965): “Security Prices, Risk and Maximal Gains from Diversi…cation,”Journal of Finance, 20, 587–615.
Pagan, A. R., and Y. S. Hong (1991): “Nonparametric Estimation and the Risk Premium,”in Nonparametric Models in Econometrics and Statistics: Proceedings of the Fifth
International Symposium in Economic Theory and Econometrics, ed. by W. A. Barnett,
J. A. Powell, and G. E. Tauchen, pp. 51–75. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, New
York and Melbourne.
Sargent, T. J. (1989): “Two Models of Measurements and the Investment Accelerator,”
Journal of Political Economy, 97, 251–287.
Sargent, T. J., and C. A. Sims (1977): “Business Cycle Modeling Without Pretending
to Have Too Much Apriori Theory,” in New Methods of Business Cycle Research, ed. by
C. A. Sims. Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, Minneapolis, MN.
Schwert, G. W. (1989): “Why Does Stock Market Volatility Change over Time,”Journal
of Finance, 44(5), 1115–53.
(1990): “Stock Market Volatility and the Crash of 87,”Review of Financial Studies,
3(1), 77–102.
Sharpe, W. (1964): “Capital Asset Prices: A Theory of Market Equilibrium under Conditions of Risk,”Journal of Finance, 19, 425–444.
Shiller, R. J. (1981): “Do Stock Prices Move Too Much to be Justi…ed by Subsequent
Changes in Dividends?,”American Economic Review, 71, 421–436.

Stock, J. H., and M. W. Watson (1989): “New Indexes of Coincident and Leading
Economic Indicators,” in NBER Macroeconomics Annual: 1989, ed. by O. J. Blanchard,
and S. Fischer, pp. 351–94. MIT Press, Cambridge.

(1991): “A Probability Model of the Coincident Economic Indicators,” in The
Leading Economic Indicators: New Approaches and Forecasting Records, ed. by G. Moore,
and K. Lahiri, pp. 63–90. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

(2002a): “Forecasting Using Principal Components From a Large Number of Predictors,”Journal of the American Statistical Association, 97(460), 1167–1179.
(2002b): “Macroeconomic Forecasting Using Di¤usion Indexes,” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 20(2), 147–162.
(2004): “Forecasting With Many Predictors,”Unpublished, Princeton University.
Whitelaw, R. F. (1994): “Time Variations and Covariations in the Expectation and
Volatility of Stock Market Returns,”The Journal of Finance, 49(2), 515–41.
(2000): “Stock Market Risk and Return: An Equilibrium Approach,” Review of
Financial Studies, 13(3), 521–547.

Table 1: Summary Statistics for fbit and gbit
i
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8

AR1(fbit )
0.678
0.806
0.565
0.369
0.039
0.590
0.195
0.221

Ri2
0.245
0.431
0.499
0.538
0.569
0.598
0.622
0.643

AR1(b
git )
-0.03
0.844
0.166
0.284
0.762
0.492
0.429
0.262

Ri2
0.657
0.700
0.739
0.774
0.792
0.807
0.820
0.831

For i = 1; : : : 8, fbit is estimated by the method of principal components using a panel of data with 209 indicators

of economic activity from t=1960:1-2002:4 (172 time series observations). The data are transformed (taking logs
and di¤erenced where appropriate) and standardized prior to estimation. g
bit is estimated using a panel of 159

series consisting primarily of …nancial data. AR1(Fit ); AR1(g
bit ) are the …rst order autocorrelation coe¢ cients for

factors i. The relative importance of the common component, Ri2 , is calculated as the fraction of total variance in
the data explained by factors 1 to i.

Table 2: Regressions of Quarterly Excess Returns on Lagged Conditioning Variables and Factors

Model: mt+1 =

0

+

0 b
1 Ft

+

0 b
2 Gt

+

0

Zt +

t+1 ;

Row Regressor
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f )
1
cayt
1.98
2.09
2.15
1.55
(t-stat)
(4.01)
(4.52) (4.22)
(2.67)
2
dt pt
0.03
0.00
(t-stat)
(1.62)
(0.89)
3
RRELt
-5.86 -7.31
-4.13
(t-stat)
(-2.29) (-2.47)
(-1.69)
4
V OLt
0.43
0.44
0.46
(t-stat)
(2.18) (2.21)
(2.58)
5
DEFt
0.64
(t-stat)
(0.11)
6
T RMt
-2.12
(t-stat)
(-0.61)
b
7
F2t
-0.02
-0.01
(t-stat)
(-2.92) (-1.35)
b
8
F5t
-0.01
-0.01
(t-stat)
(-2.43) (-1.09)
b
9
G3t
0.02
0.02
(t-stat)
(3.49) (2.96)
b
10
G6t
-0.02
-0.01
(t-stat)
(-2.80) (-1.26)
2
11
R
0.08
0.01
0.12
0.11
0.10
0.15
12
BIC
-2.07 -2.00
-2.06
-2.01
-2.02
-2.01
Notes: See next page.

Table 2, Continued:
Regressions of Quarterly Excess Returns on Lagged Conditioning Variables and Factors

Model: mt+1 =
Row Regressor
13
cayt
(t-stat)
14
RRELt
(t-stat)
15
V OLt
(t-stat)
b2
16
G
1t

17
18

19
20
21
22

(t-stat)
b3t
G
(t-stat)
b6t
G
(t-stat)
b
b4t
G3t G
(t-stat)
Fb3t Fb6t
(t-stat)
2
R
BIC

(g)

(h)

0

+

0 b
1 Ft

+

0 b
2 Gt

+

0

Zt +

t+1 ;

(i)
(j)
(k)
(l)
(m)
(n)
(o)
(p)
1.70
1.84
1.68
1.79
1.64
1.90
1.82
(3.20)
(4.04) (3.89) (4.00) (3.48) (4.24) (3.94)
-5.59
-5.40 -5.05 -5.42
(-2.27)
(-2.26) (-2.39) (-2.28)
0.19
0.14
(0.79)
(0.60)
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
(4.11) (4.06) (2.02) (3.73) (2.15) (3.40) (3.68) (3.57) (3.91) (3.88)
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.02
(3.73) (3.78) (3.11) (3.40) (3.04) (2.98) (3.11) (2.90) (3.17) (3.13)
-0.01
-0.01
(-2.44) (-0.82)
0.01
0.01
0.01
(3.77)
(3.09)
(2.80)
-0.01
-0.01
(-3.00)
(-2.90)
0.09
0.10
0.16
0.12
0.16
0.19
0.17
0.17
0.17
0.16
-2.06
-2.05
-2.04
-2.07
-2.07
-2.08
-2.10
-2.10
-2.10
-2.11

Notes: The table reports estimates from OLS regressions of excess stock returns on lagged variables named
in column 2. The dependent variable mt+1 is the log return on the CRSP value-weighted stock market index

bit and G
bit are estimated by the method of principal
over the three-month Treasury-bill rate. The regressors F

components using a panel of data with 209 and 159 individual series, respectively, over the period 1960:1-2002:4.

bit from a panel of data on …nancial returns. The
Fbit are constructed from a panel of data on economic activity, G

exogenous conditioning variables in Zt are cayt , the consumption-wealth variable of Lettau and Ludvigson (2001),
dt

pt the CRSP log dividend-price ratio, RRELt , the yield on the 3-month Treasury bill rate minus its 4 quarter

moving average, DEFt , the BAA corporate bond rate minus the AAA corporate bond rate, T RMt , the di¤erence
between the 10-year Treasury bond yield and the 3-month Treasury bill yield. Newey and West (1987) corrected

t-statistics are reported in parentheses. Coe¢ cients that are statistically signi…cant at the 5% level are highlighted
in bold. A constant is always included in the regression even though its estimate is not reported in the Table. The
sample spans the period from the …rst quarter of 1960 to the fourth quarter of 2002.

Table 3: Regressions of Quarterly Volatility on Lagged Conditioning Variables and Factors

bt + b0 Zt + ut+1 ;
Model: V OLt+1 = a0 + a01 Fbt + a02 G

Row Regressor
(a)
(b)
(c)
1
cayt
-0.702
(t-stat)
(-2.776)
2
dt pt
-0.026
(t-stat)
(-2.652)
3
DEFt
(t-stat)
4
Y IELDt
(t-stat)
5
V OLt
(t-stat)
6
V OLt 1
(t-stat)
7
F1t
0.007
(t-stat)
(3.650)
b
8
F6t
-0.005
(t-stat)
(-2.393)
9
Fb7t
-0.006
(t-stat)
(-2.558)
b1t
10
G
11
12
13
14

(t-stat)
b6t
G
(t-stat)
b7t
G
(t-stat)
2
R
BIC

0.08
-4.17

Notes: See next page.

0.10
-4.19

0.11
-4.16

(d)

(e)

(f )

(g)

(h)
(i)
-0.167
-0.302
(-1.303) (-1.694)
-0.031
-0.033
(-4.829) (-2.333)
2.237
3.822
(1.0156) (1.095)
1.046
1.033
(3.566)
(1.863)
0.380
0.306
0.284
0.254
(5.525) (5.143) (4.956)
(3.442)
0.198
0.211
0.075
0.168
(2.895) (3.621) (1.505)
(2.587)
0.005
0.002
0.004
(3.233) (1.603)
(2.860)
-0.005 -0.004
-0.004
(-2.617) (-2.436)
(2.728)
-0.005 -0.004
-0.004
(2.273) (-2.295)
(-2.0243)
-0.004 -0.004
-0.002
-0.004
(-2.177) (-2.193)
(1.139)
(1.772)
0.009
0.007
0.004
-0.001
(3.116) (2.454)
(2.372)
(-0.418)
0.009
0.009
0.005
-0.002
(3.673) (4.198)
(2.517)
(-0.437)
0.18
0.25
0.32
0.32
0.40
0.36
-4.24
-4.25
-4.37
-4.38
-4.41
-4.35

Table 3, continued:
Regressions of Quarterly Volatility on Lagged Conditioning Variables and Factors

bt + b0 Zt + ut+1 ;
Model: V OLt+1 = a0 + a01 Fbt + a02 G

Row Regressor
(i)
(j)
(k)
(l)
(m)
(n)
15
cayt
-0.147
(t-stat)
(-1.083)
16
dt pt
-0.026 -0.035 -0.036 -0.033
(t-stat)
(-4.169) (-6.945) (-6.717) (-5.030)
17
Y IELDt
1.165
1.291
1.152
1.299
(t-stat)
(3.852) (4.554) (3.592) (3.854)
18
V OLt
0.365
0.245
0.345
0.347
0.399
(t-stat)
(5.141) (3.845) (5.025) (4.706) (4.332)
19
V OLt 1
0.139
0.070
(t-stat)
(2.329) (1.577)
b
20
F1t
0.003
0.005
0.005
(t-stat)
(2.135) (3.802) (4.015)
b
21
F6t
-0.004 -0.005
(t-stat)
(-2.349) (-2.854)
b
22
F7t
-0.003
(t-stat)
(-1.715)
2
b
23
G1t
0.002
-0.001
0.000
(t-stat)
(2.525) (-1.407) (0.176)
b
b
24
G2t G7t -0.006 -0.004
-0.001
(t-stat)
(-6.192) (-5.053) (-1.285)
2
b3t
25
G
0.005
0.003
0.002
(t-stat)
(4.892) (2.662) (2.545)
b5t G
b7t
26
G
0.010
0.007
0.004
(t-stat)
(3.023) (2.628) (1.982)
2
27
R
0.25
0.35
0.41
0.39
0.37
0.35
28
BIC
-4.30
-4.40
-4.35
-4.49
-4.49
-4.48
Notes: See next page.

Notes: The table reports estimates from OLS regressions of excess stock returns on lagged variables named in
column 2. The dependent variable V OLt+1 is realized volatility for the CRSP value-weighted stock market index.

bit and G
bit are estimated by the method of principal components using a panel of data with 209
The regressors F

bit are constructed from a panel of data on
and 159 individual series, respectively, over the period 1960:1-2002:4. F
bit from a panel of data on …nancial returns. The exogenous conditioning variables in Zt are
economic activity, G
cayt , the consumption-wealth variable of Lettau and Ludvigson (2001), dt

pt the CRSP log dividend-price ratio,

DEFt , the BAA corporate bond rate minus the AAA corporate bond rate, Y IELDt , the one year Treasury bill
yield. Newey and West (1987) corrected t-statistics are reported in parentheses. Coe¢ cients that are statistically

signi…cant at the 5% level are highlighted in bold. A constant is always included in the regression even though its
estimate is not reported in the Table. The sample spans the period from the …rst quarter of 1960 to the fourth
quarter of 2002.

Table 4: Relation Between Conditional Mean and Conditional Volatility

Model:

t

= +

1 t

+

2 t 1

+

t 1

+ mt

1

+ "t+1

Regressor
Row

2

Regressand
mt 1
R
BIC
1;t
1;t 1
2;t
2;t 1
1;t 1
2;t 1
(t-stat) (t-stat) (t-stat) (t-stat) (t-stat) (t-stat) (t-stat)
t =
1
1.40
-1.46
0.62
0.41 -4.23
1;t
(4.80) (-7.67) (10.03)
2
1.07
-1.18
0.71
-0.11
0.46 -4.30
1;t
(4.14) (-7.25) (11.32)
(-3.40)
3
-0.05
-0.01 -3.76
1;t
(-0.14)
4
1.31
-1.38
0.63
0.42 -4.25
1;t
(4.57) (-7.09) (10.60)
5
1.00
–1.14
0.71
-0.11
0.47 -4.32
1;t
(4.05) (-7.35) (11.71) (-3.39)
6
-0.08
0.00 -3.76
1;t
(-0.22)
7
1.40
-1.45
0.62
0.36 -4.07
2;t
(4.80) (-7.52) (9.53)
8
1.08
-1.19
0.70
-0.11
0.41 -4.13
2;t
(4.17) (-7.11) (10.46)
(-3.22)
9
-0.04
-0.01 -3.75
2;t
(-0.11)
10
1.31
-1.39
0.63
0.42 -4.24
2;t
(4.66) (-7.23) (10.11)
11
1.02
-1.15
0.71
-0.10
0.46 -4.30
2;t
(4.15) (-7.51) (10.84) (-3.16)
12
-0.07
-0.00 -3.75
2;t
(-0.18)
13-2SLS
2.22
-2.15
0.68
0.36
–
1;t
(4.86) (-5.53) (11.58)
Notes: See next page.

Notes: This table reports regressions of estimated conditional mean excess returns

t

bt (mt+1 ), mt+1
E

rt+1 rf;t+1 ;on the CRSP value-weighted stock market index over the 3-month Treasury-bill rate on estimated
bt (V OLt+1 ) and one-period lags of these variables. The conditional mean and volatility
conditional volatility t E
are estimated as …tted values from regressions of excess returns and realized volatility on informaton variables known
at time t.

1;t

denotes the …tted value from a regression of excess returns on the information variables cay t , G21t ,

and G3t .

2;t

denotes the …tted value from a regression of excess returns on the information variables used to

form

1;t

plus F3t F6t .

1;t

denotes the …tted value from a regression of realized quarterly volatility, V OLt+1 ,

on the information variables dt

pt , the CRSP log dividend-price ratio, Y IELDt , the one year Treasury bill
yield, F1t and V OLt . 2;t denotes the …tted value from a regression of realized quarterly volatility, V OLt+1 ,
on the information variables dt
pt , the CRSP log dividend-price ratio, Y IELDt , the one year Treasury bill
yield, and V OLt . Newey and West (1987) corrected t-statistics are reported in parentheses. Coe¢ cients that are
statistically signi…cant at the 5% level are highlighted in bold. A constant is always included in the regression even
though its estimate is not reported in the table. All estimation is by OLS except for results reported in row 13,
where two-stage least squares (2SLS) is used with instruments

1;t 1 ;

1;t 2 ;

1;t 1 ;

sample spans the period from the …rst quarter of 1960 to the fourth quarter of 2002.

1;t 2 ; mt 1 ; V

OLt 1 :The

Table 5:
Relation Between Conditional Mean and Conditional Volatility, Omitting Factors

Model:

t

= +

1 t

+

2 t 1

+

t 1

+ mt

1

+ "t+1

Regressor
2

Row Regressand
mt 1
R
BIC
2;t
2;t 1
3;t 1
(t-stat) (t-stat) (t-stat) (t-stat)
t =
1
0.33
-0.36
0.85
0.72 -5.66
3;t
(2.67) (-2.81) (20.28)
2
0.02
-0.07
0.93
-0.10 0.81 -6.00
3;t
(0.20) (-0.76) (26.39) (-6.42)
3
-0.44
0.10 -4.55
3;t
(-2.36)
4
-0.49
-0.04 0.12 -4.54
3;t
(-2.57)
(-2.00)
Notes: This table reports regressions of estimated conditional mean excess returns

t

bt (mt+1 ) on the
E

CRSP value-weighted stock market index over the 3-month Treasury-bill rate on estimated conditional volatility

bt (V OLt+1 ) and one-period lags of these variables. The conditional mean and volatility are estimated as
E
…tted values from regressions of excess returns and realized volatility on informaton variables known at time t. 3;t
t

denotes the …tted value from a regression of excess returns on cayt , the best …tting conditional mean speci…cation
omitting factors, according to the BIC criterion.

2;t

is the best …tting conditional volatility speci…cation omitting

factors, according to the BIC criterion, and denotes the …tted value from a regression of realized quarterly volatility,
V OLt+1 , on the information variables dt

pt , the CRSP log dividend-price ratio, Y IELDt , the one year Treasury

bill yield, and V OLt . Newey and West (1987) corrected t-statistics are reported in parentheses. Coe¢ cients that
are statistically signi…cant at the 5% level are highlighted in bold. A constant is always included in the regression
even though its estimate is not reported in the table. The sample spans the period from the …rst quarter of 1960
to the fourth quarter of 2002.

Table 6: Out-of-Sample Predictive Power
Row Forecast Sample
1
2
3
4
5
6

1975:1-2003:2
1985:1-2003:2
1995:1-2003:2
1975:1-2003:2
1985:1-2003:2
1995:1-2003:2

Comparison
M SEu =M SEr
Excess Returns
0
b21 ; G
b3 v.s. const
G
0.918
b2 ; G
b3
G
1

0

Test Statistic 95% Asympt. CV
11.56**

2.79

v.s. const

0.911

7.69**

1.90

v.s. const

0.786

5.97**

1.03

Volatility
SP EC1 v.s. AR
0.902
SP EC1 v.s. AR
0.821
SP EC1 v.s. AR
0.706

16.58**
9.75**
10.04**

3.46
4.35
1.28

b21 ; G
b3
G

0

**Signi…cant at the one percent or better level.
Notes: The table reports results from one-quarter-ahead out-of-sample forecast comparisons of log excess re0

turns, mt+1 and volatility, V OLt+1 . (G21 ; G3 ) denotes a predictive model for excess returns that uses the
squared value of G1t and G3t as predictive variables. These factors are formed from the …nancial data set with

cay t removed. SP EC1 denotes a forecasting model for volatility that includes as predictive variables dt pt ; the
CRSP log dividend-price ratio, Y IELDt , the one year Treasury bill yield, F1t , and V OLt 1 . Rows 1 through
0
3 report forecast comparisons of an unrestricted model, which includes (G21 ; G3 ) as predictors for excess returns,
with the constant expected returns benchmark (const). Rows 4 through 6 report forecast comparisons of the
unrestricted model Spec1 for predicting volatility, with a …rst-order autoregressive benchmark (AR). M SEu is
the mean-squared forecasting error of the unrestricted model; M SEr is the mean-squared forecasting error of the
restricted model that excludes additional forecasting variables. In the column labeled “M SEu =M SEr ”, a number
less than one indicates that the models that use the additional forecasting variables have lower forecast error than
the benchmark to which it is compared. In Rows 1 and 4, the parameters and factors were estimated recursively,
using only data available from 1960:1 through 1975:1. The forecasting regressions were run for t =1960:1,...,1975:1,
then the values of the regressors at t =1975:1 were used to forecast m1975:2 (row 1) or V OL1975:2 . All parameters and factors are then reestimated from 1960:1 through 1975:2, and forecasts were recomputed for m1975:3
and V OL1975:3 , and so on, until the …nal out-of-sample forecast is made for m2003:2 and V OL2003:2 : The same
procedure is used to compute results reported in rows 2, 3, 5, and 6 where the initial estimation period is either

t =1960:1,...,1985:1 (rows 2 and 5) or t =1960:1,...,1995:1 (rows 3 and 6). The column labeled “Test Statistic”
reports the ENC-NEW test statistic of Clark and McCracken (2001) for the null hypothesis that the benchmark
model encompasses the unrestricted model with additional predictors. The alternative is that the unrestricted
model contains information that could be used to improve the benchmark model’s forecast. “95% Asympt. CV”
gives the 95th percentile of the asymptotic distribution of the test statistic.

Table 7: Small Sample Inference: Bootstrapping the Regressors
Excess Returns

xit
c
b21t
G
b3t
G

cayt
R2
R2

^
-0.001
0.011
0.019
1.822
0.170
0.16

(
(
(
(
(
(

Unrestricted model
95% CI
90% CI
-0.016 0.013) ( -0.013 0.011)
0.003 0.018) ( 0.004 0.017)
0.007 0.032) ( 0.009 0.030)
0.793 2.836) ( 0.986 2.659)
0.068 0.287) ( 0.081 0.266)
0.051 0.274) ( 0.065 0.253)

(
(
(
(
(
(

Under
95% CI
-0.006 0.025)
-0.008 0.008)
-0.013 0.014)
-1.135 1.109)
0.001 0.055)
-0.017 0.038)

the null
90% CI
( -0.003 0.023)
( -0.007 0.006)
( -0.011 0.012)
( -0.936 0.927)
( 0.002 0.046)
( -0.016 0.029)

Volatility

xit
c
dt pt
Y IELDt
Fb1t
V OLt
R2
R2

^
-0.106
-0.036
1.152
0.005
0.347
0.386
0.371

(
(
(
(
(
(
(

Unrestricted model
95% CI
90% CI
-0.177 -0.047) ( -0.165 -0.059)
-0.056 -0.021) ( -0.053 -0.024)
0.446 2.022)
( 0.584 1.853)
0.001 0.010)
( 0.002 0.009)
0.188 0.451)
( 0.210 0.428)
0.189 0.694)
( 0.223 0.652)
0.170 0.686)
( 0.204 0.644)

(
(
(
(
(
(
(

Under
95% CI
-0.017 0.141)
-0.022 0.020)
-0.907 0.974)
-0.005 0.005)
-0.158 0.138)
0.003 0.065)
-0.021 0.043)

the null
90% CI
( -0.002 0.126)
( -0.017 0.016)
( -0.758 0.791)
( -0.004 0.004)
( -0.138 0.110)
( 0.004 0.056)
( -0.020 0.033)

Let xit denote the state variables for summarizing the conditional value of yt (either returns or volatility):
For each state variable xit ; i = 1; : : : K

1, we estimate xit =

i xit 1

residuals. Let x
~1;: = x1;: . For t = 2; : : : T , x
~it is generated as x
~it =

+ vit . Let v:;t be the 1

K vector of

~it 1
ix

+ v~it , where v~:;t is sampled (with
~ 1 : K 1) ^ (1 :
replacement) from v:;t ; t = 2; : : : T . Unrestricted samples of yt are generated recursively as y~t = X(t;
K 1) + ^ (K)~
yt 1 e~(t), where ^ are the least squares estimates reported in column 2, and e~ are resampled from

e^, the least squares residuals. Samples under the null are generated as y~ = y + e~0 , where e~0 is resampled form
e^ = y

y.

Table 8: Small Sample Inference: Bootstrapping the Panel Data and Regressors
Excess Returns

^

xit
c
b21t
G
b3t
G

cayt
R2
R2
2
(2)

-0.001
0.011
0.019
1.822
0.170
0.16
16.87

(
(
(
(
(
(
(

Unrestricted Model
95% CI
90% CI
-0.015 0.013) ( -0.013 0.011)
0.004 0.017) ( 0.005 0.016)
0.007 0.032) ( 0.009 0.029)
0.802 2.835) ( 0.988 2.654)
0.077 0.297) ( 0.092 0.278)
0.060 0.284) ( 0.076 0.265)
6.373 44.108) ( 8.010 39.600)

(
(
(
(
(
(
(

Under
95% CI
-0.006 0.025)
-0.008 0.007)
-0.013 0.013)
-1.124 1.109)
0.001 0.056)
-0.017 0.039)
0.052 7.651)

the null
90% CI
( -0.003 0.023)
( -0.007 0.006)
( -0.011 0.011)
( -0.929 0.917)
( 0.002 0.046)
( -0.016 0.029)
( 0.104 6.117)

Volatility

xit
c
dt pt
Y IELDt
Fb1t
V OLt
R2
R2

^
-0.106
-0.036
1.152
0.005
0.347
0.386
0.371

(
(
(
(
(
(
(

unrestricted model
95% CI
90% CI
-0.177 -0.048) ( -0.163 -0.060)
-0.056 -0.021) ( -0.053 -0.024)
0.459 2.009)
( 0.596 1.855)
0.002 0.010)
( 0.002 0.009)
0.191 0.453)
( 0.211 0.428)
0.208 0.709)
( 0.242 0.674)
0.189 0.702)
( 0.224 0.666)

(
(
(
(
(
(
(

under the null
95% CI
90% CI
-0.017 0.141) ( -0.002 0.125)
-0.022 0.020) ( -0.017 0.016)
-0.918 0.962) ( -0.744 0.768)
-0.005 0.005) ( -0.004 0.004)
-0.158 0.138) ( -0.139 0.110)
0.003 0.066) ( 0.004 0.056)
-0.021 0.044) ( -0.020 0.034)

Let xit denote the state variables for summarizing the conditional value of yt (either returns or volatility): Let
zit ; i = 1; : : : N; t = 1; : : : T be standardized data from which the factors are extracted. By de…nition, zit = 0i Ft +uit .
Let ^ i and F^t be the principal components estimators of i and Ft , and let u
^it be the estimated idiosyncratic
errors. For each i = 1; : : : N , we estimate an AR(1) model u
^it =

^it 1 + wit . Let u
~1;: = u1;: . For t = 2; : : : T ,
iu
0
+
w
~
,
where
w
~
is
sampled
(with
replacement)
from
w
^
;
t
=
2;
:
:
: T . Then z~it = ^ i F^t + u
~it .
1
it
i;t
:;t
Estimation by principal components on the data z~ yields F~t . The remaining regressors (other than the factors and

let u
~it = ^i u
~it

the lagged dependent variable) are obtained by …rst estimating an AR(1), and then resampling the residuals of the
~ ^ + e~, where ^ are the least squares estimates
autoregressions. Unrestricted samples of yt are generated as y~ = X
~ is a set of bootstrapped
reported in column 2, and e~ are resampled from e^, the least squares residuals, and X
0
regressors with F^t replaced by F~t . Samples under the null are generated as y~ = y + e~ , where e~0 is resampled form
e^ = y

2

y. The row labeled “

coe¢ cients on

G21t 1

and G3t

1

(2)” in the top panel reports the Wald statistic for the null hypothesis that the

are jointly zero. The Wald statistic has an asymptotic

2

(2) distribution.

Figure 1
.20

Fitted Expected Returns

.16
.12
.08
.04
.00
-.04
-.08
-.12
1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000
95% Bootstrap Confidence Interval

Estimate Based on CRSP-VW Index Data
Note: Shading denotes quarters designated recessions by the NBER.
Source: Authors’ Calculations.

Figure 2
.16

Fitted Volatility

.12

.08

.04

.00
1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000
95% Bootstrap Confidence Interval
Note: Shading denotes quarters designated recessions by the NBER.
Source: Authors’ Calculations.

Figure 3
.15
Correlation = -2.6%

Fitted Values

.10

.05

.00

-.05
Returns

Volatility

-.10
1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000
Note: Shading denotes quarters designated recessions by the NBER.
Source: Authors’ Calculations.

Figure 4
Quarterly Conditional Sharp Ratio

2.0

Std. Dev. = 0.53

1.6
1.2
0.8
0.4
0.0
-0.4
-0.8
-1.2
1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000

Estimate Based on CRSP-VW Index Data
Note: Shading denotes quarters designated recessions by the NBER.
Source: Authors’ Calculations.

Figure 5
.3
Forecast

Actual Returns

Out Of Sample Forecast

.2
.1
.0
-.1
-.2
-.3
-.4
1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000

Note: Shading denotes quarters designated recessions by the
NBER. Forecasts are based on volatility and combination
factors only, constructed from financial dataset
excluding cay.
Source: Authors’ Calculations.

Figure 6
.30
Forecast

Actual Volatility

Out Of Sample Forecast

.25
.20
.15
.10
.05
.00
1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000

Note: Shading denotes quarters designated recessions by the
NBER. Forecasts are based on the dividend-price ratio,
one-year Treasury yield, one-quarter lagged volatility
and the real factor from the macro dataset.
Source: Authors’ Calculations.

