NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

POLITICAL COMPETITION AND ECONOMIC PERFORMANCE:
THEORY AND EVIDENCE FROM THE UNITED STATES
Timothy Besley
Torsten Persson
Daniel Sturm
Working Paper 11484
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11484
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2005

We would like to thank John Curry from the Bureau of the Census and Jim Snyder for providing data. We
are also grateful to Niciola Gennailoi, Michael Smart, David Strömberg, Guido Tabellini, Gavin Wright and
participants in seminars at Stanford, Princeton, CIAR, the Stockholm School of Economics, IIES and
Bocconi for their helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by Timothy Besley, Torsten Persson and Daniel Sturm. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Political Competition and Economic Performance: Theory and Evidence from the United States
Timothy Besley, Torsten Persson and Daniel Sturm
NBER Working Paper No. 11484
July 2005
JEL No. D72, H11, H70, N12, O11
ABSTRACT
One of the most cherished propositions in economics is that market competition by and large raises
consumer welfare. But whether political competition has similarly virtuous consequences is far less
discussed. This paper formulates a model to explain why political competition may enhance
economic performance and uses the United States as a testing ground for the model’s implications.
It finds statistically robust evidence that political competition has quantitatively important effects
on state income growth, state policies, and the quality of Governors.
Timothy Besley
LSE
Houghton Street
London WC2A 2AE
UNITED KINGDOM
t.besley@lse.ac.uk
Torsten Persson
Director, Institute for International Economic Studies
Stockholm University
S-106 91 Stockholm
SWEDEN
and NBER
torsten.persson@iies.su.se
Daniel Sturm
Department of Economics
University of Munich
Ludwigstr. 28 (Vgb)
80539 Munich
GERMANY
daniel.sturm@lmu.de

1

Introduction

One of the most cherished propositions in economics is that, by and large,
monopoly is bad and market competition between firms raises the welfare
of consumers. Whether competition between political parties has similarly
virtuous consequences is far less discussed1 , despite the long-term monopoly
on power by a dominant party observed in a number of existing democracies.2 Moreover, almost no empirical studies speak to the question if political
competition matters at all for economic outcomes.3
In this paper, we argue that political competition may be crucial for
economic performance. Even though aspects of the argument are quite
general, our main motivation is the breakup of the Democratic party’s near
monopoly on power in the Southern U.S. since the Civil War. To illustrate
this development, Figure 1 graphs political competition averaged by decade
from the 1930s to the 1990s, using a measure (detailed below) that varies
between −0.5 and 0 with larger values corresponding to more competition.
The graph contrasts the average in the 16 states of the US “South” (as
defined by the US Census) against the remainder of the continental United
States, the “Non-South”. It shows a clear increase in political competition
in the South, particularly in the 1960s, but almost no change elsewhere.
The post-war economic transformation of the American South — with
living standards converging to those in the rest of the US — is typically viewed
as reflecting either economic forces alone, as in the macroeconomic growth
literature (see, e.g., Barro and Sala-i-Martin, 2004, Ch.11), or a change in
“culture”, as in the literature on political and economic history (see e.g.,
Wright, 1999). Our argument does not rule out these explanations for
Southern convergence, but adds the force of political competition.4 Figure
2 plots the log of income per-capita in each of the Southern states relative
1

See, however, Wittman (1989, 1995) for a strong argument in favor of the eﬃciency of
political competition. Polo (1998) and Svensson (1998) provide early formal analyses of
how lopsided political competition may lead to excessive rent-seeking or lack of ineﬃcient
provision of government services.
2
A large literature in political science discusses the dominant-party systems in countries such as Japan (the LDP), Malaysia (the UMNO), Mexico (the IRP), Paraguay (the
Colorado Party), and South Africa (the ANC), and their political eﬀects (see e.g., the
contributions in Pempel, 1990)
3
Besley and Case (2003) discusses some evidence from studies using U.S. data.
4
Haber (2004) also argues that institutions that create competition are important to
understand economic development in the U.S.

2

to the entire US against political competition in the state relative to the
entire US, again using averages for each decade from 1930 to 2000. The
regression line has a slope of unity, suggesting that each percentage point
of (relative) political competition is associated with a percentage point of
(relative) income. Our paper will argue that this relation is not a mere
coincidence, but the result of a causal mechanism.
To shed light on this mechanism, we use the abolition of voting rights
restrictions. Figure 3 shows an “event-study diagram”, plotting growth rates
within an average state five years before and after the last form of voting
restriction was abolished. The picture gives a clear sense of a growth takeoﬀ,
with an average growth diﬀerence of about 2% before and after the “event”.
Against this background, Section 2 presents a theoretical model to illustrate how lack of political competition can harm economic performance. In
the model, party attachments are formed on a non-economic issue (race in
the example of the South). These attachments may give one party a large
advantage, blunting the responsiveness to voters over economic issues. This
lack of accountability, in turn, allows narrow economic interests, antithetical
to growth, to capture the political process. Our model weaves these ideas
together by showing how lopsided political support and weak political competition may spill over into party selection of low-quality political candidates
who are more susceptible to influence by special interests. It has a number
of empirical predictions linking economic growth, the quality of government
and economic policies to the degree of political competition.
In Section 3, we further discuss why the United States provide a good
testing ground for these predictions. We briefly describe the economic and
political transformation of the South in the post-war period. The description
pays particular attention to the 1960s, and the events leading up to the federal
Voting Rights Act of 1965 (and its 1970 amendment), which eliminated poll
taxes, literacy tests and other means of disenfranchising large parts of the
black and poor population. We argue that this shock, together with the
Civil Rights legislation of about the same time, fundamentally changed the
nature of political competition and reduced the electoral advantage enjoyed
by Southern Democrats. We further argue that the Voting Rights Act was
largely exogenous to the political, policy and economic outcomes of interest.
The section also details our data set, which is based on annual observations
from 1929 and onwards in the 48 continental states.
We thus use panel data and instrumental-variable methods to estimate
the eﬀect of political competition. Our results are presented in Section
3

4. Political competition has a statistically significant and quantitatively
important positive eﬀect on state income and growth. According to our IV
estimates, the stiﬀer political competition induced by the Voting Rights Act
raised long-run income in the average aﬀected state by about 25%. Moreover,
we find empirical evidence for the mechanisms highlighted by the theoretical
model. Thus, higher political competition leads to policies of lower overall
state taxes and more business-friendly labor regulation, and to a larger share
of manufacturing in state production. We also find that the quality of
politicians — as measured by state Governor fixed eﬀects — are increasing in
the degree of political competition. The empirical strategy and the results
are robust to a number of legitimate statistical concerns.
Section 5 oﬀers concluding comments, and an Appendix collects some
proofs of theoretical results.

2

Theory

Our model illustrates how political competition may aﬀect policy and economic growth via the “quality of politicians”. While the argument is quite
general, our specific purpose is to explain the development in the US states.
To that end, we model a state where two parties compete by picking candidates for Gubernatorial elections. We distinguish two groups of citizens —
those holding a traditional asset (called “land”) and those drawing incomes
only from the modern sector. Policy is set by the elected Governor and may
favor the traditional economy. Owners of the traditional asset protect their
quasi-rents by lobbying, but their influence depends on the characteristics of
the Governor. Political (non)competition is defined as an electoral advantage
of one party arising from a surplus of “committed voters”, due to the parties’
non-pliable stance on non-economic issues, which — in the Southern example
— we can think about as “race”. Such electoral advantage gives a dominant
party less incentive to appeal to “swing voters”, who are not committed on
racial issues and prepared to vote against candidates susceptible to lobbying.
The model assumes away all intrinsic diﬀerences between the parties except
for the asymmetric political support for their stance on non-economic issues.
Though this assumption is patently unrealistic, it allows us to focus on the
implications of party competition pure and simple.
The timing of the model is as follows. At a first stage, each of the parties
picks a candidate for Governor under uncertainty about a popularity shock.
4

Second, this shock is realized as voters cast their ballot. Third, whoever is
elected Governor receives transfers from vested interests and selects a policy.
At the last stage, all private economic choices are made. The next three
subsections deal with these choices in reverse order. Thus, we first describe a
simple economic model, then the political model, and finally the full politicoeconomic equilibrium.

2.1

The Economic Model

Our model of the economy and policy is based on Persson and Tabellini (2000,
Section 14.3). It has two sectors — a traditional sector and a new sector
— and two time periods. The key question is how the owners of traditional
factors can protect their quasi-rents and the impact of such protection on
economic growth.
Preferences and Technology Consider a finite population of citizens of
size M, where each citizen has an economic type and a political type. Political
types are discussed in the next subsection. Economic types denoted by I ∈
{K, L} refer to the ownership of factors. One group, I = K has (1 − α)M
members, owns no land and is referred to as “capitalists”. The other group,
I = L with size αM, is referred to as “landowners”, each of which is endowed
with the same amount of land l/α, where l is the per-capita amount of land
in the population.
Every citizen has the same period 1 endowment, y1 , which can be consumed or invested in either of the two sectors S ∈ {T, N}, where T stands
for “traditional” and N for “new”. The period 1 budget constraint of an
individual from group I is thus
cI1 + kI,T + kI,N = y1 ,

(1)

where cI1 is his first period consumption and kI,T and kI,N are his investment
in the traditional and new sector respectively.
In period 2, the same consumption good can be produced with two different technologies, associated with the two diﬀerent sectors of production.
In the new sector, production requires only capital and takes place according to a linear technology Y N = MAk N , where Y N is output of the new
sector and kN is the per-capita investment in the new sector. The traditional sector has a well-behaved, constant-returns-to-scale production technology Y T = MQ(kT , l), where Y T is output of the traditional sector, kT is
5

per-capita investment in the traditional sector. We assume that Q(kT , l) is
increasing in both arguments and that Qkk < 0, Qll < 0 and Qlk > 0.5
A citizen in group I evaluates economic outcomes by the quasi-linear
utility function:
V I = H(cI1 ) + cI2 ,
(2)
where cIj is consumption in period j and we assume that Hc > 0 and Hcc < 0.
Policy and Growth Relative profitability of capital in the two sectors will
be aﬀected by a host of diﬀerent policies, including regulatory, industrial,
labor-market, and commercial policies. For simplicity, we represent such
detailed policies by a catch-all sectorial tax τ ≥ 0, levied on the output of
the new sector. The per-capita tax proceeds τ Ak N are distributed as an
equal lump-sum transfer f to every individual in the economy. The period
2 budget constraint of an individual from group I is thus:
cI2 = (1 − τ )Ak I,N + Qk kI,T + Ql lI + f ,

(3)

where lI denotes per-capita holdings of land in group I and we have exploited
that in equilibrium the reward to each factor equals its marginal product.
When savings and investments are chosen τ is already known, as economic
choices are made after the election in the political model below. Optimal
economic decisions imply that in (an interior) equilibrium:
Hc (y1 − kI,N − kI,T ) = A(1 − τ ) = Qk (kT , l) .

(4)

In equilibrium each person thus invests the same amount kI = kI,N + kI,T
irrespective of whether she owns any land and is indiﬀerent between the two
forms of investment. As Hcc is negative, we get a savings function, kI = K(τ ),
which defines per-capita investment as a declining function of the sectorial
tax. However, as Qkk < 0 per-capita investment in the traditional sector is an
increasing function of the tax on the new sector, kT = K T (τ ). Moreover, this
implies that the quasi-rents to land R(τ ) = Ql (K T (τ ), l) are an increasing
function of the tax as Qlk > 0.6
5

In a slight re-formulation of the model, the two sectors could be based on technologies
requiring alternative sets of skills, as in Krusell and Rios-Rull (1996).
6
The model does not explicitly allow for a market in land. As long as there is some
indivisibility in land, such that inequalities in land hodings remain, we would obtain
similar conclusions with the existence of a land market as the conflicts of interest over

6

Substituting into the utility function (2) yields:
V I (τ ) = F (τ ) + R(τ )(lI − l) ,

(5)

where F (τ ) is defined as
F (τ ) = H(y1 − K(τ )) + A(K(τ ) − K T (τ )) + Q(K T (τ ), l) ,

(6)

and where we have used the fact that the per-capita budget constraint is
f = τ A(K(τ ) − K T (τ )). The expression F (τ ) is the indirect utility of a hypothetical person, who owns the average per-capita amount of land. The indirect utility function V I illustrates the conflict of interest between landowners
and capitalists. Since Fτ (0) = 0 (see below) and Rτ (0) > 0, landowners with
above average land holdings prefer a strictly positive value of τ , even though
a positive tax rate depresses the return to capital. The utilitarian optimum
is to set τ = 0, as average utility has a maximum at the point τ = 0.7
The two key results of the economic model for the growth rate and the
structure of the economy are first that the growth rate (of GDP and GDP
per-capita)
g(τ ) =

1
M(y2 − y1 )
= [A(K(τ ) − K T (τ )) + Q(K T (τ ), l)] − 1
My1
y1

(7)

is a decreasing function of the tax on the modern sector τ . Intuitively, the
tax depresses growth for two reasons: it distorts the accumulation as well as
the allocation of capital between the two sectors.8 Second, the share of the
modern sector in period 2 output:
sN (τ ) =

Ak N
A(K(τ ) − K T (τ ))
=
.
y2
A(K(τ ) − K T (τ )) + Q(K T (τ ), l)

is an increasing function of the tax on the modern sector. The results of the
discussion in this section are summarized in the following lemma:
policy would remain. In the Krusell-Rios Rull (1996) interpretation of the model the
issue does not arise, as a market for human-capital specific knowledge is more diﬃcult to
imagine.
£
¤
7
Diﬀerentiating (6) results in Fτ = (A − Hc )Kτ + (Qk − A)KτT . From (4) τ = 0
implies that A = Hc and Qk = A which implies that Fτ (0) = 0. Given the convexity of
the technology and perferences this is also the unique global maximum.
8
In our simple two-period model, this result would hold even if total savings were
inelastic in the sectorial tax rate, as the latter would still lead to misallocation of capital.

7

Lemma 1 A positive tax rate on the modern sector reduces the growth rate
and increases the share of the traditional sector in output. Owners of land
prefer a strictly positive tax rate on the modern sector, while the utilitarian
optimum is to set the tax equal to zero.

2.2

The Political Model

As mentioned above, each citizen has a political type P , defined with reference to the utility obtained from non-economic issues. We distinguish three
types: Democrats, Republicans and independents, P ∈ {D, R, 0}. The partisan voters make up a share 1 − σ of the population. Let δ(P, p)∆ be the
utility gain of a partisan from having his preferred political type, p, in the
Governor’s oﬃce. We assume that p ∈ {D, R}, only Democrats and Republicans are organized in parties, which field candidates for Gubernatorial oﬃce.
Thus, we set δ (D, R) = δ (R, D) = 0, and δ (P, P ) = 1. As explained below,
independents also care about the parties’ stance on non-economic issues, but
to a smaller degree than partisans.
The political part of the model concerns the behavior of interest groups,
political parties, elected Governors, and voters. We next describe each of
these political players.
Interest groups Agents who benefit from the use of capital in traditional
technologies become vested interests and have strong incentives to get organized in order to protect their quasi-rents. In sectors based on new technologies, interest groups are harder to form, especially before the necessary
factors or skills have been accumulated. As policy decisions precede economic
decisions in the model, we realistically assume that only economic group L
lobbies the elected governor and his party, by paying a per-member transfer
t in exchange for policy favors.
To simplify the analysis, we assume that the land-owning group only consists of ideologically motivated citizens from both parties. After the election,
however, any political conflict is moot. Moreover, as all members own the
same amount of land, there is no policy conflict within the group either. The
utility level of the representative member, at the point of lobbying, is:
V P,L (τ , t) = V L (τ ) − t = F (τ ) +

8

1−α
R(τ )l − t .
α

(8)

Parties and Elected Governors Each of the two parties, D and R, comprises a small fraction of ideologically motivated citizens, with P = D, R. We
rule out any direct vested interests in the party, by assuming that all party
members are capitalists, i.e., they have economic type K. Parties pick candidates for Governor among the party members. Hence, the approach is in
the spirit of the citizen-candidate models of Osborne and Slivinski (1986) and
Besley and Coate (1997). Candidate selection provides a process through
which policies become credible.
After the election, the candidate elected Governor picks the policy τ and
decides how much transfers to take from the special interest. Elected candidates share any transfers they receive with party members, according to
a fixed sharing rule where the party’s share is given by ρ. We assume that
(1 − ρ) > M1 . Party members diﬀer in the amount of “guilt” or “shame”
they attach to any bribe received. Let q, with 0 ≤ q ≤ 1, denote the discounting due to guilt or shame, so a unit of transfers has value (1 − q) to
a politician. In the following, we refer to q as the “quality” of a candidate.
The preferences of an elected Governor, at the point where he sets policy,
can thus be written as:
V G,K (q, τ , t) = V K (τ ) + (1 − ρ)(1 − q)tαM + ∆
= F (τ ) − R(τ )l + (1 − ρ)(1 − q)tαM + ∆ .

(9)

The party share of transfers is split equally between members. Let the
number of party members (in each party) be mM, with m < 12 (1 − σ), and
denote the average quality of party members by qP . We assume that parties
are “Coasian”, maximizing the indirect utility of the average member and
that mρ (1 − qP ) > 1.
The utility of the average party member when the policy is τ and transfers
are t is:
³
´
ρ
V P,K (τ , t) = V K (τ ) + δ (P, p) ∆ + (1 − q P )αt .
(10)
m
Selecting a candidate for Gubernatorial oﬃce thus amounts to picking a type
qp , which aﬀects the level of t if the election is won by party P .
Voters The two groups of voters correspond to the political types defined
above. A share (1 − σ) of the population — the types P = D, R — strongly
prefers one of the parties due to non-economic issues. We assume this preference to be strong enough that committed citizens vote for their preferred
9

party no matter what (i.e., the utility gain ∆ is large enough to dominate
any economic concerns). Of these committed voters, a fraction (1 + λ) /2
prefers party D. To fix ideas on the US South example, we think about race
as the salient non-economic issue and the Democrats as having an advantage
among the committed voters in this dimension, i.e., λ > 0.
The remaining share σ of voters are independent “swing voters”. We
have already assumed that all landowners are partisans, so all swing voters
are found among the capitalists. Thus, the economic payoﬀ to a swing voter
of having party p ∈ {D, R} in oﬃce is vp = V K (τ p ), depending on the party’s
tax policy as evaluated by a capitalist. In addition, swing voters have an
individual party preference, ω[δ (0, D) − δ (0, R)], for or against party D’s
relative stance on non-economic issues, with ω S 0 distributed among the
voters.
A swing voter casts her ballot for party D whenever:
η + ω + vD − vR > 0 ,
where η is an aggregate popularity shock. If Gω denotes the c.d.f. for ω, it
is easy to show that party D wins when:
σ [1 − 2Gω (−η − vD + vR )] + (1 − σ) λ > 0 .
i
h
1
1
1
, with 2φ
, 2φ
< ∆; namely,
To simplify, ω is assumed uniform on − 2φ
all swing voters have weaker preferences on non-economic issues than the
partisan voters. We may use the support of the ω distribution to gauge
the relative salience of non-economic issues among the swing voters, with a
higher value of φ capturing lower salience.
Under this parametrization, the condition for a Democratic win becomes:
σφ [η + vD − vR ] + (1 − σ) λ > 0 ,
corresponding to the following critical value of the popularity:
η̂ =

1−σ λ
· − [vD − vR ] .
σ
φ

i
h
To further simplify the algebra, let η be uniform on − 2ξ1 , 2ξ1 and define the
parameter κ =

1−σ
σ

· λφ .

10

We assume that parties pick their candidates for Governor knowing the
distributions of ω and η, but not the realization of η. At that point in time,
the probability of a Democratic win is:
⎧
⎨ 1 if ξ [κ + vD − vR ] ≥ 12
1
+ ξ [κ + vD − vR ]
(11)
PD (κ + vD − vR ) =
⎩ 2
1
0 if ξ [κ + vD − vR ] ≤ − 2 .

Hence, this probabilistic voting model predicts the electoral success of the
Democrats to primarily depend on two factors. One is any utility diﬀerence
in the eyes of the swing voters between the policies pursued by the Democratic
and Republican candidates, vD − vR .
The second factor favoring the Democrats is their inherent electoral advantage, as summarized by the composite parameter κ, a policy-neutral measure of political competition. Note that competition is stiﬀer when κ is lower.
According to the model, this happens when λ is lower — the Democrats have a
smaller number of committed supporters. Political competition is also stiﬀer
when σ is greater — the swing voters make up a larger fraction of the voting
population (recall that we assume λ > 0). Lower salience of non-economic
issues among the swing voters — a higher φ — raises political competition, as
would a more ideologically neutral set of swing voters.9
Post-election Politics The candidate and party winning the election is
described by the pair {qp , p}. In the post-election lobbying game, suppose
the elected Governor can make a take-it-or-leave-it oﬀer to the interest group
(less drastic assumptions about bargaining would yield similar qualitative
results). But the reservation utility of an interest group member cannot fall
below the utility of a capitalist (e.g., because of the possibility of land sales),
i.e., V K (τ ) = F (τ ) − R(τ )l. It follows from (8) that equilibrium transfers
satisfy
R(τ )l
t=
.
α
In other words, the rent from land is fully captured and transferred to the
Governor and his party. Since Rτ > 0, higher taxes go hand in hand with
9

Our assumption that ω is uniformly distributed is made for analytical convenience.
If instead ω had a smooth unimodal distribution, a shift of the mass in this distribution
towards the middle would raise the p.d.f. gω in that range. An increase in the density φ
of our assumed uniform can be thought of as approximating such a shift towards a more
ideologically neutral electorate.

11

higher transfers.
Using this result in (9), yields the Governor’s ex post payoﬀ
F (τ ) + ∆ + R(τ )l(1 − ρ)(1 − qp )M − 1) .

(12)

Since there is no commitment in policy, the equilibrium tax rate is the ex
post optimal tax rate for the elected Governor, i.e.,
τ (qp ) = arg max {F (τ ) + R(τ )l ((1 − ρ)(1 − qp )M − 1)} .
τ ∈[0,1]

It is straightforward to see that for qp below q, defined by (1−ρ)(1−q)M = 1,
we have τ (qp ) > 0. Unless his quality is very high, the elected Governor
wants to protect production in the traditional sector, because he can extract
the rents of protection from the landowners through the lobbying process.
Given that qp < q, τ (qp ) follows from the first-order condition:
Fτ (τ (qp ))
= −[(1 − ρ)(1 − qp )M − 1] .
Rτ (τ (qp )) l

(13)

By the second-order condition, the left-hand side of (13) is decreasing in
τ . As the right-hand side is increasing in qp , τ (qp ) must be a decreasing
function. By fielding a gubernatorial candidate of lower quality (a lower qp ),
a (winning) party can thus implement a higher tax rate with more protection
of the traditional sector and higher transfers to party members.
Pre-election Politics The main check on rent extraction by parties is the
contest over swing-voter support. Eﬀectively, parties compete by oﬀering
equilibrium utility levels of their candidates to the swing voters. The range
of utility levels [v, v] a party can credibly oﬀer, however, depends on the
range of ex post optimal taxes. To define this range, let
v = F (τ (q)) − R(τ (q))l
be the swing voter’s payoﬀ, when a party picks its most preferred tax rate
without worrying about the electoral consequences. Thus, the party just
maximizes its ex post policy preferences, which from (10) are
F (τ ) + R(τ )l(

ρ
(1 − q P ) − 1) .
m
12

(14)

This simple problem of strategic delegation ideally calls for a Governor type
whose weight on rents in the ex post payoﬀ (12) coincides with the party’s
weight in (14). However, if the party’s share of the rent is large enough,
it will always want the most corrupt kind of Governor. Hence, the party’s
preference for quality q is given by
¾
½
ρ(1 − qP )
,0 .
(15)
q = max 1 −
mM (1 − ρ)
We assume that M is large enough so that q > 0.10 Next, let
v = F (0) − R (0) l
be the swing voters’ highest utility level, i.e., when τ = 0. By our previous
results, this will be delivered by any Governor with qp ≥ q. Without loss of
generality, we can thus confine the party’s choice of politician types to the
range q ∈ [q, q] or, equivalently, to the range of swing-voter utilities v ∈ [v, v] ,
where v is defined by
v = F (τ (q (v))) − R (τ (q (v))) l .
We can write the (ex post) payoﬀ to party members if they oﬀer v to the
swing voters as:
¡
¢
m − ρ(1 − qP )
W (v) = F (τ (q (v))) − R (τ (q (v))) l
.
m
It is straightforward to show that the derivative of this function satisfies
Wv (v) = 1 −

ρ(1 − qP )
<0
mM(1 − ρ)(1 − qp )

(16)

on v ∈ (v, v].
With these preliminaries in hand, we write the pre-election maximands
of the Democratic party:
vR + PD (κ + vD − vR ) [∆ + W (vD ) − vR ]
10

(17)

If there is equal sharing between the party and the Governor, i.e.
(1 − ρ) =

1
mM + 1

then q = q P , i.e. the party prefers a Governor who is of the same quality as party members.

13

and the Republican party:
∆ + W (vR ) − PD (κ + vD − vR ) [∆ + W (vR ) − vD ] .

(18)

where we have used the fact that the party members have the same utility
levels as ordinary capitalists if their party does not gain oﬃce.
The trade-oﬀ facing parties should now be clear. By oﬀering a higher
utility to the swing voters — i.e., by picking a higher quality Gubernatorial
candidate (someone with higher qp ) — they raise their chance of winning.
However, this reduces the rents that they capture from the interest group,
if winning (τ and hence t will be lower). The full politico-economic equilibrium reveals how this trade-oﬀ is resolved by party strategies. The only
diﬀerence between the parties is captured by κ which measures the extent of
political competition. As we will see, because κ > 0 the Democrats (more
generally the party with an inherent electoral advantage) are less pro-growth.
Intuitively, a party with a larger set of committed voters is tempted to pick
politicians who care more about rents, protect the rents and the size of the
traditional sector, and thereby retard growth.

2.3

Politico-economic Equilibrium

In this section, we close the model by studying its full equilibrium. We show
that, over a range of values for κ, growth and the quality of politicians is
increasing in the degree of political competition.
An equilibrium is a pair of utility levels {vD , vR } ∈ [v, v] 2 which forms
a Nash equilibrium in pre-election game between the two parties, given the
equilibrium behavior of voters, interest groups and elected Governors, as
described above. At no loss of generality, we focus on the empirically relevant
case where κ > 0, i.e., the electorate is biased towards the Democrats.
We will study the equilibrium of the model when two key assumptions
hold:
Assumption 1

¢
¡
1 ρ 1 − qP
·
>1.
2
m
This guarantees that the party reaction functions slope upwards in a neighborhood of v. We also postulate

Assumption 2
1 ρ(1 − qP ) − m
·
> ξ∆ .
2
m
14

This says that the party’s marginal cost of in terms of foregone rents exceeds
the marginal benefit in terms of ideological stance, at the point where no
protection is given to the traditional sector. As a result, (dominant) parties
will tend to pick an outcome where vp < v. Clearly, Assumptions 1 and 2
hold for small enough m or q P , since then rents are concentrated in a small
elite or the party members do not have large inhibitions in extracting political
rents.
We start by stating (proof in the Appendix)
Lemma 2 An equilibrium exists.
From (11), (17) and (18) — at an interior equilibrium — the reaction functions of the two parties satisfy:
¾
½
1
+ ξ[κ − vD (vR ) − vR ] Wv (vD (vR )) + ξ [∆ + W (vD (vR )) − vR ] = 0 .
2
and
¾
½
1
− ξ[κ − vD − vR (vD )] Wv (vR (vD )) + ξ [∆ + W (vR (vD )) − vD ] = 0 .
2
We now characterize equilibria for diﬀerent values of parameter κ.
Consider first the extreme case where the party bias is so large that
the Democrats win any election. They can thus pick their most preferred
Governor q, oﬀering minimum utility v to the swing voters, and still win for
sure even though the Republicans oﬀer them maximum utility v. Define
κH =

1
+v−v
2ξ

as the level of κ which guarantees victory to the Democrats in this circumstance. Then we have (proof in the Appendix):
Lemma 3 If κ ≥ κH . the Democratic party wins for sure and picks qD = q
∗
and vD
= v. Growth and the quality of Governors are minimized and do not
depend on political competition.
What happens when competition is suﬃcient to give the Republicans
some chance of winning? Under Assumption 1, there is a range of κ such
∗
< v. Thus, the Republicans still
that the equilibrium has vR∗ = v and v < vD
15

do exactly what the swing voters want and the Democrats pick an interior
point. Define:
∆m
.
κL = κH −
(ρ(1 − qP ) − m)
Assumption 1 guarantees that κL > 0. At this level of κ, the Republicans
will pick v whatever the Democrats choose. Thus we have:
∗
Lemma 4 For κ ∈ (κL , κH ), v < vD
< v = vR∗ . Over this range, stiﬀer political competition improves the quality of the Governor, brings about lower
taxes, and raises growth. This improvement comes about only through Democratic candidates and policies.

Republicans (more generally the underdog party) are more pro-growth
than Democrats (the overdog party), but are still at a corner solution giving
swing voters what they want. Stiﬀer political competition now has two effects: raising the utility the Democrats oﬀer to swing voters which increases
growth when they are in oﬃce, and making it more likely that the Republicans win.
Finally, we consider the outcome when competition becomes very stiﬀ.
Under Assumption 2, we can find an interior equilibrium, such that both
Democrats and Republicans oﬀering something below v. The eﬀect of an
increase in political competition is now ambiguous (proof in the Appendix).
Lemma 5 There exists κ < κL , for which we have an interior equilibrium
with vp∗ ∈ (v, v) for p ∈ {D, R} . The ranking of the parties’ stances on
growth and the eﬀect of a marginal change in political competition are ambiguous in sign.
For small enough κ, an increase in political competition (smaller κ) leads
to a higher v for the Democrats and a lower v for the Republicans. At the
same time, the probability that the Republicans win is increasing. Without making stronger assumptions on parameter values, the overall eﬀect on
growth of political competition is ambiguous over this range of κ.
Let us summarize the results. Under Assumptions 1 and 2, the model
predicts the following relations between political competition, political outcomes and economic growth (recall that Democrats and Republicans really
stand for the advantaged and disadvantaged party, respectively).
Proposition The eﬀect of political competition on economic outcomes has
three ranges:
16

1. For very high κ above an upper threshold (κH ) the Democrats pursue
their own preferred (anti-growth) policy by optimally picking bad Governors who win for sure and take bribes from the traditional sector which
they protect.
2. For κ in an intermediate range above a lower threshold (κL ), the Republicans pick highly pro-growth policies, and the Democrats still choose
bad candidates for Governor, but are somewhat constrained. As competition increases, the probability of observing a Republican Governor
goes up and the Democrats improve the quality of their gubernatorial
candidates. Hence, taxes go down, while the quality of politicians,
the output share of the modern sector and economic growth go up with
competition.
3. For κ close enough to zero, the party ranking and the eﬀect of political
competition on policy and economic growth are ambiguous.

3

The US as a Testing Ground

In this section, we discuss how to apply the insights from the model to
the impact of state-wide political competition on economic growth in the
United States. As already mentioned in the Introduction, the main historical
episode we want to exploit is the increase in political competition associated
with the breakdown of Democratic near-monopoly on power in Southern
states post World War II. We begin with some general background.

3.1

Historical background

The Southern Economy, Polity and Society Understanding developments in the U.S. South inevitably requires a joint analysis of the economy,
society, and polity of these states and their common historical roots. The
Civil War may have abolished slavery for good, but its aftermath left an
economy heavily specialized in certain forms of agriculture, a polity dominated by the Democratic party, and a society where the rights of blacks were
severely constrained.
The long-standing diﬀerences in (average) living standards between Southern states and the remainder of the United States were rooted in an economy

17

dominated by a single form of production, in particular the plantation for
cotton or tobacco. As noted by Naylor and Clotfelter (1975, p.190)
"Through most of its history, the South’s political structure
has been dominated by a conservative rural minority that sought
to advance its self-interests through policies such as the perpetuation of a ready supply of cheap labor. Because of the South’s
rigid social structure, the rural middle class was abnormally subordinated to the planter class."
The so-called “planter class” represents the elite from a traditional sector,
like the one in our economic and political model. Another group with similar goals was the owners of the traditional textile mills located in the South.
These elites clearly wanted to protect their quasi-rents. As vested interests they worked to suppress public infrastructure and reduce educational
attainment, neither of which was conducive to rural diversification. There
is no reason per se, however, why the dominance of a small, mainly rural
elite should always prevent rural diversification and hinder economic growth.
Indeed Britain’s industrial revolution is a major counter-example. The key
feature of our theoretical model is that the modern sector uses capital and
not land. In nineteenth century Britain, the rural elite were needed as financiers in the equivalent of our modern sector creating a complementarity
between landownership and industrial development. It is less clear that the
Southern elites had anything like this to oﬀer.
Over time, bringing modern industry to the South became more important and by the 1930s a number of states were waking up to the possibility
of promoting economic growth. For example, Governor White of Mississippi
was elected in 1935 on a pro-industrialization ticket (see Cobb, 1993). In
the post-war period, Southern states began to adopt a variety of policies
explicitly aimed at attracting industry: discouragement of unionization, a
relatively regressive tax base, provision of infrastructure and subsidies, especially in urban areas. By 1975, a business friendliness ranking compiled by
Fantus consulting, had three southern states — Texas, Alabama and Virginia
— at the top of the list and eight southern states in the top twelve (Cobb,
1993, Table 15).
The overall trends in post-war economic developments are undisputable
— income per-capita in the South converging to the rest of the U.S. Income
convergence surely, in part, reflects the economic forces emphasized in the
18

growth literature (see Barro and Sala-i-Martin, 2004, for an overview and
also applications to the U.S. States).
Southern Democrats had completely dominated state politics since the
1880s. A key to our political model is that interests groups, such as the
planter class, support low-quality politicians who become subservient to their
vested economic interests. Implicitly, we thus assume that within-party
competition in a dominant party, say through primary elections, can not play
the same role as between party competition in fostering a good selection of
candidates.11 That the political domination by Southern Democrats resulted
in the election of low-quality politicians is indeed a resounding theme in the
political-science literature. In his classic book on Southern politics, V.O.
Key (1955) demonstrates just why relying on within-party politics was an
imperfect substitute for between-party competition in bringing forward the
best candidates. According to Key, personal connections was the main
selection device rather than high skill and integrity. In his treatise on US
Governors, Sabato (1978, p. 122) echoes this general theme when he argues:
"A one-party system is undesirable for a state because it can
easily result in second-rate government. If a party is assured a
victory regardless of whom it chooses to nominate for governor,
then it is likely to treat the governorship more as a “reward” for
dedicated service to the party than as a public trust where the
best qualified men and women should be placed."
Our theoretical analysis emphasizes the Governor’s role in determining
policies that aﬀect growth. This rhymes well with the received view that
Governors in the one-party South were decisive, especially in determination
of the budget (see Naylor and Clotfelter, 1975). It also fits with the more
general trend emphasized by Sabato (1978) that Governors became more
important in policy making. The results in Besley and Case (2003) also
confirm the view that the incentives facing Governors shape policy making
in U.S. states.12
11

Adding primaries (at least closed primaries) in the model of the previous section would
not significantly change the results, under the same assumption about the motives of party
members.
12
Naturally, political competition as modeled in this paper will also aﬀect state congressional politics, and extensions of our — theoretical and empirical — analysis should take
this into account.

19

At the end of Reconstruction in 1877, Northern troops withdrew from the
South and relinquished control back to Southern states. From then on, white
Democratic majorities had systematically built a society, where blacks were
treated as second-class citizens to whites. The Jim Crow laws imposed racial
segregation on many aspects of public life. Blacks had to attend separate
schools, be buried in separate churchyards, abstain from using public libraries
or parks, and had to use separate restrooms, means of public transportation
or entries to public buildings. The legislation also permitted or encouraged
private discrimination, relegating blacks to badly paid jobs and forbidding
them to enter private restaurants, participate in sports, and so on. These
laws and practices were not only enforced by state courts and police forces,
but also by white vigilante groups, such as the Ku Klux Klan.
To uphold this status quo, blacks were largely kept disenfranchised. Discriminating regulation included all-white primaries in the Democratic party,
and “grandfather clauses” which reserved the franchise to individuals whose
grandparents had that right (before the Civil War). Requirements for voter
registration did not discriminate de jure, but de facto. Poll taxes may have
been relatively low, but were still significant for poorer voters. Moreover,
in some states tax liabilities cumulated over years; they had to be paid voluntarily and often before the beginning of primary elections, at collection
points inconvenient for prospective black voters (Ogden, 1958, discusses the
history of poll taxes up to the mid 1950s). Literacy tests were used and
administered in a very discretionary fashion. Mackaman (2005) describes
the rules in a county where blacks made up 58.7% of the population, in 1960,
but only 3.3% of the registered voters.
"In Selma, the county seat of Dallas County, for example,
voter registration took place only two days per month. An applicant was required to fill in more than 50 blanks, write from
dictation a part of the Constitution, answer four questions on
the government process, read four passages from the Constitution and answer four questions on the passages, and sign an oath
of loyalty to the United States and Alabama. ... Between May
1962 and August 1964 only 8.5 percent (93 out of 795) of blacks
who applied to register were enrolled, while during the same period 77 percent (945 of the 1232) applications from whites were
accepted."

20

The Civil Rights Movement and the Voting Rights Act Blacks in
Southern states and elsewhere had long been fighting against discrimination and segregation with quite limited success. The movement took an
important turn in 1954, however, when the US Supreme Court declared
state-sponsored school segregation unjustifiable in its Brown vs. Board of
Education decision. Spurred on by this ruling and the legitimacy it gave,
Southern civil-rights organizations moved their struggle from the court room
to the street. About ten years later, the issues were placed on the national
political agenda by events such as the March on Washington in the summer
of 1963, culminating in mass demonstrations and Martin Luther King Jr’s
classic "I have a dream" speech, and the widely publicized murders of three
civil rights activists in Mississippi committed by the Ku Klux Klan in the
summer of 1964.
Having assumed the presidential duties of assassinated John F. Kennedy,
Lyndon B. Johnson skillfully used the political momentum to introduce federal legislation. A landmark speech by the Senate Minority leader, Everett
Dirksen, lead Republicans to join Northern Democrats to overcome the filibustering tactics of Southern Democrats and pass the Civil Rights Act, which
Johnson signed into law on July 2, 1964. The Act bars racial discrimination
and segregation in public accommodations and facilities, employment and
education. Its first section also makes voting restrictions in federal elections
illegal.
But the disenfranchisement of blacks in state elections remained, and no
federal reform challenging state regulations appeared to be in sight as of
early 1965. In his State of the Union Address, which otherwise outlined a
very ambitious legislative agenda for the coming term, newly elected President Johnson did not mention anything whatsoever about existing voting
restrictions in the South. Neither did Dirksen, whose support would once
again become critical, in speeches about his legislative ambitions at the same
time. It appears that the 1965 Voting Rights Act was initiated very quickly,
in response to the graphic media coverage of brutal crackdowns, on March
7, 1965, by state troopers on the protesters against political discrimination
who were marching from Selma, AL to the state capital of Montgomery.13
The Voting Rights Act (and its 1970 amendment) gave the Attorney General authority to appoint federal examiners to oversee voter registration in
13

See Mackaman (2005) for an account of the political events in 1965 and the adoption
of the Act.

21

states, or parts of states, using literacy or other qualification tests and where
less than 50% of the voting age population was registered. The Attorney
General could also seek legal action against poll taxes as a prerequisite for voting in state elections, and the Supreme Court indeed ruled such usage illegal
in a 1966 decision, which became directly binding on Alabama, Mississippi,
Texas and Virginia.14 Just before this, Supreme Court judgements had also
dealt with malapportionment of electoral districts, which over-represented
rural areas in Southern states.15
This historical experience translates into increases in political competition
as expressed by a lower κ — the key parameter of our model. A first channel
is due to the enfranchisement of black voters by the Voting Rights Act.
Registration rates among blacks rose from about 20% on average, and 510% in states such as Alabama and Mississippi, to above 60% over a few
years. If these black voters were more prone than whites to be committed
Republicans — given the local Democrats’ record on race — or to be swing
voters, this would lower κ via lower values of λ or higher values of σ.
A second channel is through groups of citizens who had been enfranchised
all along. The Civil Rights Act reduced the ability of Southern Democrats
to maintain their stance on race, and to enact discriminating state laws and
policies, the salience of race in state politics is likely to have diminished.
As discussed in Section 2.2, this can be captured by an increase in φ, also
leading on to lower κ. This eﬀect may have been reinforced by greater
turnout among committed Republicans — resulting in a lower value of λ — or
among swing voters — a higher value of σ — those who had earlier not found
it worthwhile to participate in elections (in some Southern states Republican
candidates had not even appeared on the ballot). All of these eﬀects serve
to reduce κ.16
14

Harper v. Virginia State Board of Elections (1966). North Carolina, Louisiana,
Georgia, Florida, Arkansas, and Tennessee had abolished their poll taxes at an earlier
date.
15
Baker vs. Carr (1963) and Reynolds vs. Simms (1964).
16
The transformation of voter preferences and the two major parties in the South was
undoubtedly a very complex process (see Black and Black, 2003 for a recent account). But
some of the eﬀects in the text must have been operating. Over the 1960s, the support
for the Republicans in Southern states went up significantly, so as to raise drastically
our measures of political competition displayed in Figures 1 and 2 and described in the
next subsection. Finding an independent measure of voter preferences by race in the
relevant period is, however, very diﬃcult. The only available sources we are aware of are
the biannual National Election Studies (NES), which go back to the mid 1950s. But the

22

3.2

Data

We use data from a number of sources. State economic performance —
corresponding to y2 and g(τ ) in the model — is measured by per-capita state
personal income, provided by the Bureau of Census in electronic form and
is available from 1929 onwards. The structure of production is measured
using sectoral income shares, obtained from the same source; we mainly
identify 1 − sN (τ ) in the model with the share of non-farm income in total
personal income. All nominal variables are deflated with the CPI for all
urban consumers with the base year 1982-1984 provided by the Bureau of
Labour Statistics.
The empirical work also demands a proxy for κ in the model, the composite parameter for the dominant party’s electoral advantage. Our principal
measure comes from data in Ansolabehere and Snyder (2002) who collected
election results for a number of directly elected state executive oﬃces other
than the governorship, such as Lieutenant Governor, Secretary of State, Attorney General, etc. These election results should be a good proxy for the
relative party strength in the state: the low name recognition rates for such
lower-state oﬃces imply that ballots are mainly cast along party lines. Let
dst be the vote share of the Democrats in the lower-oﬃce elections in state
s at time t. While we formulated our argument for the case where the
Democrats are ahead, several states — such as Iowa, Kansas, South Dakota
and Wyoming — have been solidly Republican over the entire time period
that we study. Thus, we use a party-neutral measure:
pst = −abs (dst − 0.5) .
A value of pst close to zero means a high level of political competition (corresponding to a low value of κ). This variable has a distribution skewed to
the left: its mean and standard deviation are both −0.084. The maximum
value in the sample is −0.000 (Illinois in 1998), while the minimum is −0.447
number of respondents in each NES cross-section is quite small, at most 1500 in total, even
before singling out Southern voters and subdividing by race. (Moreover, every state did
not have a Gubernatorial election in every NES year and the NES has no data concerning
state congressional elections). With this qualification, self-declared (pre-election) party
preferences on a 1-7 scale (NES variable VCF0103) for whites suggest a clear shift away
from strong Democrats towards independent voters in the middle, when we compare the
pre-1964 period with the late1960s. For blacks, we see a shift towards the middle, but
also a decrease in the number of committed Republicans.

23

(Texas in 1940). We also use a more conventional measure of political competition, namely the combined seat advantage of the stronger party in the
state senate and house combined, as compiled by Besley and Case (2003)
based on the reports in the Book of the States.17
As discussed further below, we exploit changes in the uses of poll taxes and
literacy tests as instruments for political competition. As described above,
these were driven in significant measure by the federal Voting Right Acts of
1965 and 1970. To gauge these changes, we use data originally collected by
Husted and Kenny (1997) and extended in Besley and Case (2003). These
take the form of a binary indicator for the use of poll taxes, and a continuous
indicator of the share of the 1970 population of the state that was living in
an area that uses a literacy tests which attracted the scrutiny of the 1965
Voting Rights Act or its 1970 revision. In the first years when these data
are available (1929 and 1950, respectively), poll taxes are used in 10 states,
while literacy and qualifying tests are used in 15 states. An appendix (Table
A1) summarize these voting restrictions by state and year.
To capture aspects of economic policy (corresponding to τ in our model),
we analyze some components of the state budgets, such as total taxes and
corporate income taxes. This data was provided by the Bureau of the Census
in electronic form and originally appeared in the State Government Finances
series of the Census; it is available on a yearly basis from 1950 onwards
and for selected years between 1942 and 1950. In addition, we exploit the
presence of so-called Right to Work laws — which make it illegal to demand
that employees join a union, to deduct union fees automatically from wages,
etc. We collected data on the year when a state first passed (if at all) a
Right to Work law.18 The first state to pass such a law was Arkansas (in
1944), while 22 states have one by the end of the sample (in 2001).
Finally, to measure the quality of gubernatorial candidates in terms of
susceptibility to pressure from vested interests in traditional sectors (the
parameter qp in the model), we estimate a set of Governor fixed eﬀects. Each
governor’s party aﬃliation and tenure in oﬃce were taken from Congressional
Quarterly (1998). The estimation of the Governor fixed eﬀect is discussed
in detail below.
17

The index is closely related to a well-known measure in the political science literature
known as the “Ranney index”.
18
Information on the use of right-to-work laws was taken form the webpage of the
National Right to Work Legal Defense Foundation at http://www.nrtw.org/rtws.htm.

24

4
4.1

Evidence
Baseline Specification and Results

Our basic results concern the relationship between political competition, income per-capita and economic growth. The base-line specification is:
yst = ζ s + υ t + χpst + εst ,

(19)

where yst is the log income per-capita in state s in year t, ζ s is a state fixed
eﬀect and υ t is a year dummy variable and pst our political competition
measure. We estimate robust standard errors clustered by state which allow
for arbitrary state-specific serial correlation.
Baseline estimation results are collected in Table 1 where column (1)
displays estimates of (19) by OLS for annual data between 1929 and 2001. It
shows a strong positive correlation between political competition and income
per-capita.
The coeﬃcient χ gives us the causal eﬀect of political competition on yst
as long as pst is uncorrelated with εst . Our main econometric concern is
the possibility of omitted factors that influence both economics and politics.
The main candidate for this is the Civil Rights Act of 1964 whose removal
of discrimination in southern schools and labor markets following the Civil
Rights Act may have independently raised output and income.19 This is
an issue if the Civil Rights Act is also correlated with pst . The remaining
columns in Table 1 address such concerns in two ways: (i) introducing instruments for pst and (ii) adding in a separate set of year indicators for southern
states.
Our IV strategy introduces drivers of political change that are likely to
be independent of economic change — the abolition of poll taxes and literacy tests. The Voting Rights Act of 1965 (and its 1970 amendment). As
shown in Table A1, the timing of these voting law changes creates a source
of identification over time. We consider a “first stage” equation of the form:
pst = fs + nt + θzst + µst ,

(20)

where fs is a state fixed eﬀect and nt a year fixed eﬀect. The instruments zst
measure the extent to which registering to vote in state s in year t required
passing a literacy test and/or paying a poll tax.
19

Note however, that economic historians have been unable to identify large economic
eﬀects of these changes (see the overview in Wright, 1999).

25

Results from the IV version corresponding to (19), using (20) as the first
stage, is found in column (2). The IV estimate suggests a causal eﬀect of
political competition on state per-capita income. This estimate is precise
and considerably higher than the OLS estimate, as would be the case if
political competition is measured with noise. More precisely, permanent
changes in political competition will generate more pronounced eﬀects on
policy and economic outcomes, in the long term, than fluctuations from one
election to the next. By construction, our instruments will isolate such
permanent change. Column (3) displays the reduced form and, as expected,
the instruments are negatively correlated with income per-capita. In this
specification, poll taxes seem more important than literacy tests in explaining
economic performance.
Our second strategy to test the identifying assumption is presented in
columns (4) and (5) of Table 1, which augment (19) by a set of separate
year-dummy variables for Southern states. This will capture in a flexible
way any time trend in the South where the Civil Rights Act had its greatest
impact.20 The OLS and IV results show that, while the size of the eﬀect is
somewhat smaller than in columns (1) and (2), the eﬀect of political competition remains highly significant. Given that we are identifying most of the
change in political competition from Southern states, these results are quite
a stiﬀ test of the model and make us confident that an independent eﬀect
from political competition is at work.
In column (6) of Table 1, we take more literally the timing and importance of the 1965 Voting Rights Act and its eﬀect on abolition of poll taxes.
As explained in Section 3.1, Alabama, Mississippi, Texas and Virginia were
forced to abolish poll taxes as a requirement for voting by the Supreme Court
ruling following the Voting Rights Act. We create an indicator variable for
these four core states, which takes the value one after 1965 and zero before,
and then use this as our sole instrument for political competition. Hence our
identification comes only from these core states. As shown by the F-statistic
in column (1), the core state-year indicator variable is strongly significant in
predicting the change in political competition. Moreover, the IV estimate
finds political competition to be highly significant with an eﬀect similar in
20

The precise reason for the change in political circumstances is probably not important.
What matters is that these measures had no direct impact on our outcome variables of
interest: policies, quality of politicians, and economic growth. There seems to be no
evidence that any of these measures were premeditated eﬀorts to raise living standards in
Southern states.

26

magnitude to the one in column (2).
We turn next to a dynamic specification akin to that used in the growth
literature. Here, we include lagged income on the right-hand side and estimate the relationship:
gst = ζ s + υ t + βyst−1 + χpst + εst ,

(21)

where gst is the annual growth rate in state s at time t, and where β < 0
indicates income convergence. There are well-known issues from dynamic
panels with fixed eﬀects, but the large number of time periods we have (about
70) makes us confident that any bias is of small order.
Results for this specification are in Table 2, which otherwise repeats the
same specifications as in Table 1. With the exception of column (4), the
results confirm the findings using the level of income per-capita as a regressor
with political competition positively correlated with economic performance.
On the whole, the long-run eﬀects on income implied by this table are consistent with those in Table 1.
Table 3 explores our identifying assumptions in more detail. We begin in
column (1) by reporting results from (20). This confirms the primacy of the
poll tax variable in aﬀecting political competition. Column (2) reports the
same thing when southern year dummies are added to the specification. This
demonstrates that poll taxes and literacy tests remain strong predictors of
political competition (the latter more so even than in column (1)). Columns
(3) and (4) further explore the robustness of the timing implicit in the voting
law changes. Here, we create five-year leads and lags of our instruments and
include these “false” variables along with the “true” variables in the firststate regression for political competition. Thus we conduct a “Placebo test”,
asking whether the false variables predict the change in political competition
as well as the true ones. The estimates show that, with the exception of the
five-year lead on poll taxes which is significant at the 10 percent level, these
false variables are not significant, while the true poll taxes and literacy test
variables remain highly significant, whether we take five-year leads or lags.
This exercise confirms that the timing of the political change agrees with the
timing predicted by our instruments. The results from these Placebo tests
further support the credibility of our identification strategy.
The results in this section show that political competition has a strong
positive eﬀect on economic performance. This eﬀect is not only statistically
significant, but also quantitatively important. By the IV estimate in column
27

(2) of Table 1, e.g., an increase in political competition corresponding to one
standard deviation (about 0.08) raises personal income by about 11.5% in
the long run ((e0.08·1.358 − 1) · 100), whereas an increase corresponding to
the full range of our sample (0.45) would raise income by a whopping 84%.
More interesting, perhaps, is the estimated eﬀect of the removal of voting
restrictions. The results in column (2) of Table 1 and column (1) in Table 3
imply an eﬀect on the order of 25% of income in the average aﬀected state.

4.2

Inspecting the Mechanism

Our results, so far, provide convincing evidence of a causal eﬀect of political
competition on economic performance which is fully consistent with the predictions of our model. In this subsection, we turn to the mechanism whereby
political competition improves economic performance. Following the model,
we analyze policy outcomes, the quality of governors, as well as some further
predictions.
Policy To study policy, we run equations of the form:
τ kst = ζ ks + υ kt + χk pst + εkst , k = 1, 2, ...K ,

(22)

where τ kst is the outcome variable, ζ ks is a state fixed eﬀect and υ kt a year eﬀect
for the kth policy. As in the previous section, we estimate robust standard
errors allowing for clustering at the state level.
Column (1) in Table 3 reports the OLS estimate of χk in (22), when
k
τ is set equal to total taxes as a share of state income. Using total taxes
focuses on the role of state policy in aﬀecting overall accumulation, one of the
channels whereby τ in our model diminishes growth. Clearly, more political
competition is correlated with a lower overall burden of taxation. Column (2)
reports the IV estimate, when we instrument political competition by the use
of poll taxes and literacy tests, in the same way as in the previous subsection.
It is close to the OLS estimate. The increase in political competition implied
by the abolition of the voting restrictions, cuts the average state tax rate by
about 5% (0.5% of state income). Column (3) shows that this result holds
up when we include separate year dummy variables for southern states.
Columns (4) and (5) report OLS and IV estimates of χk , when τ k is
set equal to corporate taxes (again, normalized by state income). While
the estimated coeﬃcients are negative, they are typically not significantly
28

diﬀerent from zero. This remains true when in column (6), we introduce the
southern year-dummy variables.
Finally, columns (7) through (9) replace taxation by labor market regulation in the form of Right to Work laws. These laws indeed seem strongly
dependent on political competition. According to the IV estimate, the higher
political competition implied by the Voting Rights Act raised the probability
of introducing a Right to Work law by circa 30%. This result is robust to
including separate year dummies for southern states.
While the policy regressions carry some of the same concerns that we
discussed in the context of income levels, it seems less plausible that these
conflate the impact of the Civil Rights movement with changes in political
competition. It is not very convincing to argue that the Civil Rights movement would lead to either tax cuts or regulations favoring new businesses.21
Quality of Governors The model predicts Governor quality to be a key
determinant of policy and growth. To address this prediction, we first test for
evidence of Governor quality, as such, and then ask whether quality is indeed
related to political competition. During the period 1950 to 2000, there were
553 diﬀerent Governors in oﬃce in the 48 continental states, which served
for more than two years.22 We now allow for the possibility that the quality
of Governors has an impact on income per-capita in their state. This is
similar in spirit to Bertrand and Schoar (2003) who test for the importance
of CEO’s by estimating CEO fixed eﬀects for a set of U.S. firms.
Specifically, we estimate the following empirical model:
ygst = γ g + υ t + ϑs t + εgst ,

(23)

where ygst is now the level of income per-capita with Governor g in state s in
year t and γ g is a Governor fixed eﬀect. Thus, e.g., there is a specific Reagan
dummy, which takes a value of 1 in the state of California in each year from
1967 to 1974, and a value of 0 for all other states and years. As above, υ t is
a year indicator, while the new parameter ϑs allows for a state-specific time
trend. The standard errors are estimated robustly and clustered by state.
21

Recall that Husted and Kenny (1997) used the federal interventions in the 1960s to
find support for the prediction that an increase in the franchise might trigger hikes in
welfare spending. We can replicate their results on welfare spending with our data.
22
Including also governors that served less than two years in oﬃce in the sample only
has a minimal impact on the results.

29

The resulting test is quite stringent, because a “high-quality” Governor has to
deliver increases in income per-capita above trend. Note, however, that since
each Governor serves only in one state, the average quality of the Governors
is “absorbed” in a state fixed eﬀect, which we exclude from this regression.
We also estimate growth specifications:
ggst = γ g + υ t + βyst−1 + εgst ,

(24)

again with standard errors estimated robustly and clustered by state.
To asses whether Gubernatorial quality “matters”, we test the equality of
γ g within a state. This allows us to test whether all Governors are of uniform
quality. Figure 4 shows the distribution, by state, of the F-statistics of this
test from (24).23 Even though the degrees of freedom vary across states,
it is evident already from this graph that these are highly significant. In
fact, there is no case in which we can reject the hypothesis that there is no
diﬀerence in quality of Governors. This presents quite strong evidence of an
important quality dimension in holding political oﬃce.
A by-product of the approach is that we can gauge the performance of
specific governors. This is particularly interesting among those who go on
to higher oﬃce, like the Presidency. Among recent presidents, the point
estimates indicate that Bill Clinton and George W. Bush were above-average
performers while Ronald Reagan was a below-average performer, relative
to other chief executives in their states. Figure 5 displays a histogram of
the estimated fixed eﬀects on the growth rate of personal income for our
entire sample of Governors, each expressed as an annualized mean relative
to the state mean.24 The graph gives a feel for the general distribution of
Gubernatorial quality uncovered by this approach.
While these results are suggestive, the distribution may largely reflect
good or bad luck — i.e., some Governors benefit from a series of positive
exogenous shocks through their terms, while others suﬀer from negative ones.
However, our model predicts quality to be systematically shaped by party
selection, which in turn should be determined by political competition in the
state at the time the Governor is elected. Thus, for example, we would expect
the U.S. South to display a rising pattern of Gubernatorial fixed eﬀects as
23

The results are similar for the estimated level fixed eﬀects. The correlation in the
F-statistics is 0.64.
24
The graph omits the 59 (out of 443) governors in the underlying regression, who have
served for only one or two years.

30

a symptom of improving quality. To investigate this we run the following
regression:
γ
bgso = ζ s + υ t + ρpgso + ν gs ,
(25)

where ζ s is a state indicator, υ t is a time indicator and pgso is the state of
political competition at the date of the Governor’s first election. The error
term ν gs is estimated with robust standard errors clustered at the state level.
Now, if the quality of the Governor is aﬀected by political competition, we
should find ρ > 0. Because of the variation in entry dates and realized term
lengths across states, this exercise is not just another way of estimating a
relation between political competition and realized income or growth, as in
Table 1.
Table 5 shows our estimates of (25) to test for a positive relationship between political competition and Governor quality. In column (1), we report
the OLS results for the level eﬀects. They indicate a significant positive association. Column (2) introduces poll taxes and literacy tests as instruments
for competition and — in line with the results shown earlier — the coeﬃcient
becomes more precisely estimated and increases in size. In column (3), we
look at the “reduced form” eﬀect of the poll tax and literacy tests on Gubernatorial quality. Again, these show that there is a significant reduced
form relation. The same specifications are repeated in columns (4)-(6) for
Gubernatorial growth eﬀects. A similar pattern of significance and orders
of magnitude appears. Overall, these results suggest that stiﬀ political competition when Governors are elected seems to have a positive eﬀect on their
economic performance in oﬃce.
Further Implications of the Theory Table 6 investigates some further
predictions of the model in Section 2. We begin with the specific implication
that higher political competition changed policy so as to allocate resources
away from the main traditional sector, namely agriculture — cf. the result
concerning sN (τ ) at the end of Section 2.1. To test this prediction, we use
the share of non-farm income in state income as the left hand side variable.
Columns (1) and (2) shows that political competition is indeed positively
correlated with a greater share of non-farm income, and that this also holds
when political competition is instrumented with poll taxes and literacy tests.
The model also predicted a non-linear relationship between political competition and economic performance — the three regions for κ in Section 2.3.
To test for this, we created four indicator variables for political competition
31

less than −0.1, −0.2, −0.3 and −0.4 respectively. We include these indicators in our standard specification instead of the level of political competition.
Thus, the eﬀect of political competition in the range −0.3 to −0.4, say, must
now be read as the sum of the coeﬃcients on the first three of these dummy
variables. The results in column (3) of Table 5 confirm a non-linear eﬀect.
Political competition between −0.1 and −0.2 is not significantly diﬀerent
from a higher degree of competition in terms of its eﬀect on personal income
per-capita. However, political competition in the −0.2 to −0.3 range is
damaging and more damaging still in the −0.3 to −0.4 range. However, the
eﬀect below −0.4 is not significantly diﬀerent from the one in the −0.3 to
−0.4 range.25 As in the theory, therefore, political competition has its main
eﬀect in an intermediate range (the range from κH to κL ), in between the
very stiﬀ and the very lopsided.
Our model supposed that political competition shapes the incentives for a
party selecting the quality qp of its Gubernatorial candidates. In the model,
these incentives do not vary systematically by party. We now take this idea
more seriously by splitting up our measure of political competition, defined
in Section 3.2, by party. Thus, we multiply the competition measure with
an indicator for the Governor’s party, creating separate measures for Democratic and Republican party advantage — note that these measure the lack of
political competition. We then put the party advantage indicators into the
regression, along with a control for whether the Governor is a Democrat or
a Republican. The results are found in columns (4) and (5) of Table 6. For
income as well as growth, both coeﬃcients are negative indicating a negative eﬀect of weak political competition regardless of which party dominates.
There is some evidence, however, that the diminishing political advantage
of Democratic Governors is more important (in line with the discussion in
Section 2.3, given that Democratic party dominance is more important empirically). As an aside, we note that being a Democratic Governor appears
to be positively correlated with growth as long as the political advantage is
small.
Finally, our model portrays political competition as the sole source of policy diﬀerences between parties. This runs counter to the stereo-typical view
that the Republican party is more pro-business. Since the increased political
competition in the South mainly involves the growth of Republicanism, we
want to check that our results are not driven by a “party-preference” eﬀect.
25

Note, however, that there are only 23 state-year observations below −0.4.

32

Thus, the remaining columns of Table 6 add in measures of political control
in state legislatures to some of our previous specifications. In columns (6)(7), we find that neither the party of the Governor nor the majority party of
the state legislatures are correlated with the level or growth rate of personal
income. An F-test comfortably rejects the significance of these variables.
The final column shows that the party-control variables do have some bearing on the share of taxes in state income, but that the relationship with
our measure of political competition remains strong independently of these
eﬀects.

4.3

Robustness Checks

In Table 7, we turn to two further checks as to whether our results are robust
to the frequency of our data and to our measure of political competition.
As is well known in the growth literature, the strong cyclical component
in annual data may bias upwards the estimated rate of convergence. Such
bias could conceivably bias also our point estimates of political competition.
Note, however, that an upward bias in the convergence coeﬃcient would bias
down the long-run eﬀect of political competition estimated from the growth
specification. Thus, we reconsider our main results in a panel of five-year
averages between 1930 and 2000. Columns (1)-(4) show that the main
empirical findings from the annual data hold up in this case. As in Table
1, the estimated eﬀect of political competition on income growth rises with
instrumentation. Note that the rates of convergence estimated in columns
(2) and (3) are indeed lower than in the annual data (about 6% per year
rather than 10%).
Some readers may be concerned that running these regressions on a mere
13 observations in each state panel might generate biased estimates due to
the presence of a lagged dependent variable. To shed some light on this
concern, we use the Arellano and Bond GMM 1st diﬀerence estimator, as
recommended by Caselli, Esquivel and Lefort (1996). The specification in
column (5) uses one additional lag of income as an instrument for the lagged
dependent variable and treats political competition as endogenous with poll
taxes and literacy tests as additional instruments. Here, we estimate the
eﬀects from 1950 and onwards, to avoid including the volatile income levels
of the 1930s in the instrument set. As the table shows, the earlier results on

33

political competition hold up.26
Throughout the paper, we have measured political competition using data
from Ansolabehere and Snyder (2002). What happens if we instead use the
alternative measure discussed in Section 3.2 based on seat shares in the state
house and senate? Most of our earlier results can be replicated under this
alternative measurement, with the qualification that it is only available from
1950 and onwards. Thus, columns (6) and (7) of Table 7 illustrate how the
main results on income from Table 1 remain robust.

5

Final Remarks

How politics and economics interact in promoting the quality of government
and economic performance is of first-order importance. This paper argues
that the structure of political competition, and a fortiori the underlying political institutions, can have a profound impact on economic life. Two forces
take center stage in our story: attachment to parties on the basis of central non-economic issues, and support on such issues skewed towards parties.
Even though the electoral institutions of democracy are nominally functioning, these forces create an entree for malign political influences — vested
interests who wish to protect their quasi-rents.
The results demonstrate convincingly that the extent of political competition can be an important factor in shaping economic policy and performance.
For social scientists who want to understand patterns of long-run development, it may be inescapable to study their political ramifications.
Our analysis also casts light on eﬀorts to understand the diﬀerences between political systems across the globe. In formal terms, the southern
United States had many institutions in common with the rest of the country.
But small diﬀerences endured and historical factors shaped the way in which
these institutions produced policy outcomes. Trying to understand the performance of democracy without taking these factors into account would be
quite misleading. Clearly, a great deal more research is needed to understand
the heterogenous performance of political institutions, due to interactions
with social and historical preconditions.
26

Because the dependent variable in column (5) is the level of income (even though the
estimation is in 1st diﬀerences), the coeﬃcient on lagged income should be compared to
one plus the coeﬀeicent on lagged income (1+β) in the growth specification of columns (3)
and (4).

34

References
[1] Ansolabehere, Stephen and James M. Snyder, Jr., [2002], “The Incumbency Advantage in U.S. Elections: An Analysis of State and Federal
Oﬃces, 1942-2000,” Election Law Journal 1(3), 315-338.
[2] Barro, Robert, J. and Xavier Sala-i-Martin, [2004], Economic Growth,
Cambridge, MA, and London: MIT Press.
[3] Bertrand, Marianne and Antoinette Schoar, [2003], “Managing with
Style: The Eﬀect of Managers on Firm Policies,” Quarterly Journal
of Economics 118(4), 1169-1208.
[4] Besley, Timothy and Anne Case, [2003], “Political Institutions and Policy Choices: Evidence from the United States,” Journal of Economic
Literature 41(1), 7-73.
[5] Besley, Timothy and Stephen Coate, [1997], “An Economic Model of
Representative Democracy,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 112(1),
85-114.
[6] Black, Earl and Merle Black, [2003], The Rise of Southern Republicans,
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
[7] Caselli, Francesco, Gerardo Esquivel, and Fernando Lefort, [1996],
“Reopening the Convergence Debate: A New Look at Cross-Country
Growth Empirics”, Journal of Economic Growth 1(3), 363-390.
[8] Caselli, Francesco and Massimo Morelli, [2004], “Bad Politicians,” Journal of Public Economics 88(3), 759-782.
[9] Cobb, James C., [1993], The Selling of the South: The Southern Crusade for Industrial Development, Urbana and Chicago, IL: Univerisity
of Illinois Press, 2nd Edition.
[10] Congressional Quarterly [1998], “Gubernatorial Elections: 1787-1997”,
Washington, DC: Congressional Quarterly.
[11] Council of State Governments, The Book of the States, Lexington, KY:
Council of State Governments, various years.

35

[12] Haber, Stephen, [2004], “Political Institutions and Economic Development: Evidence from the Banking Systems of the United States and
Mexico,” typescript, Stanford University.
[13] Husted, Thomas, and Lawrence Kenny, [1997], “The Eﬀect of the Expansion of the Voting Franchise on the Size of Government”, Journal of
Political Economy 105(1), 54-82
[14] Key, V. O., [1950], Southern Politics in State and Nation, New York,
NY: A.A. Knopf.
[15] Krusell, Per and Jose-Victor Rios-Rull, [1996], “Vested Interests in a
Positive Theory of Stagnation and Growth,” Review of Economic Studies
63(2), 301-321.
[16] Mackaman, Frank [2005], “Commemoration of the 40th Anniversary of
the Passage of the Voting Rights Act”, Mimeo, Howard H. Baker Center
for Public Policy, University of Tennessee.
[17] Naylor, Thomas H. and James Clotfelter, [1975], Strategies for Change
in the South, Chapel Hill, NC: The University of North Carolina Press.
[18] Ogden, Frederic D, [1958], The Poll Tax in the South, University, AL:
The University of Alabama Press.
[19] Osborne, Martin J. and Al Slivinski, [1996], “A Model of Political
Competition with Citizen Candidates,” Quarterly Journal of Economics
111(1), 65-96.
[20] Pempel, T. J. (ed.), [1990], Uncommon Democracies: The One-Party
Dominant Regimes, Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
[21] Persson, Torsten and Guido Tabellini, [2000], Political Economics: Explaining Economic Policy, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
[22] Polo, Michele, [1998], “Electoral Competition and Political Rents”,
Mimeo, IGIER, Bocconi University.
[23] Sabato, Larry [1978], Goodbye to Good-Time Charlie: The American
Governor Transformed, 1959-1975, Lexington MA, Lexington Books.

36

[24] Svensson, Jakob [1998], “Controlling Spending: Electoral Competition,
Polarization, and Primary Elections”, Mimeo, The World Bank.
[25] United States Bureau of Census, “State Government Finances”, Washington DC, various years.
[26] Wittman, Donald, [1989], “Why Democracies Produce Eﬃcient Results”, Journal of Political Economy 97(6), 1395-1424.
[27] Wittman, Donald, [1995], The Myth of Democratic Failure: Why Political Institutions are Eﬃcient, Chicago,. IL: University of Chicago Press.
[28] Wright, Gavin, [1987], “The Economic Revolution in the South,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 1(1), 161-178.
[29] Wright, Gavin [1999], “The Civil Rights Revolution as Economic History,” Journal of Economic History 59(2), 267-289.

37

6

Appendix: Proofs

∗
∗
Proof of Lemma 2: If κ ≥ 2ξ1 + v − v, then Wv (vD
) = 0 or vD
= v and
1
existence is trivial. Hence, suppose that κ < 2ξ + v − v. Define f (x) for
x ∈ [v, v] from:
∙
¸
1
−
− ξ [κ + x − f (x)] Wv (f (x)) + ξ [∆ + W (f (x)) − x] = 0 .
2

Observe that f (x) > v for all x ∈ [v, v] since Wv (v) = 0. Now, let:
½
v
if f (x) > v
vR (x) =
f (x) for f (x) ∈ (v, v] .
As vR (x) is everywhere continuous on [v, v], so is:
∙
¸
1
H (x) = −
+ ξ [κ + x − vR (x)] Wv (x) + ξ [∆ + W (x) − vR (x)] .
2
It is straightforward to check that H (v) > 0. Now, consider:
∙
¸
1
H (v) = −
+ ξ [κ + v − vR (v)] Wv (v) + ξ [∆ + W (v̄) − vR (v)]
2
∙
¸
1
ρ(1 − qP ) − m
= −
+ ξ [κ + v − vR (v)]
+ ξ [∆ + v − vR (v)]
2
m
∙
¸
1
ρ(1 − qP ) − m
≤ −
+ ξκ
+ ξ∆
by Assumption 1
2
m
< 0
by Assumption 2 if κ > 0 .
Since H (·) is continuous, there exists (by the intermediate value theorem) a
∗
∗
such that H (vD
) = 0.
vD
Proof of Lemma 4: First, we show for all κ > κL , the Republicans will
pick vR = v. To see this, observe that at vR = v and vD = v, the change in
the payoﬀ of the Republican party from a small increase in v is:
¸
∙
ρ(1 − q P ) − m
1
− ξ [κ + v − v]
+ ξ [∆ + W (v) − v] >
−
2
m
∙
¸
1
ρ(1 − qP ) − m
−
− ξ [κL + v − v]
+ ξ∆ = 0
2
m
38

from the definition of κL . Moreover, Assumption 1 implies that this inequality holds for all vD > v.
∗
Second, we show that it is optimal for the Democrats to pick vD
< v.
Suppose not, such that vD = v. Then, a small increase in vD alters the
Democratic payoﬀ by:
¸
∙
ρ(1 − q P ) − m
1 ρ(1 − q P ) − m
1
+ ξκ
+ ξ∆ < − ·
+ ξ∆ < 0 ,
−
2
m
2
m
where the last inequality follows from Assumption 1. Thus, the best response
for the Democrats must be vD < v. To see that vD > v , observe that
Wv (v) = 0 — this follows from evaluating (16) at the point qp = q. To prove
the last statement, observe that vD (v) is defined from:
¸
∙
1
+ ξ [κ + vD (v, κ) − v] Wv (vD (v, κ)) = ξ [∆ + W (vD (v, κ)) − v] . (26)
2
At any point where this equality holds, Wv (vD (v, κ)) < 0. Moreover, a
maximum exists on [v, v]. Elementary arguments now show that, at any
point satisfying (26), vD (v, κ) is decreasing in κ.
Proof of Lemma 5: For κ = 0, Assumption 2 implies that both parties
will pick vp∗ < v for p ∈ {D, R}. Moreover, since strategies are continuous
in κ, this holds for some κ > 0.

39

Table 1 - Basic Results on Political Competition and Personal Income
(1)
Personal
income
Political competition

0.435***
(0.099)

(2)
Personal
income

(3)

Personal
income

1.358***
(0.268)

Poll taxes

-0.218***
(0.043)

Literacy tests

-0.078
(0.057)

Instruments

(4)
Personal
income

(5)
Personal
income

(6)
Personal
income

0.222**
(0.105)

0.887**
(0.396)

1.152***
(0.366)

Literacy Tests,
Poll Taxes

Literacy Tests,
Poll Taxes

Four “core”
states

South*year interactions

No

No

No

Yes

Yes

No

Method

OLS

IV

OLS

OLS

IV

IV

Sample

1929-2001

1929-2001

1929-2001

1929-2001

1929-2001

1929-2001

189.46

458.65

First-stage F-Statistic

388.83

Observations

3376

3376

3376

3376

3376

3376

R-squared

0.995

0.993

0.995

0.996

0.995

0.994

Notes: Variables explained in text. All specifications include state and year indicator variables. In parentheses, standard errors, which are robust
to heteroskedasticity and adjusted for clustering at the state level; * denotes significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%

Table 2 - Basic Results on Political Competition and Growth
(1)
Growth of
personal income

(2)
Growth of
personal income

Political competition

0.031**
(0.013)

0.122***
(0.035)

Lagged income

-0.095***
(0.015)

-0.111***
(0.015)

Poll taxes

(3)
Growth of
personal income

-0.101***
(0.015)

(4)
Growth of
personal income

(5)
Growth of
personal income

(6)
Growth of
personal income

0.016
(0.013)

0.078**
(0.036)

0.010**
(0.041)

-0.104***
(0.016)

-0.109***
(0.014)

-0.107***
(0.016)

-0.018***
(0.005)

Literacy tests

-0.007
(0.005)

Instruments

Four “core”
states

Literacy Tests,
Poll Taxes

Literacy Tests,
Poll Taxes

South*year interactions

No

No

No

Yes

Yes

No

Method

OLS

IV

OLS

OLS

IV

IV

Sample

1930-2001

1930-2001

1930-2001

1930-2001

1930-2001

1930-2001

168.23

462.98

First-stage F-Statistic

400.02

Observations

3333

3333

3333

3333

3333

3333

R-squared

0.776

0.771

0.776

0.789

0.787

0.773

Notes: Variables explained in text. All specifications include state and year indicator variables. In parentheses, standard errors, which are robust to
heteroskedasticity and adjusted for clustering at the state level; * denotes significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%

Table 3 - First Stage
(1)
Political competition

(2)
Political Competition

(3)
Political competition

(4)
Political competition

Poll taxes

-0.137***
(0.032)

-0.108***
(0.039)

-0.068***
(0.015)

-0.090**
(0.044)

Literacy tests

-0.107*
(0.057)

-0.096*
(0.055)

-0.063**
(0.031)

-0.076**
(0.036)

Poll taxes
(5-year lead)

-0.088*
(0.047)

Literacy tests
(5-year lead)

-0.060
(0.070)

Poll taxes
(5-year lag)

-0.053
(0.039)

Literacy tests
(5-year lag)

-0.036
(0.047)

South*year interactions

No

Yes

No

No

Method

OLS

OLS

OLS

OLS

Sample

1929-2001

1929-2001

1929-2001

1929-2001

Observations

3376

3376

3376

3376

R-squared

0.514

0.554

0.527

0.519

Notes: Variables explained in text. All specifications include state and year indicator variables. In parentheses, standard errors, which are robust to
heteroskedasticity and adjusted for clustering at the state level; * denotes significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%

Table 4 The Impact of Political Competition on Economic Policy

Political
competition

(1)
Total taxes
as share of
state
income

(2)
Total taxes
as share of
state
income

(3)
Total taxes
as share of
state
income

-0.031***
(0.008)

-0.059***
(0.014)

-0.026***
(0.008)

(4)
Corporate
taxes as
share of
state
income
-0.002
(0.001)

(5)
Corporate
taxes as
share of
state
income
-0.008*
(0.004)

(6)
Corporate
taxes as
share of
state
income
-0.001
(0.001)

(7)
Right to
work laws

(8)
Right to
work laws

0.810***
(0.290)

1.832***
(0.544)

(9)
Right to
work laws

0.727**
(0.293)

South*year
interactions

No

No

Yes

No

No

Yes

No

No

Yes

Method

OLS

IV

OLS

OLS

IV

OLS

OLS

IV

OLS

Sample

1942-2001

1942-2001

1942-2001

1942-2001

1942-2001

1942-2001

1929-2001

1929-2001

1929-2001

First Stage FStatistic

218.06

141.20

388.83

Observations

2640

2640

2640

2146

2146

2146

3376

3376

3376

R-squared

0.846

0.834

0.855

0.635

0.599

0.650

0.738

0.716

0.742

Notes: Variables explained in text. All specifications include state and year indicator variables. In parentheses, standard errors, which are robust to
heteroskedasticity and adjusted for clustering at the state level; * denotes significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%

Table 5 - Determinants of Gubernatorial Quality

Political competition

(1)
Governor income
per capita

(2)
Governor income
per capita

0.260**
(0.114)

0.404**
(0.174)

(3)
Governor income
per capita

(4)
Governor growth
per capita
0.291***
(0.072)

(5)
Governor growth
per capita

(6)
Governor growth
per capita

0.715***
(0.177)

Poll tax

-0.084**
(0.039)

-0.117***
(0.030)

Literacy test

0.043
(0.048)

-0.034**
(0.044)

Method
Sample
First Stage F-Statistic
Observations
R-squared

OLS
48 States
553 Governors
553
0.918

IV
48 States
553 Governors
36.70
553
0.917

OLS
48 States
553 Governors

OLS
48 States
553 Governors

553
0.918

553
0.809

IV
48 States
553 Governors
36.70
553
0.769

OLS
48 States
553 Governors
553
0.817

Notes: Variables explained in text. All specifications include state and year indicator variables. We only include governors which served more than two years in
office. In parentheses, standard errors, which are robust to heteroskedasticity and adjusted for clustering at the state level; * denotes significant at 10%; **
significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%

Table 6 - Further Implications of the Theory
(1)
Share of non-farm
income in total
income
Political competition

0.109***
(0.036)

(2)
Share of non-farm
income in total
income

(3)
Personal
income

(4)
Personal
income

(5)
Growth of
personal
income

0.166*
(0.091)

(6)
Personal
income

(7)
Growth of
personal
income

(8)
Total taxes as
share of state
income

0.243***
(0.050)

0.029**
(0.012)

-0.031***
(0.009)

-0.006
(0.005)

0.001
(0.001)

0.000
(0.001)

Democrats control
house and senate

-0.005
(0.008)

0.001
(0.001)

0.002**
(0.001)

Republicans control
house and senate

0.010
(0.008)

0.000
(0.001)

-0.002*
(0.001)

Democratic
governor advantage

-0.278***
(0.056)

-0.030**
(0.013)

Republican governor
advantage

-0.057
(0.060)

-0.028*
(0.015)

Democratic
governor

0.001
(0.005)

0.002**
(0.001)

-0.105***
(0.027)

Lagged income
Political competition
< -0.4

-0.077
(0.059)

Political competition
< -0.3

-0.131**
(0.055)

Political competition
< -0.2

-0.038**
(0.016)

Political competition
< -0.1

-0.020
(0.013)

Method
Sample
First Stage F-statistic
Observations
R-squared

-0.102***
(0.026)

OLS

IV

OLS

OLS

OLS

OLS

OLS

OLS

1929-2001

1929-2001
377.21
3329
0.744

1929-2001

1950-2001

1950-2001

1950-2001

1950-2001

1950-2001

3377
0.995

2336
0.997

2336
0.573

2368
0.997

2368
0.572

2368
0.823

3329
0.747

Notes: Variables explained in text. All specifications include state and year indicator variables. In parentheses, standard errors, which are robust to
heteroskedasticity and adjusted for clustering at the state level; * denotes significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%

Table 7 - Robustness
(1)
Personal
income

Political competition

0.607***
(0.130)

Lagged income

(2)
Growth of
personal
income

(3)
Growth of
personal
Income

(4)
Political
competition

(5)
Personal
income

0.080*
(0.040)

0.369***
(0.116)

1.061*
(0.573)

-0.307***
(0.037)

-0.366***
(0.038)

0.512**
(0.221)

Poll taxes

-0.153***
(0.036)

Literacy Tests

-0.116
(0.079)

(6)
Personal
income

(7)
Personal
income

0.592***
(0.102)

1.978***
(0.445)

Five-year
averages

Five-year
averages

Five-year
averages

Five-year
averages

Five-year
averages

Alternative
competition
measure

Alternative
competition
measure

Method

OLS

OLS

IV

OLS

GMM 1st
Differences

OLS

IV

Sample

1930-2000

1930-2000

1930-2000

1930-2000

1950-2000

1950-2001

1950-2001

Specification

First-stage F-statistic
Observations
R-squared

116.58

160.67

649

601

601

601

0.973

0.863

0.846

0.610

459

2372

2372

0.997

0.994

Notes: Variables explained in text. All specifications include state and year indicator variables. In parentheses, standard errors, which are robust to
heteroskedasticity and adjusted for clustering at the state level; * denotes significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%

Figure 1
-.05

Political competition by decades
Non-south
Non-south

Non-south

Non-south

Sou
Non
Non-south

Non-south

Political competition
-.15
-.1

South
South

South

-.2

South
South
South

1930s

1940s

1950s

1960s
Decades

1970s

1980s

1990s

Figure 2

-1

Relative (log) income by decade
.5
0
-.5

Political competition and income in Southern states relative to US

-.3

-.2
-.1
0
Relative political competition by decade

.1

.04

Average growth rate in reform states
.05
.06
.07
.08
.09

Figure 3: Growth Before and After Abolition of Voting Restrictio

-5

0
Years before and after abolition of voting restrictions
before

after

5

Figure 4: Distribution of F-Statistics
Alabama
Arizona
Arkansas
California
Colorado
Connecticut
Delaware
Florida
Georgia
Idaho
Illinois
Indiana
Iowa
Kansas
Kentucky
Louisiana
Maine
Maryland
Massachusetts
Michigan
Minnesota
Mississippi
Missouri
Montana
Nebraska
Nevada
New Hampshire
New Jersey
New Mexico
New York
North Carolina
North Dakota
Ohio
Oklahoma
Oregon
Pennsylvania
Rhode Island
South Carolina
South Dakota
Tennessee
Texas
Utah
Vermont
Virginia
Washington
West Virginia
Wisconsin
Wyoming

0

10
20
30
40
F-statistic on all Governors' Growth Rates within a state being identical

0

20

Density
40

60

80

Figure 5: Histogram of Governor Quality

-.1

-.05
0
.05
Governor Quality Measured by Annual Growth

.1

Table 1A - Poll Taxes and Literacy Tests (1929 – 2001)
Voting Requirement

Year in which state abolishes the voting requirement

Poll Taxes

Louisiana (1934), Florida (1937), Georgia (1945), South
Carolina (1951), Tennessee (1951), Arkansas (1964),
Alabama (1966), Mississippi (1966), Virginia (1966), Texas
(1966)

Literacy Tests

Arizona (1965), Georgia (1965), Louisiana (1965),
Mississippi (1965), North Carolina (1965), South Carolina
(1965), Virginia (1965), California (1971), Connecticut
(1971), Massachusetts (1971), New Hampshire (1971), New
York (1971), Wyoming (1971).

Notes: Year is bracket is the year in which the voting restriction was abolished. We follow Husted and Kenny
(1997) in only considering literacy tests in states all or parts of which were declared a “covered jurisdiction” under
the 1965 Voting Rights Act or its 1970 revision. Sources: Ogden (1958) and Husted and Kenny (1997).

