NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DENIAL OF DEATH AND ECONOMIC BEHAVIOR
Wojciech Kopczuk
Joel Slemrod
Working Paper 11485
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11485
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2005

The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by Wojciech Kopczuk and Joel Slemrod. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Denial of Death and Economic Behavior
Wojciech Kopczuk and Joel Slemrod
NBER Working Paper No. 11485
July 2005
JEL No. D11, D81, D91
ABSTRACT
We model denial of death and its effect on economic behavior. Attempts to reduce death anxiety and
the possibility of denial of mortality-relevant information interact with intertemporal choices and
may lead to time-inconsistent behavior and other “behavioral” phenomena. In the model, repression
of signals of mortality leads to underconsumption for unsophisticated individuals, but forwardsophisticated individuals may over-consume in anticipation of future denial and may seek ways to
commit to act according to one’s mortality prospects as currently perceived. We show that the mere
possibility of engaging in this kind of denial leads to time-inconsistent but efficient behavior.
Refusal to face up to the reality of death may help explain a wide range of empirical phenomena,
including the underutilization of tax-advanced inter vivos gifts and inadequate purchase of life
insurance.

Wojciech Kopczuk
Columbia University
MC3323
420 W 188th Street, Room 1022 IAB
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
wk2110@columbia.edu
Joel Slemrod
Ross School of Business
University of Michigan
701 Tappan Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1234
and NBER
jslemrod@umich.edu

Death. William James called it the “worm at the core of all our usual springs of delight.” Life
must end for all living beings, but only humans may grasp its existential meaning. Many, though,
recoil. “One cannot look directly at either the sun or death,” said La Rochefoucauld. Winston
Churchill claimed that “any man who says he is not afraid of death is a liar.”
The implications of turning away (or denying) death have been taken seriously by some
psychologists, sociologists, and philosophers. In his influential book Denial of Death,
Ernest Becker (1973) argued that people do many things — such as having children and passing
wealth to next generation — to achieve a kind of symbolic immortality. In the standard work on
the psychology of death, Kastenbaum (2000) summarized the state of psychological research
about attitudes toward death by saying that “there are divergent theories and somewhat
discordant findings, but general agreement that most of us prefer to minimize even our cognitive
encounters with death.”
In contrast, economics has generally treated death in a perfunctory manner, assuming that
people make decisions to maximize expected utility over their lifetime given rationally-formed
assumptions about their longevity, perhaps also receiving utility from the prospect of bequests
left to descendants or charities. Although recently economics has begun to address aspects of
behavior that systematically diverge from the standard construction of rationality
(cf. Mullainathan and Thaler 2000, Rabin 1998), the field dubbed behavioral economics has not
yet addressed James’ “worm at the core.” Yet arguably death is the essential aspect of human
aspect of human nature that humans, or at least some humans, do not confront rationally. Indeed,
the sociologist/philosopher Zygmunt Bauman asserts that “death blatantly defies the power of
reason: reason’s power is to be a guide to good choice, but death is not a matter of
choice” (Bauman, 1992). The new social science of “non-rational” behavior has not yet directly

addressed the fundamental aspect of humanity that defies rationality. In so doing it may be
overlooking explanations for patterns of lifetime consumption and intergenerational behavior
In this paper we propose a model of humans who are “rational” but who fear death. Our
approach is motivated by a significant literature in psychology and sociology that has its origin
in the work of Rank (1941) and Becker (1973). Becker (1973) asserts that “the fear of death
must be present behind all our normal functioning, in order for the organism to be armed toward
self-preservation. But the fear of death cannot be present constantly in one’s mental functioning,
else the organism could not function.” Fearfulness in the presence of a danger is a natural
phenomenon that can be easily explained on evolutionary grounds: fear forces an individual to
fully concentrate on its source and, therefore, facilitates survival. Fear arises when and if an
immediate danger is perceived and leaves no room for manipulating it. If generalized death
anxiety is a consequence of an evolutionary-grounded fear coupled with a fully rational
understanding that one is mortal and therefore constantly endangered, cognitive strategies that
lead to ignoring non-preventable risks can play an important role.
We argue that anxiety associated with thinking about death may in some circumstances
lead people to repress, or deny, news about their mortality. We use the terms “denial” and
“repression” to refer to selective ignoring of information, regardless of whether it takes the form
of actual forgetting, selective attention or conscious effort to keep certain thoughts away. What is
essential is that some previously received information is not assimilated. Such a broad notion of
repression has been considered in an economic context by Benabou and Tirole (2001).
While the possibility of active repression is taken seriously by psychologists, there is
limited understanding of its biological mechanisms. A recent study by Anderson et al. (2004)
showed that subjects asked to forget a piece of information were indeed able to suppress it and,

2

using a functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging technique, identified the neural systems
involved in this process. These researchers concluded that their work confirms the existence of
“an active process by which people can prevent awareness of an unwanted past experience.” We
note, though, the classic experiment by Wegner, Schneider, Carter, and White (1987) that offers
conflicting evidence: when given five minutes to state their thoughts—but told not to think of a
white bear—most people could suppress the “white bear” thought only for a brief period,
suggesting that thought suppression can have the effect of inducing the very thought it is directed
against.
There is evidence that in some situations people choose not to receive information that is
crucial to their longevity. Lyter et al. (1987) report that many patients are reluctant to learn their
HIV status, and commonly cite as a reason the anticipation of severe psychological distress if the
result is positive. Wong, Reker, and Gesser (1994) report that for five statements having to do
with death avoidance (e.g., “I always try not to think of death.”) on a 7-point Likert scale where
three corresponds to “mildly disagree,” the mean response was 2.89, with a standard deviation of
1.36. The self-professed fear of death was slightly higher. For seven statements having to do
with fear of death (e.g., “I have an intense fear of death.”), the mean response was 3.02, with a
standard deviation of 1.30. Thus, on average, people neither constantly think of death nor
intensely fear it. These answers are merely suggestive, however, because this pattern of response
may, but might not be, the result of successful repression of disturbing thoughts about one’s
mortality.
Our objective is to model the impact of the fear of death on the most basic economic
decisions: consumption and saving. Our departure point is the realization that attitudes toward
death should determine how individuals discount the future. We model this by assuming that

3

perceived mortality risk plays both the role of determining death anxiety (which reduces utility)
as well as the standard role of being a component of the discount rate. Thus, there is a trade-off
involved in manipulating the perceived mortality risk through denial: denial will alleviate future
anxiety, but it will also bias time preference in the future. In contrast, the standard modeling
assumption of using mortality rates for discounting only amounts to assuming that individuals
fully acknowledge the prospect of death; this is a special case of our model for which fear is nonexistent. When fear is present, however, individuals will pursue strategies intended to reduce it,
and these strategies will have consequences for how they think about the future.
In the model, individuals receive a signal about their mortality, make their consumption
decision under full information, and repress the signal over time if they (consciously or
unconsciously) choose so. As a result, their future decisions may rely on a skewed information
set but, if repression is successful, future fear will be reduced. The cost of allaying the fear of
death in this model is therefore an otherwise inefficient intertemporal pattern of consumption: an
unrealistically optimistic assessment of one’s longevity will induce people to consume too little,
and leave too much wealth upon their death. But this is not the end of the story. People who are
forward-sophisticated (the term we use to describe people aware of the consequences of their
denial on future behavior) will anticipate the possibility that later they will repress bad news
about their longevity, and adjust consumption to minimize the cost of leaving too much wealth
unconsumed.
Although we do not suggest that repression is a fully conscious phenomenon, it is
nevertheless reasonable to expect that some people may be aware of their tendency to forget
selectively. That does not change the fact that some information may be truly forgotten. Benabou
and Tirole (2001) introduce an assumption of “meta-cognition” to allow that, when decisions are

4

made, people consider the possibility that information has been repressed in the past. We refer to
this assumption as “partial backward sophistication.”1
This model of the denial of death derives, rather than assumes, several of the so-called
behavioral phenomena that have been drawn on to justify rethinking of conventional economic
models. In our model, time-inconsistent behavior is a consequence of fear and denial for
everyone with at least a moderate degree of backward sophistication. Backward-sophistication
does not preclude the possibility that repression is unconscious; it requires only some awareness
of a tendency to repress. Even though individuals are fully rational in a standard economic sense,
they may discard some informative signals. Although not everyone denies information about
their own mortality, even people who do not repress end up with distorted behavior because a
person who does not repress at all cannot distinguish herself ex post from someone who
successfully repressed. This implies that the equilibrium distribution of death anxiety may not be
characterized by a general overoptimism. On average, people perceive their mortality risk
accurately, but under repression are closer to the mean than they should be.
Our model of death anxiety and the possible repression of information about mortality
implies that people who are unaware of their denial will underconsume, acting as if their
expected lifetime is longer than is accurate.

Sophisticated individuals may, however,

overconsume early in life in anticipation of future denial and may seek ways to commit

1

Fully backward sophisticated may additionally look back upon their life and try to infer from their past
consumption patterns whether relevant information has been suppressed, so that inconsistency of beliefs with all
available information cannot persist. In anticipation of that, fearful people may try to arrange their behavior so as to
conceal having received bad news. The idea of full backward sophistication is that repression by an aware individual
may be successful only if it is accompanied by a logically consistent picture of the world. Apparent contradictions
(e.g., there is no reason to worry even though I drank too much yesterday, but I only drink when there is a reason to
worry) may reveal self-deception of an unpleasant event, even though the event itself is otherwise forgotten and
should not be present. Many real-life decisions may serve as clues about one’s state of mind when the decision was
made.

5

themselves to act according to the mortality prospects as they currently appear. Repressing small
reminders of mortality is always beneficial in this setting, but whether stronger signals should be
repressed depends on balancing the utility gain from repressing anxiety and the utility cost of
making inappropriate intertemporal decisions. Finally, the behavior of those individuals who
recognize the possibility of past denial may be affected even if they do not end up repressing
negative mortality signals.
This is not the first model that generates time inconsistency from more fundamental
assumptions. For example, Caplin and Leahy (2001) demonstrate that time inconsistency may
arise as the result of the (dis)utility flow from anticipation prior to the resolution of uncertainty.
In their model, time inconsistency may arise because, ex ante, people may make decisions about
the future motivated in part by the desire either to reduce anxiety or to facilitate savoring; ex post
such choices need not be preferred. In our model, there is no present anxiety that can be
manipulated. Instead, the individual is attempting to reduce future fear. Furthermore, in our
model, time inconsistency hinges on the ability to suppress information, a feature that is not
present in the Caplin and Leahy (2001) framework. Without an ability to repress, fear of death
would have no effect on economic decisions in this model. Kőszegi (2003) uses a framework
motivated by Caplin and Leahy (2001) to analyze the patient-physician relationship, and shows
that patients might be reluctant to gather information (as a result of visiting a doctor) that could
indicate bad outcomes. His focus is on the decision whether to pursue the acquisition of
information, and his two-period framework does not give rise to time inconsistency. In contrast,
our objective is to analyze the implications that fear and repression have for discounting future
utility and for critical decisions such as consumption and saving. Finally, Brunnermeier and
Parker (2005) develop a model where individuals can directly choose their beliefs to influence

6

current felicity, which may depend on the perceived level of expected future utility, while
imposing conditions on the evolution and consistency of beliefs. Two features of our framework
distinguish our approach. First, individuals derive disutility directly from their beliefs. Second,
while in our model beliefs also have to be consistent over time (by following Bayes’ rule), they
cannot be arbitrarily selected. Instead, pieces of information can be effectively (consciously or
unconsciously) ignored and therefore entail consequences for future beliefs.
We believe that further elaboration of the implications of death anxiety and the denial of
death may help to explain other empirical phenomena that hinge on the rational contemplation of
the world after one’s demise, such as procrastination in estate planning, the apparent
underutilization of tax-advantaged inter vivos gifts to heirs and the inadequate provision of life
insurance, but these questions must await future research. We begin next to develop the formal
model of death anxiety, denial of death and their implications for economic behavior.

1. Model - Preliminaries
We consider an individual who may live as long as three periods i = 0,1, 2 . She is characterized

by an unknown frailty parameter f that can take either of two values f L and f H , f L < f H , with
corresponding unconditional probabilities π and 1 − π . An individual with frailty of f faces a
hazard rate of dying by the end of period i given by hi ( f ) . Everybody dies by the end of period
2 so that, trivially, h2 ( f ) = 1 for all values of f . Higher frailty corresponds to higher mortality
risk, in that hi ( f H ) ≥ hi ( f L ) for i = 0, 1 . Individuals hold beliefs about the frailty parameter that
are summarized by q = P( f = f L ) .
Instantaneous utility in period i is given by u(Ci ) − Fi , where Ci is consumption and Fi

7

is an index of the fear of death. We assume that u (⋅) is increasing and concave. Fear of death
depends on the subjective probability of death occurring before the next period. If that
probability is equal to m , the fear of death index is F ( m ) , where F is an increasing function.
We denote by bi j the belief, or subjective probability, as of period i that one will survive until
period j conditional on being alive at time j − 1 (with bii = 1 ). For example, b02 is a belief held
at time 0 that one will live to see period 2 if one is alive at time 1. The value of bi j depends
directly on the frailty belief q in a manner we make explicit later. Given beliefs, the individual
maximizes in period i the additively separable expected utility2
 j



j =i  k =i
2


k
i 



∑ ∏ b E[ u ( C ) − F ] .
j

j

(1)

Mortality risk is accounted for explicitly in this objective function through its dependence on
subjective mortality. The only non-standard element is the presence of fear. The current level of
fear cannot be manipulated and is given by Fi = F (1 − bii +1 ) . However, future fear F j , j > i , can
be divorced from the currently perceived future hazard rate 1 − bi j +1 by actions that bias future
perceptions of the subjective mortality risk. Because mortality risk plays the dual role of
determining fear as well as being a component of the discount rate, there is a trade-off involved
in manipulating the perceived mortality risk through denial: denial will bias time preference in
the future. By itself, this suggests that time inconsistency may arise as an outcome of the model.
We will explore this possibility in what follows.

2

We assume no discounting other than via the survival probability. Introducing exponential discounting would not
change major conclusions, but it would complicate notation.

8

1.1 News
We assume that at time 0 individuals observe with probability α a signal indicating their frailty.
The signal is bad news: individuals with high frailty f H observe it with probability sH that is
higher than the probability of observing it when frailty is low, sL . The kind of signal we have in
mind might be subtle such as, for example, perceived discomfort that may, but need not, indicate
illness. Our framework is also consistent with the possibility that one of the frailty beliefs is
unrealistically optimistic (in the extreme, a belief in immortality) and the other one corresponds
to more realistic expectations.3 In that case, many real-life events may act as signals by simply
reminding (or informing) people that they are mortal.
Individuals update their beliefs regarding their frailty type using Bayes’ rule. The signal
is used to update beliefs at time 0 . If still remembered at time 1 , it is analogously used to
construct beliefs then. If, however, it is not remembered in period 1, the individual (depending
on her level of sophistication4) may take into account the likelihood that the signal was repressed

while updating beliefs.
At time i , the present fear Fi is no longer a choice variable. Manipulation of information (if
any) is intended to affect future fear, that is F j , j > i . With three periods of life, only the fear
level in period 1 can be affected (at time 0 ): fear in period 0 is predetermined, and fear in period
2 must be F (1) . Given that by assumption fear does not interact with consumption in the utility

3

A pattern like that would be consistent with the developmental process of constructing and understanding the
concept of death in childhood (Kastenbaum, 2000).
4
Sophistication refers here to the updating process and is different than sophisticated behavior with timeinconsistent preferences (O’Donoghue and Rabin, 1998). Benabou and Tirole (2002) use the term “meta-cognition”
in a related sense. Because we deal with both kinds of issues later in the paper, we will later refer to sophistication in
the time-inconsistency context as “forward sophistication” and to sophistication related to the Bayesian updating as
“backward sophistication.”

9

Period 0 Frailty belief π ⇒ Signal ⇒ Beliefs q0 , b01 = b0 ( q0 ) , b02 = b1 ( q1∗ ( q0 )) ⇒
Choose C0 & denial
Interim

Denial takes place, belief based on retained information is q0∗

Period 1 Mortality resolved ⇒ Update beliefs to q1 = q1∗ ( q0∗ ) , b12 = b1 ( q1 ) ⇒
Choose C1
Period 2 Mortality resolved ⇒ Choose C2 .
Table 1: Sequence of Events
function, F0 and F2 do not play any role in individual behavior and we suppress these terms
throughout the paper.
We assume that the individual updates beliefs throughout the whole lifespan. The
sequence of actions and evolution of beliefs is depicted in Table 1. Before the signal can be
observed, the prior belief of low frailty f L is equal to its population frequency π . We denote the
belief in period 0 that incorporates the signal by q0 . Our assumption of Bayesian updating and
the information structure imply that q0 can take two values, as follows

π,
if no signal was received,


q0 = 
π sL
 π s + (1 − π ) s , if a signal was received.
 L
H

(2)

We denote the value of q0 when the signal was (not) received by q0S ( q0N ). Note that q0S < q0N
because sH /sL > 1 . Receiving the signal increases the likelihood that one is of high frailty. In the
same manner, we also introduce beliefs formulated in period 1 and denote them by q1 .
Frailty beliefs translate in a natural manner into subjective survival rates. To facilitate the

10

discussion, we introduce a function bi ( q) that maps frailty risk q into a subjective one-period
survival rate conditional on being alive at time i . Equivalently, bi ( q) is one minus the subjective
mortality hazard rate at time i . The value of bi ( q) is defined as
bi ( q) = q[1 − hi ( f L )] + (1 − q)[1 − hi ( f H )] .

(3)

Clearly, b′i ( q) = hi ( f H ) − hi ( f L ) > 0 : a higher likelihood of low frailty increases subjective
survival rates. From this formula, b01 = b0 ( q0 ) and b12 = b1 ( q1 ) . Note, though, that b02 ≠ b1 ( q0 ) .
This is because surviving one period provides new information about frailty, so that the survival
rate between the first and second period should reflect the updated frailty belief. Having survived
until period 1, beliefs should be revised according to5
q1∗ ( q) =

1 − h0 ( f L )
q.
b0 ( q)

(4)

The function q1∗ ( q) represents updating of the prior q to incorporate the fact of survival. If no
information is forgotten in period 1 , then q1 = q1∗ ( q0 ) . In general, however, due to repression q0
need not be known in period 1 and the appropriate prior has to be constructed using available
and possibly incomplete knowledge. That prior is denoted by q0∗ (with q0∗ = q0 if no information
is repressed), so that generally q1 = q1∗ ( q0∗ ) . This is not a concern in period 0 when no
information is yet forgotten, so that



1 − h0 ( f L ) 
q0  .


b01



b02 = b1 ( q1∗ ( q0 )) = b1 

(5)

The final piece of the individual’s problem is the budget constraint. We denote by Y the total
5

To see the derivation of equation (4), note that the subjective probability of survival is b0 ( q ) , while the subjective

11

initial wealth and, to simplify notation, set the interest rate to zero. All income is received in the
first period and we assume away annuity and insurance markets as well as bequest motives.
Consequently, the intertemporal constraint is
C0 + C1 + C2 ≤ Y ,

(6)

which must hold in every state of the world (with just C2 or both C1 and C2 equal to zero in the
case of death before the last period).

1.2. Perfect recall
Note that, without fear of death, repressing information is not optimal and behavior is timeconsistent. We next introduce a fear of death but without the possibility of denial, which we
refer to as perfect recall. We proceed by backward induction. The individual problem in period
2 is trivially to maximize u (C2 ) , so that all the remaining resources are spent on consumption.
In period 1, the individual updates frailty beliefs using two available pieces of information: the
fact that she survived until period 1 , and information pertaining to the period 0 signal. Having
perfect recall, it follows that q1 = q1∗ ( q0 ) as in expression 4 (with q0 being the first-period frailty
belief that already incorporates news as defined in expression 2). In period 1, the consumer
attempts to maximize u(C1 ) − F (1 − b12 ) + b12u(C2 ) . The fear of death is no longer uncertain then,
so that F (1 − b12 ) is taken as given. As a result, the problem is completely standard and the
optimal consumption choice is to pick consumption according to a variant of the Euler equation
given by
u′(C1 ) = b12u′(C2 )) .
probability of survival and being low-frailty is q(1 − h0 ( f L )) . Hence, the formula follows by Bayes’ rule.

12

(7)

The decision in period 0 can be analyzed analogously, with individuals having beliefs q0 = q0S or
q0 = q0N depending on the signal. When evaluated in period 0 , consumption in periods 1 and 2
are weighted using the discount factors of b01 and b02b01 , respectively, so that the relative discount
rate is b02 . Crucially, b12 = b02 because q1 = q1∗ ( q0 ) , so that in period-0 and period-1 the individual
uses the same discount rate to compare first- and second-period consumption: behavior is
perfectly time-consistent.6

2. Denial of Death among Backward-Naïve Individuals
We now allow that individuals may want to repress bad information. In particular,
following Benabou and Tirole (2002), we assume that the individual may select the rate of recall
1 − µ . Thus if news is received, the individual may be able to forget this information with the
probability of µ .7
We again proceed by backward induction. In period 2, the problem is trivial: with no
bequest motive, in the last period of life one should consume everything that is left. In period 1,
the individual must formulate subjective beliefs regarding her frailty. There are again two
sources of information: the fact that one is still alive and information pertaining to news received
in period 0. We will assume throughout that information stemming from survival is fully
6

Halevy (2001) shows that this is a more general result in the presence of mortality risk.
Building on the model developed in Carrillo and Mariotti (2000), Benabou and Tirole (2002) show that ignoring
information may be beneficial if a person is time-inconsistent (in their framework: if the person is a hyperbolic
discounter) to begin with. Our argument is different: a person may decide to ignore information to alleviate fear and
thereby ends up being time-inconsistent. In this case considerations that Benabou and Tirole (2002) analyzed can
come into play: given time inconsistency generated by denial, the individual may additionally manipulate
information to increase self-confidence. Contrary to Benabou and Tirole (2002), we do not introduce a cost of
forgetting. Allowing for the utility cost of forgetting is a straightforward extension of the problem that would not
affect our conclusions in an important manner. In particular, except for the simplest case considered in what follows
7

13

incorporated into individual beliefs.
As for the information regarding the signal, we will consider both “backwardsophisticated” and “backward-naive” behavior. A backward-naive individual trusts her memory:
if the signal is not recalled she believes that it was not received. In the same circumstances, a
backward-sophisticated individual engages in introspective behavior, incorporating into the
updating process the possibility that the bad news was received but was repressed. (To avoid
confusion, we denote as a “forward-naïve” individual someone who assumes that future selves
will share her preferences, while a “forward-sophisticated” individual recognizes that there may
be a conflict between today’s and tomorrow’s objectives.) We begin by considering the
backward-naïve case.
A backward-naive individual trusts her state of knowledge in period 1. If she does not
remember observing the signal, she presumes it was not received; if she remembers observing it
she presumes it was received. Without acknowledging the possibility of repression, Bayesian
updating implies that q1 is given by q1N ≡ q1∗ ( q0N ) when no signal is recalled and q1S ≡ q1∗ ( q0S )
when one is remembered. This amounts to completely discarding a repressed signal.
The initial problem is now more complex, because the individual must also decide
whether to repress bad news. Repressing bad news will increase future subjective survival rates,
which reduces future fear of death, but also leads to sub-optimal future choices (i.e., too much
saving), because the choices do not reflect the full information available.
There are two scenarios to consider at time 0 . People who did not receive the signal have
no decision to make regarding the rate of recall. In this case, in the next period the individual will

(the case of individuals who are both backward- and forward-naive), we obtain an interior optimum for µ.

14

presume that the signal was not received and proceed as in the perfect recall case.8
Individuals who have received the signal have to decide whether to repress it. For all
those who repress it, their behavior is time-inconsistent. When repression is successful (and thus
reduces fear), the objectives of period-1 and period-0 selves diverge: given the level of firstperiod fear, the period-1 self maximizes u(C1 ) + b1 ( q1N )u(C2 ) , rather than u(C1 ) + b1 ( q1S )u(C2 ) , as
preferred by the period-0 self.
In this model, time inconsistency is the result of a choice that, while reducing fear, results
in a sub-optimal consumption profile.9 Although the possibility of time inconsistency follows in
a straightforward manner from the assumed form of preferences, our modification of standard
preferences is grounded in two important aspects of human behavior: people fear death and have
an ability to repress. Both of these are required for behavior to be time-inconsistent. Fear of
death alone does not lead to time-inconsistent behavior but without a fear of death, an individual
(with additively separable preferences and exponential discounting) has no incentive to forget
anything. Consequently, contrary to most of the prior literature on time-inconsistent behavior,
time inconsistency here is a consequence of human psychology, rather than an assumption.
We now turn to the implications of whether people are forward-naïve or sophisticated. In order
to characterize the repression strategy, we introduce the solution function for the optimization
problem of the period-1 self as C ( q, z ) ≡ (C1 ( q, z ), C2 ( q, z )) , where q is the first-period frailty
belief, and z is the available income. C (⋅) is defined as follows:

8

Note that even if it was possible to fabricate signals, people who did not receive a bad signal about their frailty do
not have an incentive to do so, because it would both increase their future fear and lead to sub-optimal consumption
choices.
9
This idea is conceptually similar to the cognitive dissonance approach of Akerlof and Dickens (1982). There are
several key differences, though. They assume that people can directly choose their beliefs, they do not consider a
game-theoretic framework, and they consider contexts that are different than the fear of death.

15

C ( q, z ) = argmax {u(C1 ) + b1 ( q)u(C2 ) | C1 + C2 = z},

(8)

C1 ,C2 ∈R

Note that, due to the way fear enters the utility function, this solution does not depend on the
level of fear. We also define the quasi-value functions V ( q, b, z ) and V F ( q, b, z ) as
V ( q, b, z ) = u (C1 ( q, z )) + bu (C2 ( q, z )) ,

(9)

V F ( q, b, z ) = V ( q, b, z ) − F (1 − b1 ( q)) .

(10)

The function V (⋅) represents the value given some alternative subjective survival belief b , so
that it allows one to evaluate welfare generated by the period-1 self’s choices from a different
perspective. Total continuation utility that depends on both V (⋅) and the fear of death is
represented by V F .

2.1. Backward- and Forward-Naive Individuals
A forward-naive individual appreciates the benefits of reduced fear but does not recognize the
implications of repression for her future behavior.10 Therefore, regardless of the outcome of
repression, she expects to receive utility from consumption given by V ( q1S , b1 ( q1S ), z ) . At period
0, her objective function is

u(C0 ) + b0 ( q0S ) V ( q1S , b1 ( q1S ), z ) − (1 − µ ) F1S − µ F1N )  .

(11)

The marginal impact of a change in µ is thus equal to F1S − F1N , which is unambiguously
positive: repression is beneficial because it reduces fear from the high level of F1S to the low
level of F1N . The individual will feel better off with a lower level of fear and thus full repression
( µ = 1 ) is optimal. A fearful forward-naive individual always denies death, and so sets µ = 1 .

10

She also know that, if µ < 1, repression may not be successful.

16

Period-0 consumption is identical to what it would be without the ability to deny death.
However, because all bad news is fully repressed, first-period consumption will be smaller than
in the full-information case, C1 ( q1N , z ) < C1 ( q1S , z ) .11 The time-1 self will perceive lower mortality
risk and thus consume less than otherwise in order to save for later periods of life that are, overoptimistically, perceived to be following. He is more likely to die without having consumed his
wealth which, in the absence of any bequest motive, is a waste of resources.

2.2. Backward-Naive but Forward-Sophisticated Individuals
A forward-sophisticated individual realizes that the cost of denial is a future consumption pattern
that may not be what she would prefer a priori. The period-0 self’s objective is to select C0 and

µ to maximize
u(C0 ) + b0 ( q0S ) (1 − µ )V F ( q1S , b1 ( q1S ), z ) + µV F ( q1N , b1 ( q1S ), z )  ,

(12)

where recall that z = Y − C0 , is the income available in period 1 . With probability 1 − µ , the
individual will assimilate the bad news and make choices according to the “right” objective
function but with a high level of fear. With probability µ , the individual will repress the news
successfully and will make choices with the “wrong” frailty belief q1N and a corresponding lower
level of anxiety.
The utility impact of a marginal change in the level of repression is given by
W ( q1N , q1S , z ) ≡ V F ( q1N , b1 ( q1S ), z ) − V F ( q1S , b1 ( q1S ), z )

=  F1S − F1N  − (V ( q1S , b1 ( q1S ), z ) − V ( q1N , b1 ( q1S ), z ) ) .

11

The inequality is a straightforward consequence of the concavity of u (⋅) in consumption.

17

(13)

This formula does not depend on µ , so that the individual will decide to either repress fully or
not to repress at all. The decision depends on which of the following two factors dominates: the
S
N
reduction in fear F1 − F1 , or the loss of utility due to the bias in the discount rate used in the

future, (V ( q1S , b1 ( q1S ), z ) − V ( q1N , b1 ( q1S ), z ) ) .
Note, though, that a small degree of time inconsistency has only a second-order effect on
welfare, while a reduction in fear has a first-order effect.12 So, in the case where sH sL is
sufficiently close to 1, so that q1S is arbitrarily close to q1N , such as weak indicator of frailty will
always be fully repressed ( µ = 1 ). As a result, behavior becomes (slightly) time-inconsistent.13
As the informativeness of the signal increases ( sH sL → ∞ ), there is a loss of utility from
suboptimal choices and a gain from the reduced fear of death. Which of the effects dominates
depends on the specification of utility and fear of death. Note that changes in the functional form
of F (⋅) do not affect consumption choices. Therefore, depending on one’s innate fearfulness, the
benefits of reduced fear may be smaller or greater than the utility loss from suboptimal future
consumption and saving decisions.
There is no monotone relationship between optimal repression and the informativeness of
signals. One interesting specification of F would allow for fear to increase without bounds as
mortality risk increases, so that lim F ( m) = ∞ . In this case, signals that point to almost certain
m→1

death by the end of first period14 will result in complete repression. Consequently, it may be that
12

This is intuitive: the period-1 self will proceed with a slightly biased rate of time preference and will therefore
pick only a slightly different consumption plan than the period-0 self would. Because we start at the period-0 self’s
optimum, such consumption changes do not have a first-order impact on welfare. Fear, on the other hand, affects
welfare directly.
13
A proof is offered in the appendix.
14
The signal must be both informative, i.e., have a large value of sH sL and be such that high frailty indicates a

18

both non-informative and very informative signals will end up being repressed, while moderate
signals end up being accepted.
Intuitively, information will be repressed when the marginal gain in welfare from
reduction in fear is large relative to the marginal loss of welfare from a distorted pattern of
lifetime consumption. This must the case if the disutility from fear is large (for example when we
increase fear holding constant the utility from consumption), but it is also the case when the loss
of welfare from consumption is negligible (for example, in the neighborhood of optimal
consumption choices absent any fear.)
Because in the presence of denial future consumption decisions are suboptimal, it might
seem that a forward-sophisticated denier should increase present consumption and reduce the
resources devoted to misallocated subsequent consumption. This is not necessarily so, however.
Recall that O’Donoghue and Rabin (1998) have shown that a (forward) sophisticated individual
facing a time-inconsistency problem may decide to perform a task earlier than would be optimal
with commitment, because she realizes that otherwise she would procrastinate too long. Such a
possibility is present in this setting as well, even though time inconsistency arises as a choice and
decisions are continuous rather than being binary.
The direction of the effect of repression on period-0 consumption and saving depends on
preferences. The key to determining the effect of repression on C0 lies in understanding its effect
on the marginal utility of wealth carried over to period one. Holding C0 constant, the level of
utility in the future must unambiguously fall, but the same does not necessarily obtain for
marginal utility: it is possible that the marginal utility in the future will be lower under repression

hazard rate close to one: h1 ( f H ) ≈ 1 .

19

than without it, but it is also possible that it will be higher. Depending on the direction of this
effect, consumption should be postponed or accelerated. An example presented in the appendix
1−ξ

it depends on whether ξ > 1. If it
shows that with an isoelastic utility function where u( c ) = c
1−ξ
is, period-0 consumption moves upward. The ambiguity is due to the fact that a suboptimal
allocation of future consumption has two offsetting effects on the attractiveness of present
consumption: the fact that saving will be put to suboptimal use makes present consumption more
attractive, but the knowledge that future utility will be lower due to suboptimal consumption
makes saving more needed, and thus makes present consumption less attractive. In the isoelastic
utility case, whether ξ > 1 determines which of these effects dominates.
Even if C0 is not affected by repression, the lifetime pattern of consumption is still
affected by the presence of denial: consumption decisions in period 1 will be made relying on the
“wrong” mortality rate. The forward-sophisticated individual knows that tomorrow she may
make bad choices. This realization induces time inconsistency, but of a type that is conceptually
different than instant gratification: this is a fully rational choice that would be affirmed by any of
the selves if they had the same information. Note also that there is an unambiguous welfare
measure that selves at different points in time would agree on: the utility that relies on full
information for discounting. In this respect, by providing an unambiguous welfare metric while
allowing for time inconsistency, this is an alternative to the framework of Gul and Pesendorfer
(2001, 2002).
A forward-sophisticated person could in principle deal with time inconsistency using
various commitment devices. What is interesting here is that an appropriate commitment device
would force the individual to consume in period 1 rather than save. Knowing that the period-1

20

self will be committed to consume would reduce the period-0 self’s concern that her saving will
be used inefficiently. The period-0 self could then consume appropriately. At the same time, the
availability of such devices would make repression less costly by reducing future inefficiency
without affecting the utility benefit of the lower level of fear.

3. Denial of Death among Partially Backward-Sophisticated
Individuals
A backward-naive model is inconsistent with some stylized observations. For example
individuals do appear to, on average, predict their mortality accurately (Hurd and McGarry 1995,
2002; Smith et al. 2001). For this reason, it is worthwhile to consider an extension of this model
that is consistent with this evidence. In particular, we now consider the possibility that people are
what we call partially backward-sophisticated. (In what follows, we will concentrate on
individuals who are also forward-sophisticated.) In addition, although we allow the individual to
be sophisticated enough to recognize the possibility of past denial, we do not allow her to be so
sophisticated as to learn about the possibility of past denial by examining past consumption
decisions. In period 1, C0 is not in the information set of the individual or, alternatively, the
information related to the initial income Y is not in the information set.
For an individual who is partially backward-sophisticated and forward sophisticated,
when the signal is remembered it is clear that it was received, so that the likelihood of being of
low frailty before mortality risk is resolved is q0S . If it is not remembered, however, the person
recognizes that there is a chance that it was in fact received, but repressed. Recall that the
likelihood of receiving the signal is α . If the repression rate is µ, the likelihood that the signal

21

was received and repressed is then αµ . Therefore, after the signal is forgotten, but before it is
known whether the individual survived until period 1, the chance of being low frailty conditional
on observing no signal is given by15 q0∗ ( µ ) =

(1−α ) q0N +αµ q0S
(1−α ) +αµ

. On top of that, the individual uses

expression (4) to incorporate information due to survival. Consequently, individuals who
remember the signal hold the first-period belief of q1S = q1∗ ( q0S ) , while individuals who do not
remember it hold a belief of
 (1 − α ) q0N + αµ q0S
q1K ( µ ) = q1∗ 
 (1 − α ) + αµ


.


(14)

It is trivial to show that unless µ = 0 we have q1K < q1N : a partially backward-sophisticated
individual who does not remember the signal doubts herself, and thus is less confident of being a
low-frailty type than a backward-naive individual would be. Clearly, q1K ′ ( µ ) < 0 : the higher is
the degree of repression, the less confidence is placed on not remembering bad news and the
lower is the subjective survival rate when the news is not recalled.
The decision of the period-0 individual who received bad news differs from the decision
faced by a forward-naive individual as set out in (12) due to the fact that the belief q1K ( µ ) is held
instead of q1N : if the signal is not recalled, it is no longer automatically assumed that it was not
received. Thus the maximand becomes
u(C0 ) + b0 ( q0S ) (1 − µ )V F ( q1S , b1 ( q1S ), z ) + µV F ( q1K ( µ ), b1 ( q1S ), z )  .

(15)

The problem of the period-0 individual who did not receive bad news is also different than for a
backward-naive individual, whose consumption decision is completely unaffected by fear and
15

The unconditional probability of not remembering a signal is given by (1 − α ) + αµ : the signal either was not

22

repression considerations.
The partially backward-sophisticated individual who received no signal does not repress,
but also knows that she is not able to transfer this knowledge to the period-1 self. When period 1
arrives, she will suspect she might be of high frailty. This problem is caused by the repression
strategy of the bad-news type, µ, that must be taken as given. We assume that in equilibrium the
period-1 self knows the actual rate of repression µ, but does not know whether repression did in
fact occur or not. Consequently, the period-1 self will proceed with a belief of q1k ( µ ) instead of
the “right” one, q1s , where q1k ( µ ) > q1s , and will strive to maximize
u(C0 ) + b0 ( q0N )V F ( q1K ( µ ), b1 ( q1N ), z ) .

(16)

Note that for a partially backward-sophisticated individual who would repress bad news,
behavior is time-inconsistent even for individuals who did not receive the signal. The healthy,
low-frailty person suspects himself on being a high-frailty denier of death, and over-consumes.16
To see this, we define a perfect Bayesian equilibrium of this game with partial backward
sophistication as consisting of (1) assignments of C0 , C1 , C2 to both types conditional on the
realization of repression, (2) a denial strategy µ , and (3) beliefs q1 , for which: (4) q1 is
formulated using Bayes’ rule given the repression outcome and µ , (5) consumption choices C1
and C2 are optimal given q1 , i.e., Ci = Ci ( q1, Y − C0 ) , i = 1, 2 , and (6) C0 of the no-news type is
optimal given µ (i.e., it maximizes (16)), while µ and C0 of the bad-news type maximize (15).

N

S

received or was repressed. In the first case, the likelihood of being low frailty is q0 . In the second case, it is q0 .
16

Interestingly, in this case the direction of the bias in the discount rate is the same as considered in the hyperbolic
discounting and related literature: the individual without bad news appears impatient. Consequently, the results from
a hyperbolic model apply conditional on the degree of time inconsistency. This degree is not under the control of the
individual who did not receive a signal, but rather follows from the behavior of the other type and the uncertainty
concerning which type one is.

23

The marginal welfare effect of a change in µ for an individual who receives bad news is given
by
W ( q1K ( µ ), q1S , z ) + b0 ( q0S ) µ ⋅ q1K ′ ( µ ) ⋅ V1 ( q1K ( µ ), b1 ( q1S ), z ) .

(17)

The W (⋅) term represents the considerations that were also faced by a backward-naive, though
forward-sophisticated, individual. Repression reduces fear but leads to suboptimal consumption
choices. The second term is new: repressing leads to suboptimal consumption choices even if
repression is not successful. The first-order condition implies that at an interior optimum,
expression (17) is equal to zero.17
It can be shown that a partially backward-sophisticated individual who receives bad news
selects at least partial repression ( µ > 0 ) whenever a backward-naive but forward-sophisticated
individual represses fully.18 Then, behavior of all types is time-inconsistent.
With a small degree of repression, the loss of utility due to self-doubting when news is
forgotten is negligible because it happens with very low probability. Therefore, the decision to
engage in denial is warranted if the reduction in fear dominates the cost of sub-optimal
consumption, as in equation (13). In particular, the previous discussion of denial of weak
indicators of mortality applies here as well with a qualification that such indicators will certainly
be repressed with µ > 0 , but denial needn’t be complete.
Even full repression may be optimal in this context. This is because q1K (1) < q1S : even
though the individual realizes ex post that he always forgets bad news, there is still the possibility
that no news was received. As in the backward-naïve case, there are no general results regarding
17

Corner solutions are also possible. When no repression is optimal this expression is negative at

positive at µ = 1 when full denial is optimal.
A proof is offered in the appendix.

18

24

µ = 0 , and it is

the direction of the bias in period-0 consumption for the forward-sophisticated, partially
backward-sophisticated case.19
Backward naïveté implies that even though a tendency to repress is recognized, its
implications are ignored ex post. Introducing partial backward sophistication eliminates this
model feature by requiring that past repression strategy be accounted for when constructing
future beliefs. This has the consequence of introducing diminishing payoffs to extensive
repression: the more common is repression, the less effective it will be in reducing fear because
it undermines confidence in one’s own future memory. It also has the consequence of affecting
the decisions of good-news types who do not repress at all: they will doubt their state of
knowledge in the future.

4. Conclusions
Fear and even a form of paralysis in the face of death is a common theme among psychologists,
sociologists, and philosophers. The model described in this paper incorporates into an economic
model of lifetime consumption the intuitively attractive idea that some people act, ceteris
paribus, to reduce this fear. We model death anxiety as dependent on subjective mortality
expectations, and allow anxiety to be manipulated by repressing information that would lead to a
higher level of fear in the future. Such repression is, however, costly: suppressing information
makes future intertemporal decisions suboptimal. As a result, repression induces timeinconsistency. The consequences of this mechanism depend on the individuals’ fearfulness, to be
sure, but also on their degree of sophistication, both looking forward (recognizing the time
inconsistency problem) and looking backward (recognizing the tendency to repress).
19

Examples using an isoelastic and constant absolute risk aversion utility function are available from the author.

25

A forward-naive individual does not consider the possibility of future denial, and will
under-consume upon receiving (and repressing) bad news. A forward-sophisticated individual
who is aware of the possibility of self-deception may (but need not) over-consume in anticipation
of future denial, and may seek ways to commit himself to act according to the mortality pattern
that he perceives now, knowing that in the future he may be over-confident about his mortality
prospects. We demonstrate that repressing minor reminders of mortality is always beneficial: it
results in a first-order reduction in fear, but only a second-order utility loss from regular
consumption. Stronger signals may be repressed or not, depending on the utility cost of
fearfulness and the cost of making inappropriate intertemporal allocation decisions. This result
highlights that to some extent the ability to repress can be helpful rather than harmful, and
suggests a justification of “behavioral” phenomena from an evolutionary standpoint: while
economically “rational” behavior is feasible, it may not be the optimal strategy in the presence of
conflicting objectives that give rise to fear.
Perhaps most surprisingly, time inconsistency is not limited to those individuals who
repress. For backward-sophisticated individuals, repression is successful only to the extent that it
is not distinguishable from not having received bad news at all. As a result, the behavior of
individuals who are aware of the phenomenon of repression is affected by the possibility of
repression, regardless of whether they actually repressed or not. In this case, the possibility that
one successfully represses information is enough to result in behavioral bias. The model of fear
and repression provides a fabric for a profound psychological trait even within a fully “rational”
economic framework. In a sense, the model is an economic interpretation (and a vindication) of
the ideas of Rank (1941) and Becker (1973), who postulate that the fear of death is a key to
understanding the human psyche.

26

As a possible extension, we note that this theory should be able to match any age-profile
of denial without making the specification of how fear affects utilty explicitly age-dependent.
This is because as the horizon becomes shorter, the utility cost of the misallocation of lifetime
consumption becomes smaller, but higher baseline mortality rates shift individuals to a different
segment of the anxiety function. Because it is the local properties of the fear function that matter
for engaging in denial, by appropriately choosing the shape of the fear function one could make
the likelihood of denial grow or fall with age. This suggests that age variation can be useful in
pinning down the shape of the fear function.
Ultimately, the contribution of thinking through the implications of denial of death will
rest on whether it can explain behavior that other models cannot. This will not be an easy task, in
part because of the problematic nature of interpreting measures of what people may be denying
to themselves. Indeed, the early psychology literature concerning death attitudes that addresses
the causes, correlates, and consequences of death anxiety took seriously the idea that most
people, most of the time, live in denial of their true attitude toward death, and tried to delve
below the level of conscious report using such diverse procedures as imagery tasks, galvanic skin
response, and word association tasks. This approach waned by the mid-1970’s, and most death
anxiety measures since then have been based on conscious reports in the form of written scales
or questionnaires.
Although there is intriguing evidence that induced shocks to mortality salience have
immediate attitudinal consequences (e.g. Greenberg et al. (1990) and Solomon et al. (2000)), no
research has investigated the cross-sectional relationship between self-confessed death anxiety
and behavior, nor would the theoretical implications be clear (as indicated by our model), in part
because denial of death might otherwise affect immediate attitudes and behavior. The same

27

caveat applies to the findings in economics that elderly people do not systematically
overestimate their longevity, and that individuals’ subjective assessments of their chances of
living to a ripe old age co-vary with known risk factors in an appropriate way.
The refusal to face up to one’s mortality seems consistent with the substantial evidence
demonstrating the inadequacy of life insurance (Bernheim et al., 2003). In addition, it is
consistent with the observation that, among people wealthy enough to have a taxable estate,
intergenerational transfers are postponed for too long (Poterba 2001, Kopczuk and Slemrod
2003). The level of inter vivos giving is much lower than would be implied by simple models of
dynastic utility maximization, and the intergenerational transfers in the estates of the first dying
spouse of a married couple are too small in view of the significant tax advantages they afford.
Although both the tax law and the financial vehicles constructed to contravene the tax law are
complicated (and so the incentives are difficult to precisely identify), it appears that many people
forgo a significant amount of tax saving by postponing passing along their wealth to the next
generation.20
This behavior is broadly consistent with an unwillingness to face up to one’s mortality. It
is, to be sure, also broadly consistent with an aversion to financial planning and with simple
myopia. There is, though, reason to be hopeful that careful empirical research could distinguish
between these alternative explanations and the implications of the denial of death. Clearly, the
immediate objective of any further theoretical and empirical research in this area is to document
the particular identifying implications of fear and denial of death, such as the behavioral
response to events that increase the salience of mortality.

20

Fennell (2003) discusses how the effect and evaluation of the estate tax depends on how people cognitively
process the prospect of death.

28

This paper discusses a first attempt to model the psychological and behavioral
implications of mortality. One can imagine other approaches. Becker (1973) argued that people
attempt to gain symbolic immortality through their children — we survive and live through them
— and through wealth accumulated and passed on to the next generation. A model with
immortality in the utility function and with wealth and children as substitutable means for
“producing” immortality could imply that, ceteris paribus, estates would be higher for childless
people, producing data patterns that are routinely taken by economists to be evidence for a
bequest motive.

29

References
ANDERSON, M. C., K. N. OCHSNER, B. KUHL, J. COOPER, E. ROBERTSON, S. W. GABRIELI, G. H. GLOVER AND J. D.
E. GABRIELI (2004): “Neural Systems Underlying the Suppression of Unwanted Memories,” Science, 303 (January
9), 232-235.
AKERLOF, G. A., AND W. T. DICKENS (1982): “The Economic Consequences of Cognitive Dissonance,” American
Economic Review, 72(3), 307–319.
BAUMAN, Z. (1992): Mortality, Immortality, and Other Life Strategies. Stanford University Press, Stanford.
BECKER, E. (1973): The Denial of Death. The Free Press, New York.
BÉNABOU, R., AND J. TIROLE (2002): “Self-Confidence and Personal Motivation,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
117(3), 871–915.
BERNHEIM, B. D., L. FORNI, J. GOKHALE, AND L. J. KOTLIKOFF (2003): “The Mismatch between Life Insurance
Holdings and Financial Vulnerabilities: Evidence from the Health and Retirement Study,” American Economic
Review, 93(1), 354–365.
BRUNNERMEIER, M. K. AND J. A. PARKER (2005): “Optimal Expectations,” American Economic Review,
forthcoming.
CAPLIN, A., AND J. LEAHY (2001): “Psychological Expected Utility and Anticipatory Feelings,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 116(1), 55–79.
CARRILLO, J. D., AND T. MARIOTTI (2000): “Strategic Ignorance as a Self-Disciplining Device,” Review of Economic
Studies, 67, 529–544.
FENNELL, L. A. (2003): “Death, Taxes and Cognition,” North Carolina Law Review, 81(2).
GENEAKOPLOS, J., D. PEARCE, AND E. STACCHETTI (1989): “Psychological Games and Sequential Rationality,”
Games and Economic Behavior, 1(1), 60–79.
GREENBERG, J., T. PYSZCZYNSKI, S. SOLOMON, A. ROSENBLATT, M. VEEDER, S. KIRKLAND, AND D. LYON (1990):
“Evidence for Terror Management Theory II: The Effects of Mortality Salience on Reactions to Those Who
Threaten or Bolster the Cultural Worldview,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 58(2), 308–318.
GUL, F., AND W. PESENDORFER (2001): “Temptation and Self-Control,” Econometrica, 69(6), 1403–1435.

30

— (2002): “Self-Control and the Theory of Consumption,” Princeton University.
HALEVY, Y. (2001): “The Structure of Intertemporal Preferences Under Uncertain Lifetime,” Working Paper 01-25,
University of British Columbia.
HURD, M. D., AND K. MCGARRY (1995): “Evaluation of the Subjective Probabilities of Survival in the Health and
Retirement Survey,” Journal of Human Resources, 30(5), 268–292.
— (2002): “The Predictive Validity of Subjective Probabilities of Survival,” Economic Journal, 112(482), 966–
985.
KASTENBAUM, R. (2000): The Psychology of Death. Springer Publishing Company, New York, 3rd edn.
KOPCZUK, W., AND J. SLEMROD (2003): “Tax Consequences on Wealth Accumulation and Transfers of the Rich,” in
Death and Dollars: The Role of Gifts and Bequests in America, ed. by A. H. Munnell, AND A. Sundén, pp. 213–249.
Brookings Institution Press.
KŐSZEGI, B. (2003): “Health Anxiety and Patient Behavior,” Journal of Health Economics, forthcoming.
LYTER, D., R. VALDISERRI, L. KINGSLEY, W. AMOROSO, AND C. RINALDO (1987): “The HIV Antibody Test: Why
Gay and Bisexual Men Want or Do Not Want to Know Their Results,” Public Health Reports, 102, 468-474.
MULLAINATHAN, S., AND R. H. THALER (2000): “Behavioral Economics,” Working Paper 7948, National Bureau of
Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
O’DONOGHUE, T., AND M. RABIN (1999): “Doing It Now or Later,” American Economic Review, 89(1), 103–124.
PINKER, S. (1997): How the Mind Works. Norton, New York.
POTERBA, J. M. (2001): “Estate and Gift Taxes and Incentives for Inter Vivos Giving in the US,” Journal of Public
Economics, 79(1), 237–264.
RABIN, M. (1998): “Psychology and Economics,” Journal of Economic Literature, 36(1), 11–46.
RANK, O. (1941): Beyond Psychology. Dover, New York.
SMITH, V. K., D. H. TAYLOR, JR., AND F. SLOAN (2001): “Longevity Expectations and Death: Can People Predict
Their Own Demise?,” American Economic Review, 91(4), 1126–1134.
SOLOMON, S., J. GREENBERG, AND T. PYSZCZYNSKI (2000): “Pride and Prejudice: Fear of Death and Social
Behavior,” Current Directions in Psychological Science, 9(6), 200–204.
VENTI, S. F., AND D. A. WISE (2000): “Choice, Chance, and Wealth Dispersion at Retirement,” Working Paper 7521,

31

National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
WEGNER, D.M., D. SCNIEDER, S. CARTER III,

AND

T. WHITE (1987):

“PARADOXICAL EFFECTS

OF

THOUGHT

SUPPRESSION.” JOURNAL OF PERSONALITY AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY, 53, 409-418.
WONG, P. T. P., G. T. REKER, AND G. GESSER (1994): “Death Attitude Profile-Revised: A Multidimensional
Measure of Attitudes Toward Death,” in Death Anxiety Handbook: Research, Instrumentation, and Application, ed.
by R. A. Neimeyer, pp. 121-147. Taylor and Francis.

32

APPENDIX
Section 2.2:
Time inconsistency for backward-naïve but forward-sophisticated individuals

Lemma: Fear considerations alone determine whether an individual decides to repress when
repression has a sufficiently small effect on future beliefs:
and

∂
∂q

{W (q

N
1

∂
∂q

{W (q, q , z )}(q
S
1

S
1

) = F ′b′1( q1S ) > 0

, q, z )}( q1N ) = − F ′b′1( q1N ) < 0 .

Proof. Note that

∂
∂q

{W ( q, q , z )} = V ( q, b ( q
S
1

1

S
1

1

), z ) + F ′b′1( q ) . Also,

V ( q, b1 ( q1S ), z ) = V ( q, b1 ( q ), z ) + [b1 ( q1S ) − b1 ( q )]u (C2 ( q, z )) . Because V ( q, b1 ( q ), z ) is the value function
of the period-1 self with a frailty belief of q , the envelope theorem applies to it. Thus,

V1 ( q, b1 ( q1S ), z ) = b′1( q )u (C2 ) − b′1( q )u (C2 ) + [b1 ( q1S ) − b1 ( q )] ∂∂q u (C2 ( q, z )) , where C2 is evaluated at
( q, z ) . Substituting q = q1S makes this term equal to zero and yields the first part of the lemma. To show
the second part, note that
∂
∂q

{W ( q

N
1

}

, q, z ) ( q1N ) = b′1( q ) V2 ( q1N , b1 ( q ), z ) − V2 ( q, b1 ( q ), z )  − V1 ( q, b1 ( q ), z ) − F ′b′1( q1S ) . The first term

is zero when evaluated at q = q1N . The second term was considered in the first part with q1N replacing q1S ,
and was shown to be equal to zero.

Proposition: Weak indicators of frailty are fully repressed, causing behavior to be timeinconsistent
′

Proof. Define q1S ( s ) , which satisfies q1N = q1S (1) and q1S < 0 . The welfare impact of an increase in
sH
L

{

is given by ∂/∂

sH
sL

}{W ( q

N
1

}

′

, q1S ( s ), z ) = q1S ( s )W2 , which is positive when evaluated at
sH
L

sH
L

sH
sL

sH
sL

= 1 , by the

previous lemma. Noting that W ( q1N , q1N , z ) = 0 for any z , this implies that repression increases welfare

33

for

sH
sL

close enough to 1.

Section 2.2: the impact of denial on consumption is ambiguous.

Example Consider an isoelastic utility function u (C ) =

C 1− ξ
1−ξ

where ξ > 0 . In the presence of

certain denial ( µ = 1 ), period-0 consumption is biased upward (downward) if ξ < 1 ( ξ > 1 ). In
the special case of u(C ) = ln(C ) ( ξ = 1 ), C0 is unaffected by the ability to repress.


Proof. Fix the value of z . Denote b1 ( q1N ) = τ . It is straightforward to show that C2 = z  1 + τ


− ξ1 

−1





and

− ξ1

C1 = τ C2 . The marginal utility of z is



Vz ( q , b1 ( q ), z ) = u′(C1 )  1 −
N
1

S
1




τ − b1 ( q1S ) ∂C2 
−
= τ z − ξ  1 + τ


∂z 
τ

1

ξ

ξ 
 
 1 −

 


τ − b1 ( q1S ) 
−
1 + τ

τ

1

ξ






−1 






This whole expression is positive and depends on z only through the contribution of the z − ξ terms.
Therefore, the marginal utility is decreasing in z ( V is concave in z ). It can be shown by direct
differentiation that Vz is decreasing (increasing) with τ when (b1 ( q1S ) − τ )(1 − ξ ) < 0 ( > 0 ). Because

τ = b1 ( q1N ) > b1 ( q1S ) , when ξ > 1 ( ξ < 1 ), the marginal utility of z under repression is uniformly greater
(smaller) than without it.
The optimal choice of C0 is subject to the linear budget constraint C0 + z = y . Without repression, it is
characterized by u′(C0 ) = b0 ( q0S )Vz ( q1S , b1 ( q1S ), z ) , while with repression it is characterized by
u′(C0 ) = b0 ( q0S )Vz ( q1N , b1 ( q1S ), z ) . The impact of repression on Vz established above (given the concavity
of u (⋅) and the concavity of Vz in z ) implies that C0 falls as the result of repression when ξ > 1 and
increases if ξ < 1 .

34

Section 3: Partially-backward sophisticated individuals

Proposition: A partially backward-sophisticated individual selects at least partial repression
whenever a backward naïve but forward-sophisticated individual represses fully.
Proof. When µ = 0 , the second-term in equation (17) is zero and q1K ( µ ) = q1N . Therefore, the individual
will select µ > 0 if W ( q1N , q1S , z ) > 0 and will select µ = 0 otherwise. This is the same criterion as the
one used by a backward-naive but forward-sophisticated individual.

35

