                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              CRIME, PUNISHMENT, AND MYOPIA

                                              David S. Lee
                                             Justin McCrary

                                          Working Paper 11491
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w11491


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       June 2005




Brett Allen provided excellent research assistance. We are grateful to Jeff Kling for detailed suggestions on
a previous draft. For useful comments we thank Josh Angrist, David Autor, David Card, Kerwin Charles,
Ken Chay, Gordon Dahl, John DiNardo, Michael Greenstone, Vivian Hwa, Christina Lee, Robert McMillan,
Enrico Moretti, Daniel Parent, and seminar participants at the Center for Advamced Study in the Behavioral
Sciences, Columbia University, the NBER Summer Institute, the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, the
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, the University of Rochester, the University of Toronto, and the
University of Wisconsin. Sue Burton of the Florida Department of Law Enforcement was instrumental in
obtaining the data we use here. McCrary acknowledges funding from the Center for Local, Urban, and State
Policy at the University of Michigan. Any errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by David S. Lee and Justin McCrary. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Crime, Punishment, and Myopia
David S. Lee and Justin McCrary
NBER Working Paper No. 11491
July 2005
JEL No. D9, K4

                                           ABSTRACT



Economic theory predicts that increasing the severity of punishments will deter criminal behavior
by raising the expected price of committing crime. This implicit price can be substantially raised by
making prison sentences longer, but only if offenders’ discount rates are relatively low. We use a
large sample of felony arrests to measure the deterrence effect of criminal sanctions. We exploit the
fact that young offenders are legally treated as adults——and face longer lengths of
incarceration——the day they turn 18. Sufficiently patient individuals should therefore significantly
lower their offending rates immediately upon turning 18. The small behavioral responses that we
estimate suggest that potential offenders are extremely impatient, myopic, or both.



David S. Lee
Department of Economics
University of California, Berkeley
549 Evans Hall #3880
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
dslee@econ.berkeley.edu

Justin McCrary
Ford School of Public Policy and
Department of Economics
University of Michigan
440 Lorch Hall
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220
jmccrary@umich.edu
I. Introduction

   Crime continues to be an important social and economic issue in the United States. While

crime rates have fallen in the recent past, the cost of controlling crime has not. From 1970 to 1999,

criminal justice system expenditures as a share of national income increased 170 percent, and the

ratio of criminal justice employees to the population grew 115 percent. Over the same period, the

fraction of the population that is incarcerated increased 395 percent, making the U.S. incarceration

rate the highest in the world (Maguire and Pastore 2000, Chaddock 2003).

   Crime also continues to be an active area of economic research. Recent studies have investigated

a wide range of potential factors, including the effect of police and incarceration (Levitt 1997,

Di Tella and Schargrodsky 2004, Levitt 1996, Levitt 1998), conditions in prisons (Katz, Levitt

and Shustorovich 2003), education (Lochner and Moretti 2004), social interactions and peer effects

(Case and Katz 1991, Glaeser, Sacerdote and Scheinkman 1996, Gaviria and Raphael 2001, Kling,

Ludwig and Katz 2005, Jacob and Lefgren 2003), and family circumstances and structure (Glaeser

and Sacerdote 1999, Donohue and Levitt 2001). Economists have also considered the returns

to education among recent prison releasees (Western, Kling and Weiman 2001), the impact of

criminal histories on labor market outcomes (Grogger 1995, Kling 2004), the impact of wages and

unemployment rates on crime (Grogger 1998, Raphael and Winter-Ebmer 2001), and the effect of

incarceration on the supply of crime in the economy (Freeman 1996, 1999).

   Much of this research is grounded in Becker’s (1968) framework, in which criminal behavior

is considered the outcome of a simple cost-benefit calculation. Arguably, the core message of the

economic model of criminal behavior is that it can be discouragedby raising its expected “price”. As

a practical matter, for serious offenses such as murder, robbery, or burglary, increases in expected

price may be achieved either through increases in the likelihood of punishment, or increases in the

length of prison sentences.

   In addition, the ability to raise the price of crime crucially depends on how much potential

offenders discount their future welfare. On the one hand, if potential offenders value their future

as much as their present welfare, an increase in sentence lengths from 3 to 6 years, for example,

would double the expected price. The same effect could be achieved by holding sentence lengths

fixed and doubling the probability of punishment. That is, with patient offenders, certainty and


                                              1
severity are substitutes (Becker 1968).

    On the other hand, the population at risk of committing crime is generally thought to have very

high discount rates (Wilson and Herrnstein 1985, Katz et al. 2003). If potential offenders value

their future significantly less than their present welfare, then the same increase in sentence lengths

from 3 to 6 years will have a much more modest impact than it would if they were patient. Indeed,

in the extreme case of infinite discount rates, increasing sentence lengths would have no effect, and

increasing the likelihood of punishment would be the only way to deter crime.

    This paper measures the deterrence effect of incarceration length on criminal behavior. As the

empirical literature has emphasized, there are two key difficulties in measuring this magnitude.

First, criminal sanctions may be endogenously determined. For example, high crime rates may

induce state and local governments to make criminal sanctions more punitive (Ehrlich 1973, Levitt

1997, Levitt 2004a). Second, even ignoring any potential endogeneity, the large estimates of the

impact of more punitive sanctions generated from cross-regional variation have an ambiguous in-

terpretation (Levitt 1996, Kessler and Levitt 1999). One interpretation is that sanctions are signifi-

cantly discouraging criminal behavior by making it less attractive—a true deterrence or price effect.

The alternative interpretation is that more punitive criminal sanctions reduce crime mechanically,

by removing highly crime-prone individuals from the community—the incapacitation effect. This

latter explanation has nothing to do with behavioral responses to incentives.

    To address these problems, this paper uses (1) a large, person-level, longitudinal data set on

arrests with information on exact date of birth and exact date of offense, and (2) a quasi-experiment

generated by criminal law. Specifically, we take advantage of the following fact: when an individual

is charged with a crime that occurs before his 18th birthday, his case is handled by the juvenile

courts.1 But if the offense is committed on or after his 18th birthday, his case must be handled by

the adult criminal court, which is known to administer more punitive criminal sanctions.2 Thus,

when a minor turns 18, there is an immediate increase in the expected price of crime.

    We argue that even if all other determinants of criminal offending change rapidly by age, they

do not change discontinuously at 18. This allows us to attribute any discontinuous drop in offense
   1
     While in principle the case may then be transferred to the adult criminal court, this is rare generally (Snyder
and Sickmund 1999). We examine juvenile transfer empirically in Section IV.
   2
     In Florida, as in most states, the (criminal) age of majority is 18. Several other states have legislated age cutoffs
at 16 or 17 (Bozynski and Szymanski 2003).



                                                        2
rates at 18 to a behavioral response to more punitive sanctions. Our approach circumvents the

endogeneity of a community’s response to crime since it does not use any cross-regional variation in

criminal sanctions. Equally important, our high-frequency, longitudinal data permit us to isolate

a pure deterrence effect, rather than a combination of deterrence and incapacitation effects.

      Our theoretical and empirical results are as follows. First, we use a standard economic model of

crime to provide quantitative predictions of the deterrence effect. Assuming exponential discounting

with a 0.95 discount factor, the theory predicts at least a 55 percent decline in the odds of arrest in

response to a tripling of incarceration lengths when the minor turns 18. The theory also predicts

that the proportional response to a marginal increase in incarceration lengths should be larger in

the near future (e.g., 3 versus 9 weeks) than in the distant future (e.g., 3 versus 9 years).

      Second, using data on the universe of felony arrests in Florida from 1995-2002, we document the

following important fact: there is no significant drop in offending at age 18. The point estimates

are small in magnitude, with standard errors small relative to predicted effect sizes; even our most

negative effects are consistent with annualized discount factors less than 0.1. The estimates are

consistently small across types of crime and characteristics of the individual or jurisdiction.

      The estimates are significantly smaller than those found by existing studies that have examined

the reduced-form impact of more punitive sanctions on crime (for a summary, see Levitt 2004b). A

plausible explanation for these differences is that estimates in the existing literature are operating

mostly, and perhaps entirely, through an incapacitation effect. In particular, if incapacitation begins

immediately—e.g., due to an initial detention upon arrest—then almost all analyses examining

crime rates at annual aggregates will estimate a combination of deterrence and incapacitation

effects, rather than deterrence alone.3 We provide evidence consistent with this view, finding large

incapacitation effects that are apparent even within a few weeks of an arrest.

      We consider three potential explanations for our results. First, it is possible that potential of-

fenders either have systematically incorrect information about punishments, or behave irrationally.

Our economic model, calibration exercise, and supporting empirical evidence tell us that individuals

with reasonable discount factors should reduce their criminal propensities upon turning 18. But,

as a matter of fact, they may be making systematic errors in under-estimating the likelihoods and

severity of punishments, either at a given point in time, or in the transition from juvenile status to
  3
      A notable exception is the approach of Kessler and Levitt (1999).


                                                       3
adulthood.

      Second, it is possible that offenders are behaving rationally, but have extremely low discount

factors, perhaps much smaller than 0.1. Taken literally, this would imply that criminals perceive

the difference between prison sentences of 2 years and 20 years as negligible.

      We consider this implication to be somewhat unlikely, and thus tend to favor a third interpreta-

tion: offenders have hyperbolic time preferences, with very low short-run discount factors but more

reasonable long-run discount factors. Such a theory of present-biased preferences would imply that

criminals view the price difference between 2 and 6 weeks of incarceration to be small, but the price

difference between 2 and 6 years to be large. This kind of myopia could explain why we observe

such small effects: most incarceration lengths are in fact short, so the sub-population of offenders

threatened by long prison sentences may be too small to measurably affect the overall estimates of

deterrence.

      We conclude that, for any of the above interpretations, increases in incarceration lengths—from

current levels—are unlikely to significantly deter criminal behavior. The remainder of the paper

is organized as follows. Section II outlines our conceptual framework and identification strategy.

Section III describes the data. We report our results in Section IV. Section V discusses alternative

interpretations, Section VI discusses policy implications, and Section VII concludes.

II. Conceptual Framework

      We begin this section by reviewing the standard economic model of crime, embedding it in a

stochastic life-cycle framework.4 We use the model for two main purposes. First, we clarify the

identifying assumptions of our empirical strategy. Essentially, we are assuming that all determinants

of criminal behavior are evolving “smoothly” as the potential offender turns 18—except for the

severity of criminal sanctions, which rises immediately upon the 18th birthday.

      Second, after imposing some additional structure, we generate quantitative predictions for the

drop in offense rates at age 18. Specifically, we suppose that offenders (1) are rational, (2) have

accurate information about punishments, and (3) have exponential time preferences and annual

discount factors of 0.95. The theory predicts at least a 55 percent decline in the odds of arrest at

18, in response to a three-fold increase in the length of incarceration, for an elasticity of -0.28.5 We
  4
      We discuss the highlights of the model here and provide details in Appendix A.
  5
      This is in the middle of the range of estimates from the empirical literature (Levitt 2004b).


                                                        4
illustrate how these predictions change with different discount factors and time horizons.

   After presenting our empirical results, we return in Section V to the model, extending it to

allow for hyperbolic discounting and contrasting the predictions from the two approaches.


II.A. The Economic Model of Criminal Behavior


   Consider a dynamic version of the model given in Becker (1968). Throughout his (infinite-

period) lifetime, the individual chooses whether or not to commit a crime in each period t during

which he is free. If he chooses to commit a crime, with probability pt he will be apprehended

and punished, leading to the payoff Uts , the lifetime utility properly discounted to period t. With

probability 1 − pt , the offense is undetected, and he obtains lifetime utility Utcr . If he chooses not

to commit the crime in period t, he receives lifetime utility Uta . Thus, at each point in time t, the

individual commits crime if and only if


                                       pt Uts + (1 − pt )Utcr > Uta


where we assume Uts < Uta < Utcr . Equivalently, he will commit crime if and only if the probability

of apprehension is less than a “reservation probability”, given by

                                                     Utcr − Uta
                                            pt =                                                    (1)
                                                     Utcr − Uts

   For any given pt , as the rewards to crime rise (an increase in Utcr ), the payoff to legal activity

falls (a decrease in Uta ), or the criminal sanctions become less punitive (an increase in Uts ), the

individual is more likely to commit an offense, because it is more likely that pt will fall below the

reservation probability pt .

   To allow for a stochastic element to the model, suppose that in each period t, the individual

receives a random draw from a distribution of criminal opportunities. Each opportunity is more

or less attractive as pt is low or high. For example, the least valuable opportunity is one for

which apprehension is assured, (i.e., one for which pt = 1). Letting Ft (·) denote the cumulative

distribution function of pt , the probability that the individual commits a crime in period t is thus


                                       Pr(Crime in t) = Ft (pt )




                                                 5
II.B. Identification Strategy


    Our identification strategy exploits the fact that in the United States, the severity of criminal

sanctions depends discontinuously on the age of the offender at the time of the offense. In all 50 U.S.

states, offenders younger than a certain age, typically 18, are subject to punishments determined

by the juvenile courts. The day the offender turns 18, however, he is subject to the more punitive

adult criminal courts. The criminal courts are known to be more punitive in a number of different

ways. For example, as we document below, the expected length of incarceration is significantly

longer when the offender is treated as an adult rather than as a juvenile.

    We follow a cohort of youth longitudinally and examine whether there is a discontinuous drop

in their offense rates when they turn 18. Our data contain exact date of birth and exact date

of offense, allowing us to examine the timing at high frequencies. A high frequency approach is

important, because it allows us differentiate between secular age effects (Grogger 1998, Levitt and

Lochner 2001) and a response to the increase in the price of crime.

    Illustrating our approach, Figure I plots criminal propensities at each point in time, under

two hypothetical scenarios. In the first scenario, represented by the solid line, the individual is

patient and possesses a low discount rate (high discount factor). The probability of offense drops

discontinuously at the age of 18, because at that age the expected cost of crime jumps significantly,

leading crime to be less attractive.6

    In the second scenario, the individual is impatient and possesses a high discount rate. Here,

even facing the same increase in incarceration lengths as above, the individual perceives the jump

in the price of crime to be much more modest. As a result, the drop in criminal propensity is

not as great. Our empirical analysis amounts to determining whether the data are relatively more

consistent with the first or second scenario.

    Our approach does not require that the determinants of criminal behavior be constant through-

out the individual’s life. Instead, it relies on the arguably plausible assumption that determinants

of criminal propensity—other than the severity of punishments—do not change discontinuously

at 18. For example, we are arguing that on average, wages do not “jump up” the day after an
    6
      Note that we are estimating what is known in the criminology literature as “general deterrence”, which is the
effect of the threat of punishment on criminal behavior. General deterrence is the phenomenon traditionally addressed
in the economics of crime. By contrast, Pintoff (2004) identifies what is known in criminology as “specific deterrence”,
or the extent to which a prison experience will lower post-release criminal propensity.


                                                       6
individual turns 18, and that the distribution of criminal opportunities does not systematically and

dramatically change between the day before and day after the 18th birthday. As another example,

we consider it plausible that the ability of law enforcement to apprehend an offender does not

discontinuously change between the week before and the week after the agent’s 18th birthday.

   We emphasize that we only believe that “all other factors” are roughly constant when examining

offense rates in relatively short intervals (e.g., one day, or one week). By contrast, we consider it

likely that all determinants of criminal behavior are changing significantly from year to year. In

the age range of 17, 18, or 19, for example, youth could be graduating from high school, starting

a new job, or developing physiologically and psychologically in ways that could affect underlying

criminal propensities.

   Formally, let t0 be the week following the individual’s 18th birthday, and t be measured in week

intervals so that t0 − 1 is the week before his 18th birthday. We are arguing that it is plausible

that Utcr
        0
          = Utcr
               0 −1
                    , Uta0 = Uta0 −1 , and Ft0 (·) = Ft0 −1 (·): the lifetime utilities from the crime, from

the legitimate activity, and the distribution of available criminal opportunities are approximately

the same for the two periods. The only difference between periods t0 − 1 and t0 , we are arguing, is

that lifetime utility will be different if apprehended: Uts0 6= Uts0 −1 .

   This key smoothness assumption implies that

                                                                        Utcr0
                                                                              − Uta0
                   Pr(Crime at t0 − 1) = Ft0 (pt0 −1 ), where pt0 −1 =
                                                                       Utcr
                                                                          0
                                                                             − Uts0 −1
                                                                  U cr − Uta0
                       Pr(Crime at t0 ) = Ft0 (pt0 ), where pt0 = crt0
                                                                 Ut0 − Uts0

Thus, we obtain the unambiguous prediction that the discontinuous jump in the punitiveness of

sanctions at age 18 will lead to a corresponding discontinuous drop in the probability of offending.


II.C. Estimation


   We implement our identification strategy by providing an empirical analogue to the profile

depicted in Figure I. We follow a fixed cohort of individuals and estimate the probability of offending

for every week, starting at the 17th birthday, and ending on the 19th birthday. Specifically, we

estimate the logit
                                           µ                  ¶
                                                 Ft (pt )
                                      ln                          = Xt0 α + Dt θ                        (2)
                                               1 − Ft (pt )


                                                       7
          ¡                                           ¢0
where Xt ≡ 1, t − t0 , (t − t0 )2 , . . . , (t − t0 )q , q is the order of the polynomial, t indexes age in

weeks, t0 is the week of the 18th birthday, and Dt is 1 if t ≥ t0 , and is 0 otherwise.7 The reduced-

form parameter of interest is θ, the discontinuous change in the log-odds of committing an offense

when the youth turns 18 and immediately becomes subject to the adult criminal courts.

       The logit model is a simple way to parametrically describe the time profile of criminal propensi-

ties. A completely non-parametric approach would proceed as follows. Let N be the total number

of individuals in our sample of 17 year-olds, and let n1 denote the number of individuals who com-

mit their first post-17 offense in the first week, n2 the number who commit their first offense in
                                                                                                              n1
the second week, and so on. We could then simply compute the first three values of Ft (pt ) as                N,
 n2        n3
N −n1 , N −n1 −n2 ,   for example.8

       We present these nonparametric estimates graphically in our empirical analysis. In addition,

we use the logit in Equation (2) to fit the nonparametric estimates to a parametric form and to

provide more efficient estimates of the discontinuity at age 18.

       Note that we utilize arrest information as a proxy for criminal offending—as is common in the

crime literature—since error-free criminal offending data does not exist. Thus, strictly speaking,

we cannot estimate Equation (2), which expresses the odds of offending as a function of age.

       Nevertheless, this does not pose a problem for our identification strategy, since we have already

assumed that the distribution Ft (·) is evolving smoothly and does not discontinuously change at

18. As discussed above, this means that the risk of apprehension for any fixed criminal opportunity

does not change abruptly upon an individual’s 18th birthday. Thus, we henceforth re-define Ft (pt )

as the probability as of time t of being arrested for the first time since turning 17, defining Ft (pt ) ≡

Ft∗ (pt )Ept , where Ft∗ (·) is the distribution of criminal opportunities, and Ept ≡ Et [pt |pt < pt ] is the

expected apprehension rate conditional on committing the crime. Since both Ft∗ (·) and Ept are

monotonically increasing in pt , the qualitative predictions are unchanged when using arrests.

II.D. Predicted Magnitudes

       In this sub-section, we address the following question: How large should we expect θ to be

if individuals are forward-looking and have rational expectations? The answer to this question
   7
    The vector Xt can also include interactions of the polynomial in t with the indicator Dt .
   8
    This evolving “risk-set” is also used in estimation of the logit model. Thus, the data is an unbalanced panel,
where there are N observations for the first period, N − n1 for the second, N − n2 for the third, and so on. Efron
(1988) points out that the logit model described estimates the hazard function.


                                                     8
requires quantifying the difference between punishments in the juvenile and adult systems. Our

calibration exercise focuses on the differences in expected incarceration length. We discuss other

qualitative differences between the punitiveness of the two systems at the end of this sub-section.

       Appendix B provides some simple estimates of the expected duration of incarceration, condi-

tional on an arrest. For Florida, the average incarceration length for juveniles arrested for Index

crimes range from 2.7 to 6.5 weeks. Adult incarceration lengths are 3.1 to 7.4 times as long.9 We

emphasize that these numbers are conditional on arrest, and will represent an average of long peri-

ods (for convicted felons) and very brief periods of incarceration (for those who are released shortly

after an arrest). Thus, we broadly define “incarceration” to be any period in which an arrestee is

in custody of the criminal justice system (e.g., awaiting trial).

       Using these estimates in conjunction with age-specific arrest rates and assumptions on discount

factors, we derive quantitative predictions for the size of the reduced-form discontinuity
                             µ                                  ¶          µ                                    ¶
                                   Ft0 (pt0 (δ, SJ , SA ))                       Ft0 (pt0 −1 (δ, SJ , SA ))
                    θ ≈ ln                                          − ln                                            (3)
                                 1 − Ft0 (pt0 (δ, SJ , SA ))                   1 − Ft0 (pt0 −1 (δ, SJ , SA ))

where the notation emphasizes that pt0 and pt0 −1 are functions of the weekly discount factor δ,

incarceration length for juveniles, SJ , measured in weeks, and the incarceration length for adults,

SA . To make these quantitative predictions, we invoke the following assumptions:

 A1. Linear Approximation of Ft∗0 (·). Consider a first-order approximation around pt0 = 0
         (where Ft∗0 (0) = 0), so that we have Ft∗0 (pt0 ) ≈ f · pt0 , with f a positive constant.10 With
                                                                                       ¡ ¢
         this approximation, it follows that Ept ≡ E[pt0 |pt0 ≤ pt0 ] ≈ 12 pt0 and Ft0 pt0 ≈ 12 f p2t0 .
                                                        0


 A2. Stationarity. In each period, the flow utilities from committing a crime undetected, from
         the alternative legal activity, and from being caught, are ucr , ua , and us , respectively, for all
         t ≥ t0 − 1. Similarly, the distribution of criminal opportunities is the same over time: Ft∗ (·) =
         F ∗ (·) for all t ≥ t0 −1. Furthermore, we assume that no matter how many incarceration spells
         the offender has experienced, he faces the same dynamic optimization problem whenever he
         is released.

 A3. Structure of Punishments.                     If apprehended, the individual must remain incarcerated
         for SJ (if caught as a juvenile) or SA (if caught as an adult) periods. After this incarcer-
         ation, the individual is released and faces the original decision problem. For each period
         during the incarceration, he receives flow utility us . This implies that an offender who is
   9
     Our estimates are in the the range of the case-control matching approach to sentencing differences found in the
criminological literature (for a review, see Redding 2003).
  10
     Glaeser and Sacerdote (2000, Appendix 1) use a first-order approximation in a similar context.


                                                            9
      apprehended as an adult and is incarcerated for SA periods evaluates his time in prison as
        ¡                             ¢           SA
      us 1 + δ + δ 2 + · · · + δ SA −1 = us + δ−δ
                                               1−δ us .


    As we explain below, with these simplifications, if we choose SJ = 2 (weeks), SA = 6, δ = 0.999

(an annualized discount factor of 0.95), the expected probability of apprehension Ept to be 0.1,
                                                                                     0
       ¡ ¢
and Ft0 pt0 to be 0.0025, the predicted θ is −1.54, or about an 80 percent decline in the odds of

arrest at 18 in response to an increase in the length of incarceration from 2 to 6 weeks.


II.E. Construction of Prediction for θ


    We use the numerical example discussed above to illustrate the construction of the predicted θ.

In order to compute the predicted θ, it is sufficient to solve for the following unknowns: f , ucr , ua ,

and us . To solve for f , we first use the relation Ept ≈ 12 pt0 and our estimate of Ept = 0.1, which
                                                              0                                      0

implies pt0 = 0.2. The estimate of Ept is roughly based on FBI statistics on “clearance rates”—the
                                              0

fraction of reported crimes that end in an arrest of a suspect. Appendix B provides further details
                                                       ¡ ¢
on this number.11 Using pt0 = 0.2, the relation Ft0 pt0 ≈ 12 f p2t0 , and our own estimate of the
                                    ¡ ¢
probability of arrest at age 18 of F pt0 = 0.0025 yields f = 0.125.

    As shown in Appendix A, assumptions A2 and A3 result in the expressions

                                                            ucr − ua
                                  pt0 −1 =                                                                         (4)
                                                           δ−δ SJ
                                              ucr − us +    1−δ ((1 −   δ)V − us )

                                                           ucr − ua
                                    pt 0 =                                                                         (5)
                                                          δ−δ SA
                                             ucr − us +    1−δ ((1 −   δ)V − us )
where
                                                                                1−δ SA ∗
                             F ∗ (pt0 )(1 − Ept )ucr + (1 − F ∗ (pt0 ))ua +      1−δ F (pt0 )Ept0 us
                                                  0
               (1 − δ)V =                                                                                          (6)
                                                           δ−δ SA ∗
                                                      1+    1−δ F (pt0 )Ept0

    It can be shown that—as with all expected utility problems of this type—optimal choices are

invariant to affine transformations of the flow utilities. Thus, it is innocuous to normalize us = 1

and ua = 2, for example. After substituting (6) into (4) and (5), we obtain two equations with

two unknowns, ucr and pt0 −1 . Using δ = 0.999, SJ = 2, and SA = 6, we obtain ucr ≈ 3.52, and

pt0 −1 ≈ 0.43. We then use Equation (3) to calculate θ ≈ −1.54.
  11
     It is worth noting that these data may overstate the probability of arrest, since pressure to “clear” offenses may
lead to inflated counts. This may cause our calibration to be too conservative regarding the magnitude of θ.




                                                      10
II.F. Intuition Behind Prediction for θ


   A more detailed discussion of the derivation of (4), (5), and (6) is provided in Appendix A. For

now, we simply note a number of intuitive features of these expressions. First, when δ = 0, pt0
                                  ±
and pt0 −1 collapse to (ucr − ua ) (ucr − us ), the reservation probability from the static economic

model of crime (see, for example, Freeman 1999). This is intuitive since, for example, no criminal

opportunity will be worth doing when ucr = ua , leading to F (pt0 ) = F (pt0 −1 ) = 0.

   Second, V is the expected discounted utility for the rest of an individual’s life at any point in

which he is free to commit a crime; (1 − δ)V is its “annuitized” value. In this numerical example,

(1 − δ) V ≈ 2.02; it is strictly higher than ua = 2, because there is an “option value” of being able

to engage in crime. The per-period cost of being incarcerated is (1 − δ)V − us . The total cost to
                                             SA
                                                h               i
the apprehended individual is ucr − us + δ−δ
                                          1−δ    (1 − δ)V − u s  . Note that V is the same at both

t0 − 1 and t0 , because in both periods, the individual will face the same (adult) problem in the

subsequent period.

   Third, equation (6) shows that (1 − δ)V is a weighted average of the three flow utilities ucr ,

us , and ua , with weights given by the “steady-state” probabilities of receiving those utilities in a

randomly chosen time period.

   Finally, the intuition behind the calculation can be summarized as follows. First, estimates of

the probability of being apprehended Ept allow us to approximate the reservation probability pt0 .
                                        0
                                                         ¡ ¢
Our first order approximation of F (·) and estimate of F pt0 give us an approximation of how

much the arrest probability changes with a change from pt0 −1 to pt0 . The reservation probability

pt0 yields information on the relative payoff of crime ucr . Intuitively, a large pt0 means that ucr − ua

is large relative to ua − us ; a small pt0 implies just the opposite. Finally, with a value for ucr we

may calculate pt0 −1 , and this allows us to calculate θ.


II.G. Sensitivity of Predictions


   The use of exponential discounting leads to an important implication: increases in incarceration

lengths for short periods (e.g., 3 versus 9 weeks) will lead to a larger percentage response—that is,

a larger θ—than will increases at longer periods (e.g., 3 versus 9 years). We illustrate this in Figure

II. In the top panel of Figure II, we maintain pt0 = 0.2, but vary (SJ , SA ) from (1, 3) to (100, 300)


                                                11
weeks. For each value of SJ , we consider what θ would be if SA were 3 times as long as SJ .12

       The solid squares show the predicted θ, when δ = 0.999 (corresponding to an annual discount

factor of 0.95). The predicted θ begins close to -1.54 (consistent with an 80 percent decline in the

odds of arrest) and declines only slightly in magnitude as SJ and SA increase. That the predicted

magnitude should decline as SJ increases is intuitive. Periods in the near future are given roughly

equal weight, so that a tripling of incarceration lengths from 5 to 15 weeks will represent a roughly

three-fold increase in the cost. On the other hand, for an increase from 5 to 15 years, utility in the

additional 10 years is weighted much less than utility in the initial 5 years.

       This principle is illustrated more dramatically by the solid circles, which performs the same

calibration, but setting δ = 0.987 (corresponding to an annual discount factor of 0.50). Under this

scenario, an increase in incarceration from 100 to 300 weeks will lead to θ = −0.5, or a 40 percent

reduction in the odds of an arrest at 18. The calculation for an increase in incarceration from 5

to 15 years (not shown in the figure) yields θ = −0.05, or a 5 percent decline in the odds of arrest

at 18. The solid triangles present the analogous computations for δ = 0.957 (corresponding to an

annual discount factor of 0.1), which exhibits a similar, but more extreme profile than the other

discount rates considered.

       In the bottom panel of Figure II, we illustrate the same calculations for pt0 = 0.5, which is the

largest pt0 consistent with clearance rates, as described in Appendix B. Note that this value implies

that an individual will commit an offense if he perceives the probability of being apprehended to be

0.5 or less. The three curves have a similar shape, but the predictions using pt0 = 0.5 are roughly

half as large in magnitude as those using pt0 = 0.2.


II.H. Other Factors Affecting θ


       The calculation of our predicted θ is based on a very parsimonious model, and clearly ignores a

few potentially important factors. First of all, the adult and juvenile justice systems differ in ways

other than in the expected incarceration length. There is general agreement that the conditions

of incarceration are worse in adult than juvenile facilities (Myers 2003).13 One inmate quoted in
  12
      Note that for each value of SJ , we re-calculated the predicted θ as described above, so there is a unique ucr (and
V ) associated with each SJ , SA pair.
   13
      Arguably the qualitative aspect of confinement most salient for a youthful offender is sexual assault. A widely-
cited study estimates that juvenile offenders held in adult prison were sexually assaulted at a rate five times that of
juvenile offenders held in juvenile facilities (Forst, Fagan and Vivona 1989).


                                                       12
Levitt (1988) observed that “[When] you are a boy, you can be put into a detention home. But you

can go to jail now [as an adult]. Jail ain’t no place to go.”14 Moreover, these qualitative differences

may be most important for youthful offenders.15

    Second, we also do not incorporate the other advantages of being apprehended as a juvenile

rather than as an adult. For example, it is generally easier to expunge or seal arrest or conviction

records if the offense was committed as a juvenile rather than an adult. There may also be a labor

market penalty to having a criminal record (compared to a clean record).16

    Third, our dynamic model of criminal behavior does not allow for a richer kind of intertemporal

decision making. That is, we are assuming that the distribution of opportunities is strictly exoge-

nous: stealing a car today does not affect the opportunities for stealing a car next week. A richer

model would allow the individual to explicitly choose the optimal timing of a particular crime.

    Although our simple model ignores these factors, we conjecture that most reasonable formal-

izations of these additional factors would work to produce a θ that is larger in magnitude, for the

same SJ , SA and δ. In addition, as we show in Appendix B, the ratio SA /SJ could be as high as 7.

In sum, we believe that our predictions for the magnitude of θ are probably somewhat conservative.


III. Data and Sample

    Our analysis uses an administrative database maintained by the Florida Department of Law

Enforcement (FDLE). Essentially, the data consist of all recorded felony arrests in the state of

Florida from 1989 to 2002. The database includes exact date of birth, gender, and race for each

person. For each arrest incident, there is information on the date of the offense, date of arrest, the

county of arrest, the type of offense, whether or not the individual was formally charged for the

incident, and whether or not the incident led to a conviction and prison term. Most importantly,

the data are longitudinal: each arrest incident is linked to a person-level identifier. A more detailed

description of the database and its construction is provided in Appendix C.

    Our data has two important advantages over typically available arrest data. First, the data are
  14
     The quotation is from interview research conducted by Glassner, Ksander, Berg and Johnson (1983, p. 219,
brackets in original).
  15
     The youngest inmates in an institution are typically targeted for sexual victimization (Robertson 1999, Saccenti
2000). The age pattern of victimization is relevant since the marginal adult offender, if confined, will be youngest
among his peer inmates, whereas the marginal juvenile offender, if confined in a juvenile facility, will be oldest among
his peer inmates.
  16
     We suspect this effect is minor in light of evidence given in Kling (2004).


                                                       13
high-frequency, allowing us to pinpoint age at offense in weeks rather than years. Second the data

are longitudinal. In our context, these aspects are necessary to distinguish between deterrence and

incapacitation effects.

       To illustrate the value of these aspects of our data, we briefly illustrate the inference problems

that arise when using the more readily available, but coarser, cross-sectional data on arrests. Figure

III plots the frequency distribution of age (by year), for all arrestees and those arrested for index

crimes,17 as computed from the two most readily available, public-use data sources on arrests: the

National Incident-Based Reporting System (NIBRS) and the Uniform Crime Reports (UCR).

       The figure shows clear secular age effects in arrest rates, with an apparent trend break around

18. This is consistent with a change in criminal behavior due to more severe punishments for adults

at 18. But it is also consistent with criminal behavior declining as youth finish high school and enter

the labor market (Grogger 1998, Lochner 2004). A third—and arguably simpler—interpretation of

the peak at 18 is that it is entirely due to an incapacitation effect. Starting at 18, arrestees are

confined for longer periods, and therefore are temporarily removed from the community, and thus

cannot commit crime. Fewer and fewer arrests at older ages will occur as offenders are incapacitated,

leading to a mechanical trend break at 18.

       By comparison, our approach guarantees that we isolate only a deterrence effect. Specifically,

our main estimation sample consists of all persons who have been arrested prior to age 17. Starting

at the 17th birthday, we begin tracking this population over time, and for each subsequent day,

estimate the probability of being arrested. A discontinuous drop in this arrest rate between day

365 and 366 will be due to deterrence. This is because the population still at risk of experiencing

their first-post-17 arrest will be virtually identical for days 365 and 366.

       There are a number of advantages of our main estimation sample compared to the remainder

of youth who have not been arrested as of age 17.18 First, our sample will include individuals who

will more likely be affected by the increase in sanctions. In particular, it seems likely that for this

group, there is a positive net benefit to criminal activity. After all, an individual in our sample
  17
     Index crimes are murder, robbery, aggravated assault, rape, burglary, larceny, and motor vehicle theft.
  18
     The choice of an age 17 threshold in constructing our sample was based on two competing interests. A higher
threshold would have the advantage of raising the sample size, but it would give us a shorter period from which to
estimate the probability of arrest on the left side of the discontinuity threshold. In the extreme, if we had chosen
all those who had been arrested prior to age 17.99, there would be almost no data to estimate the left side of the
discontinuity. A lower threshold would yield more periods from which to estimate the left part of the function (as
shown in Figure I), but would result in a lower number of individuals present in the first period.


                                                     14
has already been arrested at least once by 17, suggesting that at least one crime was worthwhile

to the juvenile. By contrast, those who have not been arrested as of 17 could potentially include

many youth who have virtually no chance of committing a serious crime. Indeed, this law-abiding

population may well be at a “corner solution”, whereby ua > ucr > us . We would not expect to

see any impact of more punitive sanctions for this sub-population.

       Second, it is plausible that those who have already been arrested by age 17 are more likely to

understand that there is a difference between the juvenile and adult criminal justice systems; they

may even have been warned about this fact upon their initial arrest. Glassner et al. (1983) provide

anecdotal evidence to support this.19

       Third, our sample is not likely to be affected by expungement or sealing of criminal records. In

Florida, as in most states, it is possible to have criminal records sealed or expunged. If juvenile

records were systematically missing relative to adult records, then we would be biased against

finding a deterrence effect. As we demonstrate empirically in Section IV, by selecting on having

at least one juvenile record, we focus on a subpopulation whose entire juvenile arrest record is

observed.

       Overall, we believe our sample is reasonably representative of the population that is likely to

be affected by the increase in sanctions. Table I reports some summary statistics for our main

estimation sample. We begin with 64,073 individuals who have been arrested at least once by their

17th birthday. As is common in criminal justice data sets, 80 to 90 percent of these arrestees

are male, and roughly 50 percent are non-white. The first three columns present information on

the first, second, and third arrest for these individuals. Age at first arrest is about 15, and the

most common category of offense is property crime, followed by violent crime. At second and third

arrests, offenders are over 16 and 17 on average, respectively, and the offense mix is similar, with

drug crimes becoming somewhat more prevalent. At all three arrest snapshots, individuals are

distributed evenly among small, medium, and large counties.20

       Column (4) of Table I presents means for the first arrest since 17, which is observed for slightly
  19
     For example, responding to a question regarding how he knew that sanctions were more punitive after the age
of majority, one twelve-year-old interviewed by the authors who was earlier arrested for stealing from cars responded
that the police had told him so: “Police come in our school and a lot of stuff, and I get caught and they tell [sic] me
that” (p. 220).
  20
     We classified counties according to total arrests in the FDLE data. Medium counties are Franklin, Palm Beach,
Duval, Pinellas, Polk, Escambia, and Volusia. Large counties are Miami-Dade, Broward, and Orange. Remaining
counties are classified as small.


                                                      15
less than half of our main estimation sample. The sex and gender composition of those observed at

their first arrest since 17 is similar to those observed at their first, second, and third arrests, as is

the county-size distribution. Offenses are distributed somewhat more evenly among the four crime

types described. The final column reports the same statistics for all arrests where the individual

was 17 or 18 years old at the time of arrest. From the means, it is apparent that our sample is

broadly representative of this larger arrest population.


IV. Results

       Our main result is summarized by Figure IV, an empirical analogue to Figure I. Each open circle

in the figure represents the fraction of the population that is arrested for each week subsequent to

the 17th birthday. For example, the first circle shows that about 0.005 of the sample are arrested

within a week of their 17th birthday. In the week of their 18th birthday almost 0.0025 are arrested.

These numbers are calculated as a proportion of the sample that has not yet been arrested; that

is, the top panel of Figure IV is an empirical hazard function for being arrested, starting at age

17. The solid line gives predicted probabilities of arrest, based on maximum likelihood estimates

of the logit in equation (2).21

       The figure shows little indication of a systematic drop in arrest rates at the age of 18. The

arrest probability literally does fall between the week before and after the 18th birthday, but that

drop does not appear to be unusual, as compared to week-to-week differences ranging from age 17

to 19.

       For comparison, the bottom panel of Figure IV plots the analogous weekly arrest probabilities

for those who were arrested at least once by age 19. We track the arrest records for individuals

in this “falsification” sample for two years, from 19 to 21. At each point over this time span, the

offenders face the same punishment schedule (i.e., that of the adult criminal justice system) leading

to arrest probabilities which are smooth in age, as expected. Empirically, the top and bottom

panels of the figure are remarkably similar.

       Table II reports estimated discontinuities in arrest probabilities at 18, based on the logit model

of Equation (2). These estimates support the inference suggested by Figure IV: the drop in arrests
  21
   Here, Xt is a cubic polynomial in t. These predictions correspond to estimation of the model in column (1) of
Table II.



                                                   16
at 18 is small in magnitude and statistically insignificant. The estimated discontinuity is roughly

-0.018, with a standard error of about 0.047. These estimates imply that we can statistically rule

out values of θ more negative than -0.111.22 These estimates are much smaller than the predictions

of our theoretical model—even with an annual discount factor of 0.1, our model predicts that θ

should be in the range of -0.8 to -1.54.23

      The estimated discontinuity is robust to changes in specification. Moving from left to right in

Table II, we control for an increasing number of factors. Column (1) gives our most parsimonious

model, controlling only for a juvenile/adult dummy and a cubic polynomial in age at current arrest;

column (8) gives our most complex model, adding controls for race, size of county in which the

baseline arrest24 occurred, offense type of baseline arrest, and a quintic polynomial in age at baseline

arrest. In each column, the added controls are good predictors of the probability of arrest, but in

no case does including additional controls affect the estimated discontinuity importantly.

      Appendix Table III explores the sensitivity of the estimates to functional form. It reports the

estimated θ for different orders of the polynomial, ranging from a linear to a quintic polynomial in

time and allowing for interactions of the polynomial with the juvenile/adult dummy. The models are

also tested against an unrestricted specification, where the polynomial and the dummy are replaced

with a full set of week-dummies. Overall, the linear and quadratic specifications are apparently too

restrictive, and can be statistically rejected by a test against the unrestricted model. For richer

specifications, including ones that include a linear term interacted with juvenile/adult status, the

point estimates range from -0.065 to 0.029, with none of the estimates being statistically significant.

A similar pattern is found when baseline covariates are included.

      We interpret our results as showing a small behavioral response to more punitive criminal

sanctions. Given our standard errors, we cannot rule out small deterrence effects, but our estimates

are precise enough to easily rule out the benchmark magnitudes predicted by annualized discount

factors of 0.95, 0.5, and even 0.1.

      We now consider some important potential threats to our analysis and interpretation.



 22
    Use of a one-sided test implies rejection of any θ more negative than -0.095.
 23
    Below, we inflate our estimates to account for juvenile transfer.
 24
    For those in our estimation sample, we refer to the first pre-17 arrest as the “baseline arrest”.



                                                      17
IV.A. Transfers of Juveniles to the Adult Criminal Court


      The first threat to the validity of our research design is the possibility of a lack of a discontinuity

in the “treatment”. That is, while all adults are handled by the criminal courts, and most minors are

handled by the juvenile courts, all states allow a juvenile offender to be transferred to the criminal

courts to be tried as an adult. This is particularly of concern in Florida, where prosecutors have

discretion on whether to try a juvenile arrestee as an adult.

      In principle, prosecutors could be more likely to request that the case be transferred to the

criminal justice system when the arrestee is almost 18. In the extreme case, all arrestees aged 17.8

or 17.9 could be transferred to the adult court, which would result in no discontinuous jump in the

punitiveness of criminal sanctions and hence no “treatment”.

      Our data allow us to empirically rule out this possibility. The top panel of Figure V plots the

probability of being formally charged as an adult as a function of the age at the first post-17 arrest.

Each open circle represents the number of individuals against whom a formal prosecution was filed,

expressed as a fraction of those who were arrested in that particular week.25 There is a striking

upward discontinuity at the age of 18; apparently, those who are arrested just before their 18th

birthday have about a 0.2 probability of being formally prosecuted as an adult, while those arrested

just after their 18th brithday have a 0.6 to 0.7 probability. The latter probability is not 1, because

not all arrestees will have formal charges filed against them.

      The bottom panel of Figure V provides further evidence of a discontinuity in the treatment,

using a different measure of punishment. It instead plots the probability that the arrestee is

eventually convicted and sentenced to either state prison or a county jail. Again, the figure shows

a flat relationship between this measure of punitiveness and the age at arrest. There is a noticeable

jump at age 18, from about 0.03 to 0.17.

      We quantify these discontinuities in Table III, which reports coefficient estimates from different

OLS regressions. Columns (1) through (5) simply regress the dummy variable for whether the indi-

vidual was prosecuted on the juvenile/adult status dummy, a cubic polynomial in age at arrest, the

same cubic polynomial interacted with the juvenile/adult dummy, and other covariates. Columns

(6) through (8) further include the age at the baseline arrest as additional controls. Across spec-
 25
      Therefore, the sample for this figure is the same as that underlying the top panel of Figure III.



                                                        18
ifications, the discontinuity estimate of about 0.40 is relatively stable. Appendix Table IV is an

analogous table for the probability of being convicted as an adult and sentenced to prison or jail.


IV.B. Effects by Sub-groups and Crime Types


    Another potential threat to the research design is the possibility that offenses committed by

juveniles and adults have different likelihoods of being recorded in our data. For example, it is

possible that law enforcement may exercise discretion in formally arresting an individual, based on

age. In particular, if the probability of arresting an individual, conditional on the same offense, is

substantially higher for an 18.1 year old than a 17.9 year old, then it is theoretically possible that

the small effects we observe are a combination of a negative deterrence effect and a positive and

offsetting jump in the arrest probability, due to law enforcement discretion.

    There are a number of reasons why believe this is probably not occurring in our data. First,

our analysis focuses on very serious crimes, where it seems unlikely that an officer would be willing

to release a suspect without an arrest, purely on the basis of the individual’s age. Index crimes

include murder, robbery, rape, assault, burglary, larceny and motor vehicle theft, and involve a

victim. We suspect that the pressure to capture a suspect is too great for officers to be willing

to release an individual suspected of committing an Index crime. By contrast, for relatively less

serious crimes such as misdemeanors, or victimless crimes such as drug possession, the selective

release of offenders based on age is more plausible.

    Second, our main estimation sample consists of individual who already have a recorded formal

arrest as of age 17, when we begin following their arrest experiences. Thus, it seems unlikely that

the law enforcement agency will exercise leniency in recording an arrest: as of age 17, it is too late

to do anything to keep the youth’s felony arrest record clean.

    Third, our analysis focuses on arrests since 1994, the year of Florida’s Juvenile Justice Reform

Act (JJRA), which required that felonies committed by juveniles be forwarded to the state for

inclusion in the criminal history records maintained by the FDLE.26 The impact of this law on
  26
     The implications of this Florida law was summarized by an attorney general opinion in 1995: “Under Florida
law, crime and police records regarding crime have been a matter of public record. With limited exceptions, however,
the identity of a juvenile who committed a crime has been protected. With the enactment of Chapter 94-209, Laws
of Florida, an omnibus juvenile justice reform measure, the Legislature has amended the confidentiality provisions
relating to juvenile offenders to allow for greater public dissemination of information. The clear goal of the Legislature
was to establish the public’s right to obtain information about persons who commit serious offenses, regardless of
age” (Butterworth 1995, p. 274).


                                                        19
the prevalence of juvenile records is shown in Appendix Figure I. This figure show the ratio of

arrests of 17-year-olds to 18-year-olds, by year and month, from 1989 to 2002. There is a marked

discontinuity in the ratio after October 1994, the effective date of the JJRA.

   Finally, if juvenile and adult arrests had different likelihoods of being recorded in our data,

we would expect to observe significant heterogeneity in the estimated θ, by different groups of

individuals, and different crime types, since it is likely that any off-setting measurement problems

will vary by characteristics of the individual, as well as by crime type. Figure VI provides evidence

contrary to this prediction. The top panel of the figure disaggregates the arrest probabilities from

the top panel of Figure IV into two components: property and violent crime. The figure shows

that the estimated discontinuity is essentially the same for the two categories of crime.

   We also estimate θ separately by sub-groups defined by key correlates of arrest propensities,

and find no evidence of significant negative effects for some groups being masked by positive effects

of other sub-groups. Table IV reports estimates from interacting the juvenile/adult dummy with

race, size of county of the baseline arrest, and offense of the baseline arrest. The estimates for these

different sub-groups range from -0.07 to 0.09. These estimates are generally of small magnitude;

moreover, none of the 20 are statistically significant. Finally, we fail to reject the null hypothesis

that the interaction effects are equal to the main effect presented in Table II, and this holds for all

specifications considered.

   Although our analysis focuses on Index crimes, we show for completeness the results for all

remaining offenses in the bottom panel of Figure VI. We consider the potential for arrest discretion

to be the most serious for these non-Index crimes, which include “victimless” offenses such as drug

possession, or resisting arrest felonies, for example. Here, the cubic polynomial predictions do show

a small perverse discontinuity, although the simple means, represented by the squares and circles,

do not reveal an obviously compelling jump at age eighteen. Thus, the relative smoothness for these

arguably “worst-case” crime categories, as well as their similarity between the drug and non-drug

stratification are also consistent with minimal arrest discretion at age eighteen.


IV.C. Expungement of Records


   Here, we describe in greater detail how the longitudinal nature of our data allows us to circum-

vent problems caused by potential expungement and sealing of juvenile records. In general, the

                                               20
ability to expunge or seal one’s records could potentially generate a positive discontinuity in arrest

probabilities. That is, if we observe a much greater number of arrestees of age 18.1 compared to

17.9, this could be entirely due to some fraction of those of age 17.9 erasing their juvenile records,

which would therefore not be included in our database. More generally, this expungement effect

could offset any true negative deterrence effect.

       Florida law allows individuals who successfully complete a juvenile diversion program to apply

to have all juvenile records expunged (Fla. Stat. 943.0582). Apart from this provision, Florida law

also mandates that juvenile arrest histories be expunged when the individual turns 24.27

       Our sample circumvents these two expungement provisions in the following way. First, our

estimation sample is restricted to those committing baseline crimes before age 17 but subsequent

to January 1, 1995. Therefore, the individuals are no older than 24 by the end of our sample

frame, and thus will not be subject to the time-activated expungement. Second, a requirement for

inclusion in our sample is an arrest record prior to age 17. These individuals therefore did not have

their complete juvenile arrest history expunged.

       To illustrate how our sample avoids the expungement problem, we examine the time profile

of arrests for the individuals who are not included in our sample. For this remainder sample of

individuals who were not observed as arrested prior to turning 17. Some of these individual’s

first real arrest will occur before eighteen, and for some it will occur after eighteen. If there

is an opportunity for the former group to later expunge their juvenile records, then a positive

discontinuity in the number of arrests should occur at age eighteen.

       This is the pattern found in Figure VII. This figure is a “stacked” histogram, where the combined

total represents the total number of people who are arrested for the first time since turning 17. The

histogram is comprised of two populations, those arrests corresponding to our estimation sample

(the dark bars) and the remaining, unused observations (the light bars). For the total, there is

a striking positive discontinuity at age 18. But this discontinuity is entirely concentrated in the

unused sample (the upper part of the stacked graph).28


  27
     The exception to this is when the individual has committed a serious offense as an adult. “Habitual offenders’”
juvenile records are retained by the FDLE until the offender is 26, (Fla. Stat. 943.0585, 943.059).
  28
     The dark bars represent the values used in the upper panel of Figure III, except that Figure III normalizes each
value with the “at-risk” population at each point in time to provide a probability value.



                                                     21
IV.D. Evidence on Incapacitation


   We have argued that expected incarceration length becomes discontinuously more punitive at

age 18. If this is correct, then subsequent to the arrest of two individuals—one just older than 18

and the other just younger than 18—we should expect to see the marginal adult offender committing

fewer subsequent offenses due to this differential incapacitation. The data are strongly consistent

with this prediction.

   This is shown in Figure VIII. The top panel of the figure plots the average number of arrests that

occur after the initial arrest as a function of the age at the initial arrest. Specifically, the leftmost

open circle indicates that among those who are arrested the week after their 17th birthday, the

average number of times they are arrested within the subsequent 30 days is a little less than 0.20.

Among those arrested just before their 18th birthday, they are arrested approximately 0.20 times

within the subsequent 30 days.

   There is a discontinuity at age 18, with 18.02 year olds being arrested half as many times

within the 30 day window. We believe the most plausible explanation for this difference is that

being handled by the adult courts leads to a longer period of custody than does being processed

as a juvenile. The 17.98 year old is released earlier and hence has a greater opportunity to commit

more crimes, compared to the 18.02 year old. There seems to be no other differences between

the 17.98 and 18.02 year-old arrestees. For example, soon after being initially arrested, the 17.98

year-old will turn 18, and from that point on both groups of individuals will be subject to the same

adult regime.

   The solid circles and open triangles plot the same kind of graph, except that we examine the

number of arrests occurring within 120 and 365 days after the initial arrest. Since the number of

arrests is cumulative, the averages are necessarily higher. The discontinuity estimate also grows in

magnitude, but seems to level off at longer periods.

   Note that the length of the follow-up period—30 days, 120 days, or 365 days—is arbitrary.

The bottom panel of Figure VII plots the profile of discontinuity estimates using follow-up lengths

ranging from 1 to 365 days. For example, the estimates at 30, 120, and 365 days in the bottom

panel—emphasized with large solid triangles—correspond to the discontinuity estimates from the

top panel of the figure. Overall, the bottom panel shows that even after 20 days, there is a large


                                                22
divergence in the cumulative number of arrests between those who are arrested as a 17.98 year-old

and those arrested at age 18.02, for example. This divergence continues to grow, slowing down at

around 100 days after the initial arrest.

       We interpret this as evidence that incapacitation effects occur fairly rapidly after an arrest

occurs. This finding is important for two reasons. First, it provides a potential explanation for

why our magnitudes are so much smaller than those of, for example, Levitt (1996).29 It is possible

that the use of arrest data at relatively coarse intervals (age in years) could lead to estimates that

combine both deterrence and incapacitation effects.

       Second, Figure VIII constitutes further supporting evidence for our research design. Marginal

juveniles and marginal adults, while similar in age, do appear to be given very different punishments,

with differences in incarceration lengths occurring in the very short run.


V. Alternative Interpretations

       As shown in Section IV.A, 20 percent of the juvenile arrestees in our sample are prosecuted

as adults. This “noncompliance” means that our discontinuity estimates are “intent-to-treat”

parameters, and must be inflated in order to be comparable to our theoretical predictions. After

accounting for both noncompliance and sampling variation, we can rule out predicted values for θ

more negative than -0.14.30,31

       This magnitude is significantly smaller than is predicted by the theoretical model outlined in

Section II. For example, consider the θ of smallest magnitude that is consistent with our estimates

for SJ , SA , and Ep , and our choice of δ. As is apparent in Figure II, the magnitude of θ is smaller

when we choose SJ and Ep to be as large as possible. Based on Appendix Tables I and II, this

results in SJ = 7, SA = 21, and Ept = 0.5. Setting δ = 0.1 leads to a predicted θ of -0.66. Using
                                            0

the estimate from column (1) of Table II, we reject at the 1 percent level the hypothesis that θ is

equal to this value.
  29
     Levitt (2004b) notes that the range of estimates of the elasticity of crime with respect to expected punishment is
roughly -0.10 to -0.40. Our theoretical predictions are comfortably within this range. A 200 percent increase in the
expected incarceration is predicted to lower arrest rates by 55-79 percent, leading to elasticity estimates of -0.275 to
-0.39.
  30
     Juvenile transfer leads us to scale up our estimated discontinuity (standard error) of -0.018 (0.0474) by 1/0.8=1.25,
resulting in a point estimate (standard error) of -0.0225 (0.05925).
  31
     Using a one-sided confidence region, we can rule effect sizes larger in magnitude than 12 percent.




                                                        23
   The unusually low discount factors implied by our calibration exercise suggest that it is worth-

while to consider a number of reasonable alternative interpretations of the estimated magnitudes.


V.A. Myopia and Hyperbolic Discounting


   One possibility is that our assumption of exponential discounting is too restrictive. With ex-

ponential discounting, an increase in incarceration from 2 to 6 days represents a larger increase in

the relative “price” of crime, compared to an increase from 2 to 6 weeks, which in turn, represents

a larger relative price increase than a change from 2 to 6 years.

   A natural alternative to consider is the case of hyperbolic discounting, where short-run discount

factors are smaller than long-run discount factors. Under hyperbolic discounting, a tripling of

incarceration lengths can potentially have a smaller proportional response in the short-run than in

the long run.

   To illustrate this, we adopt quasi-hyperbolic discounting, where the discount sequence is given

by 1, βδ, βδ 2 , βδ 3 , . . . with β < 1. This sequence captures the qualitative aspect of different discount

factors for the short-run and the long-run. In the psychology and economics literature, this form

of discounting is often used to model tastes for immediate gratification and self-control problems.

   Here, we consider the case of the so-called sophisticated hyperbolic discounter, who has correct

expectations about his own future preferences and actions. In Appendix A, we show that under

this scenario, (4) and (5) are modified only slightly to become

                                                         ucr − ua
                              pt0 −1 =
                                                        δ−δ SJ
                                          ucr − us +   β 1−δ ((1    − δ) V − us )
                                                         ucr − ua
                                 pt 0 =                                                                  (7)
                                                        δ−δ SA
                                          ucr − us +   β 1−δ ((1    − δ) V − us )

and the expression for (1 − δ) V remains the same as in (6). Using these modified equations, we

can compute the predicted θ in the exactly same manner as described in Section II, except that we

must choose a value for β.

   Figure IX illustrates the predicted θ that would result in response to a tripling of incarceration

lengths, for different values of SJ , SA , and δ, while letting β = 0.05. For comparison, the same

curves from the bottom panel of Figure II (representing the exponential case) are provided in the

figure. The open squares present predicted effects under hyperbolic discounting, with β = 0.05


                                                  24
and δ = 0.999. These predictions show that for very short horizons—when SJ is 1 or 2 weeks—a

tripling of the incarceration length at age 18 leads to a θ that is smaller in magnitude than 0.20.

This is much smaller than the prediction under exponential discounting, which is about 0.80 in

magnitude.

   For the hyperbolic agent, the predicted θ grows in absolute value as we examine longer time

horizons, as intuition would suggest: in the very short run, when discount factors are very low,

additional periods of incarceration seem less costly, but in the longer run, when discount factors are

higher, those additional periods of punishment become more important. Note that the predicted θ

asymptotes to zero in the long run.

   The open circles and triangles illustrate the predicted θ for the case of β = 0.05, δ = 0.987

(annual discount factor of 0.5) and for the case β = 0.05, δ = 0.957 (annual discount factor of 0.1).

These two curves show a similar pattern. For very short time horizons, θ is relatively small in

magnitude. It becomes more negative for longer horizons, and asymptotes toward the curves for

the exponential case.

   In summary, the average incarceration length for juveniles ranges between 2.6 and 6.4 weeks,

and it is precisely within this time horizon that the exponential model has a difficult time explaining

small discontinuity estimates. On the other hand, a certain degree of myopia, which allows short-

run discount factors to be smaller than long-run discount factors, can explain small effects in short

time horizons.


V.B. Inframarginal Criminals


   Another potential explanation for our results is that our sample of offenders are “inframarginal”

in the sense that large changes in the price of crime do not affect criminal behavior because the

benefits of crime far exceed the costs. That is, in the discussion above, we conjecture that criminal

offending does not respond significantly to increased incarceration lengths because the effective

price of crime does not change significantly—due to the degree and form of the discounting. Alter-

natively, the price may be changing significantly, but so few crimes are prevented that the decline

is imperceptible.

   Figure X illustrates the point. It plots a hypothetical density for p. In the figure, most of the

mass of the density is on the left side of the support, implying that most criminal opportunities

                                               25
carry a small risk of apprehension. Thus far, we have emphasized that impatience and myopia

could lead the cutoff p, to be highly inelastic, in which case an an increase in incarceration lengths

could result in the small shift of p from line A to line B, for example.

   But an alternative possibility is that offenders are reasonably patient and not myopic, and that

an increase in incarceration lengths lead the cutoff p to fall significantly—but from line C to line

D. Since the density is low in that region, offense rates would not change significantly under such a

scenario. In other words, only a small fraction of criminal opportunities are affected by the change

in the cutoff p.

   It should be noted, however, that a natural consequence of this alternative hypothesis is that

the elasticity of criminal behavior with respect to law enforcement must be small. Intuitively, if

most opportunities’ benefits far exceed their costs, increases in the probability of punishment will

only slightly affect offending rates. In the graph, increasing police will tend to shift the density

of p to the right. This means that the “inframarginal criminal” hypothesis also implies very small

marginal effects of police.

   Thus, we cannot completely rule out the “inframarginal criminal” hypothesis, but we view it

as unsatisfactory. The empirical literature on policing is well-developed, and most studies find

large elasticities of crime with respect to policing levels (Levitt 2004a). For example, Di Tella and

Schargrodsky (2004) estimate an elasticity of crime with respect to police of roughly -0.3. In sum, if

the population that we study is sensitive to the likelihood of punishment, then it must also be true

that there is a nontrivial number of criminal opportunities “on the margin” of being worthwhile.


V.C. Irrational or Uninformed Criminals


   Finally, the theory that we utilize presumes that potential offenders are rational, and have

correct expectations about the consequences of their behavior. This may simply be untrue. As an

example, our empirical analysis shows quite clearly that the probability of being formally prosecuted

as an adult rises discontinuously at age 18 (see Figure V). But it may well be that young offenders

are unaware of this fact. They may be unaware that the average incarceration length for adults is at

least 3 times the length for juveniles, and they may be unaware that being caught as an adult rather

than as a juvenile implies an immediate difference in the length of incapacitation (as suggested by

Figure VIII). Young offenders may not only be unaware of the actual probabilities of arrest, but

                                              26
also unaware that juveniles and adults are treated differently by the criminal justice system. These

are all examples of how young offenders could be making systematic errors in estimation. Each of

these possibilities could independently explain why the estimates θ could be so small.32


VI. Policy Implications

       We view our results as inconsistent with the hypothesis that transferring juveniles to the adult

court or lowering the criminal age of majority will reduce crime through deterrence. The evi-

dence does suggest, however, that such policies could lead to a reduction in the incidence of crime

through incapacitation. Prison expansion may be desirable, particularly if the crimes prevented by

incarceration have a high social cost. On the other hand, the general equilibrium effects described

by Freeman (1999) may offset these benefits: even as locked-up criminals are prevented from re-

cidivating, in a long-run equilibrium, previously “crowded-out” criminals may simply take their

place.

       We also conclude—albeit more tentatively—that increasing the frequency of jail or prison sen-

tences or otherwise lengthening periods of incarceration has limited value as a deterrent. Strictly

speaking, our discontinuity estimate measures an evolutionary response to an anticipated change

in the price of crime at a given point in time, while uniform increases in incarceration lengths

represent an increase in price of crime along all points in the life cycle. It should be noted, how-

ever, that the two effects are connected. Specifically, in our model, the former is strictly greater in

magnitude than the latter. This is because an anticipated change in punitiveness will raise the total

punishment exclusively through the length of incarceration, while a uniform increase throughout

the lifecycle will additionally make crime generally less attractive and hence reduce the per-period

opportunity cost of being incarcerated.33

       A caveat to this conclusion involves the case of hyperbolic discounting. If potential offenders

have very high short-run discount rates but low long-run discount rates, then in principle, there
  32
   On the other hand, as Levitt (1998) suggests, there is reason to believe that young offenders are, at a minimum,
aware that it is better to be arrested as a juvenile than as an adult for the same crime.
                                                                                          SA
  33                                                       pt −1        ucr −us + δ−δ
                                                                                   1−δ
                                                                                                 ((1−δ)V −us )
       To see this, compare our discontinuity parameter,     0
                                                            pt
                                                                    =                 SJ                         , to the deterrence parameter
                                                                0       ucr −us + δ−δ
                                                                                   1−δ
                                                                                               ((1−δ)V −us )
                                                                                                     SA
                                                                        p∗
                                                                         t           ucr −us + δ−δ
                                                                                                1−δ
                                                                                                          ((1−δ)V −us )
associated with lowering SA for all adult ages to SJ , given by,        pt
                                                                             0
                                                                                 =               δ−δ SJ
                                                                                                                            . The latter is smaller
                                                                             0       ucr −us +    1−δ
                                                                                                          ((1−δ)V ∗ −us )
                                            ∗
in magnitude than the former because V , the new discounted expected utility of being free, is larger than V (since
incarceration lengths have fallen).


                                                           27
can be large marginal effects for the sub-population who are to face long prison sentences. On the

other hand, our estimates indicate that this sub-population may be relatively small—at least too

small to affect the overall estimates for our main sample.

   Finally, we note that our findings may indicate that the marginal criminal justice dollar is more

effectively spent on raising the probability of imprisonment rather than the incarceration length.

Even with highly impatient or myopic criminals, doubling the odds of punishment will double the

effective price of crime.


VII. Conclusions

   A longstanding notion in the economics of crime is that illegal behavior can be deterred by

raising either the certainty or severity of punishment. In practice, this tradeoff is highly dependent

on criminals’ discount rates. This is because the only practical way to increase severity is to lengthen

periods of incarceration, which will only raise the price of crime if discount rates are relatively low.

If discount rates are very high, then incarceration can do little to deter illegal behavior. By contrast,

elasticities with respect to the likelihood of incarceration are invariant to discount rates.

   Learning about discount rates requires a setting that generates exogenous variation in the timing

of future payoffs. We believe that our research design generates such exogenous variation. Upon

turning 18, an individual faces an immediate increase in the length of incarceration. In addition,

all other determinants of criminal behavior are arguably stable from one week before to one week

after the 18th birthday.

   Using this approach, we find that criminals are largely unresponsive to this sharp change in

future penalties. We attempt to rationalize the magnitudes with a simple expected utility model

with exponential discounting. We find this model to be unappealing for two reasons. First, to

accommodate the data, the model requires extremely small discount factors, e.g., lower than 0.1.

Second, the exponential model predicts the largest elasticities for the incarcerations at the shortest

horizons—an increase in incarceration length from 1 to 3 days is predicted to have much larger

proportional effects than an increase in incarceration length from 1 to 3 years.

   Thus, we favor a less restrictive form of time preferences: that of hyperbolic discounting. A

model of myopia with reasonable long-run discount rates predicts an inverted U-shape for elasticity

sizes. Elasticities are small in the very short-term (e.g., days), larger in the medium-term (e.g.,

                                                28
weeks/months), and small again in the very long-term (e.g., years). Such a model also seems

intuitive, as criminal behavior—at least for the kinds of crimes that we focus on—could be thought

of as the consequence of a self-control problem and a taste for immediate gratification.




                                             29
A. Theory Appendix
    In this Appendix, we describe in detail how we obtain Equations (4), (5), (6), and (7), which
we use for providing our predicted magnitudes of θ. We first describe the case of exponential
discounting, and then the case of “sophisticated” hyperbolic agents.

1. Exponential Discounting

     The model is similar to a search model of unemployment, in which each period the individual
obtains a draw from a distribution of wage offers. In our context, at the beginning of any period
t, the individual draws from a distribution of criminal opportunities, indexed by pt . Let F ∗ (·) be
the cumulative distribution function of pt . The individual then chooses whether or not to commit
the crime. With probability pt , he is arrested and is incarcerated for a fixed number of periods: if
caught as a juvenile t < t0 , SJ periods, if caught as an adult t ≥ t0 , he faces SA (> SJ ) periods of
incarceration. During this period of incarceration, he cannot commit crime, and upon release, he
is free again to commit crime.
     In each period, he receives flow utility ucr if he commits the crime undetected, us if he is caught
in the act or is serving an period of incarceration, and ua if he abstains from crime. In each period,
he maximizes the discounted expected utility
                                                "∞           #
                                                  X
                                                        τ −t
                                             Et       δ uτ
                                                       τ =t

where δ is the constant discount factor, Et is an expectation given information at the beginning of
period t, and uτ is a random variable that equals either ucr , us , or ua , depending on the random
draw of pt , the agent’s plan, and whether the agent is apprehended. The individual maximizes over
all feasible plans, so his choice consists of a sequence of decisions to commit or abstain, conditional
on draws of pt .
     We solve recursively, first beginning with the adult’s (t ≥ t0 ) problem. Upon observing the
draw pt , the individual has two choices:
                                                                              ¡                                       ¢
                                                                                                      SA −1 u + δ SA V ,
    1. Commit the crime: obtain the utility (1 −  ³ p t ) (u cr + δV   )+p  t  u s +
                                                                                   ´ δu s + · · · + δ        s
                                                                SA
       or equivalently, (1 − pt ) (ucr + δV ) + pt us + δ−δ   1−δ  u s  + δ SA V .


   2. Abstain from crime: obtain the utility ua + δV
                                         £P∞ τ −t ¤
where V is the continuation payoff, Et       τ =t δ uτ , evaluated at the optimal plan. The agent
                                                                SA
commits the crime if and only if (1−pt )(ucr +δV )+pt (us + δ−δ
                                                             1−δ us +δ
                                                                       SA V ) > u +δV . Equivalently,
                                                                                 a
he will commit the crime if and only if pt < pt , where
                                                        ucr − ua
                                   pt =
                                                       δ−δ SA
                                          ucr − us +    1−δ ((1 −    δ) V − us )

which is the expression given in (5).
   Since the problem is stationary for the adult, pt = p. We may solve for V recursively as follows:
        Z p· ½                             ¾                         ¸           Z 1
                      δ − δ SA        SA
  V =        π us +            us + δ V + (1 − π) {ucr + δV } f (π)dπ +              [ua + δV ] f (π)dπ
          0            1−δ                                                        p
                 n          SA
                                           o
     = F ∗ (p)Ep us + δ−δ1−δ   us + δ SA
                                         V   + F ∗ (p) (1 − Ep ) {ucr + δV } + (1 − F ∗ (p)) {ua + δV }


                                                     30
where Ep ≡ E[pt |pt ≤ p]. Re-arranging, we obtain

                              1−δ SA ∗
                               1−δ F (p) Ep us   + F ∗ (p) (1 − Ep ) ucr + (1 − F ∗ (p)) ua
                (1 − δ) V =
                                                        δ−δ SA ∗
                                                 1+      1−δ F (p) Ep

which is the expression given by (6). Note that (1 − δ) V can be viewed as the “annuitized” value
of the problem (whenever the individual is free to commit a crime), and is a weighted average of
the three flow utilities, where the weights depend on F ∗ (p), Ep , δ, and SA .
    Now consider the individual at time t = t0 − 1, the period immediately preceding his 18th
birthday. His two choices are
                                                              ¡                                     ¢
   1. Commit crime: obtain utility (1 − pt³) (ucr + δV ) + pt us +´δus + · · · + δ SJ −1 us + δ SJ V , or
                                                        SJ
      equivalently, (1 − pt ) (ucr + δV ) + pt us + δ−δ        SJ
                                                     1−δ us + δ V .

   2. Abstain from crime: obtain utility ua + δV
   The only difference here is that SA has been replaced by the shorter incarceration length SJ .
V is exactly the same as before because at time t0 − 1, the individual becomes an adult in the next
period and faces the adult (stationary) dynamic problem. This leads to
                                                       ucr − ua
                              pt0 −1 =
                                                      δ−δ SJ
                                         ucr − us +    1−δ ((1 −   δ) V − us )

which is the expression in (4).

2. Hyperbolic Discounting

    Now consider the problem with the quasi-hyperbolic discount sequence given by 1, βδ, βδ 2 , βδ 3 . . .
The solution has a similar form to that of the exponential case, with two differences: (1) the solution
includes the short run discount factor β, and (2) V has a slightly different interpretation.
    At each point in time t, the individual now maximizes
                                         "         ∞
                                                                 #
                                                  X
                                      Et ut + β        δ τ −t uτ
                                                      τ =t+1

Since preferences are now time-inconsistent, we need to make an additional assumption about the
agent’s beliefs about his preferences in the future (O’Donoghue and Rabin 1999). We consider the
case of sophistication, where the individual is aware of his present-biased preferences, and of the
future choices he will make due to those preferences. Consider the adult’s (stationary) problem
first. His two choices are
                                                                ¡                                        ¢
    1. Commit crime: obtain utility (1 − pt ) (ucr ³+ βδV )+pt us + βδus + ´· · · + βδ SA −1 us + βδ SA V ,
                                                               SA
       or equivalently, (1 − pt ) (ucr + βδV ) + pt us + β δ−δ
                                                            1−δ us + βδ
                                                                        SA V .


   2. Abstain from crime: obtain utility ua + βδV
which is similar to
                  £Pbefore, except that¤ V has a different definition.
                     ∞        τ −t−1
   Here, V ≡ Et      τ =t+1 δ        uτ , evaluated at the optimal contingent plan. Note the change in
where the index τ starts. With this definition, βδV gives the sophisticated agent’s evaluation—from
the perspective of period t—of all periods starting at t + 1.

                                                 31
   The expressions for the sophisticated agent’s thresholds at time t0 and t0 − 1 are
                                                  ucr − ua
                      psp = psp
                             t =                       S                   , for t ≥ t0
                                    ucr − us + β δ−δ A
                                                  1−δ ((1 − δ) V − us )

                                                       ucr − ua
                              psp
                               t0 −1 =                     S
                                         ucr − us + β δ−δ J
                                                       1−δ ((1 − δ) V − us )

which are given in (7). The superscript sp denotes the solution for a sophisticated hyperbolic agent.
   Even though V here£hasP∞a slightly      different
                                               ¤     definition,
                                                        £P∞ theτ −t−1expression
                                                                           ¤    for£P
                                                                                    it is identical ¤ to (6).
                                     τ −t−1                                           ∞      τ −t
This is because V ≡ Et      τ =t+1 δ        uτ = Et+1       τ =t+1 δ    uτ = Et       τ =t δ      uτ . Thus,
we have
                         1−δ SA ∗ sp
                          1−δ F (p ) Ep us
                                       sp        + F ∗ (psp ) (1 − Epsp ) ucr + (1 − F ∗ (psp )) ua
           (1 − δ) V =
                                                       δ−δ SA ∗ sp
                                                 1+     1−δ F (p ) Ep
                                                                     sp



Although V has the same form as in the exponential case, its actual value will be different, because
it is evaluated at the steady-state threshold psp rather than at p.
     In general, holding all else equal—including keeping δ constant—a lower β leads to higher levels
of crime, for two reasons. First, the discounted cost is lower, due to β < 1. Second, the expected
opportunity cost of incarceration, given by (1 − δ) V − us , will be smaller for the hyperbolic agent.
This is because the sophisticated hyperbolic correctly knows that he has a self-control problem and
will commit “too much” crime in the future. More formally, we know that p—the threshold for the
exponential case—maximizes V . Therefore, any other threshold psp must make V smaller.

B. Details on Selected Calculations
    In this Appendix, we describe how we obtain rough estimates of (1) the average length of
incarceration conditional on an arrest for both juveniles (SJ ) and adults (SA ), and (2) the expected
probability of arrest Ep = E [p|p < p]. These quantities are used in our computation of predicted
magnitudes of θ in Section II.

1. Average Incarceration Lengths: SJ and SA

    To estimate the average number of weeks that an arrestee can expect to spend incarcerated, we
obtain the cumulative number of person-weeks that are spent incarcerated for a given year, and
divide by the total number of arrests that occur within the year. As long as jail/prison populations
and arrest numbers are reasonably stable, this should provide the average number of weeks spent
incarcerated per arrest.
    In the juvenile courts, a serious criminal offender will be placed in secure “detention” (the
rough equivalent of jail), where they await an adjudication by the juvenile court judge. If they are
found to be guilty, they are committed to a residential placement facility (the rough equivalent of
a prison). In the table, column (2) (labeled “jail”) includes juveniles in secure detention awaiting
an adjudication as well as adults who are unconvicted, but awaiting court proceedings. Note that
in the United States, jails not only incarcerate those awaiting hearings and trials, but also those
who have been convicted to short prison terms. Therefore, the prison population includes adults
in a state correctional facility as well as those incarcerated in jail who are serving a sentence. For
juveniles, the prison population (column (3)) includes those in juvenile residential placement.
    Our estimates of the jail and prison populations are complied from the 1999 Census of Jails,
the 2000 Census of State and Federal Correctional Facilities, and the 1999 Census of Juveniles in

                                                  32
Residential Placement. Our estimates of the number of arrests come from the 1999 FBI Uniform
Crime Reports.
    The first two numbers in column (1) of Appendix Table I provide the number of arrests for
juveniles (younger than 18 years old) and adults (18 and older). Column (2) provides the stock of
juveniles and adults incarcerated in jail awaiting court proceedings. Provided that these population
numbers are reasonable estimates of the average daily population throughout the year, this number
multiplied by 52 gives the number of person-weeks spent incarcerated in “jail” throughout the year.
    The next column takes the ratio of the first two columns to produce an average duration of
incarceration conditional on an arrest. For juveniles, it is about 0.59 weeks, and for adults it is
about 2.21 weeks. The ratio of these is given in the same column (3.77).
    Column (3) provides prison populations for both juveniles and adults, and the subsequent
column divides by the number of arrests to give the average length of incarceration in juvenile or
adult prison—2.06 and 6.09—conditional on an arrest. It is important to note that this average
will include many zeroes, for those who are not convicted/committed, or for whom formal charges
are dropped. The final column adds the two averages. Overall, the expected length of incarceration
conditional on an arrest is about 2.65 weeks for a juvenile, and 8.30 for adults.
    Our analysis focuses on Index crimes. More minor crimes are likely to lead to very short
periods of custody, and many offenders—particularly for misdemeanors—may be released almost
immediately after a formal arrest. Thus, the numbers in the first set of rows are probably a lower
bound on the incarceration lengths, conditional on an Index arrest.
    To obtain an upper bound, the second set of rows re-computes the average durations using the
number of Index Crime arrests as the denominator. This is an upper bound since surely some non-
Index Arrests lead to a positive incarceration length. Overall, these show a much larger average
duration for adults, with the estimated ratio SA /SJ as large as 8.86 for the average duration in jail.
Among the six ratios reported in the upper part of the table, it appears that a ratio of SA /SJ = 3
is probably a conservative estimate of the relative punitiveness of adult criminal sanctions, in terms
of incarceration lengths. For comparison, we perform the same computation for the United States
as a whole. The bottom part of the table shows that the corresponding estimates of SA /SJ are of
a similar magnitude.

2. Expected Apprehension Rates (Conditional on Crime): E [p|p < p]

    E [p|p < p] is the expected probability of being apprehended, conditional on committing a crime.
We provide a rough estimate of this quantity using so-called “clearance rates” from the FBI Uniform
Crime Reports. A reported crime is “cleared by arrest”, when an incident is followed up by law
enforcement, and results in arresting an alleged offender.
    Column (2) of Appendix Table II reports clearance rates for all FBI Index Crimes, and the
various sub-categories. The overall rate is 0.20. There are two reasons why this almost certainly
an upwardly biased estimate of E[p|p < p]. First, not all criminal incidents are reported to the
police, and therefore the denominator of Column (2) is probably too small. To address this, we
obtained estimates of the rate of reporting victimizations to the police from the National Criminal
Victimization Survey. By multiplying these rates (Column 3) by Column 2, we obtain an arguably
more accurate estimate of the probability of arrest conditional on committing an Index crime. The
average for all Index crimes is about 0.08, with the lowest for larceny (0.06), and the highest for
assault (0.26) and murder (0.49).
    The second reason why both Column (2) and the final column should be considered an upper
bound for E[p|p < p] is that it may well be true that some of the arrestees are mistakenly arrested;
that is, the numerator of both Column (2) and the final column may be too large.


                                               33
   For this reason, we believe that the estimates in final column are probably still too large.
Nevertheless—since a larger estimate of E[p|p < p] will lead to larger absolute magnitudes of θ, we
use the values 0.10 and 0.25 to generate conservative predictions for θ.

C. Data Appendix

    Our data set is constructed using four electronic files maintained by the Florida Department
of Law Enforcement (FDLE). The FDLE refers to these files as the arrest, date of birth, judicial,
and identifier files. They constitute the key elements of Florida’s Computerized Criminal History
(CCH) system, which is maintained by the Criminal Justice Information System (CJIS) division of
the FDLE. We obtained from the FDLE records on all felony arrests for the period 1989 to 2002.

1. Construction of Data Set

    We construct our data set as follows. First, we begin with the arrests file, which contains a
person identifier 34 , the offense date, the arrest date, the charge code, and the arresting agency.
Each record of the arrest file pertains to a separate offense. 35 The total number of records
in the arrest file we received is 4,498,139. Because a single arrest event may result in multiple
records (due to multiple offenses), we collapse the data down to the level of the (1) person identifier
and (2) arrest date, coding the offense as the most serious offense with which the individual was
charged on that date. 36 There are 3,314,851 unique arrest-person observations.37 Our collapsing
procedure is essentially the “Hierarchy Rule” instituted by the Federal Bureau of Investigation
(FBI) in the Uniform Crime Reporting (UCR) system for crime counting purposes (Federal Bureau
of Investigation 2004, p. 10).
    We similarly collapse the judicial file down to the person-arrest-date level. The judicial file
represents all arrests that result in a formal prosecution. For each collapsed observation, if any
of the potentially multiple arrests led to a conviction and prison or jail sentence, a prison or jail
sentence was associated with the person-arrest-date. The collapsed judicial and arrest files were
then merged on the unique person-identifier-arrest-date pair. Then, using the person identifier,
which is present in all four files, race from the identifier file was merged on, and birthday was
merged on from the birth date file.

2. Date Variables

    The key variables we utilize from the arrest file are the person identifier, the arrest date, and
the offense code. The offense date is missing for many observations, so we use the arrest date to
proxy for the date of crime commission. This is due primarily to a reporting problem—officers do
not always submit information on the offense date. On the other hand, there are no missing values
for the arrest date. Among the 1,948,096 records with information on offense date, every one of
those records has an associated arrest date. 90% of those arrest dates are equal to the offense date,
  34
     This person identifier is constant across the various FDLE files.
  35
     Roughly speaking, a record of the arrest file corresponds to the triple of (1) person identifier, (2) arrest date,
and (3) charge code. Conceptually, the named triple will not uniquely identify a record due to the possibility of
multiple arrest events for the same crime on the same day. Practically, there also appear to be some minor errors
with double-counting in the file (e.g., two such triples, one with a missing offense date and another with an offense
date equal, as usual, to the arrest date). However, the number of unique triples in the data is 94.3% of the total record
count. We conclude that neither the conceptual distinction nor the double-counting issue is important empirically.
  36
     We defined the seriousness of an offense according to...
  37
     Thus, the average arrest event is associated with 1.36 charges.



                                                       34
and over 93% of those arrest dates occur within the first week subsequent to the stated offense
date.
   To further assess the validity of date of arrest as a proxy for date of offense, we obtained
data from the Miami Police Department, which recorded arrest and offense dates for all charges
pertaining to arrests made between July 1999 and December 2002. For the 272,494 arrests we
obtained, 257,263 have a valid offense date, and 91.3% of those have offense and arrest dates that
are identical, and with 95.8% of arrests occurring within the first week after the offense date.
Focusing only on felony arrests, we find that of the 33,698 felony arrests, 32,033 have valid offense
dates, and of these 78.9% have identical arrest and offense dates, and 90.6% have associated arrest
dates that fall within a week of the offense date.




                                              35
References
Becker, Gary S., “Crime and Punishment: An Economic Approach,” Journal of Political Economy,
    March/April 1968, 76 (2), 169–217.

Bozynski, Melanie and Linda Szymanski, “National Overviews,” State Juvenile Justice Profiles,
   2003, Pittsburgh: National Center for Juvenile Justice,.

Butterworth, Bob, Annual Report of the Attorney General of the State of Florida, Tallahassee:
   Attorney General’s Office, 1995.

Case, Anne C. and Lawrence F. Katz, “The Company You Keep: The Effects of Family and
   Neighborhood on Disadvantaged Youths,” NBER Working Paper #3705, 1991.

Chaddock, Gail Russell, “U.S. Notches World’s Highest Incarceration Rate,” Christian Science
   Monitor, August 18, 2003.

Di Tella, Rafael and Ernesto Schargrodsky, “Do Police Reduce Crime? Estimates Using the
   Allocation of Police Forces After a Terrorist Attack,” American Economic Review, March
   2004, 94 (1), 115–133.

Donohue, John J., III and Steven J. Levitt, “The Impact of Legalized Abortion on Crime,”
   Quarterly Journal of Economics, May 2001, 116 (2), 379–420.

Efron, Bradley, “Logistic Regression, Survival Analysis, and the Kaplan-Meier Curve,” Journal of
    the American Statistical Association, June 1988, 83 (402), 414–425.

Ehrlich, Isaac, “Participation in Illegitimate Activities: A Theoretical and Empirical Investiga-
   tion,” Journal of Political Economy, May/June 1973, 81 (3), 521–565.

Federal Bureau of Investigation, Uniform Crime Reporting Handbook, 2004, Washington, D.C.:
   Federal Bureau of Investigation, 2004.

Forst, Martin, Jeffrey Fagan, and T. Scott Vivona, “Youths in Prisons and Training Schools:
   Perceptions and Consequences of the Treatment-Custody Dichotomy,” Juvenile and Family
   Court Journal, 1989, 40 (1), 1–14.

Freeman, Richard B., “The Labor Market,” in James Q. Wilson and Joan Petersilia, eds., Crime,
    Oakland: Institute for Contemporary Studies, 1995, pp. 171–191.

     , “Why Do So Many Young American Men Commit Crimes and What Might We Do About
    It?,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, Winter 1996, 10 (1), 24–42.

    , “The Economics of Crime,” in Orley Ashenfelter and David E. Card, eds., Handbook of Labor
    Economics, Volume 3C, Vol. 3C, New York: Elsevier-North Holland, 1999, pp. 3529–3571.

Gaviria, Alejandro and Steven Raphael, “School-Based Peer Effects and Juvenile Behavior,” Review
   of Economics and Statistics, May 2001, 83 (2), 257–268.

Glaeser, Edward L. and Bruce Sacerdote, “Why is There More Crime in Cities?,” Journal of
   Political Economy, December 1999, 107 (2, Part 2), S225–S258.

     and   , “The Determinants of Punishment: Deterrence, Incapacitation and Vengeance,”
    NBER Working Paper #7676, April 2000.

                                            36
     ,    , and Jose A. Scheinkman, “Crime and Social Interactions,” Quarterly Journal of
    Economics, May 1996, 111 (2), 507–548.

Glassner, Barry, Margret Ksander, Bruce Berg, and Bruce Johnson, “A Note on the Deterrent
   Effect of Juvenile vs. Adult Jurisdiction,” Social Problems, December 1983, 31 (2), 219–221.

Grogger, Jeff, “The Effect of Arrests on the Employment and Earnings of Young Men,” Quarterly
   Journal of Economics, February 1995, 110 (1), 51–72.

     , “Market Wages and Youth Crime,” Journal of Labor Economics, October 1998, 16 (4),
    756–791.

Jacob, Brian A. and Lars Lefgren, “Are Idle Hands the Devil’s Workshop? Incapacitation, Concen-
    tration, and Juvenile Crime,” American Economic Review, December 2003, 93 (5), 1560–1577.

Katz, Lawence F., Steven D. Levitt, and Ellen Shustorovich, “Prison Conditions, Capital Punish-
   ment and Deterrence,” American Law and Economics Review, Fall 2003, 5 (2), 318–343.

Kessler, Daniel and Steven D. Levitt, “Using Sentence Enhancements to Distinguish Between
   Deterrence and Incapacitation,” Journal of Law and Economics, April 1999, 42 (1, Part 2),
   343–363.

Kling, Jeffrey R., “Incarceration Length, Employment, and Earnings,” IR Section Working Paper
    # 494, Princeton University, 2004.

    , Jens Ludwig, and Lawrence F. Katz, “Neighborhood Effects on Crime for Female and Male
    Youth: Evidence from a Randomized Housing Voucher Experiment,” Quarterly Journal of
    Economics, February 2005, 120 (1), 87–130.

Levitt, Steven D., “The Effect of Prison Population Size on Crime Rates: Evidence from Prison
    Overcrowding Litigation,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, May 1996, 111 (2), 319–351.

    , “Using Electoral Cycles in Police Hiring to Estimate the Effect of Police on Crime,” American
    Economic Review, June 1997, 87 (3), 270–290.

     , “Juvenile Crime and Punishment,” Journal of Political Economy, December 1998, 106 (6),
    1156–1185.

     , “Deterrence,” in James Q. Wilson and Joan Petersilia, eds., Crime: Public Policies for
    Crime Control, Oakland: Institute for Contemporary Studies, 2004, pp. 435–450.

     , “Understanding Why Crime Fell in the 1990s: Four Factors that Explain the Decline and
    Six that Do Not,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, Winter 2004, 18 (1), 163–190.

     and Lance Lochner, “The Determinants of Juvenile Crime,” in Jonathan Gruber, ed., Risky
    Behavior Among Youths: An Economic Analysis, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2001,
    pp. 327–374.

Lochner, Lance, “Education, Work, and Crime,” NBER Working Paper #10478, May 2004.

     and Enrico Moretti, “The Effect of Education on Crime: Evidence from Prison Inmates,
    Arrests, and Self-Reports,” American Economic Review, March 2004, 94 (1), 155–189.



                                            37
Maguire, Kathleen and Ann L. Pastore, Sourcebook of Criminal Justice Statistics, Washington,
   D.C.: U.S. GPO, 2000.

Myers, David L., “Punishing Violent Youth in the Adult Criminal Justice System,” Youth Violence
   and Juvenile Justice, April 2003, 1 (2), 173–197.

O’Donoghue, Ted and Matthew Rabin, “Doing It Now or Later,” American Economic Review,
   March 1999, 89 (1), 103–124.

Pintoff, Randi, “The Impact of Incarceration on Juvenile Crime: A Regression Discontinuity
   Approach,” Mimeo, Yale University, 2004.

Raphael, Steven and Rudolf Winter-Ebmer, “Identifying the Effect of Unemployment on Crime,”
   Journal of Law and Economics, April 2001, 44 (1), 259–284.

Redding, Richard E., “The Effects of Adjudicating and Sentencing Juveniles as Adults: Research
   and Policy Implications,” Youth Violence and Juvenile Justice, April 2003, 1 (2), 128–155.

Robertson, James E., “Cruel and Unusual Punishment in United States Prisons: Sexual Harass-
   ment Among Male Inmates,” American Criminal Law Review, Winter 1999, 36 (1), 1–51.

Saccenti, Brian, “Preventing Summary Judgement Against Inmates Who Have Been Sexually
   Assaulted By Showing That the Risk Was Obvious,” Maryland Law Review, 2000, 59, 642–
   668.

Snyder, Howard N. and Melissa Sickmund, Juvenile Offenders and Victims: 1999 National Report,
   Washington, D.C.: Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention, 1999.

Western, Bruce, Jeffrey R. Kling, and David F. Weiman, “The Labor Market Consequences of
   Incarceration,” IR Section Working Paper, Princeton University, 2001, 450.

Wilson, James Q. and Richard J. Herrnstein, Crime and Human Nature, New York: Simon and
   Schuster, 1985.




                                           38
                                   Figure I. Criminal Propensity by Age:
                                          Theoretical Predictions




                                                                                  High discount rate
Criminal Propensity




                                   Low discount rate




                      17   17.2   17.4      17.6       17.8   18    18.2   18.4       18.6       18.8   19
                                                              Age
                            Figure II. Predicted Response to Tripling of Incarceration Length
                                                                    A. Reservation Probability ( p t ) of 0.2

                                   0



                                 -0.3            δ = 0.957 (0.1 annualized)
Discontinuity Prediction ( θ )




                                 -0.6

                                                                                                                  δ = 0.987 (0.5 annualized)
                                 -0.9



                                 -1.2



                                 -1.5
                                                                                                                   δ = 0.999 (0.95 annualized)

                                 -1.8
                                        0,0    10,30     20,60       30,90     40,120      50,150     60,180     70,210      80,240   90,270     100,300
                                                                 Juvenile vs. Adult Incarceration Length in Weeks ( S J , S A )



                                                                    B. Reservation Probability ( p t ) of 0.5

                                   0

                                              δ = 0.957 (0.1 annualized)
                                 -0.3

                                                                                                         δ = 0.987 (0.5 annualized)
Discontinuity Prediction ( θ )




                                 -0.6



                                 -0.9                                                                             δ = 0.999 (0.95 annualized)


                                 -1.2



                                 -1.5



                                 -1.8
                                        0,0    10,30     20,60       30,90     40,120      50,150     60,180     70,210      80,240   90,270     100,300
                                                                 Juvenile vs. Adult Incarceration Length in Weeks ( S J , S A )
                                       Figure III. Distribution of Age at Arrest:
                                                2002 Public-Use Data
                                            A. National Incident Based Reporting System Data

                           0.06



                           0.05

                                                     Arrested for Any Crime

                           0.04
 Fraction of All Arrests




                           0.03



                                             Arrested for Index Crime
                           0.02



                           0.01



                             0
                                  12   18                   24                    30         36   42   48
                                                                              Age in Years



                                                        B. Uniform Crime Reports Data

                           0.06



                           0.05
                                                     Arrested for Any Crime


                           0.04
 Fraction of All Arrests




                           0.03



                           0.02               Arrested for Index Crime




                           0.01



                             0
                                  12   18                   24                    30         36   42   48
                                                                              Age in Years

Note: In top panel, “Arrested for Any Crime” = arrested for “Group A” NIBRS offense. In
UCR data, some age ranges are aggregated by the FBI.
                                                   Figure IV. Criminal Propensity Estimates by Age
                                                                        A. First Arrest Since 17

                                        0.6



                                        0.5
  Arrest Probability per Week (x 100)




                                        0.4



                                        0.3



                                        0.2



                                        0.1



                                         0
                                              17   17.2   17.4   17.6     17.8        18         18.2   18.4   18.6   18.8   19
                                                                                 Age at Arrest



                                                                        B. First Arrest Since 19

                                        0.6



                                        0.5
  Arrest Probability per Week (x 100)




                                        0.4



                                        0.3



                                        0.2



                                        0.1



                                         0
                                              19   19.2   19.4   19.6     19.8        20         20.2   20.4   20.6   20.8   21
                                                                                 Age at Arrest

Note: Top (bottom) panel shows probability of first arrest since 17 (19), by age in weeks, for
those arrested at least once prior to 17 (19).
                                                  Figure V. Transfer and Punitiveness by Age
                                                              A. Probability of Being Charged as an Adult

                                0.9


                                0.8


                                0.7


                                0.6
Probability of Charge




                                0.5


                                0.4


                                0.3


                                0.2


                                0.1


                                 0
                                      17   17.2      17.4       17.6      17.8        18         18.2   18.4   18.6   18.8   19
                                                                                 Age at Arrest



                                                            B. Probability of Sentence to Adult Confinement

                                0.4




                                0.3
Probability of Prison or Jail




                                0.2




                                0.1




                                 0
                                      17   17.2      17.4       17.6      17.8        18         18.2   18.4   18.6   18.8   19
                                                                                 Age at Arrest
                                                        Figure VI. Criminal Propensity by Type of Offense
                                                                                                A. Index Crimes

                                         0.5
                                                                                                                                                     0.3


                                                                        Property Crime (right axis)
                                         0.4
  Arrest Probability per Week (x 100),




                                                                                                                                                             Arrest Probability per Week (x 100),
                                                                                                                                                     0.2

                                         0.3




                                                                                                                                                                       Property Crime
             Violent Crime




                                                                                                                                                     0.1
                                         0.2



                                                                                                                                                     0
                                         0.1
                                                        Violent Crime (left axis)



                                          0                                                                                                          -0.1
                                               17        17.2        17.4           17.6     17.8         18        18.2   18.4   18.6   18.8   19
                                                                                                    Age at Arrest



                                                                                             B. Non-index Crimes

                                         0.25                                                                                                        0.15



                                                                            Non-Drug Crime (right axis)
                                          0.2                                                                                                        0.1
  Arrest Probability per Week (x 100),




                                                                                                                                                             Arrest Probability per Week (x 100),
                                         0.15                                                                                                        0.05             Non-Drug Crimes
             Drug Crimes




                                          0.1                                                                                                        0



                                                          Drug Crime (left axis)
                                         0.05                                                                                                        -0.05




                                               0                                                                                                     -0.1
                                                   17     17.2        17.4          17.6     17.8         18        18.2   18.4   18.6   18.8   19
                                                                                                    Age at Arrest

Note: Top panel disaggregates estimates from top panel of Figure IV. Bottom panel presents
estimates for non-index crimes.
                                Figure VII. Number of Arrests by Age:
                               Main Sample versus Unused Observations
                    600


                                                                 Main Sample      Unused Observations

                    500




                    400
  Number Arrested




                    300




                    200




                    100




                      0
                          17        17.5              18                       18.5                     19
                                                 Age at Arrest

Note: Figure is a stacked histogram (shaded and light rectangles sum to total).
                                                                           Figure VIII. Incapacitation Effects
                                                                     A. Number of Follow-up Arrests, by Age at Initial Arrest

                                       1.2
                                                           Within 365 Days


                                        1
  Average Number of Arrests




                                       0.8



                                       0.6               Within 120 Days




                                       0.4


                                                      Within 30 Days
                                       0.2



                                        0
                                             17           17.2          17.4         17.6    17.8            18             18.2   18.4   18.6       18.8             19
                                                                                                    Age at Initial Arrest



                                                                  B. Discontinuity Estimates, by Length of Follow-up Window


                                       0.00
                                                                 Discontinuity at
                                                                 30 days
                                                                                            Discontinuity at                                       Discontinuity at
                                                                                            120 days                                               365 days
                                       -0.05
  Discontinuity in Number of Arrests




                                       -0.10



                                       -0.15



                                       -0.20



                                       -0.25



                                       -0.30
                                                  0                50               100         150                200             250       300             350
                                                                                                Days Since Initial Arrest

Note: Initial arrest = first arrest since 17. Top panel gives average number of arrests after
initial arrest, by age in weeks, for three different follow-up lengths. Bottom panel plots
estimated discontinuity in number of follow-up arrests, for follow-up lengths ranging from 1
to 365 days, with twice standard error bands.
               Figure IX. Predicted Response to Tripling of Incarceration Length,
                                    Hyperbolic Discounting


                                     0



                                   -0.3
  Discontinuity Prediction ( θ )




                                   -0.6



                                   -0.9
                                                β = 0.05, δ = 0.957 (0.1 annualized)

                                                                    β = 0.05, δ = 0.987 (0.5 annualized)
                                   -1.2
                                                                                      β = 0.05, δ = 0.999 (0.95 annualized)

                                   -1.5



                                   -1.8
                                          0,0     10,30     20,60       30,90    40,120     50,150     60,180     70,210        80,240   90,270   100,300
                                                               Juvenile vs. Adult Incarceration Length in Weeks ( S J , S A )


Note: Each scenario assumes pt = 0.5 . Predictions under exponential discounting from
Figure II shown as thin solid, dotted, and thick solid lines.
                  Figure X. Hypothetical Density of Criminal Opportunities:
                          Marginal versus Inframarginal Offenders




                     B     A


                                                                   D     C
Density




          0
              0                                                               1
                                           Probability of Arrest
                           Table I. Summary Statistics, Estimation Sample
                                                     Estimation Sample                        Young Arrestees
                                       First        Second      Third         First Arrest
Variable                               Arrest        Arrest     Arrest         Since 17           All Arrests
                                         (1)           (2)         (3)            (4)                 (5)
Non-white                               0.42          0.49        0.55           0.52                0.48
Male                                    0.80          0.86        0.89           0.88                0.88
Age                                    14.93        16.64        17.47          18.39              18.14
                                       (1.39)       (1.97)       (2.06)         (1.24)             (0.56)
Arrested in Small County                0.28          0.30        0.31           0.31                0.31
Arrested in Medium County               0.36          0.36        0.36           0.35                0.35
Arrested in Large County                0.36          0.34        0.33           0.34                0.34
Index Crime, Violent                    0.26          0.25        0.25           0.25                0.24
Index Crime, Property                   0.51          0.42        0.37           0.33                0.39
Non-index Crime, Drug                   0.07          0.15        0.18           0.22                0.20
Non-index Crime, Non-drug               0.15          0.18        0.20           0.19                0.17

Number of Persons                      64,073       40,520       28,703         30,938            163,037

Note: Standard deviations in parentheses. Young arrestees are those arrested between 17 and 19. Number of arrests
observed for young arrestees is 247,037.
                                                Table II. Discontinuity Estimates of Deterrence
Variable                                (1)           (2)             (3)            (4)             (5)            (6)             (7)            (8)

Estimated Discontinuity              -0.0180       -0.0172         -0.0170        -0.0176         -0.0174        -0.0174         -0.0172        -0.0171
                                     (0.0474)      (0.0474)        (0.0474)       (0.0474)        (0.0474)       (0.0474)        (0.0474)       (0.0474)

Non-white                                           0.5448          0.5028         0.5758          0.5334         0.5425          0.5405         0.5405
                                                   (0.0169)        (0.0173)       (0.0172)        (0.0176)       (0.0176)        (0.0176)       (0.0176)
Size of County of Baseline Arrest
(Relative to Large County)
    Small                                                           0.2501                         0.2553         0.2468          0.2498         0.2503
                                                                   (0.0214)                       (0.0215)       (0.0215)        (0.0215)       (0.0215)
   Medium                                                           0.0813                         0.0875         0.0869          0.0860         0.0863
                                                                   (0.0209)                       (0.0209)       (0.0209)        (0.0209)       (0.0209)
Type of Crime, Baseline Arrest
(Relative to Non-index Non-Drug)
   Index Crime, Violent                                                            0.0195          0.0087         0.0159          0.0159         0.0162
                                                                                  (0.0283)        (0.0283)       (0.0283)        (0.0283)       (0.0283)
   Index Crime, Property                                                           0.1914          0.1896         0.2017          0.2048         0.2046
                                                                                  (0.0255)        (0.0255)       (0.0256)        (0.0256)       (0.0256)
   Non-index Drug                                                                 -0.1525         -0.1541        -0.2072         -0.2134        -0.2132
                                                                                  (0.0419)        (0.0419)       (0.0421)        (0.0421)       (0.0421)

Controls for Age at
  Baseline Arrest?                      N             N               N              N               N               Y              Y               Y
Order of Polynomial in
  Age at Baseline Arrest                                                                                             1              3               5

Log-likelihood                      -96,005.7     -95,491.1       -95,420.3      -95,411.8       -95,338.8      -95,236.6       -95,178.3      -95,174.8

Note: Standard errors in parentheses. Table presents coefficients from a logit model for being arrested for an index crime since 17. In addition to controls
described, each model controls for a cubic polynomial in age at current arrest, relative to 18. Estimates are based on a panel of 4,928,226 observations
pertaining to 64,703 persons.
                                    Table III. Discontinuity in Probability of Being Charged in Adult Court
Variable                                 (1)            (2)             (3)             (4)             (5)             (6)             (7)             (8)

Estimated Discontinuity                0.4042         0.4035          0.4041          0.4037          0.4043          0.4051          0.4052          0.4054
                                      (0.0235)       (0.0235)        (0.0235)        (0.0235)        (0.0235)        (0.0235)        (0.0235)        (0.0235)
Log Discontinuity                      1.1056         1.1044          1.1054          1.1048          1.1058          1.1070          1.1073          1.1075

Non-white                                            -0.0274         -0.0294         -0.0300         -0.0320         -0.0294         -0.0296         -0.0295
                                                     (0.0057)        (0.0058)        (0.0058)        (0.0059)        (0.0059)        (0.0059)        (0.0059)
Size of County of Baseline Arrest
(Relative to Large County)
    Small                                                             0.0141                          0.0140          0.0129          0.0128          0.0129
                                                                     (0.0072)                        (0.0072)        (0.0071)        (0.0071)        (0.0072)
     Medium                                                           0.0199                          0.0198          0.0195          0.0194          0.0195
                                                                     (0.0069)                        (0.0069)        (0.0069)        (0.0069)        (0.0069)
Type of Crime, Baseline Arrest
(Relative to Non-index Non-Drug)
   Index Crime, Violent                                                               0.0055          0.0052          0.0060          0.0060          0.0060
                                                                                     (0.0095)        (0.0095)        (0.0095)        (0.0095)        (0.0095)
     Index Crime, Property                                                           -0.0031         -0.0028         -0.0015         -0.0017         -0.0018
                                                                                     (0.0085)        (0.0085)        (0.0085)        (0.0085)        (0.0085)
     Non-index Drug                                                                   0.0228          0.0229          0.0131          0.0127          0.0127
                                                                                     (0.0120)        (0.0120)        (0.0121)        (0.0121)        (0.0121)

Controls for Age at
  Baseline Arrest?                       N              N               N               N               N                Y               Y               Y
Order of Polynomial in
  Age at Baseline Arrest                                                                                                 1               3               5

R2                                     0.2144          0.2152          0.2155          0.2154          0.2157          0.2173          0.2174          0.2174

Note: Standard errors in parentheses. Log discontinuity is difference in log probabilities and is calculated from the presented difference estimate using a
baseline rate of 0.2 for the marginal juvenile. Delta method standard errors for the log discontinuity are in each instance approximately 0.039.
                                  Table IV. Heterogeneity in Discontinuity Estimates
Subsample                   (1)          (2)           (3)          (4)           (5)           (6)          (7)           (8)
All Arrestees             -0.0180      -0.0171
                          (0.0474)     (0.0474)
White Arrestees                                      0.0240        0.0240
                                                    (0.0670)      (0.0670)
Non-white Arrestees                                 -0.0592       -0.0590
                                                    (0.0670)      (0.0670)
Baseline Crime was in                                                           0.0292        0.0300
 Large County                                                                  (0.0821)      (0.0821)
Baseline Crime was in                                                          -0.0214       -0.0208
 Medium County                                                                 (0.0807)      (0.0807)
Baseline Crime was in                                                          -0.0622       -0.0619
 Small County                                                                  (0.0834)      (0.0834)
Baseline Crime was                                                                                          0.0553       0.0556
 Index, Violent                                                                                            (0.0930)     (0.0930)
Baseline Crime was                                                                                         -0.0696      -0.0683
 Index, Property                                                                                           (0.0646)     (0.0646)
Baseline Crime was                                                                                          0.0919       0.0952
 Non-index, Drug                                                                                           (0.1960)     (0.1959)
Baseline Crime was                                                                                         -0.0032      -0.0025
 Non-index, Non-drug                                                                                       (0.1250)     (0.1250)
Log-likelihood          -96,005.7     -95,174.8    -95,490.1    -95,173.8     -95,835.6     -95,170.6    -95,954.9     -95,165.0
Controls for Race?           N            Y             Y             Y            N             Y            N             Y
Controls for County
 Size?                       N            Y             N             Y            Y             Y            N             Y
Controls for Baseline
 Crime Type?                 N            Y             N             Y            N             Y             Y            Y
Controls for Age at
 Baseline Arrest?            N            Y             N             Y            N             Y            N             Y
Order of Polynomial in
 Age at Baseline Arrest                    5                          5                          5                          5
Test for Equality of
Discontinuity Estimates                               0.771         0.770        0.612         0.620         1.590        1.582
 degrees of freedom                                     [1]           [1]          [2]           [2]           [3]          [3]
 p-value                                              0.380         0.380        0.736         0.733         0.662        0.663
Note: Standard errors in parentheses. Table presents discontinuity estiamtes for different groups estimated from logit models.
Odd-numbered columns include only those controls appropriate to testing the treatment interaction of interest. For example,
column (3) includes controls for (i) white, (ii) a cubic polynomial in age, as in Table II, (iii) the interaction of the same cubic
polynomial with the indicator for white, (iv) the interaction of an indicator for being above 18 with the indicator for white
(estimate for whites shown), and (v) the interaction of the indicators for being above 18 and non-white (estimate for non-
whites shown). Even-numbered columns additionally include the richest set of controls considered in Table II. The final row
of the table tests for the equality of the interacted treatment effects.
                                   Appendix Table I. Juvenile and Adult Incarceration Length in Weeks
                                                                      Average                           Average
                                    Arrests            Jail           Duration          Prison          Duration            Total        Average Duration
A. Florida                            (1)               (2)          52*(2)/(1)           (3)           52*(3)/(1)         (2)+(3)        52*((2)+(3))/(1)
  All Offenses as Denominator
     Juvenile                       131,330            1,482              0.59            5,211              2.06            6,693              2.65
     Adult                          766,259           32,585              2.21           89,730              6.09          122,315              8.30
     Adult/Juvenile Ratio                                                 3.77                               2.95                               3.13

  Index Offenses as Denominator
     Juvenile                    53,967                1,482              1.43            5,211              5.02            6,693              6.45
     Adult                      133,853               32,585             12.66           89,730             34.86          122,315             47.52
     Adult/Juvenile Ratio                                                 8.86                               6.94                               7.37

B. United States
  All Offenses as Denominator
     Juvenile                     1,588,839           26,439              0.87           76,926              2.52          103,365              3.38
     Adult                        7,552,362          354,379              2.44        1,546,456             10.65        1,900,835             13.09
     Adult/Juvenile Ratio                                                 2.82                               4.23                               3.87

  Index Offenses as Denominator
     Juvenile                     420,543             26,439              3.27           76,926              9.51          103,365             12.78
     Adult                      1,091,530            354,379             16.88        1,546,456             73.67        1,900,835             90.55
     Adult/Juvenile Ratio                                                 5.16                               7.75                               7.09



Note: Table gives estimates of average incarceration length based on stock-flow comparisons. Adult and juvenile arrest counts are for the year 1999, from the
FBI's Uniform Crime Reports, as reported in the Sourcebook of Criminal Justice Statistics. Adult jail population counts come from the Census of Jails and
pertain to December 1999. Adult prison population counts come from the Census of Correctional facilities and pertain to June 2000. Juvenile jail and prison
population counts come from the Census of Juveniles in Residential Placement and pertain to October 1999.
                                       Appendix Table II. Arrest Probabilities
                                                                                Fraction of            Upper Bound for
                         Offenses Known         Fraction of Offenses          Victimizations               aaaaaaaa
Crime Category               to Police           Cleared by Arrest           Reported to Police            pt | pt < pt ]
                                                                                                        E[ aaaaaaaa
                                 (1)                      (2)                         (3)                    (2)*(3)
All Index Crimes            10,121,721                   0.20                        0.42                      0.08

 Violent Crime                1,184,453                  0.47                        0.48                      0.23
   Murder                       13,561                   0.64                        0.77 *                    0.49
   Forcible Rape                80,515                   0.45                        0.54                      0.24
   Robbery                     343,023                   0.26                        0.71                      0.18
   Aggravated Assault          747,354                   0.57                        0.46                      0.26

 Property Crime               8,937,268                  0.17                        0.40                      0.07
   Burglary                   1,842,930                  0.13                        0.58                      0.08
   Larceny-Theft              6,014,290                  0.18                        0.33                      0.06
   Motor Vehicle Theft        1,080,048                  0.14                        0.86                      0.12

Source:                           UCR                   UCR                       NCVS,                     Authors'
                                                                                  NCHS                     calculations

Note: Figures pertain to 2002 and are taken from the 30th Online Edition of the Sourcebook of Criminal Justice Statistics.
Figures labelled "UCR" are from the FBI's Uniform Crime Reports system (Table 4.19). Figures labelled "NCVS" are
from the Census Bureau's National Crime Victimization Survey (Table 3.36). Asterisk indicates that the fraction of
victimizations reported to police was estimated by taking the ratio of offenses known to police to the number of 2002
murders reported to the National Center for Health Statistics (Table E, National Vital Statistics Reports, Vol. 53, No. 17,
2005).
                                                       Appendix Table III. Robustness of Main Results
                                                     Imposing Equality of Derivatives at 18                       Allowing for Different Derivatives at 18
A. Unconditional Estimates                   (1)           (2)          (3)       (4)           (5)       (6)           (7)         (8)         (9)            (10)
  Estimated Discontinuity                   0.174         0.135       -0.018     0.002         0.029     0.147        -0.040       0.014      -0.054         -0.065
                                           (0.035)       (0.036)      (0.047)   (0.048)       (0.057)   (0.036)       (0.053)     (0.072)     (0.090)        (0.109)
  Order of Polynomial                           1             2           3         4             5         1              2          3           4              5
  Test Against Saturated Model             175.8          144.2       119.8     113.8         113.0     153.5          119.5      112.6       110.3          109.3
     degrees of freedom                      [102]          [101]       [100]      [99]          [98]     [101]           [99]       [97]        [95]           [93]
     p-value                               0.0000         0.0031      0.0865    0.1461        0.1421    0.0006         0.0789     0.1325      0.1351         0.1194
B. Controlling for Race, Size of County, and Type of Baseline Crime
   Estimated Discontinuity                   0.173          0.134     -0.017     0.002         0.029     0.147        -0.039       0.014      -0.054         -0.065
                                            (0.035)        (0.036)    (0.047)   (0.048)       (0.057)   (0.036)       (0.053)     (0.072)     (0.090)        (0.109)
  Black                                     0.534         0.533        0.533     0.533         0.533     0.534         0.533       0.533       0.533          0.533
                                           (0.018)       (0.018)      (0.018)   (0.018)       (0.018)   (0.018)       (0.018)     (0.018)     (0.018)        (0.018)
  Small County                              0.256         0.255        0.255     0.255         0.255     0.255         0.255       0.255       0.255          0.255
                                           (0.021)       (0.021)      (0.021)   (0.021)       (0.021)   (0.021)       (0.021)     (0.021)     (0.021)        (0.021)
  Medium County                             0.088         0.088        0.087     0.087         0.087     0.088         0.087       0.087       0.087          0.087
                                           (0.021)       (0.021)      (0.021)   (0.021)       (0.021)   (0.021)       (0.021)     (0.021)     (0.021)        (0.021)
  Baseline Crime Violent                    0.009         0.009        0.009     0.009         0.009     0.009         0.009       0.009       0.009          0.009
                                           (0.028)       (0.028)      (0.028)   (0.028)       (0.028)   (0.028)       (0.028)     (0.028)     (0.028)        (0.028)
  Baseline Crime Property                   0.190         0.190        0.190     0.190         0.190     0.190         0.190       0.190       0.190          0.190
                                           (0.026)       (0.026)      (0.026)   (0.026)       (0.026)   (0.026)       (0.026)     (0.026)     (0.026)        (0.026)
  Baseline Crime Non-index Drug            -0.153        -0.154       -0.154    -0.154        -0.154    -0.154        -0.154      -0.154      -0.154         -0.154
                                           (0.042)       (0.042)      (0.042)   (0.042)       (0.042)   (0.042)       (0.042)     (0.042)     (0.042)        (0.042)
  Order of Polynomial                           1             2           3         4             5         1              2          3           4              5
  Test Against Saturated Model             173.8          143.8       119.7     113.9         113.1     152.7          119.5      112.7       110.3          109.3
     degrees of freedom                      [102]          [101]       [100]      [99]          [98]     [101]           [99]       [97]        [95]           [93]
     p-value                               0.0000         0.0033      0.0873    0.1455        0.1414    0.0007         0.0791     0.1323      0.1351         0.1192

Note: Standard errors in parentheses. Table presents alternative parametrizations of the models given in Table II. Coefficients on the polynomial model are
suppressed throughout. In each panel the bottom row tests the fit of the presented model against a saturated model which includes a series of exhaustive and
mutually exclusive indicators for each possible age, in weeks.
                                             Appendix Table IV. Discontinuity in Probability of Adult Incarceration
                                                                           (1)        (2)         (3)          (4)          (5)           (6)          (7)          (8)
A. Main Estimates
   Estimated Discontinuity in Probability of Confinement                  0.1475     0.1474     0.1459       0.1479       0.1464        0.1463       0.1459       0.1460
                                                                         (0.0155)   (0.0155)   (0.0154)     (0.0155)     (0.0154)      (0.0154)     (0.0154)     (0.0154)
    Log Discontinuity                                                     1.7246     1.7238     1.7156       1.7264       1.7181        1.7176       1.7152       1.7162
    Non-white                                                                       -0.0053     0.0012      -0.0043       0.0020        0.0017       0.0017       0.0018
                                                                                    (0.0037)   (0.0038)     (0.0038)     (0.0038)      (0.0039)     (0.0039)     (0.0039)
    Size of County of Baseline Arrest (Relative to Large)
        Small                                                                                  -0.0476                   -0.0472       -0.0471      -0.0469      -0.0468
                                                                                               (0.0047)                  (0.0047)      (0.0047)     (0.0047)     (0.0047)
          Medium                                                                               -0.0360                   -0.0358       -0.0358      -0.0359      -0.0360
                                                                                               (0.0045)                  (0.0045)      (0.0045)     (0.0045)     (0.0045)
    Type of Crime, Baseline Arrest (Relative to Non-index Non-drug)
       Index Crime, Violent                                                                                 -0.0156      -0.0142       -0.0143      -0.0143      -0.0143
                                                                                                            (0.0062)     (0.0062)      (0.0062)     (0.0062)     (0.0062)
          Index Crime, Property                                                                             -0.0041      -0.0039       -0.0041      -0.0040      -0.0040
                                                                                                            (0.0056)     (0.0056)      (0.0056)     (0.0056)     (0.0056)
          Non-index Drug                                                                                     0.0029       0.0033        0.0044       0.0039       0.0040
                                                                                                            (0.0079)     (0.0079)      (0.0079)     (0.0079)     (0.0079)
    Controls for Age at Baseline Arrest?                                    N          N           N            N            N             Y            Y            Y
    Order of Polynomial in Age at Baseline Arrest                                                                                          1            3             5
      2
    R                                                                     0.0649     0.0650     0.0695        0.0654       0.0699       0.0700        0.0702       0.0703
B. Decomposition of Probability of Incarceration into Prison and Jail:
   Estimated Discontinuity in Probability of Prison                       0.0401     0.0400     0.0394       0.0401       0.0395        0.0395       0.0392       0.0394
                                                                         (0.0107)   (0.0107)   (0.0107)     (0.0107)     (0.0107)      (0.0107)     (0.0107)     (0.0107)
    Log Discontinuity                                                     1.4066     1.4054     1.3943       1.4067       1.3954        1.3953       1.3907       1.3930
    Estimated Discontinuity in Probability of Jail                        0.1075     0.1074     0.1065       0.1078       0.1069        0.1068       0.1066       0.1067
                                                                         (0.0120)   (0.0120)   (0.0120)     (0.0120)     (0.0120)      (0.0120)     (0.0120)     (0.0120)
    Log Discontinuity                                                     1.9417     1.9410     1.9339       1.9442       1.9370        1.9364       1.9350       1.9353
Note: Standard errors in parentheses. Log discontinuity calculated from presented discontinuity estimate using a baseline rate of 0.032 for the marginal juvenile. Delta-
method standard errors for the log discontinuity are in each case approximately 0.086. Bottom panel of table presents estimated discontinuity in probability of being
sentenced to adult prison and to adult jail, respectively. Log discontinuities in bottom panel use a baseline marginal juvenile rate for prison and jail of 0.013 and 0.018,
respectively. Delta-method standard errors for these log discontinuities are in each case approximately 0.15 and 0.086, respectively. Controls for regressions in bottom
panel suppressed.
