NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

BANK SUPERVISION AND CORRUPTION
IN LENDING
Thorsten Beck
Asli Demirgüç-Kunt
Ross Levin
Working Paper 11498
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11498
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2005

Beck and Demirgüç-Kunt: World Bank; Levine: Carlson School of Management at the University of
Minnesota and the NBER. This paper’s findings, interpretations, and conclusions are entirely those of the
authors and do not necessarily represent the views of the World Bank, its Executive Directors, or the
countries they represent. We thank J. Boyd, G. Caprio, G. Clarke, C. Plosser, C. Schenone, an anonymous
referee, and seminar participants at the Banco Central de Chile, Bank of England, Brown University,
European Central Bank, London Business School, London School of Economics, NYU’s Stern School of
Business, Oxford University’s Said Business School, University of Berne, University of PennsylvaniaWharton, University of Tübingen, and the University of Minnesota for helpful suggestions. An earlier
version of this paper circulated under the title, Bank Supervision and Corporate Finance. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
©2005 by Thorsten Beck, Asli Demirgüç-Kunt and Ross Levine. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Bank Supervision and Corruption in Lending
Thorsten Beck, Asli Demirgüç-Kunt and Ross Levine
NBER Working Paper No. 11498
July 2005
JEL No. G3, G28, L51, O16
ABSTRACT
Which commercial bank supervisory policies ease

or intensify

the degree to which bank

corruption is an obstacle to firms raising external finance? Based on new data from more than 2,500
firms across 37 countries, this paper provides the first empirical assessment of the impact of different
bank supervisory policies on firms’ financing obstacles. We find that the traditional approach to bank
supervision, which involves empowering official supervisory agencies to directly monitor, discipline,
and influence banks, does not improve the integrity of bank lending. Rather, we find that a
supervisory strategy that focuses on empowering private monitoring of banks by forcing banks to
disclose accurate information to the private sector tends to lower the degree to which corruption of
bank officials is an obstacle to firms raising external finance. In extensions, we find that regulations
that empower private monitoring exert a particularly beneficial effect on the integrity of bank lending
in countries with sound legal institutions.

Thorsten Beck
The World Bank
MSN MC 3-300
1818 H Street NW
Washington, DC 20433
tbeck@worldbank.org
Asli Demirgüç-Kunt
Economics Research
World Bank Group
1818 H Street NW
Washington, DC 20433
ademirguckunt@worldbank.org

Ross Levine
Department of Economics
Brown University
64 Waterman Street
Providence, RI 02912
and NBER
rlevine@csom.umn.edu
(From August 1, 2005)

1
1. Introduction
Banks provide a substantial proportion of external finance to enterprises around the globe.
Yet, there have been no previous studies of whether international differences in bank supervision
influence the obstacles that corporations face in raising external finance. Furthermore, the Basel
Committee, International Monetary Fund and World Bank promote the development of powerful
bank supervisory agencies with the authority to monitor and discipline banks. Yet, there exists no
cross-country evidence to support these recommendations, nor is there evidence on the general
question of which bank supervisory policies facilitate efficient corporate finance.
This paper provides the first assessment of the relationship between bank supervisory
policies and the degree to which corruption in lending impedes the ability of firms to raise external
finance. Theory provides conflicting predictions about the impact of bank supervisory policies on
the extent to which corruption of bank officials impedes the efficient allocation of bank credit.
Thus, by examining the integrity of bank lending, we distinguish among different approaches to
supervision as well as more general theories of the role of government in the economy.
Indeed, general theories of government regulation provide a natural framework for assessing
bank supervision. When information costs, transactions costs, and government policies interfere
with the incentives and abilities of private agents to monitor banks, strong official supervision of
banks can improve the corporate governance of banks (Stigler, 1971).1 This “supervisory power
view” holds that private agents frequently lack the incentives and capabilities to monitor powerful
banks. From this perspective, a powerful supervisory agency that directly monitors and disciplines

1

Also, see Becker (1968) and Becker and Stigler (1974). Furthermore, some may reject the importance of market
failures in banking. In a world with (i) no information or transactions costs, (ii) governments that maximize social
welfare, and (iii) well-defined and efficiently enforced property rights, market participants will achieve efficient
outcomes (Coase, 1960). If the prerequisites for this laissez-faire – invisible hand – theory hold, government supervision
of banks would be at best irrelevant and potentially harmful to social welfare (Stigler, 1975). The empirical evidence
below also provides evidence on this laissez-faire view.

2
banks can enhance the corporate governance of banks, reduce corruption in bank lending, and
thereby boost the efficiency with which banks intermediate society’s savings. The official
supervision theory assumes that governments have both the expertise and the incentives to
ameliorate market imperfections and improve the governance of banks.
An alternative to the supervisory power view also draws on core theories of public policy
and regulation. The “political/regulatory capture view” argues that politicians and supervisors do
not maximize social welfare; they maximize their own private welfare (Hamilton, et al., 1788;
Buchanan and Tullock, 1962; Becker, 1983; Shleifer and Vishny, 1998). Thus, if bank supervisory
agencies have the power to discipline non-compliant banks, then politicians and supervisors may
use this power to induce banks to divert the flow of credit to politically connected firms (Becker and
Stigler, 1974; Stigler, 1975; Haber et al., 2003). Under these conditions, banks do not only allocate
capital based on risk-return criteria. Rather, when supervisory agencies have the power to influence
the distribution of bank loans, then corruption and political ties may shape the allocation of bank
credit. This theory suggests that strengthening the power of the supervisory agency may actually
reduce the integrity of bank lending with adverse implications on the efficiency of credit allocation.
Logical extensions of the political/regulatory capture view imply that powerful supervisory agencies
will have less of a tendency to abuse their power for private gain in countries with sound institutions
that constrain exploitative behavior by government officials. We test this hypothesis below.
Finally, the “private empowerment view” argues that bank supervisory policies should
focus on enhancing the ability and incentives of private agents to overcome information and
transaction costs, so that private investors can exert effective governance over banks. The private
empowerment view simultaneously recognizes the potential importance of market failures, which
motivate government intervention, and political/regulatory failures, which suggest that supervisory

3
agencies do not necessarily have incentives to ease market failures. Consequently, the private
empowerment view seeks to provide supervisors with the responsibility and authority to induce
banks to disclose accurate information to the public, so that private agents can more effectively
monitor banks (Hay and Shleifer, 1998). This view also holds that many empowered private bank
creditors will be less susceptible to capture by politicians and banks than a single supervisory
agency. Furthermore, the private empowerment view stresses that transparent information will help
private investors exert effective corporate governance over banks only when sound legal institutions
operate in the country. Thus, the private empowerment view holds that corruption of bank officials
will be less of a constraint on corporate finance in countries that foster public information disclosure
and have well-functioning legal institutions than in countries that rely on powerful official
supervisors.
This paper is further motivated by recent trends in corporate finance and public policy
debates. First, an enormous theoretical literature examines the role of banks, along with
shareholders and other financiers, in easing financing constraints and exerting corporate governance
(Shleifer and Vishny, 1997; Morck, Wolfenzon, and Yeung, 2005). Based on some of these models,
empirical research examines how laws concerning shareholders influence corporate finance (Beck
and Levine, 2005). Yet, there exists no corresponding work that examines how bank supervision
influences corporate finance. This paper is an initial attempt to better understand how different
supervisory policies influence the obstacles faced by firms in raising external finance.
Second, influential international institutions, such as the Bank for International Settlements,
the International Monetary Fund, and the World Bank, are encouraging countries to strengthen bank
supervision. Although these recommendations are frequently discussed in the context of avoiding
banking crises, crises cannot be the only criterion because policymakers can essentially eliminate

4
banking crises through a 100 percent reserve requirement. Thus, an important, if often under-stated,
objective of bank supervision is to foster efficient capital allocation; i.e., to finance worthy firms
based on market – not corrupt -- criteria. To provide information about which types of bank
supervisory strategies work best to promote efficient corporate finance, this paper assesses the
impact of different bank supervisory policies on the degree to which bank corruption impedes firms
from obtaining external finance.
This paper uses firm-level data on more than 2,500 firms across 37 countries to examine the
impact of bank supervision on the obstacles that firms encounter in raising external capital. The
firm-level data come from the World Business Environment Survey (WBES), which was conducted
in 1999. This dataset includes information on firm characteristics, including the degree to which
bank corruption is important to raising capital. These data are based on survey questions in which
firms rank the impediments on a scale from one to four, with larger values implying that bank
corruption is a greater obstacle.
The bank supervisory data come from Barth, Caprio, and Levine (2004, henceforth BCL).
These data include information on official supervisory power, such as the ability to intervene in
banks, replace managers, force provisioning, stop dividends and other payments, acquire
information, etc. BCL also collect information on the degree to which supervisory authorities
facilitate private monitoring of banks by not reducing the incentives of the private sector to monitor
banks through deposit insurance and by forcing accurate information disclosure. Specifically, BCL
assemble data on whether bank directors and officials face criminal prosecution for failure to
disclose information accurately, whether banks must disclose consolidated accounts, whether
international accounting firms audit banks, whether there is implicit or explicit deposit insurance,
etc.

5
Econometrically, we use ordered probit and probit procedures because of the discrete nature
of the dependent variable. The dependent variable is the measure of the degree to which corruption
of bank officials is an obstacle to firms raising external finance. The main explanatory variables are
measures of (1) supervisory power and (2) the degree to which regulations require information
disclosure by banks and give private creditors incentives to monitor banks. We also control for a
range of firm-specific and country-specific characteristics. We also use instrumental variables to
control for potential endogeneity.
The results are inconsistent with the traditional supervisory power view and provide
qualified support for the political/regulatory capture view. Specifically, we never find that
supervisory power lowers corruption in bank lending. Indeed, even in countries with highly
developed institutions (e.g., effective governments and adherence to the rule of law), we do not find
that supervisory power improves the integrity of bank lending. Thus, while the BIS, the IMF, and
the World Bank are pushing countries to strengthen direct official oversight of banks, the evidence
does not support this recommendation. Rather, supervisory power is positively associated with
corruption in bank lending. We also find that supervisory power is strongly linked to poor legal
system development, low levels of government effectiveness, and high levels of national corruption.
Thus, the positive relationship between supervisory power and corruption in bank lending becomes
insignificant when we control for these other country characteristics.
The paper also presents evidence that supports the private empowerment view. The data are
consistent with the view that policies that force accurate information disclosure and provide
incentives to private investors to monitor banks lower the importance of bank corruption in raising
external finance. In extensions, we test whether empowering private monitoring only works in
particular institutional settings. We find that supervisory practices that force the disclosure of

6
accurate, transparent information on banks work best to promote integrity in lending in countries
that adhere to the rule of law. Thus, empowering private monitoring of banks has the largest,
positive effect in countries with well functioning legal systems.
This paper is related to recent research. BCL conduct a pure cross-country analysis and find
that financial development is (1) positively associated with supervisory approaches that force
information disclosure and (2) negatively associated with powerful supervisors that directly monitor
and discipline banks. In this paper, we use microeconomic data to examine the channels running
from bank supervision to corporate finance, rather than examining cross-country connections
between bank supervision and banking system size. In a cross-country analysis, La Porta, et al.
(2005) find that securities market regulations that induce information disclosure promote stock
market development, while securities regulations that rely on official oversight of markets only
boost equity market capitalization in countries with efficient government bureaucracies. In this
paper, we focus on bank supervision and use firm-level data in assessing the impact of different
bank supervisory practices on firms’ financing obstacles.
A number of methodological concerns need to be noted. First, individual firms subjectively
report financing obstacles. Thus firms facing the same obstacles in two different countries may
report different obstacles for reasons that do not depend on actual constraints. Although it is not
clear that this would bias the results in any particular direction, we provide evidence on the validity
of the survey information below. Second, the supervisory variables might proxy for other country
specific factors. Importantly, however, we get the same results when including the official
supervisory power and private monitoring variables simultaneously. Thus, supervisory power and
private monitoring are not proxying for the same unspecified factor. Also, the results hold even
when controlling for many country-specific factors, such as the level of economic development,

7
economic growth, macroeconomic stability, overall financial development, differences in political
systems, state-ownership of banks, regulatory restrictions on bank activities, the laws governing the
rights of creditors and shareholders, and the overall level of corruption in the economy. Third,
banking crises may both intensify financing obstacles and boost official supervisory power,
producing a spurious relationship between supervisory practices and firm financing obstacles. When
we control for crisis, however, the results do not change.
Finally, some may view the paper as an atheoretical exploration of the relationship between
bank supervisory practices and the integrity of bank lending. It is true that we do not estimate a
single model that explicitly links bank supervisory practices to bank behavior, and then to the
corporate financing decisions of firms. We do, however, evaluate broad theories of government
regulation along with influential approaches to bank supervision. Also, given the central importance
of bank supervisory policies and bank financing around the world, this paper provides initial
documentation of the relationships between bank supervision policies and corporate financing
constraints that we hope motivate additional theoretical and empirical work.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the data and the
methodology is described in Section 3. Section 4 gives the results and Section 5 concludes.

2. Data, Summary Statistics, and Links to Theory
a. Corruption as an obstacle to firms obtaining external finance: Definitions
To examine the relationship between bank supervisory strategies and corporate financing
obstacles, we use data from two main sources: the World Business Environment Survey (WBES)
for firm-level data and BCL (2004) for country-level data on bank supervision.

8
From the WBES, we use information on over 2,500 firms across 37 non-transition
economies. While the WBES comprises 80 countries and the BCL database includes data on 107
countries, the limited overlap reduces our sample. The WBES surveyed firms of all sizes; small
firms (between 5 and 50 employees) represent 40% of the sample, medium-sized (between 51 and
500 employees) firms are 40% of the sample, and the remaining 20% are large firms (more than 500
employees). The survey comprises mostly firms of the manufacturing, construction and services
sectors. We also have information on whether these are government-owned, foreign-owned, or
privately-owned firms. The data indicate whether the firm is an exporter and provide information on
sales, growth, financing patterns, and the number of competitors.
Bank Corruption equals the response to the question: “Is the corruption of bank officials an
obstacle for the operation and growth of your business?” Answers vary between 1 (no obstacle), 2
(a minor obstacle), 3 (a moderate obstacle), or 4 (a major obstacle)?” Thus, bigger numbers imply
the corruption of bank officials is a bigger obstacle to obtaining financing. Overall, 7.7% of the
firms in our sample report bank corruption as a major obstacle, 7.8% rate bank corruption as a
moderate obstacle, 19.5% respond that corruption is a minor obstacle, while 65% report that the
corruption of bank officials is not an obstacle to firm growth. Given this distribution of responses,
we sometimes divided the responses into those with a value of one (65% of the responses) and all
others. This allows us to use a comparatively balanced distribution of responses, reduce the possible
influence of outliers, and use instrumental variable procedures that are available for probit analyses
but not ordered probit regressions. The perceived degree to which the corruption of bank officials is
an obstacle to efficient corporate finance not only varies across firms within countries, but also
across countries.2 For instance, the average firm in Thailand reports that the corruption of bank

2

The overall standard deviation of the bank corruption variable is 0.93, while the between country standard deviation is
0.49, and the within country standard deviation is 0.82.

9
officials is a substantial obstacle to obtaining external finance (3.14), while the average firm in
Canada or the United Kingdom reports a very high degree of integrity in bank lending (1.03).
b. Obstacles to firms obtaining external finance: Justification
We use a unique database to investigate the impact of bank supervision on the integrity of
bank lending. The WBES survey provides information on the degree to which corruption in lending
represents an obstacle to firms. Thus, unlike other general measures of firm financing obstacles
(Fazzari, Hubbard, and Petersen, 1988; and Demirguc-Kunt and Maksimovic, 1998), the WBES
survey provides direct information from firms about specific perceived obstacles and therefore does
not infer the existence of general financing constraints from other information. Furthermore, the
WBES database has excellent coverage of small and medium size firms (as well as large firms),
while other cross-country studies of corporate finance focus almost exclusively on large, listed
corporations. Moreover, the WBES has very broad country coverage that is important for linking
the firm-level data with the bank supervision data. Finally, we stress that these survey data are
conducted at the firm-level. While we examine the relationship between firm-level responses and
national supervisory policies, it is inappropriate to aggregate the firm-level survey responses and
conduct pure cross-country comparisons because the composition of firms differs markedly across
countries. To draw appropriate inferences about the relationship between bank supervisory
practices and corruption in lending from this database, one needs to control for firm-specific traits.
As noted in the Introduction, there are good reasons for believing that these self-reported
data are not biasing the results in favor of this paper’s findings. First, if a firm facing the same
obstacles will respond to questions differently in different institutional and cultural environments,
then, to the extent that this represents pure measurement error, it would bias the results against
finding a significant relationship between bank supervision and firm financing obstacles. Second,

10
we obtain the same results when controlling for many country-specific traits. Third, additional work
suggests that the survey data are closely associated with other measurable outcomes. Hellman et al.
(2000) show that in a sub-sample of 20 countries there is a close connection between responses and
measurable outcomes, and they find no systematic bias in the survey responses. Also, reported firm
financing obstacles are highly, negatively correlated with firm growth (Beck, Demirguc-Kunt, and
Maksimovic, 2005). Furthermore, we examined the connection between reported firm financing
obstacles and Wurgler’s (2000) measure of the efficiency of investment flows.3 We find the
reported financing obstacles are negatively and significantly correlated with this efficiency of
investment indicator. Finally, we studied the link between survey responses regarding firm
financing obstacles and industrial expansion. Based on Rajan and Zingales (1998), we examine
whether industries that are naturally heavy users of external finance grow faster in economies where
firms face lower reported financing obstacles. We find that externally dependent industries grow
faster in countries where firms report the corruption of bank officials is less of an obstacle to firm
growth. Thus, firms’ responses to the survey on financing obstacles are capturing more than
idiosyncratic differences in how firms rank obstacles; the survey data are associated with
measurable outcomes.
As an additional robustness check on the usefulness of firm responses to the question
regarding the degree to which corruption of bank officials is an obstacle, we re-do all of the
analyses controlling for each firm’s response to the following question: “How problematic is
financing for the operation and growth or your business?” If a particular firm is particularly
pessimistic or is simply blaming other factors on its performance, this should be reflected in both its
response to this general financing obstacle question as well as is its response to the more specific

3

This is an investment elasticity that gauges the extent to which a country increases investment in growing industries
and decreases investment in declining ones.

11
question on the corruption of bank officials. By incorporating this additional variable in the
regressions, we lower the likelihood that idiosyncratic firm responses are biasing the results. Thus,
if we obtain the same results even when controlling for each firm’s response to this general
financing obstacle question, this strengthens the interpretation of an independent relationship
between the bank supervision indicators and the degree to which the corruption of bank officials is
an obstacle to firms obtaining external finance.
c. Firm-specific traits
In our analysis of bank supervision and corporate finance, we control for several firm
attributes such as ownership. Government takes on the value one if the government owns any
percentage of the firm, and Foreign takes on the value one if foreign entities own any fraction of
the firm.4 Our sample includes 6% government owned firms and 25% foreign firms.
We also control for each firm’s business, competitive environment, and size. The
regressions include dummy variables for whether the firm is an exporting firm (Exporter), whether
it is a manufacturing firm (Manufacturing) or a service sector firm (Services). The analyses also
include the log of the number of competitors that each firm faces (Number of Competitors). In
sum, 39% of the firms in our sample are in manufacturing and 46% in service, and on average they
face 2.1 competitors. Finally, we include the log of sales in USD as indicator of size (Sales).
The correlation analysis in Table I Panel B indicates that non-exporting firms, domestically
owned firms, smaller firms (as measured by sales), and firms with more competitors suffer more
from bank corruption.

4

While these simple zero-one indicators of ownership may not capture the varying degrees of influence that arise from
different levels of government or foreign ownership, information on the percentage of ownership is available for less
than 10 percent of the sample. However, among the firms for which we have data on the percentage of foreign and
government ownership, more than two thirds of firms with foreign ownership are majority foreign owned and more than
60% of firms with government ownership are majority state-owned.

12
d. Bank supervisory policies
We use two indicators of supervisory practices to test the empirical validity of the
competing hypotheses outlined in the Introduction. These indicators and other key country
characteristics are listed in Appendix Table I.
Supervisory Power is constructed from 14 dummy variables that indicate whether bank
supervisors can take specific actions against bank management, bank owners, and bank auditors
both in normal times and times of distress. This includes information on whether the supervisory
agency can force a bank to change its internal organizational structure, suspend dividends, stop
bonuses, halt management fees, force banks to constitute provisions against actual or potential
losses as determined by the supervisory agency, supersede the legal rights of shareholders, remove
and replace managers and directors, obtain information from external auditors, and take legal action
against auditors for negligence.5 Supervisory agencies can use these powers to improve the
governance of banks as emphasized by the supervisory power view. The supervisory authority can
also use these powers to induce banks to funnel credit to favored ends as emphasized by the
political/regulatory capture view. The exact definition of Supervisory Power is provided in the data
appendix. We use the first principal component indicator of these variables, which varies between –
3.05 (Singapore) and 1.14 (U.S.) with a mean of –0.11, and higher values indicating wider authority
for bank supervisors.6
The Supervisory Power variable relates to the theoretical debate discussed in the
Introduction. The supervisory power view predicts that strengthening official oversight of banks

5

Note, we obtain the same results when using a proxy for supervisory power that only includes information on the
power of the supervisory agency over the bank and excludes the power of the supervisory agency over external auditors.
We prefer the broader measure because the supervisory power view holds that only a supervisory agency that has both
the information and the power can improve the corporate governance of banks.
6
The mean is not exactly equal to zero because we use the raw data from Barth et al. (2004) on the supervisory
indicators. These data are available for more countries than the corresponding data on firm obstacles.

13
(increasing Supervisory Power) will improve the governance of banks and increase the likelihood
that bank allocate capital based on sound risk-return tradeoffs, so that Supervisory Power will be
negatively associated with Bank Corruption.7 In direct contrast, the political/regulatory capture
view predicts that Supervisory Power will be positively associated with Bank Corruption. In
particular, the political/regulatory capture view holds that increases in the power of the official
supervisory agency to discipline and replace bank directors and managers gives the agency grater
influence over the allocation of bank credit. If official supervisors have the incentives and ability to
use this power to promote private interests rather than the public good, then credit allocation will
potentially reflect political ties, bribes and more subtle emoluments such as family connections and
future employment opportunities. In this environment, firms will perceive that credit is not simply
allocated based on risk-return criteria and will therefore be more likely to respond that corruption in
bank lending hurts the operation and growth of their businesses. Below, we also discuss and test
more subtle versions of the political/regulatory capture view which stress that in countries with
sound legal and political institutions, supervisory power will not be abused. From this perspective,
the impact of supervisory power on the integrity of bank lending depends on institutional
development.
Private Monitoring is designed to measure the degree to which bank supervision forces
banks to disclose accurate information to the public and induces private sector monitoring of banks.
Private Monitoring is constructed from nine dummy variables that measure whether bank directors
and officials are legally liable for the accuracy of information disclosed to the public, whether banks
must publish consolidated accounts, whether banks must be rated and audited, whether banks must

7

See Polinsky and Shavell’s (2000) review of the theory of public enforcement and the discussion in Coase (1988).
Also, Spiller and Ferejohn (1992) note that lawmakers do not have sufficient information to anticipate all possible
circumstances. Thus, there may be efficiency gains to delegating power to a supervisory agency that has the expertise
and resources to set and change the specific rules as events evolve.

14
be audited by certified international auditors, whether subordinated debt is allowable (which may
create a class of private monitors), and whether there is both no explicit deposit insurance and no
actual insurance was paid the last time a bank failed (as a measure of the existence of an implicit
deposit insurance regime). The Private Monitoring Index is constructed as a principal component
indicator, with higher values indicating more tools and incentives for private bank creditors to
monitor banks, ranging from –1.56 (Ghana) to 1.46 (United Kingdom).
In terms of theory, the private empowerment view holds that supervisory policies that force
accurate information disclosure and give private creditors appropriate incentives can ameliorate
market failures without increasing the likelihood of political/regulatory capture. According to this
view, forcing banks to provide transparent comparable information to the public enhances private
sector oversight of banks and reduces the degree to which bank allocate credit on non-market terms.
Thus, the private empowerment view holds that Private Monitoring will be negatively associated
with Bank Corruption. As we develop further below, this private empowerment view presumes that
the private agents have a sufficiently well-functioning legal system at their disposal so that they can
exert effective corporate governance over banks when supervisory practices force the disclosure of
accurate information. Thus, more sophisticated versions of the private monitoring view predict that
enhancing information transparency will only improve the integrity of bank lending in countries
with sufficiently well-functioning legal systems. We test this below.

15
e. Country-level control variables
To assess the robustness of the relation between bank supervision and firms’ access to
external financing, we include other country-level variables. We include the growth rate of GDP per
capita (Growth) since firms in faster growing countries may face lower obstacles. We use the
inflation rate (Inflation) to proxy for monetary instability, conjecturing that firms in more stable
environments face fewer obstacles (Boyd, Levine, and Smith, 2001).
We also include the level of overall banking sector development (Priv), which equals credit
by banks to the private sector as a share of GDP, since we want to assess the impact of supervision
on corporate finance independent of overall bank development. Bank development is positively
associated with economic growth (King and Levine, 1993; Levine and Zervos, 1998; Levine,
Loayza, and Beck, 2000). Demirguc-Kunt and Maksimovic (1998) argue that financial development
influences growth by easing the external financing constraints faced by firms. Thus, we examine the
independent impact of bank supervision on the financing obstacles faced by firms after controlling
for overall financial development and conditions in the macroeconomic economy. As shown in
Table I, Panel C, firms in poorer countries with higher inflation, lower bank development, and less
information disclosure report higher financing obstacles (Table II Panel C).
In our sensitivity analyses, we include a variety of country controls. Specifically, we control
for (i) GDP per capita, which measures the overall level of economic development, (ii) State
Ownership, which equals the share of a country’s bank assets that are held by banks that are more
than 50 percent government owned; (iii) Banking Crisis, which equals one if the country has
experienced a systemic banking crisis during the 1990s and zero otherwise; (iv) Shareholder Rights,
which is a measure of the legal rights of minority shareholders vis-à-vis management and large
shareholders; (v) Corruption, which is a measure of the absence of corruption of government

16
officials, so that larger values signify less corruption, (vi) Rule of Law, which measures legal
system efficiency, and (vii) Government Effectiveness, which is a measure of bureaucratic quality.
The Appendix defines these variables and we discuss them further when we present the sensitivity
analyses.

3. The Empirical Model
To examine bank supervision and corporate finance, we assume that the enterprise’s
underlying response can be described by the following equation:
Bank Corruptionj,k = α + β1 Governmentj,k + β2 Foreignj,k + β3 Exporterj,k + β4 No. of Competitorsj,k
+ β5 Manufacturingj,k + β6 Servicesj,k + β7 Sizej,k + β8Inflationk + β9 Growthk + β10Privk +β11
Supervisionk + εj,k.
(1)
The j and k subscripts indicate firm and country respectively. The variable Supervision in
equation (1) represents one – or more – of the various supervision variables discussed earlier. These
supervisory indicators change across the different specifications as we discuss below.
Unlike the underlying variable, the observed variable Bank Corruption is a polychotomous
dependent variable with a natural order. Specifically, the enterprise classifies the degree to which
bank corruption is an obstacle with k = 1, 2, 3, or 4 if the underlying variable is between αk-1 and
αk+1, with the α-vector being estimated together with the coefficient vector β. We therefore use the
ordered probit model to estimate equation (1). We use standard maximum likelihood estimation
with heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors. Furthermore, we allow for clustering within
countries to allow for possible correlation of errors. Specifically, we do not require that the error
terms are independent across firms within the same country; rather, we require that error terms are
independent across countries. The results hold when we do not allow for clustering and simply run a
standard ordered probit under the assumption of independent observations. The coefficients from

17
the estimation (with or without clustering), however, cannot be interpreted as marginal effects of a
one-unit increase in the independent variable on the dependent variable, given the non-linear
structure of the model. Rather, the marginal effect is calculated as φ(β’x)β, where φ is the standard
normal density at β’x. We also include the Pseudo R2, a measure of goodness of fit, which is
computed as one minus the ratio of the log likelihood of the full model to the log likelihood of the
“constant-only” model.

4. Results
A. Findings
Table II presents regression results where the dependent variable is Bank Corruption. In
every regression we control for the array of firm-specific traits discussed above as well as the
macroeconomic controls: Inflation, Growth, and Priv. To this set of control variables, the first
regression adds Supervisory Power, and the second adds Private Monitoring. The third regression
adds Supervisory Power and Private Monitoring simultaneously.
The final regression in Table II includes all the firm-specific variables, the macroeconomic
controls, the two supervisory indicators and also includes as an additional control variable, General
Financing Obstacle, which equals each firm’s response to the question: “How problematic is
financing for the operation and growth of your business?” Controlling for this general question
about firm financing obstacles reduces the likelihood that reporting biases or interpretational
differences across firms drive the results on the relationship between bank supervisory approaches
and the degree to which bank corruption impedes efficient corporate finance. While including this
firm-specific response may induce simultaneity bias by adding a regressor that is a priori likely to
be highly correlated and co-determined with the dependent variable, adding this control variable

18
should clearly bias the results against finding any relationship between bank supervisory policies at
the country level and firms’ responses regarding bank corruption. Thus, we include it as a
robustness test.
The results in Table II are inconsistent with the supervisory power view. The supervisory
power view emphasizes that information costs, transaction costs, and other government policies
interfere with the ability of private agents to monitor banks. Thus, powerful supervisory agencies
can improve the governance of banks and thereby minimize the degree to which bank corruption
represents an obstacle to firms raising external finance. Contrary to the predictions of the
supervisory power view, however, Supervisory Power never enters negatively in any of the
regressions. This suggests that powerful supervisors, i.e., supervisors that have the power to oversee
and discipline banks do not lower the importance of corruption. Indeed, rather than entering
negatively, Supervisory Power enters positively and significantly in all of the regressions.
The Table II regression results support the political/regulatory capture view. The
political/regulatory capture view holds that politicians or banks will capture official supervisors and
thus increase the importance of corruption in obtaining bank credit and thereby intensify the
financing obstacles faced by firms. In fact, Supervisory Power enters significantly and positively in
all of the Table II regressions, which confirms the core predictions of the political/regulatory
capture view. These results are robust. Even when controlling for the degree to which policies
emphasize Private Monitoring, Supervisory Power enters positively and significantly. Furthermore,
when we include information on each firm’s view of the degree to which General Financing
Obstacles hinder its growth, the results still yield a significant, positive coefficient on Supervisory
Power.

19
The Table II results also support the private empowerment view. The corruption of bank
officials is less of a constraint on the operation and growth of firms in countries where the
supervisory agency forces banks to disclose information to the private sector. This is not an
argument for laissez-faire. Rather, the Private Monitoring variable is a conglomerate indicator of the
degree to which supervisory policies force banks to disclose accurate information to the public and
the degree to which deposit insurance reduces the incentives of private agents to monitor banks.
Thus, the results suggest that supervisory authorities that actively promote accurate information
dissemination and do not distort the incentives of depositors to exert corporate governance over
banks tend to promote the efficient corporate finance. In sum, the Table II results are strongly
supportive of the private empowerment view: corrupt bank officials are less of a barrier to raising
capital in countries where supervisory policies force banks to disclose accurate information and give
private creditors the appropriate incentives.
The effect of supervisory practices on firms’ financing obstacles is not only statistically
significant, but also economically relevant, and the econometric model fits the data well. We
compute the change in the probability that a firm rates the corruption of bank official as a major
obstacle (i.e., the probability that a firm rates bank corruption as a four) when changing bank
supervisory policies based on the coefficients in the last regression of Table II (column 4). For
example, the estimates imply that if a country moves from the 25th percentile of Supervisory Power
to the 75th percentile, the probability that a firm rates bank corruption as a major obstacle increases
from 6.8% to 9.2%. This 2.4 percentage point increase is quite large given that less than eight
percent of the firms in the sample report that bank corruption is a “major” obstacle. Even more
substantially, the probability that firm reports bank corruption as a major obstacle decreases from
11.1% to 4.9% if a country moves from the 25th percentile of Private Monitoring to the 75th

20
percentile. As another example, consider Chile and Canada. The Table II, column 4 regression
estimates indicate that if Chile had the Supervisory Power of Canada (-2.15) instead of its own level
(0.05), there would be a 2.5-percentage point decrease in the probability that Chilean firms rank
bank corruption as a major obstacle. Also, the coefficient estimates on Private Monitoring indicate
that if Chile had the Private Monitoring values of Canada (1.05 instead of 0.29), there would be
almost a three-percentage point drop in the probability that Chilean firms rank bank corruption as a
major obstacle. Taken together if Chile adopted the supervisory power and private monitoring
policies of Canada, there would be a 5.3 percentage point drop in the probability that Chilean firms
report bank corruption as a major constraint on their performance and growth.8 In terms of the fit,
the Pseudo R-squares range between five and nine percent, which is high for these types of crossfirm empirical studies (e.g., Beck et al., 2005)
B. Robustness to controlling for other country factors
Although the Table II results hold when controlling for an array of firm-specific and
country-specific traits, there may exist concerns that the supervisory variables are proxying for
other country-specific factors. Countries with different characteristics may choose different
supervisory practices. At the same time, these different country-specific traits may drive the
integrity of bank lending. Thus, we need to assess whether some third factor is driving both the
selection of the supervisory policies and the financing obstacles reported by firms.
The robustness checks in Table III indicate that data are (i) inconsistent with the supervisory
power view, (ii) consistent with the political/regulatory capture view, and (iii) supportive of the
private monitoring view. Specifically, when we control for the overall level economic development
by including real per capital GDP (column 1), Supervisory Power enters positively and significantly
8

Note, we include these examples for illustrative purposes only. These conceptual experiments do not explain how to
convince countries to change supervisory policies, and the reforms to Chilean policies contemplated in the experiments

21
at the five percent level while Private Monitoring enters negatively and significantly at the ten
percent level, which reflects the very strong, positive correlation between Private Monitoring and
GDP per capita (a correlation coefficient of 0.69). Moreover, even when controlling for (1) the
percentage of the banking industry owned by the government (State Ownership), (2) a dummy
variable of whether the country recently experienced a systemic banking crisis (Banking Crisis),
(3) the degree to which laws protect shareholder rights (Shareholder Rights), the data continue to
indicate (i) a strong positive relationship between Supervisory Power and Bank Corruption and (ii)
a strong, negative relationship between Private Monitoring and the degree to which corruption of
bank officials hinders firm performance (Table III, columns 2-4).9
Furthermore, we were concerned that an individual firm’s response to a question about the
degree to which bank corruption hinders that firm’s access to credit would simply reflect beliefs
about the overall level of corruption in the country and not specific information about the integrity
of bank-firm relationships. Thus, in column 5 of Table III, we control for the overall level of
corruption in the economy by using the ICRG indicator of corruption, where higher values indicate
less corruption. While (a) Corruption enters significantly and (b) the very strong correlation
between Corruption and Supervisory Power (correlation coefficient of 0.60) drives out the
significance of Supervisory Power, we continue to find that (1) Supervisory Power does not enter
with a negative coefficient, which contradicts the supervisory power view and (2) Private
Monitoring exerts a negative impact on corruption in lending.
To control for the general institutional environment, we include indicators of both legal
system and government effectiveness. In particular, Rule of Law measures the quality of contract

are not marginal changes.
9
We also controlled for (1) a measure of the level of legal protection of creditors from La Porta et al (1998) and (2) a
measure of regulatory impediments on banking operations from the Heritage Foundation. Controlling for these country
traits does not change the results.

22
enforcement and the court system. Government Effectiveness is based on survey information on the
competence and efficiency of the bureaucracy and public sector. Again, the data are inconsistent
with the supervisory power view: Supervisory Power does not enter negatively in either regression
6 or 7. As reported in Table I, however, there is a strong negative correlation between Supervisory
Power and both the Rule of Law (-0.45) and Government Effectiveness (-0.47). This drives out the
independent significance of Supervisory Power when these institutional variables are included in
regressions 6 and 7. Nonetheless, while Supervisory Power tends to be higher in countries with low
levels of the Rule of Law and low levels of Government Effectiveness, Supervisory Power does not
have a positive influence on the integrity of bank lending. Thus, Supervisory Power is not
beneficial; rather, it is associated with higher corruption in lending and lower levels of institutional
development. Furthermore, the results support the private monitoring view. Even though Private
Monitoring is highly, positively correlated with the Rule of Law (0.58) and Government
Effectiveness (0.59) (Table I.C), Private Monitoring enters the bank corruption regression
negatively and significantly when controlling for the Rule of Law at the 10 percent level (regression
6) and negatively and significantly at the five percent level when controlling for Government
Effectiveness (regression 7). Thus, even when controlling for firm specific traits, economic growth,
overall financial development, the power of the supervisory agency, and measures of institutional
development, the regression results indicate that Private Monitoring lowers the degree to which firm
report that corruption in lending hinders firm operations and growth.10

10

We also conducted robustness tests controlling for the overall political environment. Specifically, we included an
indicator of the degree to which citizens can select, monitor, and remove the executive and legislative officials (Voice
and Accountability). We also controlled for (i) the degree of checks and balances in the political system by including
the number of veto players in the political decision process and (ii) competitiveness of legislative elections. This paper’s
conclusions are robust to the inclusion of these political variables.

23
C. Nonlinear Effect: Interaction Terms
Some versions of the political/regulatory capture and private monitoring views suggest a
nonlinear relationship between corruption in lending and supervisory practices. Specifically, the
private monitoring view holds that when supervisory agencies force banks to disclose accurate
information to the public, then private investors can use this information to exert effective
governance over banks with positive implications for the integrity of bank lending. This view,
however, presumes that private investors have a well-functioning legal system at their disposal so
that they can use this information to improve bank operations. Furthermore, this view presumes that
the government is effective at forcing banks to disclose accurate information. That is, the
government not only has statutes requiring banks to disclose accurate information, it successfully
induces banks to disclose this information to the public. From this perspective, improvements in
information disclosure rules will only improve the quality of bank lending when the legal system
and government work effectively. We test this. Furthermore, the political/regulatory capture view
holds that powerful supervisors may use their positions to alter the flow of bank credit for private or
political reasons. International differences in legal and government institutions, however, may alter
the degree to which supervisory agencies abuse their powers. That is, effective institutions may
reduce the ability of supervisory agencies to promote private, rather than public, interests. From this
perspective, increases in supervisory power may only hurt the quality of bank lending when
institutions do not work very effectively. We examine whether the impact of both Supervisory
Power and Private Monitoring on corruption in lending depends on national institutions.
In Table III (regressions 8 and 9), we include interaction terms to test for possible nonlinear
relationships between supervisory policies, institutional development, and corruption in lending.
More specifically, in regression 8, we include two interaction terms: the interaction between the

24
Rule of Law and Supervisory Power and Private Monitoring. In regression 9, we include two
different interaction terms: the interaction between Government Effectiveness and Supervisory
Power and Private Monitoring. Since these indicators are principal components indicators, we add
five to Supervisory Power, Private Monitoring, Rule of Law, and Government Effectiveness in
regression 8 and 9 so that none of the observations is zero or negative, which makes it possible to
interpret the coefficient on the interaction term and assess the possible nonlinear impact of the
supervisory indicators on corruption in lending. These regressions include each of the supervisory
indicators, the institutional indicator, and two interaction terms. Since these are all highly correlated
country-specific traits and there are only 37 countries in our panel of firms, it may be difficult to
identify the individual effects. Nevertheless, it is valuable to assess whether supervisory practices
operate differently in different settings.
We find that (1) Private Monitoring increases the integrity of bank lending in countries with
sufficiently well developed legal and government institutions, but has no significant effect in
countries with poor institutions and (2) Supervisory Power never has a significant, positive effect on
the integrity of bank lending, even in countries with highly developed legal and government
systems. More specifically, consider regression (8) in Table III, which includes the Supervisory
Power, Private Monitoring, the Rule of Law and both the interaction between the Rule of Law and
Supervisory Power and the Rule of Law and Private Monitoring. Note that Private Monitoring
enters with a significant, positive coefficient while the interaction between Rule of Law and Private
Monitoring enters with a significant negative coefficient. While the significant positive coefficient
on Private Monitoring suggests that Private Monitoring increases corruption in lending, this is more
than balanced by the negative coefficient on the interaction term between Private Monitoring and
the Rule of Law. The derivative of regression 8 with respect to Private Monitoring equals 1.38 -

25
0.34*(Rule of Law). This is only positive for the three countries with the lowest values of the Rule
of Law (Kenya, Guatemala, and Nigeria) and for these countries we cannot reject the null
hypothesis that the effect of a marginal increase in Private Monitoring has no effect on corruption in
lending. For the next 12 countries with low levels of the Rule of Law, the marginal effect of Private
Monitoring is negative (i.e., it lowers corruption) but again we cannot reject the null hypothesis that
the effect is statistically insignificant. For the 22 countries with the highest levels of the Rule of
Law, we find that a marginal increase in Private Monitoring exerts a significant, negative impact on
corruption in lending. In regression 9, which focuses on Government Effectiveness, we find the
same result and similar cut-offs. Critically, a marginal increase in Private Monitoring never
significantly increases corruption in lending. Rather, Private Monitoring significantly reduces
corruption in lending in the 22 (out of the 37) countries in our sample with the highest levels of
Government Effectiveness and the Rule of Law.
In terms of Supervisory Power, the results confirm that Supervisory Power does not increase
the integrity of bank lending, even when accounting for cross-country differences in institutional
development. First, note that Supervisory Power and the interaction terms between Supervisory
Power and the Rule of Law never enter significantly. Second, while the individual coefficients are
insignificant, it is still possible to compute whether the joint effect of a marginal increase in
Supervisory Power exerts a significant impact on bank corruption at different levels of the Rule of
Law and Government Effectiveness. When we do this, we never find that an increase in Supervisory
Power exerts a significant negative impact on bank corruption. Thus, the results are clearly
inconsistent with the supervisory power view: The marginal impact of official supervisory power on
corruption in lending is either positive or insignificant.11

11

In terms of the Rule of Law and Government Effectiveness, note that the direct effect of these two institutional
indicators is positive in regressions 8 and 9, but one must also account for the indirect effects associated with the

26
The results using interaction terms stress three hypotheses. First, there is no evidence that
empowering official supervisors improves the integrity of bank lending. Second, for the bulk of the
sample, promoting the dissemination of transparent information about banks reduces corruption in
lending. Third, the positive impact of Private Monitoring on the integrity of lending depends on
legal institutions and government effectiveness: Private Monitoring exerts a more positive impact
on lending integrity in better functioning institutional settings.

D. Endogeneity, the distribution of responses, and outliers
We were concerned that since we do not have a balanced distribution of responses across the
four categories of answers regarding corruption of bank lending, that this might invalidate the
ordered probit estimator or that a few outliers in one of the categories with a small number of
responses could exert an undue influence on the results. As mentioned, 65 percent of firms
responded that corruption in bank lending is not a significant barrier to firm growth, while 35
percent indicated that bank corruption is an obstacle with some indicating it is a minor, moderate, or
major obstacle. Thus, we did two robustness checks. First, we omitted each country one-at-a-time to
see if firm responses from any single country drive the results. The results hold. Second, we
employed a probit estimator, where we simply designate the bank corruption variable as equal to
zero when firms respond that corruption is no obstacle and give the bank corruption variable a one
for all other responses. This produces a comparatively balanced sample of responses for the probit
estimation.

interaction terms. When doing this, two results are important from the parameters estimates in equations 8 and 9: (1) for
no country in the sample does an increase in the Rule of Law or Government Effectiveness imply a significant increase
in corruption in lending and (2) for 11 countries in the sample, an increase in the Rule of Law or Government
Effectiveness implies an significant reduction in corruption in lending after controlling for all of the other control
variables listed in Table III.

27
As shown in regressions 1-4 of Table IV, this paper’s results hold when using the probit
estimator. Again, note that in regression 4, we control for individual firm responses to the question,
“How problematic is financing for the operation and growth of your business?” By controlling for
each firm’s views on the degree to which general financial obstacles hinder firm growth, we
identify the specific link between supervisory practices and corruption in bank lending and abstract
from the possibility that particular firms are simply pessimistic about their financing and growth
opportunities. In regression 1-4, Supervisory Power never enters negatively; rather, Supervisory
Power enters with a positive and significant coefficient. These findings are inconsistent with the
supervisory power view and broadly supportive of the predictions from the political/regulatory
capture hypothesis. Moreover, Private Monitoring always enters negatively and significantly, which
indicates that supervisory policies that force the accurate disclosure of information by banks to the
public enhance lending integrity. We also find that the probit model performs relatively well,
correctly predicting at least 65% of all observations.
Next, we were concerned about possible endogeneity. This is less of a concern than in pure
cross-country analyses because we are examining the impact of policies on individual firms. It
seems unlikely that an individual firm’s views about corruption in lending will influence national
bank regulatory policies. Nonetheless, there may be feedback from the corporate sector to policy or
some third factor may be driving the results. Thus, regressions 5-8 of Table IV present instrumental
variable probit analyses.12 We base the selection of instrumental variables on the theory and
empirical work in Barth, Caprio, and Levine (2004, 2005), who study the determinants of
international differences in bank supervisory and regulatory policies. In particular, we include the
absolute value of a country’s latitude, ethnic fractionalization, and the length of time it has been

12

Note, instrumental variable estimators have not been developed, to our knowledge, for the ordered probit
specifications used in earlier tables.

28
independent. We include latitude because a growing body of work suggests that the geographical
endowments encountered by Europeans as they colonized much of the world shaped the
construction of institutions and policies that endured after countries gained their independence.13 In
particular, Europeans frequently did not settle in large numbers in tropical climates, so they tended
to form extractive regimes where small elites developed institutions and policies that facilitated
their ability to extract natural resources or grow cash crops. These extractive regimes tended to
create powerful administrative structures that protected the elite. In contrast, more temperate
climates with greater numbers of European settlers tended to create more egalitarian policies. We
include ethnic fractionalization because research indicates that more ethnically diverse economies
tend to choose policies that allow those in power to expropriate resources from others (Easterly and
Levine, 1997). Thus, ethnically diverse countries tend to choose policies associated with slower
economic growth. Finally, we include the percentage of years that the country has been independent
since 1776 because countries that gained their independence in the 18th or 19th centuries had more
opportunity to modify colonial institutions and policies and adopt policies more conducive to broadbased economic growth (Easterly and Levine, 1997). These instruments explain cross-country
differences in Private Monitoring and Supervisory Power, i.e., we reject the null hypothesis at the
five percent level that the instruments do not explain the supervisory policy indicators. We do not
claim that these instruments are the only, or necessarily the best, exogenous explanations of bank
supervisory practices. Rather, we hold that the instruments are reasonably exogenous, past
theoretical and empirical work suggests that these instruments will explain policies today, and the
first-stage results confirm that these are worthwhile instruments.

13

See Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson (2001), Engerman and Sokoloff (1997), Beck, Demirguc-Kunt, and Levine
(2003), Easterly and Levine (2003), and the review by Levine (2005).

29
The instrumental variable regression results suggest that (1) Supervisory Power exerts a
positive – not a negative – effect on corruption in lending and (2) Private Monitoring lowers the
degree to which firms respond that corruption in bank lending hinders firm operations. As shown in
regressions 5 – 8 of Table IV, Supervisory Power enters positively and significantly at the one
percent level in all of these regressions which control for potential simultaneity bias. Furthermore,
Private Monitoring enters negatively and significantly at the one percent level in all of the
specifications. Thus, even when using instrumental variables and while controlling for firm specific
traits and country characteristics, such as inflation, economic growth, financial development, the
level of economic development, the extent of national corruption, the results are consistent with the
private monitoring view, inconsistent with the supervisory power view, and generally supportive of
the political/regulatory capture view of bank supervision.

E. Different samples and estimation procedures
This sub-section presents robustness checks using different sub-samples and estimators.
First, we test whether the results are robust to only including the sub-sample of firms that
actually receive bank financing. The full sample might contain firms that have not applied for bank
credit, either because they feel discouraged or because they do not need it. The results hold with this
sub-sample (Table V, column 1).
Second, we also tested whether the results are robust to only including the sub-sample of
firms that do not receive bank financing to see if they have a different perception of the importance
of the corruption of bank officials in raising capital. Again, we obtain very similar results with this
sub-sample. (Table V, column 2).

30
Third, the number of firms varies substantially across countries. Though we use an ordered
probit estimator with robust standard errors and allow for clustering within countries, we assess the
robustness of the results using a weighted ordered probit. The weights are the inverse of the number
of firms.14 The results are robust to this estimation procedure (Table V, column 3).

5. Conclusion
This paper (1) documents the relationship between bank supervision and the degree to which
bank corruption is an obstacle to firms raising external finance and (2) provides evidence on
different theories of bank supervision. The results support three conclusions about which bank
supervisory practices work best to ease the external financing obstacles faced by firms.
First, the data are strongly inconsistent with the view that powerful supervisory agencies
with the authority to directly monitor and discipline banks facilitate efficient corporate finance. The
results indicate that countries with stronger supervisory agencies – countries where supervisory
agencies can intervene banks, replace managers, force provisioning, stop dividends, etc. – tend to
have firms that face greater obstacles to obtaining bank loans because of corrupt bank officials than
firms in countries where the supervisory agency is less powerful. The results are inconsistent with
theories that hold that powerful official supervisory agencies promote social welfare by overcoming
information and enforcement costs and efficiently monitoring banks.
Second, the results provide some support for the political/regulatory capture view, which
emphasizes that powerful supervisory agencies are prone to capture and manipulation by politicians,
regulators, or both. Specifically, we find that powerful supervisory agencies tend to lower the

14

Note, it is not appropriate to run a pure cross-country regression while averaging across the financing obstacle
variables for each country because (i) the composition of firms varies substantially across countries and (ii) the
polychotomous nature of the financing obstacles data suggest the use of an ordered probit, while controlling for
individual firm traits.

31
integrity of bank lending. This conclusion needs to be tempered, however. Powerful supervision is
so strongly correlated with poor national institutions (government ineffectiveness, the absence of
the rule of law, high national corruption) that it is difficult to identify an independent relationship
between supervisory power and bank corruption when controlling for these institutional traits.
Third, the analyses are consistent with the private monitoring view. In particular, bank
supervisory strategies that focus on forcing accurate information disclosure and not distorting the
incentives of private creditors to monitor banks facilitate efficient corporate finance. These findings
are consistent with approaches that simultaneously recognize that private agents face substantive
information and enforcement costs when monitoring banks, while also recognizing that politicians
and regulators will act in their own interests and not necessarily act to reduce market frictions. In
extensions, we find that private monitoring exerts a particularly beneficial effect on the integrity of
bank lending in countries with sound legal and bureaucratic institutions. These results on private
monitoring support the Basel Committee’s recent emphasis on the importance of private sector
monitoring of banks (Basel II’s third pillar).
At a very general level, these results emphasize the importance of both market and political
failures. Bank supervision clearly matters. Bank supervisory policies that ameliorate market failures
by forcing the accurate disclosure of information reduce the obstacles that firms face in raising
external finance. This is not a laissez faire finding. This result suggests that active bank supervision
can help ease information costs and improve the integrity of bank lending. Just as clearly, however,
the results highlight the importance of theories that emphasize political and regulatory capture and
suggest that powerful supervisory agencies too frequently do not act in the best interests of society.

32
References:
Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James A. Robinson. 2001. “The Colonial Origins of
Comparative Development: An Empirical Investigation,” American Economic Review, 91,
1369-401.
Atkinson, A.B. and J.E. Stiglitz. 1980. Lectures on Public Economics, London: McGraw-Hill.
Barth, J. R., Caprio, G. Jr., and R. Levine. 2004. “Bank Supervision and Regulation: What Works
Best?” Journal of Financial Intermediation, 13, 205-48.
Barth, J.R. Caprio, G. Jr. and R. Levine. 2005. Rethinking Bank Regulation: Till Angels Govern.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, forthcoming.
Beck, Thorsten, Asli Demirgüç-Kunt, and Ross Levine. 2003a. “Law, Endowments, and Finance.”
Journal of Financial Economics, 70, 137-81.
Beck, T. and R. Levine. 2005. “Legal Institutions and Financial Development.” in Handbook of
New Institutional Economics. Claude Menard and Mary Shirley, Eds., The Netherlands:
Springer.
Beck, T., Demirguc-Kunt, A., and V. Maksimovic. 2005. “Financial and Legal Constraints to Firm
Growth: Does Size Matter,” Journal of Finance, forthcoming.
Becker, G. 1983. “A Theory of Competition among Pressure Groups for Political Influence,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 98, 371-400.
Becker, G. 1968. “Crime and Punishment: An Economic Approach,” Journal of Political Economy
76, 169-217.
Becker, G. and G. Stigler. 1974. “Law Enforcement, Malfeasance, and the Compensation of
Enforcers,” Journal of Legal Studies 3, 1-18.
Boyd, J.H., Levine, R., and B.D. Smith. 2001. “The Impact of Inflation on Financial Sector
Performance,” Journal of Monetary Economics 47, 221-48.
Buchanan, J.M. and G. Tullock. 1962. The Calculus of Consent. University of Michigan Press.
Caprio, G. and D. Klingebiel, 1999, “Episodes of Systematic and Borderline Financial Distress”,
World Bank.
Coase, R.H. 1960. “The Problem of Social Cost,” Journal of Law and Economics 3, 1-44.
Coase, R.H. 1988. The Firm, the Market, and the Law, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

33
Demirgüç-Kunt, A. and E. Detragiache. 2002. “Does Deposit Insurance Increase Banking System
Stability? An Empirical Investigation.” Journal of Monetary Economics 49(7), 1373-1406.
Demirgüç-Kunt, A. and V. Maksimovic. 1998. “Law, Finance, and Firm Growth,” Journal of
Finance 53, 2107-2137.
Easterly, William and Ross Levine. 1997. “Africa’s Growth Tragedy: Policies and Ethnic
Divisions.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112, 1203-1250.
Easterly, William and Ross Levine. 2003. “Tropics, Germs, and Crops.” Journal of Monetary
Economics, 50, 3-39.
Engerman, Stanley L., and Kenneth L. Sokoloff. 1997. “Factor Endowments, Institutions, and
Differential Paths of Growth among New World Economies,” in How Latin America Fell
Behind. Stephen Haber, ed. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, pp. 260-304.
Fazzari, S. M., R. G. Hubbard, and B. C. Petersen. 1988, Financing constraints and corporate
investment, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 19, 141-195.
Glaeser, E., Johnson, S. and A. Shleifer. 2001. “Coase versus the Coasians,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 116, 853-899.
Grossman, S. and O. Hart. 1980. “Disclosure Laws and Takeover Bids,” Journal of Finance 35,
323-334.
Haber, S.H., A. Razo, and N. Maurer. 2003. The Politics of Property Rights: Political Instability,
Credible Commitments, and Economic Growth in Mexico (Cambridge University Press).
Hamilton, A., Lay, J. and J. Madison. 1788. Federalist Papers (In C. Rossiter, Ed., New York: New
American Library, 1961).
Hay, J.R. and A. Shleifer. 1998. “Private Enforcement of Public Laws: A Theory of Legal Reform,”
American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 88, 398-403.
Hellman, J., Jones, G., Kaufmann, D. and M. Schankerman. 2000, “Measuring Governance and
State Capture: The Role of Bureaucrats and Firms in Shaping the Business Environment,”
European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, WP #51.
Kaplan, S. N. and L. Zingales. 1997. “Do Investment-Cash Flow Sensitivities Provide Useful
Measures of Financing Constraints?” Quarterly Journal of Economics 112.
Kaufmann, D., Kraay, A., and P. Zoido-Lobatón. 1999. Aggregating Governance Indicators. World
Bank Research Working Paper No. 2195.
King, R. G. and R. Levine. 1993. “Finance and Growth: Schumpeter Might Be Right,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 108, 717-38.

34
La Porta, R., Lopez-de-Silanes, F., and A. Shleifer. 2005. “What Works in Securities Laws?”
Harvard University, Journal of Finance, forthcoming.
La Porta, R., Lopez-de-Silanes, F., Shleifer, A., and R.W. Vishny, 1998. “Law and Finance”,
Journal of Political Economy 106, 1113-1155
Levine, R. 2005. “Law, Endowments, and Property Rights,” Journal of Economic Perspectives,
forthcoming.
Levine, R. and S. Zervos. 1998. "Stock Markets, Banks, and Economic Growth," American
Economic Review 88, 537-558.
Levine, R., Loayza, N., and T. Beck. 2000. “Financial Intermediation and Growth: Causality and
Causes”, Journal of Monetary Economics 46, 31-77.
Morck, R., Wolfenzon, D., and B. Yeung. 2005. “Corporate Governance, Economic Entrenchment,
and Growth,” Journal of Economic Literature, forthcoming.
North, D. 1990. Institutions, Institutional Change, and Economic Performance. New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Olson, M. 1965. The Logic of Collective Action. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Polinsky, M. and S. Shavell. 2000. “The Economic Theory of Public Enforcement of Law,” Journal
of Economic Literature 38, 45-76.
Rajan, R. and L. Zingales. 1998. “Financial Dependence and Growth,” American Economic Review
88, 559-587.
Shleifer, A. and R.W. Vishny. 1997. “A Survey of Corporate Governance,” Journal of Finance 52,
737-783.
Shleifer, A. and R.W. Vishny. 1998. The Grabbing Hand: Government Pathologies and Their
Cures. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Spiller, P. and J. Ferejohn. 1992. “The Economics and Politics of Administrative Law and
Procedures: An Introduction,” Journal of Law, Economics and Organization 8, 1-7.
Stigler, G. 1971. “The Theory of Economic Regulation,” Bell Journal of Economics and
Management Science 2, 3-21.
Stigler, G. 1975. The Citizen and the State: Essays on Regulation, University of Chicago Press.
Wurgler, J. 2000. “Financial Markets and the Allocation of Capital,” Journal of Financial
Economics 58, 187-214.

35
Table I
Summary Statistics and Correlations
Summary statistics are presented in Panel A and correlations in Panels B and C, respectively. Bank Corruption is the response to the question “How
problematic is corruption of bank officials for the operation and growth of your business?” General Financing Obstacle is the response to the question
“How problematic is financing for the operation and growth of your business?” Answers vary between 1 (no obstacle), 2 (minor obstacle), 3
(moderate obstacle), and 4 (major obstacle). Government and Foreign are dummy variables that take the value 1 if the firm has government or foreign
ownership and zero if not. Exporter is a dummy variable that indicates if the firm is an exporting firm. Manufacturing and Services are industry
dummies. Sales equals the logarithm of sales in US$. Number of Competitors is the logarithm of the number of competitors the firm has. Growth is
the growth rate of GDP. Inflation is the log difference of the consumer price index. Priv is claims on the private sector by deposit money banks as
share of GDP. Supervisory Power is a principal components indicator of the power of supervisory agency to discipline and monitor banks. Private
Monitoring is a principal components indicator of the degree to which regulations force banks to disclose accurate, transparent information to the
public and whether regulations facilitate and encourage private sector monitoring of banks. GDP per Capita is in PPP adjusted dollars and averaged
over 1995-99. Corruption is a survey indicator of the absence of corruption in a country. Rule of Law and Government Effectiveness are principal
component indicators of survey indicators of the legal system effectiveness and bureaucratic efficiency in a country, respectively. Shareholder Rights
measures the rights of minority shareholders vis-à-vis block holders and management. State Ownership indicates the share of banks owned by the
government. Banking Crisis indicates whether a country suffered a banking crisis during the 1990s. Detailed definitions and the sources are in the
data appendix. *,**,*** indicate significance levels of 10, 5, and 1 percent, respectively.

Panel A: Summary Statistics:

Bank Corruption

Mean

Median

St.Dev.

Maximum

1.58

1.00

0.93

4.00

Minimum Observations
1.00

2,510

General Financing Obstacle

2.58

3.00

1.13

4.00

1.00

2,510

Government

0.06

0.00

0.24

1.00

0.00

2,510

Foreign

0.25

0.00

0.44

1.00

0.00

2,510

Exporter

0.43

0.00

0.50

1.00

0.00

2,510

15.16

16.01

5.12

25.33

-2.12

2,510

Number of Competitors

0.72

0.69

0.30

2.20

0.00

2,510

Manufacturing

0.39

0.00

0.49

1.00

0.00

2,510

Services

0.46

0.00

0.50

1.00

0.00

2,510

Inflation

0.10

0.06

0.12

0.58

0.00

37

Growth

0.02

0.01

0.02

0.04

-0.02

37

Priv

0.45

0.38

0.32

1.16

0.04

37

Supervisory Power

-0.11

0.05

1.09

1.14

-3.05

37

Private Monitoring

0.20

0.29

0.77

1.46

-1.56

37

Sales

GDP per Capita

9,226

6,035

8,246

30,056

554

37

Corruption

3.30

3.00

1.18

1.32

6.00

37

Rule of Law

0.24

0.13

0.89

-1.22

1.94

37

Government Effectiveness

0.30

0.04

0.88

-1.32

2.08

37

Shareholder Rights

3.15

3

1.38

5

1

26

State Ownership

0.19

0.12

0.21

0.8

0

34

Banking Crisis

0.35

0

0.49

1

0

31

36
Panel B: Correlations between firm-level variables

General Financing Obstacle
Government
Foreign
Exporter
Sales
Number of Competitors
Manufacturing
Services

Bank
Corruption
0.28***
-0.02
-0.10***
-0.07***
-0.16**
0.10***
-0.00
0.01

General
Financing
Obstacle

Government

Foreign

Exporter

Sales

-0.04*
-0.14***
-0.01
-0.16***
0.07***
0.02
-0.08***

1
-0.02
0.04**
-0.08***
-0.00
0.02
-0.02

1
0.22***
0.13***
-0.03
0.07***
-0.05***

1
0.01
0.04**
0.31***
-0.30***

1
-0.27*** 1
-0.10**
0.01
0.16*** -0.11***

Number of
Competitors

Manufacturing

1
-0.74***

Panel C: Correlations between country-level variables

Inflation
Growth
Supervisory Power
Private Monitoring
GDP per Capita
Priv
Corruption
Shareholder Rights
State Ownership
Banking Crisis
Rule of Law
Government
Effectiveness

Bank
Corruption
0.28*
-0.31*
0.36**
-0.36**
-0.46**
-0.10
-0.60***
-0.47**
0.35**
0.32*
-0.41**

Inflation
1
-0.36**
0.22
-0.33**
-0.44***
-0.54***
-0.42**
-0.42**
0.23
0.30
-0.44***

1
-0.23
-0.43***
-0.23
-0.44***
-0.21
0.13
0.06
-0.45***

-0.43***

-0.53*** 0.50*** -0.47***

Supervisory Private
Monitoring
Growth Power

GDP per
Capita Priv

Shareholder State
Ownership
Corruption Rights

1
-0.25
0.16
0.31*
0.07
0.39***
0.40**
0.11
-0.33*
0.51***

1
0.69***
0.48***
0.46***
0.28
-0.29*
-0.05
0.58***

1
0.66***
0.66***
0.16
-0.34**
-0.16
0.82***

1
0.36*
-0.41**
-0.32*
0.70***

0.59***

0.87*** 0.70*** 0.80***

1
0.47***
0.21
-0.23
-0.14
0.65***

Banking
Crisis

Rule of
Law

1
-0.27
-0.43**
0.35*

1
0.21
-0.17

1
-0.20

1

0.38*

-0.36**

-0.32*

0.92***

37

Table II
Supervision and Bank Corruption
The underlying model is: Bank Corruption = β1 Government + β2 Foreign + β3 Exporter + β4Manufacturing + β5 Services + β6 Sales +β7 Number
of Competitors +β8 Inflation + β9 Growth + β10 Priv + +β11 Supervision + ε. Bank Corruption is the response to the question “Is the corruption of
bank officials an obstacle for the operation and growth of your business?” General Financing Obstacle is the response to the question “How
problematic is financing for the operation and growth of your business?” Answers vary between 1 (no obstacle), 2 (minor obstacle), 3 (moderate
obstacle), and 4 (major obstacle). Government and Foreign are dummy variables that take the value 1 if the firm has government or foreign
ownership and zero if not. Exporter is a dummy variable that indicates if the firm is an exporting firm. Manufacturing and Services are industry
dummies. Sales is the logarithm of sales in US$. Number of Competitors is the logarithm of the number of competitors the firm has. Growth is
the growth rate of GDP. Inflation is the log difference of the consumer price index. Priv is claims on the private sector by deposit money banks as
share of GDP. Supervisory Power is a principal components indicator of the power of supervisory agency to discipline and monitor banks. Private
Monitoring is a principal components indicator of the degree to which regulations force banks to disclose accurate, transparent information to the
public and whether regulations facilitate and encourage private sector monitoring of banks. The regressions are run with ordered probit. Detailed
variable definitions and sources are given in the appendix. P-values are reported in parentheses. *,**,*** indicate significance levels of 10, 5, and
1 percent, respectively.

Government
Foreign
Exporter
Manufacturing
Services
Sales
Number of Competitors
Inflation
Growth
Priv
Supervisory Power

1
-0.148
(0.339)
-0.178
(0.001)***
-0.088
(0.180)
0.093
(0.256)
0.088
(0.321)
-0.023
(0.107)
0.183
(0.284)
1.023
(0.128)
0.035
(0.784)
-6.170
(0.375)
0.165
(0.021)**

Private Monitoring

2
-0.159
(0.301)
-0.187
(0.001)***
-0.159
(0.027)**
0.090
(0.265)
0.146
(0.104)
-0.020
(0.114)
0.099
(0.513)
1.477
(0.046)**
0.183
(0.233)
-7.628
(0.208)
-0.386
(0.002)***

3
-0.150
(0.329)
-0.178
(0.001)***
-0.123
(0.075)*
0.042
(0.602)
0.098
(0.269)
-0.021
(0.076)*
0.097
(0.503)
1.520
(0.051)*
0.222
(0.171)
-4.999
(0.401)
0.150
(0.006)***
-0.368
(0.004)***

4
-0.093
(0.510)
-0.087
(0.144)
-0.126
(0.100)*
0.080
(0.288)
0.166
(0.035)**
-0.014
(0.249)
0.116
(0.381)
1.670
(0.021)**
0.276
(0.068)*
-2.896
(0.613)
0.155
(0.006)***
-0.347
(0.004)***
0.298
(0.000)***

2510
0.05

2510
0.06

2510
0.09

General Financing Obstacle
Observations
Pseudo R square

2510
0.05

38
Table III
Supervision and Bank Corruption – Controlling for Other Country Characteristics

The underlying model is Bank Corruption = β1 Government + β2 Foreign + β3 Exporter + β4 Manufacturing + β5 Services + β6 Sales +β7 Number of
Competitors +β8 Inflation + β9 Growth + β10 Priv + β11X +β12 Supervision + ε. Bank Corruption is the response to the question “Is the corruption of
bank officials an obstacle for the operation and growth of your business?” Answers vary between 1 (no obstacle), 2 (minor obstacle), 3 (moderate
obstacle), and 4 (major obstacle). Government and Foreign are dummy variables that take the value 1 if the firm has government or foreign ownership
and zero if not. Exporter is a dummy variable that indicates if the firm is an exporting firm. Manufacturing and Services are industry dummies. Sales
is the logarithm of sales in US$. Number of Competitors is the logarithm of the number of competitors the firm has. Growth is the growth rate of
GDP. Inflation is the log difference of the consumer price index. Priv is claims on the private sector by deposit money banks as share of GDP.
Supervisory Power is a principal components indicator of the power of supervisory agency to discipline and monitor banks. Private Monitoring is a
principal components indicator of the degree to which regulations force banks to disclose accurate, transparent information to the public and whether
regulations facilitate and encourage private sector monitoring of banks. X is one of seven variables; GDP per Capita is in PPP adjusted dollars and
averaged over 1995-99. Shareholder Rights measures the rights of minority shareholders vis-à-vis block holders and management. State Ownership
indicates the share of banks owned by the government. Banking Crisis indicates whether a country suffered a banking crisis during the 1990s.
Corruption is a survey indicator of the absence of corruption in a country. Rule of Law and Government Effectiveness are principal component
indicators of survey indicators in the respective category, measuring legal system effectiveness and bureaucratic efficiency, respectively. In columns 8
ands 9 we interact (5+Private Monitoring) and (5+Supervisory Power) with (5+Rule of Law) and (5+Government Effectiveness), respectively. The
regression is run with ordered probit. Detailed variable definitions and sources are given in the appendix. P-values are reported in parentheses.
*,**,*** indicate significance levels of 10, 5, and 1 percent, respectively.
Inflation
Growth
Priv
Supervisory Power
Private Monitoring
GDP per Capita

1
1.703
(0.029)**
-3.160
(0.631)
0.270
(0.139)
0.132
(0.019)**
-0.297
(0.057)*
-0.113
(0.403)

State Ownership

2
3
4
1.440
1.459
0.572
(0.093)* (0.102)
(0.526)
-7.114
-7.579
-2.754
(0.213)
(0.264)
(0.586)
0.264
0.291
0.174
(0.124)
(0.126)
(0.408)
0.143
0.187
0.170
(0.039)** (0.001)*** (0.004)***
-0.422
-0.366
-0.370
(0.003)*** (0.015)** (0.017)**

5
1.335
(0.035)**
1.341
(0.810)
0.295
(0.044)**
0.093
(0.132)
-0.292
(0.005)***

6
1.763
(0.010)***
1.688
(0.808)
0.334
(0.044)**
0.107
(0.114)
-0.275
(0.056)*

7
1.676
(0.031)**
0.752
(0.923)
0.337
(0.091)*
0.105
(0.106)
-0.299
(0.022)**

9
1.376
(0.055)*
-7.413
(0.326)
0.247
(0.157)
-0.374
(0.404)
2.284
(0.010)***

0.407
(0.260)

Banking Crisis

0.078
(0.671)

Shareholder Rights

-0.164
(0.003)***

Corruption

-0.277
(0.001)***

Rule of Law

-0.257
(0.089)*

Government Effectiveness

1.428
(0.046)**
-0.251
(0.166)

Rule of Law* Supervisory Power

2.426
(0.017)**
0.040
(0.600)
-0.339
(0.007)***

Rule of Law* Private Monitoring
Government Effectiveness*
Supervisory Power
Government Effectiveness*
Private Monitoring
Observations
Pseudo R square

8
1.753
(0.013)**
-0.377
(0.962)
0.339
(0.037)**
-0.095
(0.839)
1.382
(0.033)**

2510
0.06

2340
0.07

2010
0.08

1985
0.09

2510
0.08

2510
0.07

2510
0.06

2510
0.07

0.096
(0.187)
-0.528
(0.002)***
2510
0.08

39
Table IV
Supervision and Bank Corruption – Controlling for Sampling and Endogeneity Biases
The underlying model is: Bank Corruption Dummy = β1 Government + β2 Foreign + β3 Exporter + β4 Manufacturing + β5 Services + β6 Sales +β7
Number of Competitors +β8 Inflation + β9 Growth + β10 Priv + β11X +β12 Supervision + ε. Bank Corruption Dummy is the response to the question “Is
the corruption of bank officials an obstacle for the operation and growth of your business?”, where “no obstacle” is equal to zero and “minor”,
“moderate” and “major” is equal to one. Government and Foreign are dummy variables that take the value 1 if the firm has government or foreign
ownership and zero if not. Exporter is a dummy variable that indicates if the firm is an exporting firm. Manufacturing and Services are industry
dummies. Sales is the logarithm of sales in US$. Number of Competitors is the logarithm of the number of competitors the firm has. Growth is the
growth rate of GDP. Inflation is the log difference of the consumer price index. Priv is claims on the private sector by deposit money banks as share of
GDP. Supervisory Power is a principal components indicator of the power of supervisory agency to discipline and monitor banks. Private Monitoring
is a principal components indicator of the degree to which regulations force banks to disclose accurate, transparent information to the public and
whether regulations facilitate and encourage private sector monitoring of banks. GDP per Capita is in PPP adjusted dollars and averaged over 199599. Corruption is a survey indicator of absence of corruption in a country. General Financing Obstacle is the response to the question “How
problematic is financing for the operation and growth of your business?” Detailed variable definitions and sources are given in the appendix.
Regressions in columns (1) – (4) are run with probit with clustered errors, while regressions in columns (5) - (8) are run with IV probit, where the first
stage regressions use ethnic fractionalization, percentage of years in independence since 1776 and a country’s absolute value of latitude as
instrumental variables. P-values are reported in parentheses. *,**,*** indicate significance levels of 10, 5, and 1 percent, respectively. % correctly
defined is the percentage of observations, for which the predicted value is greater (lower) than 65% if Bank corruption dummy is equal to one (zero).
1
Probit
Inflation
Growth
Priv
Supervisory Power
Private Monitoring

1.612
(0.036)**
-2.588
(0.689)
0.221
(0.170)
0.169
(0.004)***
-0.390
(0.002)***

GDP per Capita

2
Probit
1.726
(0.027)**
-1.434
(0.838)
0.251
(0.167)
0.157
(0.006)***
-0.345
(0.027)**
-0.071
(0.608)

Corruption

3
Probit
1.456
(0.017)**
3.764
(0.539)
0.300
(0.034)**
0.111
(0.096)*
-0.313
(0.001)***

1.783
(0.012)**
-0.213
(0.974)
0.273
(0.066)*
0.171
(0.005)***
-0.374
(0.001)***

5
IV Probit

6
IV Probit

7
IV Probit

8
IV Probit

1.919
(0.000)***
0.532
(0.829)
0.385
(0.000)***
0.322
(0.000)***
-0.596
(0.000)***

1.436
(0.000)***
-9.034
(0.005)***
0.270
(0.000)***
0.306
(0.000)***
-1.277
(0.000)***
0.552
(0.001)***

1.536
(0.000)***
4.769
(0.052)*
0.347
(0.000)***
0.255
(0.002)***
-0.336
(0.000)***

2.083
(0.000)***
1.846
(0.460)
0.415
(0.000)***
0.257
(0.000)***
-0.590
(0.000)***

-0.278
(0.002)***

General Financing Obstacle
Observations
Pseudo R square
% correctly predicted

4
Probit

-0.235
(0.000)***
0.289
(0.000)***

2510
0.09
66.81

2510
0.09
66.53

2510
0.11
68.13

2510
0.13
68.73

0.280
(0.000)***
2510

2510

2510

2510

66.06

65.34

64.90

66.06

40
Table V
Supervision and Bank Corruption – Robustness Tests
The underlying model is: Bank Corruption = β1 Government + β2 Foreign + β3 Exporter + β4 Manufacturing + β5 Services + β6 Sales +β7 Number of
Competitors +β8 Inflation + β9 Growth + β10 Priv + +β11 Supervision + ε. Bank Corruption is the response to the question “Is the corruption of bank
officials an obstacle for the operation and growth of your business?” Answers vary between 1 (no obstacle), 2 (minor obstacle), 3 (moderate
obstacle), and 4 (major obstacle). Government and Foreign are dummy variables that take the value 1 if the firm has government or foreign ownership
and zero if not. Exporter is a dummy variable that indicates if the firm is an exporting firm. Manufacturing and Services are industry dummies. Sales
is the logarithm of sales in US$. Number of Competitors is the logarithm of the number of competitors the firm has. Growth is the growth rate of
GDP. Inflation is the log difference of the consumer price index. Priv is claims on the private sector by deposit money banks as share of GDP.
Supervisory Power is a principal components indicator of the power of supervisory agency to discipline and monitor banks. Private Monitoring is a
principal components indicator of the degree to which regulations force banks to disclose accurate, transparent information to the public and whether
regulations facilitate and encourage private sector monitoring of banks. The regression in column 1 is for a sample of firms that received bank finance,
while the regression in column 2 is for a sample that excludes firms that received bank finance. The regression in column 3 is weighted with the
inverse of the number of firms in the country. Detailed variable definitions and sources are given in the appendix. P-values are reported in
parentheses. *,**,*** indicate significance levels of 10, 5, and 1 percent, respectively.

1

2
Firms without
Firms with Access Access to Bank
to Bank Finance
Finance
Inflation
Growth
Priv
Supervisory Power
Private Monitoring
Observations
Pseudo R square

3
Weighted
regression

1.990
(0.012)**
-2.901
(0.704)
0.177
(0.312)
0.141
(0.031)**
-0.321
(0.022)**

1.155
(0.198)
-5.958
(0.380)
0.240
(0.170)
0.159
(0.009)***
-0.401
(0.006)***

1.144
(0.193)
-1.167
(0.863)
0.166
(0.258)
0.176
(0.005)***
-0.302
(0.011)**

1074
0.06

1436
0.06

2510
0.05

41
Appendix Table I
Supervisory Practices and Country Characteristics
Supervisory Power is a principal components indicator of the power of supervisory agency to discipline and monitor banks. Private Monitoring is a principal
components indicator of the degree to which regulations force banks to disclose accurate, transparent information to the public and whether regulations facilitate
and encourage private sector monitoring of banks. GDP per Capita is in PPP adjusted dollars and averaged over 1995-99. Rule of Law and Government
Effectiveness are principal component indicators of survey indicators of the legal system effectiveness and bureaucratic efficiency in a country, respectively.
Detailed variable definitions and sources are given in the appendix.

Argentina
Bolivia
Botswana
Brazil
Canada
Chile
Egypt
El Salvador
France
Germany
Ghana
Guatemala
Honduras
India
Indonesia
Italy
Kenya
Malawi
Malaysia
Mexico
Namibia
Nigeria
Panama
Peru
Philippines
Portugal
Singapore
South Africa
Spain
Sweden
Thailand
Trinidad & Tobago
Turkey
United Kingdom
United States
Venezuela
Zambia

Supervisory
Power
-0.30
0.22
0.82
1.00
-2.15
0.05
0.38
0.09
-1.16
-0.91
-0.09
-0.28
0.82
-0.36
0.74
-1.66
1.00
-0.10
-0.25
-0.17
-0.54
0.61
1.14
0.09
0.95
1.00
-3.05
-2.95
-0.32
-1.55
0.72
-0.91
-0.30
0.59
1.14
1.14
0.51

Private
Monitoring
1.13
0.06
0.97
0.97
1.05
0.29
-0.13
0.29
0.69
0.97
-1.56
-1.14
-0.42
-0.42
0.25
1.27
-1.00
-1.25
0.55
-0.43
-0.13
0.39
-0.13
0.29
-0.63
0.97
0.35
0.77
0.97
0.69
-0.42
-0.43
0.69
1.46
0.97
-0.43
-0.13

GDP per
Capita
11,544
2,197
6,035
6,735
23,907
8,188
3,035
4,205
22,167
23,193
1,732
3,580
2,421
2,044
2,912
22,274
995
554
7,743
7,589
5,726
805
5382
4,425
3,612
14,559
19,456
8,902
1,7052
21,220
6,096
7,306
5,614
21,654
30,056
5,690
741

Government
Rule of Law Effectiveness
0.32
0.26
-0.35
-0.22
0.5
0.22
-0.22
-0.22
1.55
1.72
1.09
1.17
0.13
-0.14
-0.66
-0.26
1.08
1.28
1.48
1.41
-0.01
-0.29
-1.11
-0.23
-0.9
-0.41
0.16
-0.26
-0.92
-0.53
0.86
0.77
-1.22
-0.9
-0.41
-0.62
0.83
0.71
-0.47
0.18
0.95
0.04
-1.1
-1.32
-0.39
-0.28
-0.52
0.17
-0.08
0.13
1.08
1.15
1.94
2.08
-0.35
-0.01
1.03
1.6
1.62
1.57
0.41
0.01
0.51
0.52
-0.01
-0.41
1.69
1.97
1.25
1.37
-0.66
-0.85
-0.4
-0.4

42

Appendix : Variables and Sources
Variable

Definition

Original source

Bank Corruption

Is the corruption of bank officials no obstacle (1), a minor obstacle
(2), a moderate obstacle (3) or a major obstacle (4)?

World Business Environment
Survey (WBES)

Banking Crisis

Dummy variable that takes on the value one if the country suffered a Caprio and Klingebiel (1999)
systemic banking crisis during the 1990s

Banking Freedom

Indicator of openness of banking and financial system: specifically, Heritage Foundation
whether the foreign banks and financial services firms are able to
operate freely, how difficult it is to open domestic banks and other
financial services firms, how heavily regulated the financial system
is, the presence of state-owned banks, whether the government
influences allocation of credit, and whether banks are free to provide
customers with insurance and invest in securities (and vice-versa).
The index ranges in value from 1 (very low – banks are primitive) to
5 (very high – few restrictions). Averaged over 1995-97.
Survey indicator of the absence of corruption, with higher values
ICRG
indicating less corruption.

Corruption

Ethnic Fractionalization

Probability that two randomly selected individuals in a country will Easterly and Levine (1997)
not speak the same language.

Exporter

Dummy variable that takes on the value one if firm exports, zero
otherwise.

Foreign

Dummy variable that takes on the value one if any foreign company World Business Environment
or individual has a financial stake in the ownership of the firm, zero Survey (WBES)
otherwise.

GDP per Capita

GDP per capita in PPP adjusted international dollars, averaged over
1995-1999
General Financing Obstacle How problematic is financing for the operation and growth of your
business? no obstacle (1), a minor obstacle (2), a moderate obstacle
(3) or a major obstacle (4)
Government
Dummy variable that takes on the value one if any government
agency or state body has a financial stake in the ownership of the
firm, zero otherwise.

World Business Environment
Survey (WBES)

World Development Indicators
World Business Environment
Survey (WBES)
World Business Environment
Survey (WBES)

Government Effectiveness

Principal component indicator of survey indicators measuring the
Kaufman, Kraay and Zoidocompetence of bureaucracy and the quality of public service delivery Lobaton (1999)

Growth

Growth rate of GDP, average 1995-99

Independence

Percentage of years since 1776 that a country has been independent Easterly and Levine (1997)

Inflation

Log difference of Consumer Price Index

International Financial Statistics
(IFS), line 64

Latitude

Absolute value of the latitude of a country’s capital, normalized
between zero and one

Beck, Demirguc-Kunt, and Levine
(2003)

Manufacturing

Dummy variable that takes on the value one if firm is in the
manufacturing industry, zero otherwise.

World Business Environment
Survey (WBES)

Number of Competitors

Regarding your firm's major product line, how many competitors do World Business Environment
you face in your market?
Survey (WBES)

World Development Indicators

43
Priv

{(0.5)*[F(t)/P_e(t) + F(t-1)/P_e(t-1)]}/[GDP(t)/P_a(t)], where F is IFS
credit by deposit money banks to the private sector (lines 22d ), GDP
is line 99b, P_e is end-of period CPI (line 64) and P_a is the average
CPI for the year.

Private Monitoring

Principal component indicator of nine dummy variables that measure Barth, Caprio and Levine (2004)
whether (1) bank directors and officials are legally liable for the
accuracy of information disclosed to the public, (2) whether banks
must publish consolidated accounts, (3) whether banks must be
audited by certified international auditors, (4) whether 100% of the
largest 10 banks are rated by international rating agencies, (5)
whether off-balance sheet items are disclosed to the public,
(6) whether banks must disclose their risk management procedures to
the public, (7) whether accrued, though unpaid interest/principal
enter the income statement while the loan is still non-performing (8)
whether subordinated debt is allowable as part of capital, and (9)
whether there is no explicit deposit insurance system and no
insurance was paid the last time a bank failed.
Principal component indicator of survey indicators measuring the
Kaufman, Kraay and Zoidoquality of contract enforcement, the police and the courts, as well as Lobaton (1999)
the likelihood of crime and violence
Logarithm of firm sales
World Business Environment
Survey (WBES)

Rule of Law
Sales
Services

Dummy variable that takes on the value one if firm is in the service World Business Environment
industry, zero otherwise.
Survey (WBES)

Shareholder Rights

Summary indicator of the rights of minority shareholders vis-à-vis
management and block holders

State Ownership

Percentage of banking system’s assets in banks that are 50% or more Barth, Caprio and Levine (2004)
government owned

Supervisory Power

Principal component indicator of 14 dummy variables: 1.Does the Barth, Caprio and Levine (2004)
supervisory agency have the right to meet with external auditors to
discuss their report without the approval of the bank? 2.Are auditors
required by law to communicate directly to the supervisory agency
any presumed involvement of bank directors or senior managers in
elicit activities, fraud, or insider abuse? 3.Can supervisors take legal
action against external auditors for negligence? 4.Can the
supervisory authority force a bank to change its internal
organizational structure? 5.Are off-balance sheet items disclosed to
supervisors? 6. Can the supervisory agency order the bank's directors
or management to constitute provisions to cover actual or potential
losses? 7. Can the supervisory agency suspend the directors' decision
to distribute: a) Dividends? b) Bonuses? c) Management fees? 8.Can
the supervisory agency legally declare-such that this declaration
supersedes the rights of bank shareholders-that a bank is insolvent?
9.Does the Banking Law give authority to the supervisory agency to
intervene that is, suspend some or all ownership rights-a problem
bank? 10.Regarding bank restructuring and reorganization, can the
supervisory agency
or any other government agency do the following: a) Supersede
shareholder rights? b) Remove and replace management? c) Remove
and replace directors?

La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes,
Shleifer and Vishny (1998)

