                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          CONTRACTIONARY CURRENCY CRASHES
                               IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES

                                           Jeffrey A. Frankel

                                         Working Paper 11508
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w11508


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       June 2005




This paper was originally presented as the Mundell-Fleming Lecture at the Fifth Annual Research
Conference of the International Monetary Fund, November 2004. It is forthcoming in IMF Staff Papers,
2005. The author would like to thank Maral Shamloo, Yun Jung Kim, and Rodrigo Urcuyo for capable
research assistance; the Kuwait Fund and the Ash Institute for Democratic Governance and Innovation, both
of Harvard’s Kennedy School, for support; and Miguel Messmacher, participants at the ARC, and especially
Robert Flood, for useful suggestions. Some results draw on joint work with Eduardo Cavallo, David Parsley,
and Shang-Jin Wei. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by Jeffrey A. Frankel. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Contractionary Currency Crashes in Developing Countries
Jeffrey A. Frankel
NBER Working Paper No. 11508
July 2005
JEL No.

                                            ABSTRACT



To update a famous old statistic: a political leader in a developing country is almost twice as likely
to lose office in the 6 months following a currency crash as otherwise. This difference, which is
highly significant statistically, holds regardless whether the devaluation takes place in the context
of an IMF program. Why are devaluations so costly? Many of the currency crises of the last ten
years have been associated with output loss.     Is this, as alleged, because of excessive reliance on
raising the interest rate as a policy response? More likely it is because of contractionary effects of
devaluation. There are various possible contractionary effects of devaluation, but it is appropriate
that the balance sheet effect receives the most emphasis. Passthrough from exchange rate changes
to import prices in developing countries is not the problem: this coefficient fell in the 1990s, as a
look at some narrowly defined products shows. Rather, balance sheets are the problem. How can
countries mitigate the fall in output resulting from the balance sheet effect in crises? In the shorter
term, adjusting promptly after inflows cease is better than procrastinating by shifting to short-term
dollar debt, which raises the costliness of the devaluation when it finally comes. In the longer term,
greater openness to trade reduces vulnerability to both sudden stops and currency crashes.



Jeffrey A. Frankel
Kennedy School of Government
Harvard University
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
jeffrey_frankel@harvard.edu
                    Contractionary Currency Crashes In Developing Countries

             The Fifth Mundell-Fleming Lecture, IMF Annual Research Conference

                                         Jeffrey A. Frankel




       December 2004 is the tenth anniversary of the Mexican peso crisis of 1994. In

retrospect, this crisis ushered in an eight-year series of highly visible devaluations in

emerging markets, most of which proved highly costly to the countries involved. These

currency crashes are the theme of my lecture.

       Accordingly, I will begin by invoking neither Mundell nor Fleming, but another

article from three decades ago: Richard Cooper’s “Currency Devaluation in Developing

Countries.” This was one of the few major papers from that period to deal explicitly

with the macroeconomics of developing countries. The weight of our attention has over

the last decade or two shifted increasingly away from rich countries and toward

developing countries, whether judged by the caseload of the staff at the International

Monetary Fund or by working papers turned out by scholars in the field of International

Finance and Macroeconomics. In part this reflects the extent to which lower- and

middle-income countries have become increasingly integrated into world financial

markets. Twenty years ago, for example, one would not have wanted to apply the

Mundell-Fleming model’s insights regarding international capital mobility to developing

countries, because they didn’t have much (capital mobility). Indeed I don’t think the

phrase emerging markets even existed then. But after the liberalizations and capital

inflows of the early 1990s -- and the crises of the late 1990s -- we are applying to

developing countries a wide variety of models and tools that were originally created with



                                                                                            2
rich countries in mind. And we have as well created some new models and tools to try to

capture what is different about developing countries.



1. Political Costs of Devaluation

       I wish to take as our starting point a widely cited statistic from Cooper (1971, p.

28) that, in the aftermath of devaluations, nearly 30 per cent of governments fell within

12 months, as opposed to 14 per cent in a contemporaneous control group. This is an

impressive fact, as demonstrated by the frequency with which other authors still cite it 33

years later. AI did a citation count reveals that: Cooper’s article has received 84

citations, with no downward trend over time -- not as high as the two seminal papers that

constituted the Mundell-Fleming model and thus gave this lecture its name, but still very

healthy for a paper written so long ago.1 So I expect to garner a lot of citations myself

by updating Cooper’s calculation !



       1.1 Updating a statistic on leaders’ loss of office

       Cooper took anything over 10% to be a devaluation episode. But the world

changed in the 1970s and 1980s, and depreciations of that magnitude have become

commonplace. For a high inflation country, one would not want to say that a new

currency crisis occurs every month.    So I use the following definition:2

       •   The devaluation must be at least 25% (on a cumulative 12-month basis)



1
  This paper was originally presented as the Fifth Annual Mundell-Fleming lecture.
Mundell (1963) and Fleming (1962) received 319 and 257 citations respectively over the
same period, 1972-2003. This probably understates the contribution of the Mundell-
Fleming model: many discussions of the model cite other works, or none at all.
2
  The same as that in Frankel and Rose (1996).

                                                                                             3
       •   The devaluation must represent an acceleration of at least 10 percentage

           points, relative to the rate of depreciation in the 12 months before that.

       •   It must have been at least three years since the last currency crisis.



       By these criteria, looking at a sample of 103 developing countries over the period

1971-2003, we found 188 currency crashes. Of these the identity of the country’s chief

executive changed within 12 months of the devaluation 27% of the time. The standard of

comparison that we use normally is all other 12-month periods: the leader changed

20.5% of the time normally. Thus devaluation increases by an estimated 32% the

probability of the executive losing his or her job. The difference is only statistically

significant at the 13% level.3 However, it may be that countries that tend generally to

instability are overrepresented in the crisis group, so that political turnover is more

common in this group even if not necessarily the result of currency crises. If we narrow

the standard of non-devaluation comparison periods to the set of countries that have

experienced a currency crash at some point during the sample period, on the grounds that

these are more comparable to the crisis episodes, we find that the increase in job loss

among devaluers now becomes statistically significant at almost 1% level.4

       We then narrowed the window to a half-year.        Now the chief executive lost

office 19.1 % of the time, as opposed to 11.6 % of the time otherwise. In other words,

the currency crash increases the probability of a change in the top leadership within the

following 6 months by 1.7 times. This time the difference is statistically significant not


3
   Appendix 1 A. The source for the identity of the president, prime minister, premier, or
other chief executive, is http://rulers.org.
4
  Appendix 1 B.

                                                                                             4
only at the 10% or 1% levels, but at the 0.5% level as well, regardless whether the entire

set of countries is used as the standard of comparison.

         We also looked at whether the finance minister or central bank governor –

whoever held the office of the country’s governor of the IMF -- lost his or her job. Here,

even using the longer 12-month window (and even with only five years of data: 1995-

99), the effect is statistically significant. In the year following a currency crash, the

occupant of this position changed 58.3 per cent of the time. In other years during this

period the rate of turnover was 35.8%. So by this measure the finance minister or CB

governor was 63% more likely to lose office. The difference is highly significant

statistically (at the .001 level).5

         When we segregate countries according to three income levels, we find that the

phenomenon chiefly comes from middle income countries. Within the class of poor

countries, the increase in turnover of the leader is not statistically significant; and among

rich countries there were no cases of a leader losing office within a year of a devaluation.

         We also tried segregating countries according to three kinds of political structure:

presidential democracy, parliamentary democracy, and non-democracy.           Our

expectation was that we would find that the effect of devaluation on leadership turnover

would be greater among parliamentary democracies than among presidential

democracies. The logic was that, in any given year, the latter might not have a scheduled

election, or if they did, a term limitation might prohibit the incumbent from running for




5
    Appendix 1, Part C.

                                                                                                5
re-election.   We found, instead that the job loss rate was much higher and more

significant in the case of devaluations occurring in presidential democracies.6

        We examined whether an equally large loss of reserves results in job loss as often

as a devaluation. Such episodes also tend to be unpleasant (often implying monetary

contraction and recession, e.g., Argentina in 1995, 1999). A, but apparently they do not

carry the same political costs, however: Their effect on leaders’ job loss was not

significant.

        What is it about devaluation that carries such big political costs? How is it that a

strong ruler like Indonesia’s Suharto can easily weather 32 years of political, military,

ethnic, and environmental challenges, only to succumb to a currency crisis?



        1.2. Possible sources of political costs of devaluation

        Currency crises have often been accompanied by sharp recessions. Thus an

obvious interpretation, which we will consider further, is that leaders are punished by

their constituents when the performance of the economy is poor. But before proceeding

on the assumption that the loss of ministerial jobs is a reflection of unemployment and

depressed activity throughout the economy, let us consider the possibility that the costs of

a devaluation may be more political than economic. First, there is the possibility that

elections cause currency crashes rather than the other way around.     Second, it could be

that IMF programs or other austerity programs are unpopular in general, and that the

devaluations are an incidental aspect of this.   Third, it could be that the leaders in




6
 The breakdown by income and democratic structure is given in Parts F, G and H of
Appendix 1.

                                                                                               6
question had made public promises in advance not to devalue, and that they were

punished for breaking these promises regardless of subsequent economic performance.

       What do I mean by the first possibility, that elections cause devaluations rather

than the other way around?     It is striking in how many of the major crises of the 1990s,

even though trouble began during the run-up to a major regularly scheduled national

election, the worst speculative attack and currency crash came soon after the election.

This describes Mexico 1994, Korea 1997, and Brazil 1998-99. In an earlier era, one

would have guessed that election-motivated macroeconomic expansion -- the famous

political business cycle -- explains the need for a subsequent devaluation. But that

explanation does not fit the experience of the 1990s as well. Macroeconomic expansion

in these election campaigns was limited.7

       A better explanation is that devaluation is politically costly to leaders, and so in

an election year they try to postpone it -- whether to get re-elected,8 or so that the crash

comes on their successors’ watch rather than theirs, or out of the hope that something will

turn up to improve the balance of payments.9 A related hypothesis is that because a

devaluation uses up scarce political capital, it is more likely to be undertaken by a new

leader with a strong mandate, especially in a visible crisis, and especially if he can blame

it on his predecessor. Edwards (1994, Table 5) reports that devaluations occur



7
  The political business cycle literature observes that politicians are sometimes able to
fool voters by aggressive macroeconomic expansion preceding the election, with costs
borne later. But Brender and Drazen (2004) argue that is primarily a phenomenon found
in countries that have only recently made the transition to democracy. Voters eventually
learn.
8
  On governments’ incentive to postpone devaluations until after elections, see Stein and
Streb (1998, 1999).
9
  On governments’ incentive to postpone devaluations until after elections, see Stein and
Streb (1998, 1999).

                                                                                               7
disproportionately often during the first two years after a transfer of government: 77.3%

of devaluations among presidential democracies (i.e., those with pre-scheduled elections),

and 70.0 % among parliamentary democracies. This is a topic worth exploring, but not

here: my calculations about the frequency with which ministers lose their jobs in the year

after a devaluation were careful to start the clock the day after the devaluation, so that

cases where the devaluation came soon after an electoral change are not included in the

statistics.

          The second possibility I mentioned is that devaluations are acting as a proxy for

unpopular IMF austerity programs or other broad reform packages.         IMF-associated

austerity programs have often resulted in popular unrest. For example, riots following

food-subsidy cutbacks contributed to the overthrow of President Nimeiri of Sudan in

1985.10

          One can test the proposition that devaluations are acting as a proxy for unpopular

IMF austerity programs by conditioning our previous calculation on the adoption of IMF

programs. We created a dummy variable to represent cases where an IMF program was

initiated within 3 months on either side of the devaluation.11   The IMF program variable

does not seem to raise the frequency of leader job loss, relative to devaluations that did

not involve an IMF program. Thus it is not surprising that conditioning on the IMF



10
   Edwards and Santaella (1993) report nine cases of post-devaluation coup attempts, in a
study that looks at the role of IMF presence along with various measures of political
instability in determining whether devaluations during the period 1950-1971 were
economically successful. Lora and Olivera (2004) find that voters punish presidents for
pro-market policies and for increases in the rate of inflation, but not for exchange rate
policies per se. For an earlier summary of the political consequences of IMF-type
austerity programs, see Bienen and Gersovitz (1985).
11
   Whether Standby Agreement, or other. See Appendix 2 for list with dates. Part G of
Appendix 1 reports the results.

                                                                                              8
dummy variable has no discernible effect on the frequency of leader turnover: 21.05% of

the time for the cases with an IMF program, or 21.92% of the time for the ones without.

In both cases, it is similar to the overall rate of job loss following devaluations (19.05%)

in the complete sample, and is still almost double the 11.6% rate in normal times.

       That leaves the third non-economic explanation, that the ministers in question

have made public promises in advance not to devalue, and that they feel it necessary to

resign or are punished for breaking these promises, regardless of subsequent economic

performance. In many cases the commitment to the peg is explicitly reaffirmed by top

policy-makers and political leaders in the months immediately prior to the devaluation.

Perhaps such ill-fated promises are originally made because the minister is duplicitous, or

at least is ignorant of the speculative pressures he or she is up against. More likely they

are too attached to the peg psychologically to let go; many of the currency crashes of the

1990s occurred in countries where governments had a lot invested in the peg, because

exchange-rate-based stabilizations earlier had been the successful and popular means of

ending a 1980s cycle of high inflation, even hyperinflation.

       But I think that a still better way to view the public commitments may be as

sincere expressions of a strong desire to maintain the peg. The ministers may realize that

events could force the abandonment of the exchange rate policy, if speculative pressures

accelerate and it develops that reserves are about to run out, leaving little other option.

And they may realize that making an explicit statement beforehand increases the chances

that they will have to resign if and when the peg is abandoned. But making the promise

is a way of buying a bit of credibility, and buying some time. Specifically it is a device




                                                                                               9
for signaling that their determination to hold the line on the currency is so strong that they

are willing to risk sacrificing their jobs.

        We selected a sub-sample of 24 cases out of our total set of currency crashes.

We chose roughly equal numbers of cases with and without subsequent premier

changes.12 We searched local newspapers for the 30 days preceding the devaluation for

statements by government officials that could be construed as commitments not to

devalue.   We included assurances even if the language did not read as explicit or

ironclad, because these are so often interpreted as promises.13

        The sample size is small. But we found that when some member of the

government (chief executive, finance minister, or central bank governor) had given

assurances that there would be no devaluation, and a devaluation did subsequently occur,

the probability that the chief executive would lose his or her job within 12 months was

2/3.   Where no such assurances were reported, the frequency of job loss was only 7/18,

despite the devaluation. In other words, whatever the credibility benefits of the promise

ex ante, it almost doubles the likelihood that the leader loses office ex post.   If we use

the 6-month horizon, then the relative effect is even stronger: the leader is more than

twice as likely to be out on the street if the government had made a previous commitment

than if it had remained quiet (.50 vs. .19).   If we consider only those cases where the

chief executive himself is the one to have given the assurances, then the job loss rate



12
   The other major criteria were that the country in question be represented by
comprehensive microfiche files in Harvard’s Widener Library of past newspapers, and
that the languages of those newspapers be either English, Spanish, Korean, or Arabic, the
languages spoken by the research assistants working on this project. Appendices 3 and
4 offer details of these cases.
13
   In at least one case, Syria, the newspapers appear to have been so lacking in candor
regarding the relevant exchange rate that they did not even bring up the subject.

                                                                                              10
becomes 100%. But there were only two such cases, out of 24. Usually the dangerous

task of going on the record is delegated to a cabinet member. (Details are reported in

Appendix 3 for the 12-month horizon, and Appendix 4 for the 6-month horizon.)

       Despite this suggestive outcome, to the effect that the “broken promise” factor

does indeed matter, it seems unlikely that this is the sole reason for devaluations to result

in turnover at the top. After all, even among those cases where our newspaper search

turned up no record of assurances in the month preceding the devaluation -- either from

the leader, finance minister, or central bank governor – 220% of the leaders lost office

within 6 months of the devaluation anyway, and 393% within 12 months [tables in

Appendices 3a and 4a].[M1] This is well above the 11.6% or 20.5% rates, respectively,

of job loss in normal times. Evidently the economic effects of devaluation also play an

important role.



2. Does Devaluation Necessarily Mean Loss of Output?

       As already noted, the most obvious interpretation of why devaluations are so

often associated with high political costs is that they are accompanied by painful

recessions.14 But why? After all, devaluations are supposed to increase

competitiveness, increase production and exports of tradable goods, reduce imports, and

thereby boost the trade balance, GDP, and employment. Hence the story of the British

14
   Another possibility is that, even if there is no negative effect on GDP in the aggregate,
the redistributional effects could be politically costly to the leaders. For example, a
devaluation in an African country may benefit small rural coffee and cocoa farmers
because the price of their product is determined on world markets, but they tend to have
less political power than urban residents, who may be hurt by the devaluation. The
problem with this theory is that there are so many examples that go the other way, where
the producers of the tradable products (agricultural, mineral, or manufactured) tend to
have more political power than the producers of nontraded goods.


                                                                                           11
Chancellor of the Exchequer “singing in the bath” after the 1992 devaluation of the

pound.    Apparently developing countries are different, or at least emerging market

countries are. Figuring out why may amount to figuring out what aspect of these

countries most requires us to modify the macroeconomic models standardly applied to

advanced economies.

         One can argue that simultaneous monetary and fiscal austerity are the true causes

of these declines in economic activity. Or banking failures, or the sudden stop in foreign

lending itself. But this misses what, to me, is a key point. According to the standard

textbook theories, when a country faces a sudden stop in capital flows, there exists some

optimal combination of expenditure-reducing policies (monetary or fiscal contraction)

and expenditure switching policies (devaluation) that should adjust to external balance

(the new balance of payments constraint), without necessarily sacrificing internal balance

(i.e., without a recession). Why did all the countries in the East Asia crisis of 1997-98

suffer a sharp loss in output growth regardless of their mix of devaluation and

expenditure-reduction? The expansionary effect of the devaluation is supposed to be

able to make up for whatever contraction comes from other sources.

         Consider a graphical representation with the interest rate and exchange rate (price

of foreign currency) on the axes, as illustrated in Figure 1a. To satisfy external balance,

there is an inverse tradeoff between the two instruments. A devaluation and an increase

in the interest rate are each ways of improving the trade balance -- the latter by reducing

expenditure -- and so the more you have of one the less you need of the other. (If

external balance is defined as equilibrium in the overall balance of payments, including

the capital account along with the trade balance, the relationship is still downward-




                                                                                            12
sloping, since a devaluation and an increase in the interest rate are both ways of making

domestic assets more attractive to global investors.)

          To satisfy internal balance, the tradeoff is traditionally considered to be upward-

sloping. An increase in the interest rate reduces the domestic demand for domestic

goods, while a devaluation increases the net foreign demand for domestic goods; if you

have more of one, you also need more of the other, to prevent excess supply or excess

demand.

          The existence of two independent instruments implies the possibility of attaining

both targets simultaneously, at the intersection of the internal and external balance

schedule. In the aftermath of an adverse shock in the foreign sector, for example, the

right combination of devaluation and monetary contraction will restore balance of

payments equilibrium while maintaining real economic growth.

          This is not always the way things actually work.15 By now we have had enough

experience with crises in emerging markets that the traditional framework needs to be

modified. The simple generalization seems to be that most developing countries that are

hit by financial crises go into recession. The reduction in income is the only way of

quickly generating the improvement in the trade balance that is the necessary counterpart

to the increased reluctance of international investors to lend. External balance is a

jealous mistress that can be satisfied only if internal balance is left to go wanting.




15
     Paul Krugman, “Latin America’s Swan Song,” 1998, at http://web.mit.edu/krugman/www/swansong.html.

                                                                                                         13
          Critics of the IMF say that the recessions are the result of Fund policies,

specifically the insistence on austerity in country rescue programs. 16     Some can be

interpreted as arguing that there should have been more expenditure switching, and less

expenditure reduction; that the mix of a lower interest rate combined with a bigger

devaluation would successfully maintain internal balance. But many of the devaluations

in East Asia and elsewhere were very large as it was. The critics often make the point that

high interest rates are not in practice as attractive to foreign investors as the Mundell-

Fleming model, for example, would suggest, because they carry increased probability of

default. This is true. But in my view it is not the most important correction in the

traditional framework. Even if interest rates do not have as big a positive effect on the

capital account as our earlier models of high financial integration suggested, so that the

graphical relationship may be flatter, I believe that the sign of the effect is still the same.

Even if higher interest rates have no effect at all on capital inflows, their effect on the

balance of payments still goes the same way, owing to the effect on spending. One

cannot normally attract many investors by lowering interest rates. Therefore the external

balance line still slopes downward. Claims that high rates are damaging to the real

economy willfully ignore the lack of an alternative, if the external balance constraint is to

be met.

          Where the traditional framework needs most to be modified is the relationship

giving internal balance, not that giving external balance. By now the evidence seems

strong that devaluation is contractionary, at least in the first year, and perhaps in the

second as well. We have long been aware of various potential contractionary effects of



16
     E.g., Radelet and Sachs (1998); and Furman and Stiglitz (1998).

                                                                                              14
devaluation in developing countries. The same 1971 Cooper article that tallied job

losses among ministers also listed six ways in which devaluation could be contractionary.

By 1990, a total of ten such effects had been identified in textbooks.17

         Until the currency crashes of the 1990s, a mainstream view had been that any

negative effects from a devaluation were before long offset by the positive effect of

stimulus to net exports, so that by the second year, when the latter had gathered strength,

the overall effect on output had turned positive.18 Now however, one must judge the

negative effects stronger than we thought, and the positive effects weaker. Calvo and

Reinhart (2001), for example, calculate that exports do not increase at all after a

devaluation, but rather are down for the first 8 months. The export side, at least, was

supposed to be unambiguously positive. Apparently production is sometimes derailed by

corporate financial distress, absence of trade credit, and increased costs of imported

inputs, even when the production is for the purpose of export. Imports fall sharply;

indeed crisis-impacted countries have for this reason experienced sharp increases in their

trade balances beginning as soon as two or three months after the crisis. But this is

clearly a response to the unavailability of finance and collapse of income and spending,

not to relative prices. In other words, it is expenditure-reduction, not expenditure

switching.

         If devaluation is contractionary, then the internal balance line slopes down, not up

(as illustrated in Figure 1b). Moreover the slope may be disturbingly similar to the slope

of the external balance line. It is hard to see where the two intersect, if they intersect at

17
 E.g., the 5th through 9th editions of Ronald Caves, Jeffrey Frankel, and Ronald Jones,
World Trade and Payments, 2002.
18
     Edwards (1986) and Kamin (1988).



                                                                                                15
all. This means that it is hard to see what combination of policy instruments, if any, can

simultaneously satisfy both internal and external balance, after an adverse shock has

shifted the latter outward. The depressing conclusion is that there is no escape from

recession. All policy instruments work via reduction in income in the short run --

devaluation, fiscal contraction, and monetary contraction. Even structural policy reform,

such as insisting that bad banks go under, may have a negative effect on economic

activity in the short run.

         Is the targets-and-instruments framework then no longer useful?        I think that the

framework is still relevant during the period after a terms-of-trade shock or reversal in

capital flows (as reflected in a peaking of reserves), but before the speculative attack hits

(as reflected in a very sharp devaluation, loss in reserves, or increase in interest rates). It

can be hard to identify such an interval, especially at the time. But I have in mind the

interval of a year or so preceding December 2001 in Argentina, July 1997 in East Asia,

December 1994 in Mexico. I call this the period of procrastination, for reasons that will

become clear below.



3. Why is Devaluation Often Contractionary?

         Of the many possible contractionary effects of devaluation that have been

theorized, which are in fact responsible for the recessionary currency crashes of the

1990s?     Several of the most important contractionary effects of an increase in the

exchange are hypothesized to work through a corresponding increase in the domestic

price of imports, or of some larger set of goods.    Indeed, rapid passthrough of exchange

rate changes to the prices of traded goods is the defining assumption of the “small open




                                                                                             16
economy model,” which has always been thought to apply fairly well to emerging market

countries. The contractionary effect would then follow, in any of several ways: the

higher prices of traded goods would, for example, reduce real money balances or real

wages of workers19, or increase costs to producers in the non-traded goods sector.20

         These mechanisms were not much in evidence in the currency crashes of the

1990s.    The reason is that the devaluations were not passed through to prices for higher

imports, for domestic competing goods, or to the CPI in the way that the small open

economy model had led us to believe.      The failure of high inflation to materialize in

East Asia after the 1997-98 devaluations, or even in Argentina after the 2001 devaluation,

was good news -- a surprise that perhaps to some extent compensated for the

unexpectedly sharp recessions. But it calls for some investigation.



         3.1 The decline in exchange rate passthrough in developing countries

         Conventional wisdom has long been that passthrough is slower or less complete in

large industrialized countries than in small developing countries.    A number of authors

have pointed out a further decline during the 1990s in the passthrough coefficient among

industrialized countries. But most of the many econometric studies of passthrough, even

those that examine a recent decline in the passthrough coefficient, have focused on prices

of imports into industrialized countries, rather than into developing countries. Taylor

(2001) proposed that a decline in passthrough of exchange rate changes into the CPI in


19
   Diaz-Alejandro (1963) pointed to a transfer of income from (low-saving) urban
workers who consume traded goods, to (high-saving) rich owners of agricultural land
20
   Increased costs to producers of non-traded goods could come from either higher costs
of imported inputs like oil, or higher labor costs if wages are indexed to the cost of living
(e.g., Corbo, 1985, in the context of Chile in 1981).

                                                                                            17
the 1990s was due to a lower inflationary environment, and looked at US data. Gagnon

and Ihrig (2004) extended this claim to a sample of 11 industrialized countries. Otani,

Shiratsuka, and Shirota (2003) found a similar decline in passthrough for imports into

Japan. Campa and Goldberg (2001) again found a decline in the coefficient in the 1990s,

but attributed it to changing commodity composition more than to a less inflationary

environment.21 Their data set again consists solely of industrialized countries.

       Only a few studies include lower-income countries. Choudhri and Hakura (2001)

extend to a sample of 71, including developing countries, the finding that a low-inflation

environment reduced passthrough to the CPI in the 1990s. Borensztein and De Gregorio

(1999) and Goldfajn and Werlang (2000), study the low passthrough of recent large

devaluations in developing countries.22 But these are all studies of influences on

aggregate price measures, the CPI in particular, not on import prices. Few studies

concentrate on imports of specific goods into developing countries. The difference is

important because effects on price indices vs. prices of specific imports are really two

distinct conceptions of the word “passthrough.” It is even more important because, as in

the rich country context, some authors have claimed that what appears to be slow or

incomplete passthrough in developing countries can really be attributed to changes in

composition with regard to product varieties. 23



21
   It has been pointed out at least since Knetter (1993) that differences in passthrough
coefficients could be attributable to differences in the composition of the price index,
rather than to differences in passthrough that would show up for narrowly-defined
commodities.
22
   References to some further studies are given in Frankel, Parsley and Wei (2005).
23
   Burstein, Eichenbaum and Rebelo (2002) attribute the low observed passthrough in
general price indices to the disappearance from consumption of newly expensive import
goods, and their replacement in the indices by inferior local substitutes. No doubt this is
indeed a relevant effect.

                                                                                           18
        Table 1, taken from Frankel, Parsley and Wei (2005), reports estimates for

passthrough to prices of narrowly defined retail imports into 76 countries. Notice, first,

confirmation of the conventional wisdom that passthrough has historically been higher in

developing countries than in rich countries. As of the beginning of our sample period,

1990, the coefficient was .3 for rich countries and .8 for developing countries, with the

difference highly significant statistically. (Figure 3 illustrates the numbers on average

during our sample period.) That these numbers fall below 1.0 cannot be attributed to

compositional effects, as the 8 goods are defined very narrowly: a roll of color film, a

carton of Marlboro cigarettes, an issue of Time magazine, a bottle of Cointreau, etc.

        Theories of slow or incomplete passthrough can be divided according to what sort

of arbitrage barrier they posit as blocking the enforcement of the law of one price:

barriers to international trade such as tariffs and transportation costs, or local costs of

distribution and retail. The results in Frankel, Parsley and Wei (2005) furnish support

for both sorts of theories. Bilateral distance is a statistically significant determinant of

the Error Correction Mechanism (ECM) term; that is, higher transport costs lead to

slower passthrough to import prices. At the same time, a higher wage – the largest

component of local distribution and retail costs – also shows up as a significant negative

determinant of the passthrough coefficient.24 Both determinants apply to rich and poor



24
   Table 1 applies only to prices of retail imports. But results for prices at other stages,
reported in Frankel, Parsley and Wei (2005), supply further evidence that both kinds of
arbitrage barriers are operative. On the one hand, passthrough is incomplete even for the
prices of these imported commodities at dockside, which suggests that local distribution
costs cannot be the only barrier to arbitrage – transport costs, tariffs, and other trade
barriers must matter as well. In support of this conclusion, distance has an important
effect, either reducing or slowing passthrough, at all four stages -- dockside imports,
retail, competitors’ prices, and the CPI. On the other hand, passthrough behavior for
retail imports is more like behavior for local substitutes than it is like imports at the dock,

                                                                                               19
countries alike. Size does not appear as a determinant in most of our results: small

countries do not experience more passthrough than large, a very surprising finding in

light of “pricing to market” theories (i.e., price discrimination by sellers).

        For present purposes, the important point is that the passthrough coefficient fell

significantly in the course of the 1990s, and that the speed of decline was twice as fast

among developing countries as among rich (.051 per year as compared to .025).25 The

speed of passthrough, which is estimated in the form of an ECM term, also shows a

significant downward trend for developing countries (not for rich).

       One might wonder if this estimated decline in the passthrough coefficient during

the 1990s is an indirect reflection of an asymmetry whereby passthrough of depreciation

is greater than passthrough of appreciation, or a threshold effect whereby large

devaluations result in proportionately less passthrough. We have found in extensions

that the answer is “no;” the trend remains even after controlling for the big

devaluations.26




which suggests that tariffs and transportation costs cannot be the only barrier to arbitrage
– local distribution matters too. In support of this conclusion, higher wages have a strong
negative effect on passthrough to the local competitors’ prices and the CPI.
25
   Taken literally, the estimated trend is strong enough to bring the passthrough
coefficient to zero by 2006. This conclusion may to some extent be an artifact of the
assumption of a linear trend that should not be extrapolated. But when we try a
different functional form that allows the effect of time to asymptote to zero (the
reciprocal of time), we get a similar result: the passthrough coefficient falls most of the
way to zero during the sample period.
26
    The threshold effect, while significant, goes the wrong way: changes in the exchange
rate above 25% are found to have proportionately larger passthrough effects, not smaller.
We did find strong evidence of asymmetry. In fact we cannot reject the hypothesis that
appreciation is not passed through at all, suggesting downward price rigidity. This is an
interesting finding. But the significant downward trend in the passthrough coefficient
remains.

                                                                                            20
        One would expect passthrough to prices of domestically produced goods or the

general CPI to be (even) lower than to prices of imports. Our paper also reports results

for other local price measures, and this is indeed the pattern they show. (See Figure 2).

Tariffs and distance both contribute significantly to low passthrough to the CPI. But

passthrough to prices of local substitutes and to the CPI both show the same downward

trends over the sample period as passthrough to import prices. The difference in

coefficient trends between poor and rich countries is even greater for passthrough to the

CPI than it is for import prices. This is important, in the present context, because most

of the potential contractionary effects of devaluation require that passthrough extend

beyond import prices alone, to include also passthrough to locally produced goods or the

CPI.

        What can we say about the reasons for the decline in passthrough? As noted, one

hypothesis proposed by others is declining long-run inflation rates. This factor turns out

to be particularly relevant in the case of explaining the downward trend in passthrough to

developing country CPIs.

        Another possible explanation for the trend is rising labor costs in retail and

distribution.   We find that wages are a significant determinant of passthrough. The

wage hypothesis turns out to be particularly relevant in the case of explaining the

downward trends in passthrough either to the prices of local substitutes or to the CPI

(reported in Frankel, Parsley and Wei, 2005). Controlling for wages reverses an

estimated tendency for passthrough to the CPI to decline as country income per capita

grows. A possible interpretation is that the role of distribution and retail costs in pricing




                                                                                            21
to market becomes increasingly important as countries achieve higher incomes, owing to

the Balassa-Samuelson-Baumol effect.

       In any case, most of the decline in passthrough remains unexplained, despite the

many contributing factors we estimated.27 The strongest conclusion is simply that

incomplete passthrough is another respect in which developing countries have become a

bit more like rich countries, for whatever reason.



       3.2 The balance sheet effect

       If the contractionary effects that rely on passthrough to higher goods prices do not

explain the recessions that followed many of the 1990s devaluations, then what does? On

the list of contractionary channels, the balance sheet effect is the one that has dominated

in terms of attention from researchers, and I think appropriately so. Domestic banks and

firms had large debts denominated in foreign currencies, particularly in dollars. They ,

which they might have been able to service these debts at the previous exchange rate, but

which they had trouble servicing after the price of foreign exchange had gone up sharply.

The results were lay-offs and bankruptcies.28



27
   Another variable we looked at is long-run exchange rate variability. Here the
influence could go either way. On the one hand, if exchange rate variability is another
sign of monetary instability, like the inflation rate, it might be thought to contribute to
faster passthrough; there is some support for this effect in the case of import prices in
developing countries. On the other hand Froot and Kemperer (1989), Krugman (1989)
and Taylor (2000) have suggested that when exchange rate fluctuations are largely
transitory, passthrough is lower, an effect that is supported in the case of passthrough to
the CPI in developing countries. Indeed, an increase in exchange rate variability in the
late 1990s can apparently explain fully the significant downward trend in the speed of
adjustment of the CPI.
28
   The analytical literature on balance sheet effects and output contraction includes, but is
not limited to: Aghion, Banerjee and Bacchetta (2000), Cespedes, Chang and Velasco
(2003, 2004), Chang and Velasco (1999), Caballero and Krishnamurty (2002),

                                                                                           22
        There is plenty of evidence of the output cost associated with the balance sheet

effect. Looking at the experience of the 1990s, Cavallo, Kisselev, Perri and Roubini

(2002) show that countries entering a crisis with high levels of foreign debt tend to

experience large real exchange rate overshooting (devaluation in addition to the long run

equilibrium level) and large output contractions. Similarly, Guidotti, Sturzenneger and

Villar (2003) find evidence that liability dollarization worsens output recovery after a

sudden stop in capital inflows.      Céspedes (2004) finds that the interaction of real devaluation

and external debt has a significant negative effect on output.

        It is easier to point out the problem of “mismatch” -- between the currency of

denomination of a country’s debts and the currency that its firms earn -- than it is to

identify a remedy or even a cause. It is not enough to instruct firms to avoid dollar debts

or to hedge them, because international investors are not very interested in lending to

these countries in their own currencies. The result of following a rule to avoid

borrowing in foreign currency would thus be to borrow less in total (which admittedly

might not be such a bad outcome).        Eichengreen and Hausmann (1999) have made the

inability to borrow in local currencies famous under the name “original sin.” The phrase

is meant to imply that the problem is not the fault of the countries themselves, or at least

not the fault of recent governments. But we need not accept that it is completely pre-

determined.29


Christiano, Gust and Roldos (2002), Dornbusch (2002), Jeanne and Zettelmeyer (2005),
Kiyotaki and Moore (1997), Krugman (1999), Mendoza (2002), and Schneider and Aaron
Tornell (2001).
29
   One school of thought is that the choice of an adjustable peg regime, or other
intermediate exchange rate regime, leads to dangerously high unhedged foreign-currency
borrowing. It is argued that a floating regime would force borrowers to confront the
existence of exchange rate risk, and thereby reduce unhedged foreign-currency borrowing
(e.g., Eichengreen, 1999, p. 105). This sounds like an argument that governments


                                                                                                 23
4. How Might Debtors Mitigate Contractionary Currency Crashes?

       One need not dismiss the charge that international financial markets discriminate

against developing countries in a number of ways in order to discuss respects in which

debtors have some responsibility for their own fate. Let us consider two. One respect is

short-run, and one is long-run.



       4.1 Shifts on the balance sheet during the “procrastination phase”

       The short-run question over which countries have some control arises during the

interval that I have called the period of procrastination. When foreign investors lose

their previous enthusiasm for financing a country’s current account deficit, the national

policy makers must decide whether to adjust, or to wait. Typically they wait. Countries

that had previously managed to keep dollar-denominated debt relatively low, tend to

switch the composition of their debt in that direction during the year or so preceding the

ultimate currency crash, in order to entice skeptical foreign investors to stay in.

       A prime example is Mexico during the course of 1994.         International enthusiasm

for investing in Mexico began to decline after the beginning of the year. The authorities

clung to the exchange rate target and delayed adjustment, in the hopes circumstances

would turn around. Most obviously, during much of the year they ran down reserves, as



should introduce gratuitous volatility, because private financial agents underestimate risk.
But the models of Chamon and Hausmann (2005), Chang and Velasco (2004), Jeanne
(2005), and Pathak and Tirole (2004) point to this advantage of floating, with only
fundamentals-generated uncertainty and rational expectations. Hausmann and Panizza
(2003) find empirical support only for an effect of country size on original sin, not for an
effect of income level or exchange rate regime. Goldstein and Turner (2004) point out
things countries can do to reduce currency mismatch.

                                                                                            24
shown in Figure 4. But an important second mechanism of delay was to placate nervous

investors by offering them tesobonos (short-term dollar linked bonds) in place of the peso

bonds (Cetes) that they had previously held. Figure 5 shows the dramatic increase in

dollar-linked debt during the year leading up to the peso crisis of December 1994. It

seems likely that the magnitude of the Mexican recession in 1995 stemmed, not just from

the adverse balance sheet effects that have been so frequently noted, but particularly from

the adverse shift in balance sheets that took place during the course of 1994. A third

mechanism of delay was a shift toward shorter maturities, illustrated in Figure 6.30 And

the fourth has already been noted, an explicit commitment to defend the peg.

         These mechanisms are part of a strategy that is sometimes called “gambling for

resurrection.” What they have in common, beyond achieving the desired delay, is

helping to make the crisis worse when it does come, if it comes.31 It is harder to restore

confidence after a devaluation if reserves are near zero and the ministers have lost

personal credibility. Further, if the composition of the debt has shifted toward the short

term, in maturity, and toward the dollar, in denomination, then restoring external balance

is likely to wreak havoc with private balance sheets regardless the combination of

increases in interest rate versus increases in exchange rate.

         The lesson? Adjust sooner rather than later (which is admittedly easier said than

done).



30
   E.g., Broner, Lorenzoni, and Schmukler (2004).
31
  This helps explain why the ratio of short-term foreign debt to reserves appears most so
often and so robustly in the literature on early warning indicators for currency crashes.
Examples include Berg, Borensztein, Milesi-Ferreti, and Pattillo (1999), Frankel and
Rose (1996), Frankel and Wei (2005, Table 2), Goldstein, Kaminsky and Reinhart
(2000), Mulder, Perrelli and Rocha (2002), Rodrik and Velasco (2000), and many other
references given in those papers.

                                                                                          25
       4.2 Openness to trade reduces vulnerability to currency crises

       One final question concerns an aspect of the structure of the economy that can be

influenced by policy but only in the long-run: the degree of integration with respect to

international trade. Broadly speaking, there are two opposing views on the relationship

between a country’s openness and whether it is prone to sudden stops or currency

crashes. The first view is that openness makes a country more vulnerable to sudden stops.

A country highly integrated into world markets is more exposed to shocks coming from

abroad. The second view is that countries that are open to international trade are less

vulnerable to sudden stops. If the ratio of trade to GDP is structurally high, it is easier to

adjust to a cut-off in international financing of a given magnitude. I will describe a new

test of the relationship between trade openness and vulnerability to sudden stops to help

choose between the two hypotheses. Such tests have been done before, but usually

without taking into account the possible endogeneity of trade. The incremental

contribution here is to use the gravity instrument for trade openness -- which aggregates

geographically-determined bilateral trade across a country’s partners -- to correct for the

possible endogeneity of trade.

       The view that trade openness makes countries more vulnerable to crises comes in

a number of forms. One variant is that a weakening in a country’s export markets is

sometimes the trigger for a sudden stop in capital flows, so that a high-trade country is

more vulnerable. Another variant notes that sudden stops in finance often extend to a loss

in trade credit -- especially for imports, but sometimes also even for exports -- and that

the resulting shrinkage in trade is more painful if trade was a larger share of the economy




                                                                                           26
to begin with. A third variant says that financial openness raises vulnerability to sudden

stops, and openness to trade in practice goes hand in hand with openness to financial

flows.32 In the limiting case, a country that is in autarky with respect to trade must have a

net capital account of zero owing to the balance of payments adding-up constraint.

Regardless the specific reasoning, the notion that globalization leads to crises is a

generalization that appeals to many.

       The view that openness to trade makes countries less vulnerable also comes with

a number of different specific mechanisms that have been proposed.                 Eaton and

Gersovitz (1981) and Rose (2002) argue that the threatened penalty of lost trade is

precisely the answer to the riddle “why do countries so seldom default on their

international debts?” Strong trade links are statistically correlated with low default

probabilities. International investors will be less likely to pull out of a country with a high

trade/GDP ratio, because they know the country is less likely to default. A higher ratio of

trade is a form of “giving hostages” that makes a lending cutoff less likely.

       Another variant of the argument that openness reduces vulnerability takes as the

relevant penalty in a crisis the domestic cost of adjustment, i.e., the difficulty of

eliminating a newly-unfinanceable trade deficit. The argument goes back at least to Sachs

(1985, p.548). He suggested that Asian countries had been less vulnerable to dislocations

than Latin American countries in the international debt crisis of the 1980s -- despite

similar debt/GDP ratios -- because they had higher export/GDP ratios. The relatively

worse performance observed in Latin America was due to the lower availability of export



32
  For example because much trade needs multinational corporations, who in turn need to
be able to move money across national borders; or because it is harder to enforce capital
controls if trade is free. Aizenman (2003), and Aizenman and Noy (2004).

                                                                                            27
revenue to service debt. More recently, Guidotti et. al. (2004) make a similar point by

providing evidence that economies that trade more recover fairly quickly from the output

contraction that usually comes with the sudden stop, while countries that are more closed

suffer sharper output contraction and a slower recovery.

       Consider first a country that faces a given cut-off in financing, and must adjust

without nominal or real exchange rate flexibility. The adjustment must then come

through a reduction in spending. To achieve a $1 billion improvement in the trade

balance, the contraction has to be $ (1/m) billion, where m is defined as the marginal

propensity to import (in a Keynesian model) or the share of spending that falls on

tradable goods (in a tradable/nontradable model). The lower is m, the more painful the

adjustment. Whether output itself falls depends, of course, primarily on whether wages

and prices are flexible. But even in a full-employment world, sharp reductions in

consumption are not enjoyable.

       Consider, second, a country that does have the option of nominal and real

exchange rate flexibility. In traditional textbook models, if the adjustment is achieved in

part through nominal and real depreciation, rather than exclusively through expenditure-

reduction, the country can accommodate the tougher new financing constraint without

necessarily suffering a recession. This is true even if a relatively large devaluation is

required to generate the necessary improvement in the trade balance. But since the

emerging market crises of 1994-1998, as we have already noted, economists have

increasingly emphasized the contractionary balance sheet effect: if the country’s debts are

denominated in foreign currency, the balance sheets of the indebted banks and

corporations are hit in proportion to the devaluation. If the economy is starting from a




                                                                                        28
high ratio of trade to GDP the necessary devaluation need not be large, and therefore the

adverse balance sheet effect need not be large. But if the economy is not very open to

trade to begin with, the necessary devaluation, and the resulting balance sheet impact and

recession, will all be large. Again we arrive at the result that whether the necessary

adjustment will be large and painful depends inversely on openness.

        The balance sheet version of the openness story is modeled formally by Calvo,

Izquierdo, and Talvi (2003) and Cavallo (2004). Both have in mind the example of

Argentina, which has traditionally had a low ratio of trade to GDP, and has suffered some

of the worst sudden stops.33 But the hypothesis that openness to trade reduces a country’s

vulnerability to sudden stops transcends any one formal model, causal link, or country

example. The same is true of the opposing hypothesis, that openness raises a country’s

vulnerability. It would be useful to be able to choose empirically between the two

competing hypotheses.

        I will report new results -- from Cavallo and Frankel (2004) -- for two questions.

(1) What is the effect of openness on vulnerability to “sudden stops” implemented by a

probit model measuring the probability of a sudden reduction in the magnitude of net

capital inflows, following closely the definition of Calvo, Izquierdo and Mejía (2004)? 34

(2) What is the effect of openness on vulnerability to “currency crises,” implemented by

a probit model representing the probability of a sudden increase in exchange market


33
   Others who have argued that Argentina’s low trade/GDP ratio helps explain why it
was such a victim of the global sudden stop after 1999 include Calvo, Izquierdo, and
Mejia (2003), Calvo and Talvi (2004), Desai and Mitra (2004) and Treasury Secretary
Paul O’Neill, who once reportedly said it was unsurprising the Argentines had lost the
confidence of investors because they don’t export anything.
34
  To the best of my knowledge, the increasingly popular expression “Sudden Stops” was first used by
Dornbusch, Goldfajn and Valdes (1995). The first analytic approach to the problem of sudden stops is
Calvo (1998).


                                                                                                 29
pressure, which is in turn defined as the percentage depreciation plus percentage loss in

foreign exchange reserves? In addition to analyzing the probit model of this exchange

market pressure definition of a currency crisis, as in Frankel and Wei (2005) we also

looked at the output loss subsequent to a crisis.

       There is no reason, a priori, why something (openness) that makes the

consequences of sudden stops better (less contractionary devaluations) should also

necessarily make them less frequent.      Or that something that makes the consequences

worse should also make them more frequent. Indeed some theories are based on the

notion that the worse the consequences, the less often it will happen. But in our results

the effects turn out to go the same way, regardless which concept of performance is used.

       Calvo, Izquierdo and Mejía (2004) and Edwards (2004a, b) are among the

empirical papers that find that openness to trade is associated with fewer sudden stops.

On the other hand, Milesi-Ferretti and Razin (1998, 2000) find that openness helps

trigger crises and/or sharp reversals of the current account. Most of these papers use the

trade/GDP ratio as the measure for openness to trade.

       A critic might argue that the trade/GDP ratio is endogenous. One way in which

trade openness could be endogenous is via income: countries tend to liberalize trade

barriers as they grow richer -- in part because their mode of public finance gradually

shifts from tariff revenue to income or VAT taxes.          A second way is that trade

liberalization could be part of a more general reform strategy driven by pro-globalization

philosophy or “Washington Consensus” forces. Other aspects of such a reform program,

such as privatization, financial liberalization, or macroeconomic stabilization might affect

the probability of crises, and yet an OLS regression analysis might inappropriately




                                                                                         30
attribute the effect to trade. A third way that trade openness could be endogenous is that

experience with crises -- the dependent variable -- may itself cause liberalization, via an

IMF program. Or it might have the opposite effect, if a country’s response to a crash is

disenchantment with globalization and the Washington Consensus.              A fourth way in

which trade openness could be endogenous is through the feedbacks between trade and

financial openness.

        How can the endogeneity of trade be addressed? We use gravity estimates to

construct an instrumental variable for trade openness, the methodology developed by

Frankel and Romer (1999), in the context of the effect of trade on growth, and updated in

the Frankel and Rose (2002) dataset.

        The results reported in Table 2 show that openness reduces vulnerability to

sudden stops rather than increasing it.35 Not only does this relationship hold up when we

move from OLS to instrumental variables, but it appears stronger. The degree of trade

openness is a powerful predictor of these capital account shocks: moving from

Argentina’s current trade share (approximately .20 of GDP) to Australia’s average trade

share (approximately .30 of GDP), reduces the probability of a sudden stop by 32%. The

results for openness are the same when we seek to explain currency crashes. Trade

protectionism does not “shield” countries from the volatility of world markets as

proponents might hope. On the contrary, less trade openness leads to greater vulnerability

to sudden stops and currency crashes. In fact out of the set of controls we tried, openness

is the only variable that is virtually always statistically significant.36



35
  A more complete set of results is reported in Cavallo and Frankel (2004).
36
  The current account deficit as a share of GDP is always highly significant in the probit
regressions to determine sudden stops, and liability dollarization is sometimes; but not in

                                                                                         31
       4.3 Conclusion

       There are thus at least two ways of seeking to minimize vulnerability to sudden

stops, devaluations, and associated economic contractions: keeping the economy open to

trade, and keeping balance sheets strong by avoiding a shift to short-term dollar debt as a

means of procrastination., and keeping the economy open to trade.         TWe began this

lecture began by noting the frequency with which political leaders and ministers lose

office after a devaluation. But seeking to hold on to political viability is presumably the

precise reason why governments often procrastinate, why they feel they have to postpone

adjustment to balance of payments deficits, and instead run down reserves, shorten the

maturity of the debt, and borrow in dollars. So the openness strategy may be the most

robust option, politically as well as economically.




the currency crash equation. The reserve/import ratio is always highly significant in the
currency crash regression, and sometimes foreign debt/GDP and nominal exchange rate
rigidity, but not so in the first equation.




                                                                                        32
Figure 1a. Attaining Internal and External Balance: Traditional Version


                                     Overheating
                                                              Internal
  E                                                           balance

(Price of
foreign                                                       Recession
exchange)

or other
spending-
switching
policy

                                            Surplus            New external
                                                                 balance
                                  Deficit          Original
                                                   external
                                                   balance


              i (interest rate), or other expenditure-reducing policy




                                                                              33
Figure 1b. Attaining Internal and External Balance: When Devaluation is Contractionary




  E

(price of
foreign
exchange)


or other
spending-                                                        New
switching                                                       external
policy                                            Recession     balance


                                                    Internal
                                                    balance


              i (interest rate), or other expenditure-reducing policy




                                                                                    34
Table 1: Determination of Passthrough to Imported Goods Prices:
Developing Countries, Relative to Rich Countries (76 countries,1990-2001)

Source: Frankel, Parsley, and Wei (20054).




                                                               !       " #
                                                             #           #
                                                           " #         " #



                                   $           $%          "           "
                                                                           #
                         $%
                                                               #



                               & '( )
                               * +
                                 , -".,                            #

   / 01            / 0    2) 2
                                                                                        3    )2
  , 4          1) 2
                  ,           56 7 )5 2
                                      ,    (                   2
                                                               ,   2( 2
                                                                      2 5-     5




The 8 import commodities (given with their country of origin) are: Marlboro Cigarettes (US), Coca-cola
(US), Cognac (France), Gilbey’s gin (US), Time magazine (US), Kodak Color Film (US), Cointreau
Liqueur (France), and Martini & Rossi Vermouth (Italy).




                                                                                                         35
Figure 2. Exchange Rate Passthrough to Domestic Prices


passthrough coefficient

   0.6


   0.4


   0.2
              At the dock          Imported good                 Local             Consumer price
                                       prices                 competitor               index
                                                                prices



         Source: Frankel, Parsley, andWei (2004) – effect within one year, in 76 countries.
         Note:: Passthrough is greatest for prices of imports at dock, but less for retail and CPI




                                                                                                 36
                                  Figure 3: Pass-through and Income

          (Average 1990-2001; Country grouping based on world bank classification)
passthrough coefficient
   0.7
              12 countries
   0.6
                                                   36 countries
   0.5
   0.4
   0.3
   0.2
                                                                                    28 countries
   0.1
     0
                  Low income                     Middle income                      High income

         Source: Frankel, Parsley & Wei (2004) – Prices for 8 narrowly defined commodities
         imported into 76 countries; effect of exchange rate change within one year.

         Note: Passthrough for less developed countries is greater than for rich countries,
         historically.




                                                                                              37
Figure 4. Evolution of Mexico’s Reserves, from Sudden Stop to 1994 Currency Crash


US$
 30
    billion




 25




 20




                                                                                                                                                                                              IMF PROGRAM

 15




                                                                                                                                                                                 CRISIS


 10




  5                                                                                          1993M12
                                                                                                   1994M1 1994M2 1994M3 1994M4 1994M5 1994M6 1994M7 1994M8 1994M9   1994M101994M111994M12
                                                                                                                                                                                        1995M1 1995M2 1995M3 1995M4
      1992M12
            1993M1 1993M2 1993M3 1993M4 1993M5 1993M6   1993M7 1993M8 1993M9   1993M101993M11




                                                                                                  Level     3-month moving average


Source: IMF International Financial Statistics


                                                                                                                                                                                                          38
Figure 5. Evolution of Mexican Debt According to Currency Denomination, 1992-95
 (in percent)
   80


   70


   60


   50


   40


   30


   20


   10


       0               May-92                          May-93                        May-94
                                                                                Mar-94
            Jan-92Mar-92               Nov-92
                            Jul-92Sep-92    Jan-93Mar-93              Nov-93
                                                           Jul-93Sep-93    Jan-94                   Nov-94
                                                                                          Jul- Sep-94    Jan-95
                                                                                                              Mar-95
                                                                                                                   May-95         Nov-95
                                                                                                                       Jul-95Sep-95
                                                                                          94




                                         Tesobonos/(tesobonos+cetes)           Tesobonos/total domestic debt



Source: Mexican Ministry of Finance and Public Credit.

Figure 6. Evolution of Mexican Debt According to Maturity, 1992-95
 (in percent)                                                                                                                  (days)
 100                                                                                                                                    500




  98                                                                                                                                    400




  96                                                                                                                                    300




  94                                                                                                                                    200




  92                                                                                                                                    100




  90                     May-92
                    Mar-92              Nov-92
                             Jul-92Sep-92               May-93
                                             Jan-93Mar-93              Nov-93
                                                            Jul-93Sep-93               May-94
                                                                            Jan-94Mar-94              Nov-94
                                                                                           Jul-94Sep-94         Mar-95
                                                                                                           Jan-95                        0
           Jan-92                                                                                                    May-95         Nov-95
                                                                                                                         Jul-95Sep-95




                              Percent long term/(long + short) - left axis           Average maturity in days - right axis


Source: Mexican Ministry of Finance and Public Credit.




                                                                                                                                              39
Table 2:
Effect of openness (trade/GDP) on vulnerability to sudden stops and currency crashes

Source: Cavallo and Frankel (2004)

                                  To predict sudden stops                          To predict currency crashes
                                  (Calvo et al definition)                      (Frankel & Wei, 20054 definition)

                           Ordinary probit                     IV               Ordinary probit                       IV

                                     -0.53                     -2.45                      -0.57                      -1.73
   Trade openness t
                                  (0.259)**                 (0.813)**                   (0.269)**                  (0.918)*
                                    -0.080                     0.196                       0.23                       0.59
Foreign Debt/GDP t-1
                                   (0.217)                    (0.275)                    (0.231)                    (0.373)
      Liability                     0.316                      0.591                      0.027                       0.18
    Dollarizationt-1               (0.195)                  (0.256)**                    (0.249)                    (0.234)
                                                                                           0.13                       0.22
Exchange rate rigidity
                                                                                         (0.094)                   (0.113)*
                                   -4.068                     -7.386                     -0.272                       0.66
      CA/GDP t-1
                                 (1.297)**                   (2.06)***                   (1.392)                    (1.455)
ln Reserves in Months                                                                     -0.26                      -0.37
    of Imports t-1                                                                     (0.082)***                 (0.099)***
                                   -2.544                      -1.73                      -0.99                      0.304
       Constant
                                 (0.63)***                   (0.723)**                   (0.749)                    (0.786)
         Obs.                       778                        1062                        557                        841



Robust standard errors reported in parenthesis.
*** Statistically Significant at 1%
** Statistically Significant at 5%
* Statistically Significant at 10%
Estimation performed with regional dummies and year fixed effects.
IV is the gravity-based instrumental variable for trade openness from Frankel-Romer (1999) and Frankel-Rose (2002).




                                                                                                                               40
References


Aghion, P., P. Bacchetta, and A. Banerjee, 2000, “A Simple Model of Monetary Policy and
Currency Crises,” European Economic Review, Vol. 44, Nos. 4-6 (May), pp 728-738.

Aizenman, Joshua, 2003, “On the Hidden Links Between Financial and Trade Opening,” NBER
Working Paper No. w9906 (Cambridge: National Bureau of Economic Research).

Aizenman, Joshua, and I. Noy, 2004, “On the Two Way Feedback between Financial and Trade
Openness,” NBER Working Paper No. 10496 (Cambridge: National Bureau of Economic
Research).

Berg, Andrew, Eduardo Borensztein, Gian Maria Milesi-Ferreti, and Catherine Pattillo. 1999.
“Anticipating Balance of Payments Crises: The Role of Early Warning Systems.” Occasional
Paper 186 (Washington, D.C.: International Monetary Fund).

Bienen, Henry, and Mark Gersovitz, 1985, “Economic Stabilization, Conditionality, and Political
Stability,” International Organization, 39, no. 4 (Autumn): pp. 728-754.

Borensztein, Eduardo, and Jose De Gregorio, 1999, “Devaluation and Inflation after Currency
Crises,” (Washington, D.C.: International Monetary Fund).

Brender, Adi, and Alan Drazen, 2004, “Political Budget Cycles in New Versus Established
Democracies,” NBER WP No. 10539 (Cambridge: National Bureau of Economic Research).

Broner, Fernando, Guido Lorenzoni, Sergio Schmukler, 2004, “Why Do Emerging Economies
Borrow Short Term?” Fifth Annual Research Conference, International Monetary Fund,
November.

Burstein, Ariel, Martin Eichenbaum, and Sergio Rebelo, 2002, “Why Are Rates of Inflation So
Low After Large Devaluations?” NBER Working Paper No. 8748 (Cambridge, Massachusetts:
National Bureau of Economic Research), January.

Caballero, R., and A. Krishnamurthy, 2003, “Excessive Dollar Debt: Financial Development and
Underinsurance,” Journal of Finance, Vol. 58, No. 2 (April), pp. 867-893.

Calvo, Guillermo A., 1998, “Capital Flows and Capital-Market Crises: The Simple Economics of
Sudden Stops,” Journal of Applied Economics (CEMA), Vol. 1, No. 1., pp 35-54.

Calvo, Guillermo A., Alejandro Izquierdo and Luis Fernando Mejía, 2003, “On the Empirics of
Sudden Stops,” Inter-American Development Bank Working Paper. (Washington, D.C. Inter-
American Development Bank).

Calvo, Guillermo, Alejandro Izquierdo, and Ernesto Talvi, 2003, “Sudden Stops, The Real
Exchange Rate, and Fiscal Sustainability: Argentina’s Lessons,” NBER Working Paper
9828(Cambridge: National Bureau of Economic Research).

Calvo, Guillermo, and Ernesto Talvi, 2004, “Sudden Stop, Financial Factors and Economic
Collapse: A View from the Latin American Frontlines,” in From the Washington Consensus
Towards a New Global Governance, Barcelona, Sept. 24-26.


                                                                                              41
Calvo, Guillermo, and Carmen Reinhart, 2001, “When Capital Inflows Come to a Sudden Stop:
Consequences and Policy Options,” in Key Issues in Reform of the International Monetary
System, International Monetary Fund, edited by Peter Kenen and Alexander Swoboda.

Campa, Jose, and Linda Goldberg, 2002, “Exchange Rate Pass-Through into Import Prices, A
Macro or Micro Phenomenon?” NBER Working Paper No. 8934 (Cambridge: National Bureau of
Economic Research).

Cavallo, Eduardo A., 2004, “Trade, Gravity and Sudden Stops: On How Commercial Trade can
increase the stability of capital flows”, mimeograph, Harvard University.

Cavallo, Eduardo, and Jeffrey Frankel, 2004, “Does Openness to Trade Make Countries More
Vulnerable to Sudden Stops, or Less? Using Gravity to Establish Causality,” KSG Working Paper
Number RWP04-038, Harvard University. NBER Working Paper No. 10957(Cambridge:
National Bureau of Economic Research).

Cavallo, Michelle, Kate Kisselev, Fabrizio Perri and Nouriel Roubini, 2002, “Exchange Rate
Overshooting and the Costs of Floating,” mimeograph, New York University.

Céspedes, Luis Felipe, 2004, “Financial Frictions and Real Devaluations,” Central Bank of Chile,
October.

Céspedes, L.F., R. Chang and A. Velasco, 2003, “IS-LM-BP in the Pampas,” Staff Papers,
International Monetary Fund, Vol. 50, (special issue), pp 143-156.

Céspedes, L.F., R. Chang and A. Velasco, 2004, "Balance Sheets and Exchange Rate Policy"
The American Economic Review, Vol. 94, No. 4 (September), pp. 1183-1193.

Chamon, Marcos, and Ricardo Hausmann, 2005, “Why Do Countries Borrow the Way they
Borrow?,” in Barry Eichengreen and Ricardo Hausmann, eds., Other People's Money: Debt
Denomination and Financial Instability in Emerging Market Economies (Chicago: University of
Chicago Press).

Chang, Roberto and Andres Velasco, 1999, “Financial Crises in Emerging Markets, A
Canonical Model”, FRBA, Vol. 84, no. 2 (Second Quarter): 4-17.

Chang, Roberto and Andres Velasco, 2004, “Debt Denomination and the Exchange Rate
Regime: A Tale of Two Equilibria,” June.

Choudhri, Ehsan, and Dalia Hakura, 2001, “Exchange Rate Pass-Through to Domestic Prices:
Does the Inflationary Environment Matter?” IMF Working Paper WP/01/194 (Washington:
International Monetary Fund).

Christiano, L.J., C. Gust and J. Roldos, 2004, “Monetary Policy in a Financial Crisis”, Journal of
Economic Theory, Vol. 119, No. 1 (November), pp. 64-103.

Cooper, Richard, 1971, “Currency Devaluation in Developing Countries,” Essays in
International Finance No. 86, (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University).

Corbo, Vittorio, 1985, “Reforms and Macroeconomic Adjustments in Chile during 1974-1984,”
World Development, Vol. 13, No. 8, (August), pp. 893-916.

                                                                                               42
Desai, Padma, and Pritha Mitra, 2004, “Why Do Some Countries Recover More Readily from
Financial Crises” (New York: Columbia University), July.

Diaz-Alejandro, Carlos, 1963, “A Note on the Impact of Devaluation and the Redistribution
Effect,” Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 71, No. 6, (December), pp. 577-580.

Dornbusch, Rudiger, 2002, “A Primer on Emerging Market Crises,” in S. Edwards and J. Frankel,
eds., Preventing Currency Crises in Emerging Markets, (Chicago: University of Chicago Press).

Dornbusch, Rudiger, Ilan Goldfajn and Rodrigo Valdes, (1995), “Currency Crises and
Collapses”, Brooking Papers on Economic Activity, 2: 219-293.

Eaton, Jonathan and Mark Gersovitz, 1981, “Debt with Potential Repudiation: Theoretical and
Empirical Analysis”, The Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 48, No.2 (April), 289-309.

Edwards, Sebastian, 1986, “Are Devaluations Contractionary?” Review of Economics and
Statistics, Vol. 68, No. 3 (August), pp. 501-508.

Edwards, Sebastian, 1994, "The Political Economy of Inflation and Stabilization in Developing
Countries," NBER WP 4319; in Economic Development and Cultural Change, Vol. 42, No. 2
(January), pp. 235-66,

Edwards, Sebastian, 2004a, “Financial Openness, Sudden Stops and Current Account Reversals”,
NBER Working Paper No. 10277 (Cambridge: National Bureau of Economic Research).

Edwards, Sebastian, 2004b, “Thirty Years of Current Account Imbalances, Current Account
Reversals and Sudden Stops,” NBER Working Paper No. 10276 (Cambridge: National Bureau of
Economic Research).

Edwards, Sebastian, and Julio Santaella, 1993, “Devaluation Controversies in the Developing
Countries: Lessons from the Bretton Woods Era,” in Michael Bordo and Barry Eichengreen, eds.,
Retrospective on the Bretton Woods System (Chicago: University of Chicago Press).

Eichengreen, Barry, 1999. Toward a New Financial Architecture: A Practical Post-Asia Agenda
(Washington, DC: Institute for International Economics).

Eichengreen, Barry, and Ricardo Hausmann, 1999, “Exchange Rates and Financial Fragility,” in
New Challenges for Monetary Policy (Kansas City: Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City), pp.
329-368.

Eichengreen, Barry, and Andrew Rose "Staying Afloat When the Wind Shifts: External Factors
and Emerging-Market Banking Crises," in Guillermo Calvo, Rudiger Dornbusch and Maurice
Obstfeld, eds., Money, Factor Mobility and Trade: Essays in Honor of Robert Mundell
(Cambridge: MIT Press), pp. 171-206.

Fleming, J. M., 1962, “Domestic financial policies under fixed and under floating exchange
rates,” Staff Paper, International Monetary Fund, Vol. 9, No. 3, pp. 369-79.

Flood, Robert, and Nancy Marion, 2001, “Perspectives on the Recent Currency Crisis Literature,”
in Guillermo Calvo, Rudiger Dornbusch, and Maurice Obstfeld, eds., Money, Capital Mobility,
and Trade: Essays in Honor of Robert Mundell (Cambridge: MIT Press), pp. 207-249.


                                                                                             43
Frankel, Jeffrey, David Parsley and Shang-Jin Wei, 2005, “Slow Passthrough Around the World:
A New Import for Developing Countries?” KSG RWP05 (Cambridge: Harvard University);
NBER working paper no. 11199, March 2005.

Frankel, Jeffrey, and David Romer, 1999, “Does Trade Cause Growth?” American Economic
Review, Vol. 89, No. 3 (June), pp. 379-399.

Frankel, Jeffrey, and Andrew Rose, 1996, “Currency Crashes in Emerging Markets: An Empirical
Treatment,” Journal of International Economics Vol. 41, Nos. 3-4 (November) pp. 351-368.

Frankel, Jeffrey, and Andrew Rose, 2002, “An Estimate of the Effect of Common Currencies on
Trade and Income,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol 117, Issue 2 (May), pp. 437-466

Frankel, Jeffrey, and Shang-Jin Wei, 2005, “Managing Macroeconomic Crises: Policy Lessons,”
in Joshua Aizenman and Brian Pinto, eds., Economic Volatility and Crises: A Policy-Oriented
Guide (Washington: The World Bank).

Froot, Kenneth, and Paul Klemperer, 1989, “Exchange Rate Pass-Through When Market Share
Matters,” American Economic Review, Vol. 79, No. 4 (September), pp. 637-54.

Furman, Jason, and Joseph Stiglitz, 1998, “Economic Crises: Evidence and Insights from East
Asia,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Vol. 2, pp. 115-135.

Gagnon, Joseph, and Jane Ihrig, 2004 “Monetary Policy and Exchange Rate Pass-Through”
International Journal of Finance and Economics, Vol. 9, No. 4 (October), pp. 315-338.

Goldfajn, Ilan, and Sergio Werlang, 2000, “The Pass-Through from Depreciation to Inflation: A
Panel Study,” Economics Department, PUC-Rio, Texto Para Discussao No. 424.

Goldstein, Morris, Graciela Kaminsky and Carmen Reinhart, 2000, Assessing Financial
Vulnerability: An Early Warning System for Emerging Markets (Washington: Institute for
International Economics).

Goldstein, Morris, and Philip Turner, 2004, Controlling Currency Mismatches in Emerging
Markets (Washington: Institute for International Economics).

Guidotti, Pablo, Federico Sturzenegger and Agustin Villar, 2004, “On the Consequences of
Sudden Stops,” Economia, Vol. 4, No. 2 (Spring), pp. 171-214.

Hausmann, Ricardo, and Ugo Panizza, 2003, “On the Determinants of Original Sin: An Empirical
Investigation,” Journal of International Money and Finance, Vol. 22, No. 7 (December), pp.
957-990.

Jeanne, Olivier, 2005, "Why Do Emerging Market Economies Borrow in Foreign Currency?"
IMF Working Paper 03/177 (Washington: International Monetary Fund). In Barry Eichengreen
and Ricardo Hausmann, eds., Other People's Money: Debt Denomination and Financial
Instability in Emerging Market Economies (Chicago: University of Chicago Press).

Jeanne, Olivier, and Jeromin Zettelmeyer, 2005, "Original Sin, Balance Sheet Crises and the
Roles of International Lendin," IMF WP02/234 (Washington: International Monetary Fund). In
Barry Eichengreen and Ricardo Hausmann, eds., Other People's Money: Debt Denomination and
Financial Instability in Emerging Market Economies (Chicago:University of Chicago Press).

                                                                                            44
Kamin, Steven, 1988, “Devaluation, External Balance, and Macroeconomic Performance: A
Look at the Numbers,” Studies in International Finance, No. 62 (Princeton University, August).

Kiyotaki, N. and J. Moore, 1997, “Credit Cycles,” Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 105, No. 2,
pp. 211-248.

Knetter, Michael, 1993, “International Comparisons of Price-to-Market Behavior,” American
Economic Review, Vol. 83, No. 3 (June), pp. 473-86.

Krugman, Paul, 1987, “Pricing to Market When the Exchange Rate Changes,” in Sven Arndt and
J. David Richardson, eds., Real-Financial Linkages Among Open Economies (Cambridge: MIT
Press), pp. 49-70.

Krugman Paul, 1999, “Balance Sheets Effects, the Transfer Problem and Financial Crises,” in
Isard P., A. Razin and A.K. Rose, eds., International Finance and Financial Crises: Essays in
Honour of Robert P. Flood, Jr., (New York: Kluwer Academic Publishers), pp. 31-44.

Lora, Eduardo, and Mauricio Olivera, 2004, “The Electoral Consequences of the Washington
Consensus,” (Washington: Inter-American Development Bank), May 4.

Mendoza, Enrique, 2002, “Credit, Prices and Crashes: Business Cycles with a Sudden Stop”, in
Preventing Currency Crises in Emerging Markets, Frankel, J. and S. Edwards (eds.), Chicago, IL:
University of Chicago Press.

Milesi-Ferretti, Gian Maria, and Assaf Razin, 1998, “Sharp Reductions in Current Account
Deficits: An Empirical Analysis.” European Economic Review, Vol. 42, (May), pp. 897-908.

---------. 2000. “Current Account Reversals and Currency Crises: Empirical Regularities,” in Paul
Krugman, ed., Currency Crises (Chicago: University of Chicago Press).

Mulder, Christian, Roberto Perrelli, and Manuel Rocha, 2002, “The Role of Corporate, Legal and
Macroeconomic Balance Sheet Indicators in Crisis Detection and Prevention,” IMF Working
Paper 02/59 (Washington: International Monetary Fund).

Mundell, Robert, 1963, "Capital Mobility and Stabilization Policy under Fixed and Flexible
Exchange Rates," Canadian Journal of Economics and Political Science, (November). Or as
adapted in his International Economics (New York: Macmillan,1968), pp. 250-262.

Otani, Akira, Shigenori Shiratsuka, and Toyoichiro Shirota, 2003, “The Decline in the Exchange
Rate Pass-Through: Evidence from Japanese Import Prices,” Monetary and Economic Studies,
Bank of Japan, Vol. 21, No. 3 (October) pp.53-81.

Pathak, Parag, and Jean Tirole, 2004, “Pegs, Risk Management, and Financial Crises,” Annual
Research Conference, International Monetary Fund, Nov. 4-5.

Radelet, Steven, and Jeffrey Sachs, 1998, "The East Asian Financial Crisis: Diagnosis, Remedies,
Prospects," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Vol. 1, pp. 1-74 & 88-90.

Rodrik, Dani, and Andres Velasco, 2000, “Short-Term Capital Flows,” in Annual World Bank
Conference on Development Economics 1999 (Washington: The World Bank).


                                                                                                45
Rose, Andrew, 2002, “A Reason Why Countries Pay their Debts: Renegotiation and International
Trade”, NBER Working Paper No. 8853 (Cambridge: National Bureau of Economic Research).

Sachs, Jeffrey, 1985, "External Debt and Macroeconomic Performance in Latin America and East
Asia," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Vol. 2, pp. 523-573.

Schneider, Martin, and Aaron Tornell, 2001, “Boom Bust Cycles and the Balance Sheet Effect,”
NBER Working Paper No. 8060 (Cambridge: National Bureau of Economic Research).

Stein, Ernesto and Jorge Streb, 1998, "Political Stabilization Cycles in High Inflation
Economies," Journal of Development Economics, Vol. 56 (June), pp. 159-180.

Stein, Ernesto and Jorge Streb, 1999, "Elections and the Timing of Devaluations," Inter-
American Development Bank Working Paper No. 396 (Washington: Inter-American
Development Bank).

Taylor, John, 2000, “Low Inflation, Pass-Through and the Pricing Power of Firms,” European
Economic Review, Vol. 44, No. 7 ( June), pp. 1389-1408.




                                                                                           46
Appendix 1. Currency Crashes and Frequency of Changes of
Policymakers in Developing Countries; There are 103 countries in the
sample.

A.   Change in Premier or Chief Executive: One-Year Horizon, 1970–2003
                                 12-Month Period                                All Other 12-Month
                                   Following a                                        Periods
                                   Devaluation
           Change                       51                                                   679
          observed                   (27.1 %)                                              (20.5%)
          No change                    137                                                  2,635
          observed                   (72.9%)                                              (79.51%)
            Total                      188                                                  3,314

                                        P-value for the difference is 0.126.


Graph of number of episodes of devaluations and number of premier changes over time
   Developing Countries – Six-month period

             Number of currency crash episodes and premier changes across the world
                                                              (1970–2003)

     25

                          Premier change
                          Devaluation episode
     20




     15




     10




      5




      0
                                                    1981
                                                           1982
                                                                  1983
                                                                  1984
                                                                         1985
                                                                         1986
                                                                                1987
                                                                                1988
                                                                                       1989
                                                                                              1990
                                                                                              1991
                                                                                                     1992
                                                                                                     1993
                                                                                                            1994




                                                                                                                                        2000
                                                                                                                                        2001
                                                                                                                                               2002
                                                                                                                                               2003
                                      1977
                                             1978
                                             1979
                                                    1980




                                                                                                                   1995
                                                                                                                   1996
                                                                                                                          1997
                                                                                                                          1998
                                                                                                                                 1999
          1970
          1971
                 1972
                        1973
                        1974
                               1975
                               1976




              Note: The correlation between the two series is 18.1 percent.




                                                                                                                                        47
B.    Change in Premier or Chief Executive: One-Year Horizon, 1970–2003
                             12-Month Period                All Other 12-Month
                               Following a                        Periods
                               Devaluation
            Change                  41                                459
           observed              (29.1%)                            (21.4%)
           No change               100                               1,683
           observed              (70.9%)                            (78.6%)
             Total                 141                               2,142

     Note: “Own turnover” — The reference set is only those developing countries that have
     experienced a currency crash at some point. P-value for the difference is 0.0133.


C. Change in Premier or Chief Executive: Six-Month Horizon, 1970–2003


                             6-Month Period              All Other 6-Month Periods
                         Following a Devaluation
           Change                   36                                 812
          observed              (19.05 %)                            (11.6%)
          No change                153                                6,192
          observed               (81.0%)                             (88.4%)
            Total                  189                                7,004
                                Note: P-value for the difference is 0.004; t-statistic is 2.71.



D. Change in Premier or Chief Executive: Six-Month Horizon, 1970-2003


                            6- Months Period            All Other 6-Month Periods
                         Following a Devaluation
           Change                   31                                492
          observed               (22.0%)                            (11.5 %)
          No change                110                               3,792
          observed               (78.0%)                            (88.5%)
            Total                  141                               4,284

     Note: “Own turnover” – reference set is only for those developing countries which have
     experienced currency crash at some point. P-value for the difference is 0.0022.




                                                                                                  48
E. Change in Finance Minister or Central Bank Governor: One-year horizon.


                                  When a devaluation                All Years
                                      occurred
       Change of Governor                  14                          212
           observed                     (58.3%)                      (35.8%)
      No change of Governor                10                          380
            observed                    (41.7%)                      (64.1%)
              Total                        24                          592

      Note: The data pertain to the IMF Board of Governors Membership from 1995–1999,
      inclusive. The probability of the IMF governor of a country changing is 1.63 times larger
      when there was a currency crash. T-statistic is 3.56. P-value is 0.001.

F. One-Year Horizon, Change in Premier or Chief Executive by Income Level

   (1) Rich Countries

                           1-Year Period Following          All Other 1-Year Periods
                                a Devaluation
         Change                       0                                212
        observed                     (–)                             (28.3%)
        No change                     0                                536
        observed                     (–)                             (71.7%)
          Total                       0                                748


   (2) Middle-Income Countries

                          1-Year Period Following           All Other 1-Year Periods
                               a Devaluation
        Change                       29                                 508
       observed                   (29.3%)                            (20.2%)
       No change                     70                                2012
       observed                   (70.7%)                            (79.8%)
         Total                       99                                2520
              Note: P-value for the difference is 0.3419.




                                                                                            49
   (3) Poor Countries

                         1-Year Period Following           All Other 1-Year Periods
                              a Devaluation
        Change                      22                                171
       observed                  (24.4%)                           (16.8%)
       No change                    68                                845
       observed                  (75.6%)                           (83.2%)
         Total                      90                               1016
             Note: P-value for the difference is 0.2041.



G. Six-Month Horizon, Change in Premier or Chief Executive by Income Level

   (1) Rich Countries

                             6-Month Period                All Other 6-Month Periods
                         Following a Devaluation
        Change                      0                                235
       observed                    (–)                             (15.7%)
       No change                    0                               1,261
       observed                    (–)                             (84.3%)
         Total                      0                               1,496


   (2) Middle Income Countries

                             6-Month Period                All Other 6-Month Periods
                         Following a Devaluation
        Change                      22                               581
       observed                  (22.2%)                           (11.5%)
       No change                    77                              4,459
       observed                  (77.8%)                           (88.5%)
         Total                      99                              5,040
             Note: P-value for the difference is 0.0224.

   (3) Poor Countries

                             6-Month Period                All Other 6-Month Periods
                         Following a Devaluation
        Change                      14                                195
       observed                  (15.6%)                            (9.6%)
       No change                    76                               1,837
       observed                  (84.4%)                           (90.4%)
         Total                      90                               2,032
             Note: P-value for the difference is 0.1740.


                                                                                       50
H. Changes in Leadership According to Political System
(1) One-Year Horizon, Change in Premier or Chief Executive by Income Level and Political
System

                                         Low-Income        Middle-Income         All Developing
                                          Countries          Countries              Countries
                      Job losses
                                               11                 23                   34
                         (job
 Presidential                               (31.4%)            (38.3%)              (35.8%)
                 losses/devaluations)
                     Devaluations              35                 60                   95
                      Job losses
                                               0                  3                    3
                         (job
Parliamentary                               (0.0%)             (15.8%)              (14.3%)
                 losses/devaluations)
                     Devaluations              2                  19                   21
                      Job losses
                                               10                 4                    14
   Non-                  (job
                                            (18.9%)            (20.0%)              (19.2%)
 democracy       losses/devaluations)
                     Devaluations              53                 20                   73
                      Job losses
    All                                        21                 30                   51
                         (job
 Developing                                 (23.3%)            (30.3%)              (27.0%)
                 losses/devaluations)
  Countries
                     Devaluations              90                 99                   189

(2) Six-Month Horizon, Change in Premier or Chief Executive by Income Level and Political
System

                                          Low Income       Middle Income       All Developing
                                           Countries         Countries            Countries
                      Job losses
                                               7                  18                  25
                         (job
 Presidential                               (20.0%)            (30.0%)             (26.3%)
                 losses/devaluations)
                     Devaluations              35                 60                  95
                      Job losses
                                                0                  1                   1
                         (job
Parliamentary                                (0.0%)             (5.3%)              (4.8%)
                 losses/devaluations)
                     Devaluations               2                 19                  21
                      Job losses
                                               7                  3                   10
   Non-                  (job
                                            (13.2%)            (15.0%)             (13.7%)
 democracy       losses/devaluations)
                     Devaluations              53                 20                  73
                      Job Losses
    All                                        14                 22                  36
                         (job
 Developing                                 (15.6%)            (22.2%)             (19.0%)
                 losses/devaluations)
  Countries
                     Devaluations              90                 99                  189



                                                                                            51
I. Change In Premier, Controlling for Start of an IMF Program (Within 3 Months
   on Either Side of a Currency Crash)

   The table summarizes the statistics of devaluations, job loss, and IMF programs in the 1990s
   and 2000s.


                        Premier Change           Premier Change Did Not         Total
                       Occurred Within 6         Occur Within 6 months
                            months
 Cases with an                 4                             15
 IMF program               (21.05%)                       (78.95%)                      19
                           (20.00%)                       (20.83%)
Cases without an              16                             57
 IMF program               (21.92%)                       (78.08%)                      73
                           (80.00%)                       (79.17%)

      Total                      20                           72                        92

   The t-test below compares the probability that devaluation leads to a premier change within
   six months when there is an IMF program (21 percent) with the probability of a premier
   change occurring within six months (in general). The P-value is much larger, at 20 percent.



                Ha: diff < 0                   Ha: diff = 0                     Ha: diff > 0
                t = –0.8781                    t = –0.8781                      t = –0.8781
                P < t = 0.196                  P > |t| = 0.391                  P > t = 0.804



        Comparing IMF and non-IMF devaluation cases, and the probability with which
each leads to a change of leader within six months, shows that there is no significant
difference between the two groups.


                Ha: diff < 0                   Ha: diff= 0                      Ha: diff > 0
                t = 0.0803                     t = 0.0803                       t = 0.0803
                P < t = 0.5317                 P > |t| = 0.9366                 P>t=
       0.4683




                                                                                               52
When comparing the probability that devaluation without an IMF program leads to a change
of leader within six months with the probability of premier change occurring within six
months under normal circumstances, we find the former is significantly higher than the latter.



          Ha: diff < 0                       Ha: diff = 0                     Ha: diff > 0
          t = –1.901                         t = –1.901                       t = –1.901
          P < t = 0.031                      P > |t| = 0.061                  P > t = 0.969




                                                                                           53
      Appendix 2 : IMF country programs, with dates of approval
country              begin      appryr                comamt      drawnamt    Comments
                                                                              Cancelled prior to expiration date 8/25/93.
ALBANIA              Stand-By             8/26/1992          20       13.12   Replaced by ESAF on 7/14/1993.
ALGERIA              Stand-By              6/3/1991        300         225
ALGERIA              Stand-By             5/27/1994       457.2       385.2   Cancelled.
ALGERIA              EFF                  5/22/1995     1169.28     1169.28
ARGENTINA            Stand-By             7/29/1991        780        292.5   Cancelled prior to expiration date of 6/30/92.
                                                                              Extended from 3/30/95 to 4/30/95 and then
ARGENTINA            EFF                  3/31/1992     4020.25     4020.25   to 3/30/96. Approved amount increased.
ARGENTINA            Stand-By             4/12/1996        720         613
                                                                              At time of approval, purchase schedule
ARGENTINA            EFF                   2/4/1998        2080           0   decided through 11/98.
ARGENTINA            Stand-By             3/10/2000     10585.5      3834.3
ARMENIA              Stand-By             6/28/1995       43.88        13.5   Cancelled prior to expiration of 6/27/96.
AZERBAIJAN           Stand-By            11/17/1995        58.5        58.5
AZERBAIJAN           EFF                 12/20/1996        58.5       53.24   Extended from 12/19/99 to 3/19/2000.
BELARUS              Stand-By             9/12/1995      196.28          50
BRAZIL               Stand-By             1/29/1992        1500       127.5
BRAZIL               Stand-By             12/2/1998    10419.84     7869.15   Amounts exclude SRF drawing of SDR 2.6 b.
BRAZIL               Stand-By             9/14/2001        2193           0
BULGARIA             Stand-By             3/15/1991         279        279    Followed by another stand-by on 4/17/1992.
BULGARIA             Stand-By             4/17/1992         155        124    Approved after expiration of 3/15/91 stand-by.
BULGARIA             Stand-By             4/11/1994      139.48      116.24   Approved amount increased in 9/94.
                                                                              Cancelled prior to expiration date of 3/18/98.
BULGARIA             Stand-By             7/19/1996         400          80   Replaced by another stand-by on 4/11/97.
BULGARIA             Stand-By             4/11/1997       371.9       371.9   Replaced the 6/19/96 stand-by.
BULGARIA             EFF                  9/25/1998      627.62         523
CAMEROON             Stand-By            12/20/1991          28           8
CAMEROON             Stand-By             3/14/1994       81.06       21.91   Followed by another stand-by on 9/27/95.
CAMEROON             Stand-By             9/27/1995        67.6        28.2   Approved after expiration of 3/14/94 stand-by.
CENTRAL AFRICAN
REPUBLIC             Stand-By             3/28/1994       16.48       10.71
CHAD                 Stand-By             3/23/1994       16.52       10.32
COLOMBIA             EFF                 12/20/1999        1957           0
CONGO, REP OF        Stand-By             8/27/1990       27.98           4
CONGO, REP OF        Stand-By             5/27/1994       23.16        12.5
COSTA RICA           Stand-By              4/8/1991       33.64       25.64   Extended from 4/7/92.
COSTA RICA           Stand-By             4/19/1993       21.04           0
COSTA RICA           Stand-By            11/29/1995          52           0
COTE D'
      IVOIRE         Stand-By             9/20/1991       82.75        33.1
CROATIA              Stand-By            10/14/1994        65.4       13.08
CROATIA              EFF                  3/12/1997      353.16       28.78
CROATIA              Stand-By             3/19/2001         200           0   Precautionary arrangement.
CZECH REPUBLIC       Stand-By             3/17/1993         177          70
                                                                              Extended from 3/6/92.
CZECHOSLOVAKIA       Stand-By              1/7/1991       619.5       619.5   Followed by another stand-by 4/3/92.
                                                                              Cancelled prior to expiration date 4/2/93
CZECHOSLOVAKIA       Stand-By              4/3/1992         236          36   (Czechoslovakia ceased to exist on 1/1/93).
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC   Stand-By             8/28/1991       39.24       39.24   Followed by another stand-by on 7/9/1993.
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC   Stand-By              7/9/1993        31.8        16.8
ECUADOR              Stand-By            12/11/1991          75       18.56
                                                                              Approved amount increased in 11/94.
ECUADOR              Stand-By             5/11/1994       173.9        98.9   Cancelled prior to expiration date 3/31/96.
ECUADOR              Stand-By             4/19/2000      226.73      113.35
EGYPT                Stand-By             5/17/1991       234.4       147.2   Extended from 11/30/92 .
EGYPT                EFF                  9/20/1993         400           0
EGYPT                Stand-By            10/11/1996       271.4           0   Precautionary arrangement.
EL SALVADOR          Stand-By             8/27/1990        35.6           0
EL SALVADOR          Stand-By              1/6/1992        41.5           0   Followed by another stand-by 5/10/93.

                                                                                                               54
                                                              Approved after expiration of 1/6/92 stand-by.
EL SALVADOR       Stand-By    5/10/1993     47.11         0   Extended from 3/9/94. Amount increased 11/94.
EL SALVADOR       Stand-By    7/21/1995     37.68         0
EL SALVADOR       Stand-By    2/28/1997     37.68         0   Extended from 4/27/98.
EL SALVADOR       Stand-By    9/23/1998     37.68         0
ESTONIA           Stand-By    9/16/1992      27.9      27.9   Followed by another stand-by 10/27/93.
                                                              Approved after expiration of 9/16/92 stand-by.
ESTONIA           Stand-By   10/27/1993     11.63     11.63   Followed by another stand-by on 4/11/95.
                                                              Approved after expiration of 10/27/93 stand-by.
ESTONIA           Stand-By    4/11/1995     13.95         0   Followed by another stand-by on 7/29/1996.
ESTONIA           Stand-By    7/29/1996     13.95         0   Approved after expiration of 4/11/95 stand-by.
ESTONIA           Stand-By   12/17/1997      16.1         0   Precautionary arrangement.
ESTONIA           Stand-By     3/1/2000     29.34         0   Precautionary arrangement.
GABON             Stand-By    9/30/1991        28         4
GABON             Stand-By    3/30/1994      38.6      38.6
GABON             EFF         11/8/1995     110.3     60.67   Extended from 11/7/98 to 3/7/99.
GABON             Stand-By   10/23/2000     92.58     13.22
GEORGIA           Stand-By    6/28/1995     72.15      22.2   Cancelled prior to expiration date 6/27/96.
GUATEMALA         Stand-By   12/18/1992        54         0
HAITI             Stand-By     3/8/1995        20      16.4
HONDURAS          Stand-By    7/27/1990      30.5      30.5   Extended from 7/26/91.
HUNGARY           Stand-By    3/14/1990    159.21    127.37   Cancelled prior to expiration date 3/13/1991
HUNGARY           EFF         2/20/1991     1114     557.23   Cancelled prior to expiration date 2/19/94.
HUNGARY           Stand-By    9/15/1993      340       56.7
HUNGARY           Stand-By    3/15/1996    264.18         0
INDIA             Stand-By    1/18/1991    551.93    551.93
INDIA             Stand-By   10/31/1991     1656      1656
                                                              Approved under Fund'   s emergency procedures.
                                                              Access increased 7/15/98. Cancelled prior to
INDONESIA         Stand-By    11/5/1997   8338.24   3669.12    expiration date 11/4/2000.
                                                              Prior SBA cancelled, replaced by EFF.
                                                              EFF to cover remaining period of SBA
                                                              Cancelled before expiration date 11/5/00,
INDONESIA         EFF         8/25/1998    5383.1    3797.7   replaced by EFF on 2/4/00.
INDONESIA         EFF          2/4/2000      3638    851.15
JAMAICA           Stand-By    3/23/1990        82        82   Followed by another stand-by on 6/28/91.
JAMAICA           Stand-By    6/28/1991     43.65     43.65   Extended from 6/30/92.
JAMAICA           EFF        12/11/1992    109.13     86.75   Extended from 12/10/95 to 2/24/96 and 3/16/96.
JORDAN            Stand-By    2/26/1992      44.4      44.4   Extended from 8/25/93.
                                                              Approved amount increased in 9/94 and 2/95.
                                                              Cancelled prior to expiration date 5/24/1997.
JORDAN            EFF         5/25/1994     189.3    130.32   Replaced by another EFF 2/9/96.
JORDAN            EFF          2/9/1996    238.04    202.52   Approved amount increased from 200.8 in 2/97.
JORDAN            EFF         4/15/1999    127.88     36.54
                                                              Extended from 1/25/95.
KAZAKHSTAN        Stand-By    1/26/1994    123.75     74.25   Followed by another stand-by 6/5/95.
KAZAKHSTAN        Stand-By     6/5/1995     185.6     185.6   Approved after expiration of 1/26/94 stand-by.
KAZAKHSTAN        EFF         7/17/1996     309.4     154.7
KAZAKHSTAN        EFF        12/13/1999     329.1         0
KOREA             Stand-By    12/4/1997    15500    14412.5   Approved under Fund'
                                                                                 s emergency procedures.
KYRGYZ REPUBLIC   Stand-By    5/12/1993     27.09     11.61
LATVIA            Stand-By    9/14/1992      54.9      54.9   Followed by another stand-by on 12/15/93.
                                                              Approved after expiration of 9/14/92 stand-by.
LATVIA            Stand-By   12/15/1993     22.88      9.15   Followed by another stand-by on 4/21/1995.
                                                              Approved after expiration of 12/15/93 stand-by.
LATVIA            Stand-By    4/21/1995     27.45        0    Followed by another stand-by on 5/24/96.
                                                              Approved after expiration of 4/21/95.
LATVIA            Stand-By    5/24/1996       30         0    Followed by another stand-by on 10/10/1997.
                                                              Approved after expiration of 5/24/96 stand-by.
LATVIA            Stand-By   10/10/1997        33        0    Precautionary arrangement.
LATVIA            Stand-By   12/10/1999        33        0    Precautionary arrangement.
LATVIA            Stand-By    4/20/2001        33        0    Precautionary arrangement.
LESOTHO           Stand-By    9/23/1994      8.37        0    Cancelled. Replaced by another stand-by 7/31/95.


                                                                                              55
                                                              Approved after expiration of 9/23/94 stand-by.
LESOTHO           Stand-By    7/31/1995      7.17         0   Followed by another stand-by on 9/23/96.
LESOTHO           Stand-By    9/23/1996      7.17         0   Approved after expiration of 7/31/95 stand-by.
LITHUANIA         Stand-By   10/21/1992     56.93     56.93   Followed by another stand-by on 10/22/93.
                                                              Approved after expiration of 10/21/92 stand-by.
LITHUANIA         Stand-By   10/22/1993     25.88      5.18   Cancelled prior to expiration date of 3/21/95.
LITHUANIA         EFF        10/24/1994    134.55    134.55
LITHUANIA         Stand-By     3/8/2000      61.8         0   Precautionary arrangement.
LITHUANIA         Stand-By    8/30/2001     86.52         0   Precautionary arrangement.
MACEDONIA (FYR)   Stand-By     5/5/1995      22.3      22.3
MACEDONIA (FYR)   EFF        11/29/2000    24.115      1.15
MALAWI            Stand-By   11/16/1994        15     12.72
                                                              Extended from 8/15/96. Initial amount
MEXICO            Stand-By     2/1/1995   12070.2   8758.02   approved 2/1/95 and increased 6/30/95.
MEXICO            Stand-By     7/7/1999      3103    1939.5
MOLDOVA           Stand-By   12/17/1993     51.75     51.75   Followed by another stand-by on 3/22/95.
MOLDOVA           Stand-By    3/22/1995      58.5      32.4   Approved after expiration of 12/17/93 stand-by.
MOLDOVA           EFF         5/20/1996       135      87.5
MONGOLIA          Stand-By    10/4/1991      22.5     13.75   Extended from 10/3/92.
MOROCCO           Stand-By    7/20/1990       100        48
MOROCCO           Stand-By    1/31/1992     91.98      18.4
NICARAGUA         Stand-By    9/18/1991     40.86     17.03
NIGER             Stand-By     3/4/1994      18.6      11.1
NIGERIA           Stand-By     1/9/1991       319         0
NIGERIA           Stand-By     8/4/2000    788.94         0
                                                              Cancelled prior to expiration date 9/15/1994.
PAKISTAN          Stand-By    9/16/1993     265.4       88    Replaced by an EFF/ESAF in 2/94.
                                                              EFF and parallel ESAF replaced by a
                                                              stand-by approved by Board 12/13/95.
                                                              Three purchases made under EFF.
PAKISTAN          EFF         2/22/1994     379.1     123.2   Cancelled on 12/13/95 prior to expiration.
                                                              Extended from 3/31/97.
PAKISTAN          Stand-By   12/13/1995    562.59    294.69   Amount increased 12/17/96.
PAKISTAN          EFF        10/20/1997    454.92    113.74   This EFF approved along with an ESAF.
PAKISTAN          Stand-By   11/29/2000      465       150
                                                              Extended from 12/23/93. Amount
PANAMA            Stand-By    2/24/1992     74.17     54.57   decreased from 93.68 in 12/93.
PANAMA            Stand-By   11/29/1995      84.3      84.3   Approved amount increased from 69.8.
PANAMA            EFF        12/10/1997       120        40
PANAMA            Stand-By    6/30/2000        64         0
PERU              EFF         3/18/1993      1018    642.69   This arrangement followed by another EFF 7/1/96.
PERU              EFF          7/1/1996     300.2     160.5   Approved amount increased
PERU              EFF         6/24/1999       383         0   Precautionary arrangement.
PERU              Stand-By    3/12/2001       128         0   Precautionary arrangement.
                                                              Extended from 8/19/92 to 12/31/92 and 3/31/93.
PHILIPPINES       Stand-By    2/20/1991     334.2     334.2   Amount includes augmentation of 70.
                                                              Arrangement extended from 6/23/97 to 7/23/97,
                                                              12/31/97 and 3/31/98. Access increased 7/18/97.
PHILIPPINES       EFF         6/24/1994     791.2     791.2   Followed by another Stand-by on 4/1/98.
                                                              Approved after expiration of 6/2494 EFF.
                                                              Extended from 3/31/2000 to 6/30/2000.
PHILIPPINES       Stand-By     4/1/1998   1020.79    545.66   Then extended to 12/31/00.
POLAND            Stand-By     2/5/1990       545     357.5
POLAND            EFF         4/18/1991      1224      76.5   Cancelled prior to expiration date of 4/17/94.
POLAND            Stand-By     3/8/1993       476      357    Extended from 3/7/94.
                                                              Approved amount increased in 10/94,
POLAND            Stand-By     8/5/1994     333.3     283.3   then decreased to 333.3 in 9/95.
ROMANIA           Stand-By    4/11/1991     380.5     318.1   Followed by another stand-by on 5/29/92.
ROMANIA           Stand-By    5/29/1992    314.04     261.7   Approved after expiration of 4/11/91 stand-by.
                                                              Extended from 12/10/95 and cancelled prior
                                                              to expiration date 4/24/97.
ROMANIA           Stand-By    5/11/1994     320.5     94.27   Replaced by another stand-by 4/22/97.
ROMANIA           Stand-By    4/22/1997     301.5     120.6   Replaced the 5/11/94 stand-by.
ROMANIA           Stand-By     8/5/1999      400     139.75   Extended from 3/31/2000 to 5/31/2000.

                                                                                              56
                                                                  Then extended to 2/28/2001.
RUSSIAN FEDERATION   Stand-By     8/5/1992       719       719
RUSSIAN FEDERATION   Stand-By    4/11/1995     4313.1    4313.1   Cancelled prior to expiration date 4/10/96.
                                                                  Arrangement terminated on 3/26/99
RUSSIAN FEDERATION   EFF         3/26/1996   13206.57   5779.71   prior to 3/25/2000 end date
RUSSIAN FEDERATION   Stand-By    7/28/1999       3300    471.43
SENEGAL              Stand-By     3/2/1994      47.56     30.91   Cancelled prior to expiration date 3/1/95.
SLOVAK REPUBLIC      Stand-By    7/22/1994      115.8     32.15
SRI LANKA            Stand-By    4/20/2001        200    103.35   Precautionary arrangement.
TAJIKISTAN           Stand-By     5/8/1996         15        15
THAILAND             Stand-By    8/20/1997       2900      2500
TRINIDAD & TOBAGO    Stand-By    4/20/1990         85        85   Approved after expiration of 1/13/89 stand-by.
TURKEY               Stand-By     7/8/1994      610.5     460.5   Extended from 9/7/95. Amount increased 4/95.
TURKEY               Stand-By   12/22/1999       8676    2843.8
UKRAINE              Stand-By     4/7/1995      997.3    538.65   Followed by another stand-by on 5/10/96.
                                                                  Approved after expiration of 4/7/95 stand-by.
UKRAINE              Stand-By    5/10/1996      598.2     598.2   Extended from 2/9/97.
UKRAINE              Stand-By    8/25/1997     398.92    181.33
                                                                  Approved amount increased 5/27/1999.
UKRAINE              EFF          9/4/1998    1919.95    712.15   Arrangement extended to 8/15/2002.
URUGUAY              Stand-By   12/12/1990       94.8         9
URUGUAY              Stand-By     7/1/1992         50     15.97
URUGUAY              Stand-By     3/1/1996       100          0   Followed by another stand-by on 6/20/97.
URUGUAY              Stand-By    6/20/1997       125      114.2   Approved after expiration of 5/1/96 stand-by.
URUGUAY              Stand-By    3/29/1999         70         0   Precautionary arrangement.
URUGUAY              Stand-By    5/31/2000       150          0   Precautionary arrangement.
                                                                  Only one purchase made as BOP position
                                                                  strengthened, creating pressure on public
VENEZUELA            Stand-By    7/12/1996     975.65      350    spending and sending program off track.
                                                                  Cancelled prior to extended date 12/31/94
VIETNAM              Stand-By    10/6/1993       145      108.8    (original date was 10/5/94).
ZIMBABWE             EFF         1/24/1992      340.8      71.2   EFF cancelled prior expiration date 1/23/1995.
ZIMBABWE             EFF         9/11/1992      114.6      86.9
ZIMBABWE             Stand-By     6/1/1998     130.65      39.2
ZIMBABWE             Stand-By     8/2/1999     141.36     24.74




                                                                                                   57
  Appendix 3 (1-year horizon):
  In a sample of currency crashes, chief executives were 1.7 times as likely to lose their
  jobs over the subsequent 12 months if their government had said it would not
  devalue (2/3) as if it had not said so (7/18).


  A. Promises by Premiers, Finance Ministers, Central Bank Governors

         1) Summary Table


                      Changes                No Changes         Frequency of Change              Total
                     in Premier               in Premier            in Premier                Case Studies
   Promise                4                        2                    2/3                        6
  No Promise              7                       11                   7/18                       18
     Total               11                       13                                              24


         2) Background Table 1 (Changes in Premier)
               Month of          Date of               Presence of Promise                  Newspaper
Country
              Devaluation    Premier Change                (by whom)                      (Date of Report)
Argentina        03/75          03/24/75                        No                           La Prensa
Argentina        04/81          12/11/81                        No                           La Prensa
Argentina        04/89          07/08/89                Yes (CB Governor)              La Prensa (03/31/89) 1)
Argentina        01/02          01/02/02                  Yes (Premier)                La Prensa (12/27/01) 2)
Korea            12/97          02/25/98                        No                      Maeil Business Daily
Mexico           09/76          12/01/76                        No                          El Excelsior
Mexico           02/82          12/01/82           Yes (Premier & CB governor)        El Universal (02/06/82) 3)
Lebanon          08/90          12/24/90                        No                            Al Hayat
Sierra
                 08/97           03/10/98                       No                       Sierra Leone News
Leone
Venezuela        02/02           04/13/02               Yes (CB governor)              El Diario (02/08/02) 4)
Syria            01/88           11/01/ 88                     No                            Al Ba’ath

  1) Central Bank Governor Jose Machinea denied yesterday that modifications to the exchange rate markets
     are under study and announced a monetary policy tightening through a strong increase in the interest
     rates in order to stop the increase of the dollar.
  2) We don’t want to be slaves, said the president (Alberto Rodriguez Saa) during an effusive speech at the
     CGT. There he made transcendental announcements that there will be neither devaluation nor
     dollarization; and that there will be a new third currency, the “argentinian,” backed by the governmental
     real estate.
  3) In a vibrant announcement the president(Jose Lopez Portillo+
  -o) pointed out the most important aspects of the strategy to follow…The peso will keep floating and to
     compensate for its floating path it has been set compensatory tariff and license system. Romero Kolbeck
     (Banco de Mexico director) denied the rumor of a devaluation, the peso will keep floating… “There is no
     chance for a devaluation for our currency and therefore the floating scheme will keep going, said
     Gustavo Romero Kolbeck. If these rumors were true, that a devaluation is being structured then I
     wouldn’t be here right now” said a smiling Romero Kolbeck. The famous quotation by Presidentthat
     Lopez Portillo that he would “defend the peso like a dog” was made in a state of the union address in
     August 1981, a year before the devaluation, and did not receive the newspaper attention

                                                                                                           58
    contemporaneously that it received ex post. reported in the newspaper; it may have been made more than
    a month earlier.
 4) Castellanos (president Central Bank of Venezuela) claimed that the decision of the government to
    address the fiscal problem of the country and develop other public initiatives will allow the exchange
    rate policy to keep defending the Bolivar.


     3) Background Table 2 (No Changes in Premier)
             Month of           Date of               Presence of Promise                  Newspaper
Country
            Devaluation     Premier Change                 (by whom)                     (Date of Report)
Chile          07/71           09/11/73                        No                          El Mercurio
Chile          03/75           03/11/90                        No                          El Mercurio
Chile          07/85           03/11/90                        No                          El Mercurio
Kenya          04/93           12/30/02               Yes (Finance Minister)         Daily Nation (03/23/93) 1)
Lebanon        01/85           06/01/87                        No                           Al Anwar
Nigeria        10/86           08/26/93                        No                          Daily Times
Nigeria        03/92           08/26/93                        No                          Daily Times
Peru           06/76           07/28/80                        No                          El Comercio
Peru           12/87           07/28/90               Yes (Finance Minister)         El Comercio (11/27/87) 2)
Uganda         06/81           07/27/85                        No                         Uganda Times
Uruguay        03/72           07/13/76                        No                             El Dia
Uruguay        11/82           02/12/85                        No                             El Dia
Zambia         10/85           11/02/91                        No                       Zambia Daily Mail

 1) The Kenyan government went back to forex control. It rejected all IMF rules; Finance Minister Musalia
    Mudavadi said that Kenyan economy could no longer absorb further devaluation of the shilling.
    (Nonetheless, devaluation occurred on April 21st ).
 2) Saberbein (Minister of the economy and finance) said that the devaluation would be progressive next
    year. The exchange rate or the price of dollar would move along with wholesale prices during the next
    year as a clear export-supporting policy, for the aim is keep growing fostering external sector. (Despite
    Saberbein’s statement the devaluation actually took place December 15th).




 B. Promises by Premiers
     Summary Table

                  Changes              No Changes            Frequency of Change                Total
                 in Premier            in Premier                in Premier                  Case Studies
 Promise              2                     0                        2/2                          2
   No
                       9                     13                        9/22                        22
 Promise
  Total               11                     13                                                    24




                                                                                                           59
Appendix 4 (half-year horizon):
In a sample of currency crashes, chief executives were more than twice as likely to
lose their jobs over the subsequent 6 months if their government had said it would
not devalue (1/2) as if it had not said so (2/9).


A. Promises by Premiers, Finance Ministers, Central Bank Governors

   Summary Table

                Changes         No Changes       Frequency of Change       Total
               in Premier        in Premier          in Premier         Case Studies
 Promise            3                 3                  1/2                 6
No Promise          4                14                  2/9                18
   Total            7                17                                     24



B. Promises by Premiers
   Summary Table

              Changes         No Changes      Frequency of Change          Total
             in Premier       in Premier          in Premier            Case Studies
Promise           1                1                  1/2                    2
  No
                 6                16                  6/22                   22
Promise
 Total           7                17                                         24




                                                                                      60
