                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          BANK CONCENTRATION AND FRAGILITY:
                                IMPACT AND MECHANICS

                                            Thorsten Beck
                                          Asli Demirgüç-Kunt
                                               Ross Levin

                                         Working Paper 11500
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w11500


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       June 2005




Beck and Demirgüç-Kunt: World Bank; Levine: Carlson School of Management at the University of
Minnesota and the National Bureau of Economic Research. We received very helpful comments from John
Boyd, Maria Carkovic, George Clarke, Gianni DeNicolo, Peter Garber, seminar participants at the University
of Minnesota, the World Bank, and the NBER Conference on the Risks of Financial Institutions. This
paper’s findings, interpretations, and conclusions are entirely those of the authors and do not necessarily
represent the views of the World Bank, its Executive Directors, or the countries they represent. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

©2005 by Thorsten Beck, Asli Demirgüç-Kunt and Ross Levine. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Bank Concentration and Fragility: Impact and Mechanics
Thorsten Beck, Asli Demirgüç-Kunt and Ross Levine
NBER Working Paper No. 11500
July 2005
JEL No. G21, G28, L16

                                           ABSTRACT

Public policy debates and theoretical disputes motivate this paper’s examination of (i) the
relationship between bank concentration and banking system fragility and (ii) the mechanisms
underlying this relationship. We find no support for the view that concentration increases the
fragility of banks. Rather, banking system concentration is associated with a lower probability that
the country suffers a systemic banking crisis. In terms of policies, we find that (i) regulations and
institutions that facilitate competition in banking are associated with less    not more -- banking
system fragility and (ii) including these policy indicators does not change the results on
concentration. This suggests that concentration is a proxy for something else besides the competitive
environment. Also, we do not find that official capital regulations, reserve requirements, or official
prudential regulations lower crises probabilities. Finally, we present suggestive evidence that
concentrated banking systems tend to have larger, better-diversified banks, which may help account
for the positive link between concentration and stability.



Thorsten Beck                                         Ross Levine
The World Bank                                        Department of Economics
MSN MC 3-300                                          Brown University
1818 H Street NW                                      64 Waterman Street
Washington, DC 20433                                  Providence, RI 02912
tbeck@worldbank.org                                   and NBER
                                                      rlevine@csom.umn.edu
Asli Demirgüç-Kunt                                    (From August 1, 2005)
Economics Research
World Bank Group
1818 H Street NW
Washington, DC 20433
ademirguckunt@worldbank.org
I. Purposes & Motivation

         Public policy debates and theoretical disputes motivate this paper’s examination of the

relationship between bank concentration and banking system fragility and the mechanisms

underlying this relationship. The rapid consolidation of banks around the world is intensifying

concerns among policymakers about bank concentration, as reflected in major reports by the

Bank for International Settlements (2001), International Monetary Fund (2001), and the Group of

Ten (2001). These reports note that concentration may reduce competition in and access to

financial services, increase the market power and political influence of financial conglomerates,

and destabilize financial systems as banks become too big to discipline and use their influence to

shape banking regulations and policies. These reports also provide countervailing arguments.

Consolidation may improve banking system efficiency and enhance stability as the best banks

succeed, diversify, and boost franchise value. Further, some may question whether bank

concentration is a reliable indicator of competition in the banking industry.

         Theoretical disputes parallel these public policy deliberations. Some models yield a

“concentration-stability” prediction that banking system concentration reduces fragility (Allen

and Gale, 2000, 2003). In terms of mechanisms, concentration may signal less competition and

hence greater market power and profits. Higher profits provide a “buffer” against adverse

shocks and increase the franchise value of the bank, which reduces incentives for bankers to take

excessive risk.1 Also, some hold that it is substantially easier for supervisors to monitor a few

banks in a concentrated banking system than it is to monitor lots of banks in a diffuse banking


1
  See Boot and Greenbaum (1993), Besanko and Thakor (1993), Hellman, Murdoch, and Stiglitz (2000), and
Matutes and Vives (2000). Also, Smith (1984) shows that less competition in banking leads to more stability if
information about the probability distribution of depositors’ liquidity needs is private and lower competition allows
banking relationships to endure for longer periods. Matutes and Vives (1996), however, argue that concentration is
not a consistent signal of competition, so that bank illiquidity can arise in any market structure.


                                                          1
system, so that in equilibrium, concentrated banking systems will suffer fewer banking crises.

Some proponents of the “concentration-stability” view note that if (i) concentrated banking

systems have larger banks and (ii) larger banks hold more diversified portfolios than smaller

banks, then concentrated banking systems will tend to be more stable.2

         In contrast, some models produce a “concentration-fragility” prediction, where

concentration increases fragility. Boyd and De Nicolo (2005) stress that banks in less

competitive environments charge higher interest rates to firms, which induces firms to assume

greater risk. Their model predicts that if concentration is positively associated with banks having

market power, then concentration will increase both the expected rate of return on bank assets

and the standard deviation of those returns. Also, proponents of the concentration-fragility view

disagree with the proposition that a few large banks are easier to monitor than many small banks.

If size is positively correlated with complexity, then large banks may be more difficult to

monitor than small banks, not less. Finally, some researchers argue that larger banks are

protected by implicit “too big to fail” policies that small banks do not enjoy. This protection

intensifies risk-taking incentives beyond any diversification advantages enjoyed by large banks

(Boyd and Runkle, 1992; Mishkin, 1999; O’Hara and Shaw, 1990).3 From this perspective,


2
  Each of these conditions is debatable. Models by Diamond (1984), Ramakrishnan and Thakor (1984), Boyd and
Prescott (1986), Williamson (1986), Allen (1990), and others predict economies of scale in intermediation. As
discussed by Calomiris (2000) and Calomiris and Mason (2000), research finds an inverse relationship between
bank size and bank failure in the United States. However, Chong (1991) and Hughes and Mester (1998) indicate
that bank consolidation tends to increase the risk of bank portfolios. Moreover, Boyd and Runkle (1993) examine
122 U.S. bank holding companies and find an inverse relationship between size and the volatility of assets returns,
but not evidence that large banks fail less frequently than small banks. In contrast, De Nicolo (2000) finds a positive
relationship between bank size and the probability that the bank will fail in the U.S., Japan, and several European
countries. We control for bank size in our regressions, but the focus of our research is on the relationship between
the concentration and fragility of national banking systems.
3
  A large literature indicates that implicit or explicit deposit insurance creates incentives for banks to increase risk
(e.g. Merton (1977), Sharpe (1978), Flannery (1989), Kane (1989), and Chan, Greenbaum and Thakor (1992)). If
this insurance were the same for banks of all sizes, these models would predict no relationship between bank size
and bank fragility. Since regulators may fear potential macroeconomic consequences of large bank failures, many
countries have implicit “too large to fail” policies that protect large banks more than small banks. Thus, the largest
banks frequently receive a greater net insurance subsidy from the government. This subsidy may in turn increase the


                                                           2
concentrated banking systems with a few large banks will tend to be more fragile than diffuse

banking system with many small banks.

         Given these conflicting theoretical predictions and policy disputes, there are surprisingly

few cross-country examinations of banking system concentration and fragility.4 Although there

is a growing cross-country empirical literature that uses time-series data to examine the

determinants of banking crises, this research does not examine concentration (Demirgüç-Kunt

and Detragiache, 1998, 1999, henceforth DD; Gonazles-Hermosillo, et al., 1997; Kaminsky and

Reinhart, 1999). Although Barth et al. (2004) examine the relationship between bank regulations

and crises, they do not examine bank concentration and they use pure cross-country comparisons

rather than panel analyses. De Nicolo et al. (2003) find a positive relationship between banking

system concentration and the fragility of the largest five banks in a country. They do not,

however, examine systemic crises.

         This paper (1) assesses the relationship between bank concentration and the probability

that a country will suffer a “systemic” crisis and (2) provides evidence on whether particular

hypothesized mechanisms linking concentration and fragility – competition, diversification, and

the ease of monitoring – account for the identified relationship between concentration and

stability. We focus on these three mechanisms because of their prominence in policy and

academic discussions.

         To investigate systemic crises, we use annual data on 69 countries over the period 1980-

1997. While no single, unambiguous definition of a systemic crisis exists, we use the DD (2002)


risk-taking incentives of the larger banks more than smaller banks. For an analysis of the corporate governance of
banks, see Macey and O’Hara (2003). Note, however that even in the absence of deposit insurance, banks are prone
to excessive risk-taking due to limited liability for their equity holders and to their high leverage (Stiglitz, 1972).
4
  For the United States, Keeley (1990) provides evidence that increased competition following the relaxation of state
branching restrictions in the 1980s increased the risk of large banks. However, Jayaratne and Strahan (1998) find
that deregulation in the 1980s lowered loan losses, and Dick (2003) finds higher loan loss provisions following
deregulation in the 1990s.


                                                          3
classification and confirm the results with other definitions. DD (2002) consider a country to be

in a systemic crisis if (i) authorities use emergency measures, such as bank holidays, deposit

freezes, blanket guarantees, etc., to assist the banking industry, (ii) countries undertake large

scale nationalizations of banks, (iii) non-performing loans top ten percent of total banking assets,

or (iv) the fiscal costs of rescue operations exceed two percent of Gross Domestic Product

(GDP). Using logit regressions, we analyze the association between banking system

concentration and the probability that a country experiences a systemic crisis. In the analyses we

condition on many country characteristics, including bank supervisory and regulatory practices,

institutional development, and macroeconomic controls, such as the level of economic

development, economic growth, inflation, interest rates, terms of trade changes, and credit

growth.

       The results are inconsistent with the concentration-fragility view. We do not find a

positive relationship between banking system concentration and the likelihood that the country

suffers a systemic crisis. Using different conditioning information sets, different sample periods,

different definitions of crises, and different measures of concentration, we never find a

significant, positive link between concentration and crises. Thus, our analyses lend no support to

the view that concentration increases the fragility of banks.

       Rather, the findings are broadly consistent with the concentration-stability view.

Concentration enters the crises regressions negatively and significantly across a wide array of

specifications. Thus, although we emphasize numerous qualifications below, the data

consistently indicate a positive relationship between national bank concentration and banking

system stability.




                                                  4
       Furthermore, we provide exploratory evidence on the potential mechanisms –

competition, diversification, and ease of monitoring -- underlying the positive relationship

between concentration and stability. First, to assess whether concentration proxies for

competition, we include bank regulatory indicators and measures of national institutional

development. More specifically, we control for national policies toward bank entry, bank

activities, bank ownership as well as several indicators of national institutions that affect

competition. If (i) these variables measure the competitive environment in banking and (ii)

concentration proxies for competition, then including these variables should eliminate the

significance of concentration in the fragility regressions. Moreover, these assessments provide

independently valuable information on the linkages between banking system fragility and bank

regulations. Second, to assess whether concentration proxies for diversification or ease of

monitoring, we include numerous indicators that attempt to proxy for these mechanisms. For

diversification, we control for (a) the size of the economy, which may correlate positively with

the ability of banks to diversify domestically, (b) restrictions on making loans abroad, which may

correlate negatively with the ability of banks to diversify internationally, and (c) mean bank size,

which some argue is positively correlated with diversification. For ease of monitoring, we

control for (a) the number of banks, (b) regulatory restrictions on banks ability to engage in non-

lending services since the complexity of banks may hinder monitoring, (c) mean bank size since

larger banks may be more complex than smaller banks, (d) capital regulatory requirements,

deposit insurance, and other prudential regulations, and (e) the average cash flow rights of the

controlling owner, if any, of the largest, listed banks in the country, which may reflect the

incentives of the largest owner to govern the bank effectively. Again, if including these

variables eliminates the relationship between concentration and fragility, then this provides




                                                  5
circumstantial evidence that concentration acts as a proxy for diversification or the cost of

monitoring banks.

       In terms of regulatory policies and institutional development, we find that (1) fewer

regulatory restrictions on banks – lower barriers to bank entry, fewer restrictions on bank

activities, and fewer impediments to bank operations in general – reduce banking system fragility

and (2) countries with national institutions that foster competition have lower banking system

fragility. Thus, policies and institutions that facilitate competition in banking are associated with

less – not more -- banking system fragility. Furthermore, capital requirements, reserve

requirements, and prudential regulations do not affect the results on concentration and,

interestingly, do not reduce the likelihood of suffering a systemic crisis. Regarding specific

mechanisms associated with the concentration-stability view, the findings that (i) banking system

concentration is associated with lower fragility and (ii) policies that foster competition are

associated with lower fragility suggest that concentration is proxying for something else besides

a lack of competition.

       In terms of diversification, we find some support for the view that one of the mechanisms

underlying the negative relationship between concentration and banking system fragility is that

concentrated banking systems tend to have larger, better-diversified banks. While recognizing

that the measures of diversification are both indirect and potentially imprecise, we find that

controlling for proxies of diversification substantially reduces the ties between concentration and

crises. More specifically, we find that (i) controlling for the size of the domestic economy

eliminates the connection between concentration and systemic crises, (ii) controlling for the

mean size of banks weakens the link between concentration and crises, and (iii) controlling for

mean bank size and restrictions on foreign loans eliminates the negative relationship between




                                                  6
banking system concentration and the probability of suffering a systemic crisis. The results are

consistent with arguments that countries with, on average, larger banks tend to have a lower

likelihood of suffering a systemic crisis and inconsistent with the view that large banks distort

public policies in a manner that increases banking system fragility.

       In contrast, we find no support for any of the views suggesting that concentration is a

proxy for the degree of difficulty in monitoring banks. When controlling for the number of

banks, or regulatory restrictions on banks, or capital requirements, or prudential regulations, or

the cash flow rights of the bank’s controlling owner (if any), this does not change the finding of a

negative relationship between concentration and crises. In sum, we did not find much support

that a distinguishing characteristic of concentrated banking systems is that they are easier to

monitor than more diffuse systems.

       The analyses in this paper are subject to considerable qualifications and interpretational

limitations.

       First, as our own results emphasize, concentration is not necessarily a reliable indicator of

competition (Tirole, 1988; Sutton, 1991, 1998). Mergers and acquisitions that increase

concentration could reflect competition, not the absence of competition. A country with a few

banks in a contestable market may be more competitive than a country with lots of banks in

segmented monopolies. This does not invalidate this paper’s usefulness. Around the world,

policymakers, in forming bank regulations, and courts, in assessing anti-trust challenges to bank

consolidation, use banking system concentration as a signal. Toward this end, our work suggests

that (i) banking system concentration is not associated with greater bank instability; rather, it is

associated with less fragility and (ii) policies and regulations that ease competition lower

banking system fragility.




                                                  7
       Second, although we use different measures of banking system crises, any examination of

systemic crises is constrained by the difficulty in defining and dating a “systemic” crisis. Thus,

we interpret these results cautiously and trust that this information is one useful input into

assessing the linkages between the market structure of the banking industry, bank regulations,

and banking system fragility. Future research that examines the interactions among

concentration, bank regulations, and bank fragility at the microeconomic level will provide a

very valuable addition to the crises analyses that we provide.

       Third, the absence of time-series data on bank regulations lowers confidence in the

finding that regulatory impediments to bank competition increase fragility. The regulatory

indicators are measured toward the end of the sample period, so that these indicators are

sometimes measured after the crisis. This data limitation is difficult to correct because it is only

very recently that detailed data have been collected on bank regulations around the world (Barth,

et al. (2001a,b, 2004, 2005). More importantly for the purposes of this paper, this timing issue

does not affect the core finding supporting the concentration-stability view as these results hold

when including or excluding the regulatory indicators. Furthermore, sensitivity checks suggest

that regulatory impediments to competition did not grow after systemic crises, so that reverse

causality does not seem to drive the results.

       Finally, our exploratory evidence that (i) supports the view that concentrated banking

systems tend to have larger, better-diversified banks and (ii) contradicts the view that

concentrated banking systems with a few large banks are easier to monitor is just that,

exploratory. The measures that we use are highly imperfect measures of diversification and the

ease of monitoring. Nevertheless, when including imperfect indicators of diversification, this

reduces the significance of concentration in the fragility regressions, suggesting that




                                                  8
concentration may proxy for banking systems with larger better-diversified banks. Given the

natural skepticism about our proxies, however, considerably more evidence is required before

one can draw confident conclusions about the mechanisms underlying the negative relationship

between concentration and fragility.

       The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section II analyzes the relationship

between banking system concentration and systemic crises. Section III provides additional

information on the mechanisms explaining the positive relationship between concentration and

banking system stability. Section IV briefly lists conclusions.




                                                 9
II. Does Bank Concentration Enhance the Risk of Systemic Failure?

        In this section, we examine the impact of national bank concentration on the likelihood of

a country suffering a systemic banking crisis. Using data on 69 countries over the period 1980-

1997, we assess the connection between banking system concentration and the incidence of

systemic banking failures.5 To assess the robustness of our analyses, we (i) use a range of

different measures of bank concentration and crises, (ii) control for an array of country

characteristics, (iii) use different estimation procedures and samples of countries, and (iv) allow

for potential nonlinearities in the relationship between concentration and crises. After describing

data and methodology in the first two subsections, we present the regression results.


II. A. Data

        II.A.1. Data: Crises and concentration

        Following Lindgren, Garcia and Saal (1996), Caprio and Klingebiel (1999), and

Demirguc-Kunt and Detragiache (DD, 2002), we identify and date episodes of banking sector

distress by using information on individual bank failures and reports by national supervisory

agencies. Then, these episodes of distress are classified as systemic (i) if emergency measures

were taken to assist the banking system (such as bank holidays, deposit freezes, blanket

guarantees to depositors or other bank creditors), or (ii) if large-scale nationalizations took place,

or (iii) if non-performing assets reached at least 10 percent of total assets at the peak of the crisis,

or (iv) if the cost of the rescue operations was at least 2 percent of GDP. In sum, our sample of

69 countries contains 47 crisis episodes. Table 1 lists this information.




5
 Demirgüç-Kunt, et al. (2004) investigate the impact of bank concentration on bank net interest margins, but they
do not examine bank fragility.


                                                        10
        Crisis is a dummy variable that equals one if the country is going through a systemic

crisis, and zero if it is not. We experiment with different ways of dating and defining crises.6

First, since crises run for multiple years and since crises may influence concentration and other

explanatory variables, implying reverse causality, most of the regressions reported in the tables

exclude observations classified as crises after the initial year of the crisis. That is, we only

include the initial year of a multi-year crisis. We do include the years after a multi-year crisis is

over, which are non-crisis observations.7 If the country suffers a second crisis, this is included as

well. Second, we also conducted the analyses when including crisis observations following the

initial year of a multi-year banking crisis. The results are robust to including these years and

classifying them as either crisis observations or non-crisis observations. Thus, the results are not

sensitive to the classification of the crisis years following the initial year of multi-year crisis.

Again, once each crisis is over, we include the non-crisis years that follow a multi-year crisis in

all of the specifications. Third, this paper’s findings are robust to changing the definition of a

crisis to also include borderline crises as defined by Caprio and Klingebiel (1999). Specifically,

borderline cases do not meet the definition of a systemic crisis described above and instead

include cases where a large bank fails. We do not believe it is appropriate to include borderline

cases because we are assessing the impact of banking system concentration on systemic banking

crises, not the failure of a large bank. In sum, while recognizing that there is no single,

unanimous definition of a systemic banking crisis, the primary goal of this section is to provide a

cross-country, time-series assessment of the relationship between national bank concentration



6
  Clearly, there may be disagreements about the dating of major crises. For example, the database we are using
classifies the United States as having a crisis from 1980-1992 and many may dispute this dating. Nevertheless, we
use different dating conventions and we use different sub-samples to reduce fears that dating problems drive the
results.
7
  The results also hold when dropping all post-crisis years for each country experiencing a crisis.


                                                        11
and crises. The identified relationship is robust to using these different definitions of a systemic

crisis.

          Concentration equals the share of total banking system assets held by the three largest

banks. The data are from the Bankscope database. Since the sample of banks covered in

Bankscope increased over the sample period, changes in the concentration measure could reflect

changes in coverage. To reduce biases stemming from the coverage problem, we average the

concentration measure over the period 1988-1997. As reported in Tables 1 and 2, most countries

have concentrated banking systems with a sample mean of 72 percent. Still, there is wide cross-

country variation in the sample, with concentration levels ranging from less than 20 percent for

the U.S. to 100 percent for many African countries. Simple correlations show a significant

negative relationship between the crisis dummy and bank concentration.

          In robustness tests, we consider a number of different concentration measures. This

paper’s results hold when using (i) annual concentration values, (ii) concentration from

Bankscope measured at the beginning of the sample period (1988), and (iii) a measure of

concentration based on the Barth et al (2004) survey of bank supervisory agencies regarding

deposits in banks.8 Moreover, by confirming our results using the initial level of concentration at

the start of the sample period, we reduce reverse causality concerns. Unfortunately, using initial

values cuts the number of observations in half. Thus, we focus on the data averaged over the

entire period.




8
 This alternative measure of concentration is from the Barth et al (2004) survey database, which defines bank
concentration as the share of deposits of the largest five banks. The correlation between the concentration measures
calculated from Bankscope data and from Barth et al. is 52%, and is significant at the 1%-level.


                                                        12
        II.A.2. Data: Core Control variables

        To investigate the relationship between systemic banking crises and banking system

concentration, we condition on an assortment of macroeconomic and regulatory factors that may

also influence banking system fragility.

        We start with the explanatory variables from DD’s (2002) examination of the

determinants of banking system crises. DD (2002) include four contemporary explanatory

variables to control for macroeconomic factors that may affect the quality of bank assets and

bank profitability: (i) national economic growth (Real GDP Growth), (ii) changes in the

external terms of trade (Terms of Trade Change), (iii) the rate of inflation (Inflation), and (iv)

the short-term real interest rate (Real Interest Rate). DD (2002) include two variables to

control for international forces influencing bank vulnerability: (i) the rate of exchange rate

depreciation (Depreciation) and (ii) the ratio of M2 to foreign exchange reserves

(M2/Reserves). Since rapid credit growth may signal an asset price bubble, DD (2002) include

lagged credit growth (Credit Growtht-2). To condition on the overall level of economic

development, DD (2002) also include the level of real per capita GDP (GDP per capita). In

robustness tests, we also include DD’s (2002) measure of deposit insurance generosity (Moral

Hazard). To build an aggregate index of moral hazard, DD (2003) estimate the first principal

component of various deposit insurance design features. Specifically, they use coinsurance,

coverage of foreign currency and inter-bank deposits, type of funding, source of funding,

management, membership, and the level of explicit coverage to create this aggregate index that

increases with the generosity of the deposit insurance regime. The index varies over time since

different countries adopted deposit insurance or revised its design features at different points in

time.




                                                 13
       Simple correlations in Table 2 suggest that banking crises are more likely in countries

with less concentrated banking systems, higher levels of inflation and exchange rate depreciation

and less likely in growing countries with higher GDP per capita and higher real interest rates.

Crises are more likely in countries with more generous deposit insurance.



       II.A.3. Data: Bank Regulation and Supervision Control variables

       We augment the benchmark specification from DD (2002) by including measures of bank

regulation and supervision from Barth et al., (2001a,b, 2004). These data on bank supervision

and regulation around the world were collected through surveys of government officials from

over 100 countries in 1999. This is a problem because the crises regressions are run over the

period 1980-1997. Thus, the regulatory indicators are measured after the dependent variable.

Besides the fact that no other dataset has the level of cross-country detail on bank regulations, we

offer three additional defenses for using these data in the crisis regressions despite the time

problem. First, Barth et al., (2001a) show that the regulatory restrictions on bank activities did

not change much following systemic crises. Moreover, in the few cases when they did change,

there was a change toward fewer regulatory restrictions. Thus, the timing of the Barth et al.

(2001a) data actually biases the results against finding a positive relationship between regulatory

restrictions on bank activities and the likelihood of suffering a systemic crisis. Second, Carkovic

and Levine (2002) show that the bank regulations that compose the Barth et al. (2001a) survey

have remained virtually unchanged in Chile during the decade of the 1990s. Third, Barth, et al.’s

(2005) follow-up survey indicates that there have been remarkably few substantive changes in

bank regulatory regimes since the initial survey in 1999, which advertises the stability of bank

supervisory and regulatory policies. Nevertheless, timing issues are an important constraint on




                                                 14
our ability to draw confident conclusions on the market power, diversification, and easier

monitoring explanations of why concentration is associated with more stable banking systems.

        We include bank regulation indicators to accomplish three objectives. First, controlling

for differences in national policies provides a simple robustness test of the relationship between

concentration and crises. Second, controlling for regulations provides additional information on

the concentration-fragility relationship. If concentration is proxying for regulations that impede

competition, then controlling for the regulatory environment will drive out the significance of

concentration in the crisis regression. Finally, examining the relationship between bank

regulations and banking system stability is independently valuable since countries may

implement regulations to promote banking system stability. The timing problem primarily,

though not necessarily exclusively, affects this last motivation for including the regulatory

controls: The fact that regulations are measured after crises reduces the confidence we have in

the results on regulations.

        Fraction of Entry Denied equals the number of entry applications denied as a fraction of

the number of applications received from domestic and foreign entities, which is a measure of

entry restrictions in banking and thus the contestability of the market. If entry restrictions only

increase bank profits, this would be associated with a lower rate of fragility. If however, entry

restrictions induce inefficiencies in the banking market, then they could lead to greater fragility.

        Activity Restrictions is an index of regulatory restrictions on bank activities. This

includes information on regulation regarding bank activities in the securities, insurance, real

estate markets, and banks owning nonfinancial firms. For each of these four categories of bank

activities, each country is given a score of one through four depending on the degree to which

regulations restrict bank activity in each area: (1) unrestricted, (2) permitted, (3) restricted, or (4)




                                                   15
prohibited. The aggregate indicator has therefore a range from four to 16, with higher numbers

indicating more restrictions on bank activities. If these activity restrictions keep banks from

entering risky lines of business, then Activity Restrictions will tend to reduce the probability of

crises. If, however, regulatory restrictions on bank activities prevent firms from diversifying

risks, then higher values of Activity Restrictions will tend to increase the probability of suffering

a systemic crisis.

       Required Reserves equals the ratio of bank assets that regulators require banks to hold

as reserves. Banking systems with higher ratios of required reserves may be more stable since

they would have a greater buffer to absorb liquidity shocks. However, greater required reserves

are also a tax on the banking system, which may lower profits and raise fragility.

       Capital Regulatory Index is a summary measure of each country’s capital stringency

requirements and taken from Barth et al (2004). To the extent that book capital is an accurate

measure of bank solvency we expect better capitalized banks to be less fragile. Also, capital

regulations are a focus of Basel agreements to reduce systemic risk. Thus, including an index of

national capital regulations will provide information on whether cross-country differences in one

of the three “pillars” of the Basel II Accord on prudential bank supervision and regulation

actually explain differences in banking system fragility. Problematically, however, Barth et al

(2005) stress that Basel’s success and the lack of historical data on capital regulations make it

difficult to assess the impact of capital regulations. Specifically, because Basel has successfully

harmonized capital regulations over the past decade, there may be insufficient cross-country

variation in the Capital Regulatory Index to explain systemic crises.

       Official Supervisory Power is an index of the power of the commercial bank

supervisory agency to monitor and discipline banks (Barth, et al., 2004). It includes information




                                                 16
on the legal power of the supervisory authority to (i) meet with, demand information from, and

impose penalties on auditors, (ii) force a bank to change its internal organizational structure,

managers, directors, etc. (iii) oblige the bank to provision against potential bad loans, suspend

dividends, bonuses, management fees, and to supersede the rights of shareholders, and (iv)

intervene a bank and/or declare a bank insolvent. The Appendix provides a more detailed

definition of Official Supervisory Power. An emphasis of the Basel II accord on prudential

supervision and regulation is to strengthen official monitoring of banks. We use this indicator of

the power of the supervisory authority to assess the robustness of the results on concentration

and to examine the relationship between Official Supervisory Power and the probability that a

country suffers a systemic crisis.



        II.A.4. Data: Bank Ownership Control variables

        Next, we also control for ownership.

        State ownership equals the percentage of banking system assets controlled by banks that

are 50 percent or more government owned, which is taken from the Barth et al (2001) database.9

If government owned banks enjoy greater government support than private banks, then banking

systems with a larger share of public banks may experience fewer banks runs and fewer (overt)

banking crises. However, inefficiencies in public banks may also make them more fragile as

argued by Caprio and Martinez-Peria (2000).             While providing evidence on the relationship

between ownership and crises, we use State Ownership as a control variable to test the



9
  As a robustness check, we employ a different measure of state-ownership from La Porta et al. (2002), which equals
the percentage of government ownership (voting rights) of the assets of the ten largest banks in each country where
ownership of each bank is weighted by the assets of that bank. Thus, the La Porta et al. (2002) measure does not
define bank ownership in terms of voting rights greater than 50 percent. We get the same results with both
measures.


                                                        17
robustness of the results between concentration and crises. There is not a significant correlation

between State Ownership and crises.

       Foreign Ownership equals the percentage of the banking system’s assets in banks that

are 50 percent or more foreign owned, which is also taken from the Barth et al., (2001) database.

Foreign banks may bring better banking practices that improve the operation and safety of the

banking system (Claessens, et al., 2001). On the other hand, greater openness to foreign banks

could intensify competition, reduce profits, and hurt stability. Thus, it is an empirical question as

to whether, on net, foreign bank ownership stabilizes or destabilizes a banking system. Again,

our goal is to assess the robustness of the relationship between concentration and crises, not to

explore fully the impact of foreign banks on the operation of domestic financial system. The

simple correlation between Foreign Ownership and crises is insignificant.



       II.A.5. Data: Openness, Competition, Institutional Control Variables

       Finally, we include additional control variables for the general openness,

competitiveness, and institutional development of the banking sector in particular and the

economy more generally. There is overlap between some of these general indexes and the

individual regulatory and ownership variables defined above. Also, there is overlap among these

general indicators. Thus, we note these overlaps in defining the variables and do not include

them simultaneously in the regressions below.

       Banking Freedom is an indicator of the relative openness of the banking system. We

obtain these data from the Heritage Foundation and use an average over the period 1995-97. It is

a composite index of the barriers foreign banks and financial services firms face in conducting

banking operations, how difficult it is to open domestic banks and other financial services firms,




                                                 18
how heavily regulated the financial system is, the presence of state-owned banks, whether the

government influences allocation of credit, and whether banks are restricted from providing

insurance and securities market services to clients. Higher values indicate fewer restrictions on

banking freedoms. This aggregate Banking Freedom indicator also uses information from the

regulatory restrictions, entry restrictions, and ownership indicators discussed above. We include

this for two reasons. First, debate exists on the impact of official restrictions on bank operations.

On the one hand, fewer official impediments to bank operations and entry could stimulate

efficiency and diversification that promotes stability. On the other hand, greater banking

freedom could induce destabilizing competition. We provide information on this debate.

Second, official impediments to bank freedom could influence both concentration and fragility.

Since our goal is to assess the independent link between concentration and crises, we test the

robustness of the findings to controlling for banking freedom.

       Economic Freedom is an indicator of how a country’s policies rank in terms of

providing economic freedoms. It is a composite of ten indicators ranking policies in the areas of

trade, government finances, government interventions, monetary policy, capital flows and

foreign investment, banking and finance, wages and prices, property rights, regulation, and black

market activity. We obtain these data from the Heritage Foundation and use an average over the

period 1995-97. Higher scores indicate polices more conducive to competition and economic

freedom.   Also, Banking Freedom is a subcomponent of Economic Freedom, which includes

information on economic freedom beyond the banking industry. To the extent freedoms allow

banks to improve efficiency and to engage in different activities and diversify their risks, we

expect increased level of freedoms to reduce fragility. However, it is also true that greater

freedoms allow banks to undertake greater risks, particularly if the underlying institutional




                                                 19
environment and existing regulations and supervision distort risk-taking incentives. Thus,

overall greater freedom may also lead to greater bank fragility. Thus, we (a) examine the

relationship between economic freedom and crises and (b) assess the strength of the relationship

between concentration and crises conditional on overall economic freedom.

       KKZ_Composite is an index of the overall level of institutional development

constructed by Kaufman, Kraay and Zoido-Lobaton (1999). The underlying indicators are voice

and accountability, government effectiveness, political stability, regulatory quality, rule of law,

and control of corruption. This index is available for 1998. We expect better institutions to lead

to reduced bank fragility, controlling for all other factors. Simple correlations indicate that the

crisis dummy is negatively and significantly correlated with the two freedom indicators and the

institutions variable. Countries with better institutions also tend to have more competitive

banking systems with fewer regulatory restrictions. Thus, it is independently valuable to

examine the relationship between institutional development and banking system stability. At the

same time, we use KKZ_Composite to gauge the strength of the independent relationship

between concentration and crises.



II.B. Methodology

         Methodologically, to estimate the crisis model, we follow Cole and Gunther (1995),

Gonzalez-Hermosillo et al. (1997), Demirguc-Kunt (1989), and DD (1998, 2002) and use a logit

probability model with standard errors that are robust to heteroskedasticity. Specifically, we

estimate the probability that a systemic crisis will occur at a particular time in a particular

country, assuming that this probability is a function of explanatory variables (X(i,t)). Let P(i, t)

denote a dummy variable that takes the value of one when a banking crisis occurs in country i




                                                  20
and time t and a value of zero otherwise. β is a vector of n unknown coefficients and F(βΝX(i, t))

is the cumulative probability distribution function evaluated at βΝX(i, t). Then, the log-

likelihood function of the model is:



        Ln L = ∑t=1...T ∑i=1...n{P(i,t)ln[F(βΝX(i,t))] + (1-P(i,t)) ln[1- F(βΝX(i,t))]}.



        We also conducted robustness tests using alternative estimation procedures. First, this

core specification allows for heteroskedasticity but assumes that the errors are independent. We

confirm the results, however, when allowing for clustering of the errors within countries, which

requires that the error terms are independent across countries but not within countries. Second,

the results hold when estimating a logit model with random country effects.



II.C. Results

        The paper finds that crises are less likely in more concentrated banking systems using

different measures of concentration and conditioning on different country characteristics. As

shown in Table 3, Concentration always enters with a negative and significant coefficient.

Regression 1 presents our baseline specification, where we exclude observations classified as

crises after the first year of a multi-year banking crisis. Regressions 2 and 3 include crisis

observations after the initial crisis year. In column 2, crisis observations following the initial

year of a multi-year crisis are classified as crises.10 In column 3, crisis observations after the




10
  This explains the entry of 202 crises in column 2 of Table 3. When we include all of the years of each multi-year
banking crisis, this adds an additional 155 crisis observations to the number reported in regressions 1 and 3.


                                                        21
initial year of a multi-year crisis are classified as non-crisis observations.11 In all three

regressions, Concentration enters negatively and significantly.

         The negative relationship between concentration and crises is robust to alternative

specifications and to controlling for reverse causality. If systemic crises reduce concentration,

then it would be inappropriate to interpret our early results as implying that concentration

reduces banking system fragility. Thus, in regression 4, we use the value of banking system

concentration measured at the beginning of the sample period instead of concentration averaged

over the period. Even when using initial concentration, however, we continue to find a negative

relationship between concentration and crises. Regression 5 shows that the results do not depend

on including or excluding Real GDP per capita. Regression 6 assesses whether the results

change if the country is a G10 country. We see that country membership in the G10 does not

alter the results on concentration. Further, the insignificant interaction between concentration

and membership in G10 indicates that the relationship between concentration and systemic

banking fragility does not vary between the G10 countries and the remainder of the sample.

         Among the control variables in Table 3, annual Real GDP growth enters negatively and

significantly throughout. This suggests that macroeconomic success reduces the likelihood of

suffering a crisis. Or, to phrase this differently, recessions increase banking system fragility.

The estimates also indicate that Real interest rate enters positively, which confirms earlier

research (Demirguc-Kunt and Detragiache, 1999).

         Furthermore, the economic impact of banking system concentration on the likelihood of a

country suffering a systemic crisis is large. We evaluate the marginal impact of concentration on

the probability of crisis at the mean values for all variables using regression 1 from Table 3. The


11
  In all three specifications, we include observations after the crisis is over. Thus, we include the switch from crisis
to the non-crisis state.


                                                          22
estimates indicate that a one standard deviation increase in concentration leads to a decrease in

crisis probability of one percent. Since crisis probabilities at any point in time are quite low,

with a mean value of four percent, this is a substantial reduction. We have recalculated the

economic impact of a marginal increase in bank concentration when using a sample that includes

the year after the initial year of the crisis. Using this larger sample, we find an even larger

economic impact of concentration on crises than in the core regression presented in Table 3.

       This paper’s findings hold when allowing for a potential nonlinear relationship between

concentration and crises. First, we added a simple quadratic term and found no evidence of a

nonlinear relationship. Next, we estimated piece-wise regressions, where concentration was

broken into (a) quintiles and then (b) deciles. The results indicate that the stabilizing effect of

concentration becomes significant after the first quintile (second decile), where the quintile and

decile analyses identify consistent cut-offs. The data indicate that there is a statistically

significant, negative relationship between concentration and banking system fragility for levels

of concentration above 35 percent and the marginal impact of a change in concentration does not

vary significantly beyond this 35 percent cut-off. This cut-off is low, considering that the sample

mean value of national banking system concentration is 72 percent. There is never a positive

relationship between concentration and fragility. Third, we examine whether concentration has

different effects in different institutional settings by interacting concentration and our measures

of institutional development (Economic Freedom and KKZ_composite). Again, this did not

change the result of a negative relationship between bank concentration and the probability of

suffering a systemic crisis.

       The negative relationship between crises and concentration also holds when using

different samples of countries. Specifically, we excluded all countries with populations less than




                                                  23
1 million, less than 10 million, and less than 20 million, respectively. The coefficient on

concentration remains negative and significant across these three different samples of countries.

Next, we excluded all Sub-Saharan African countries since they tend to have very high bank

concentration ratios and we eliminated the G-10 countries because their high level of

institutional development may not be captured appropriately with the control variables. Again,

these two different samples yield the same results. Finally, we excluded a few country-year data

points where the data seem to be mis-measured because the values are extraordinarily different

from the country’s average value over the sample.12 The results do not change.

         In sum, these results are consistent with the concentration-stability theory’s argument that

banking systems characterized by a few, large banks are more stable than less concentrated

banking markets. There is certainly no evidence that banking system concentration increases

banking sector fragility. Furthermore, the inverse relationship between banking system

concentration and the likelihood of suffering a systemic crisis holds when allowing for possible

nonlinear links between concentration and fragility and when using different samples of

countries. Next, we assess the robustness of these results to conditioning on additional country

specific traits.



II.D. Additional Sensitivity Tests and Discussion

         II.D.1. Additional Country Level Controls

         In Table 4, we confirm the findings on the relationship between banking sector

concentration and systemic crises when controlling for (i) moral hazard associated with deposit

insurance, (ii) different bank regulations, (iii) the ownership of banks, and (iv) general indicators

12
  Specifically, we eliminate Ivory Coast (1993) because their M2/reserves values are very different for that year.
Similarly, in these outlier tests, we exclude Peru (1991) because its inflation and real interest rate values are so
different from other years.


                                                          24
of banking freedom, economic freedom, and institutional development. The results hold when

controlling for Moral Hazard, Fraction of Entry Applications Denied, Activity Restrictions,

Official Supervisory Power, Required Reserves, and the Capital Regulatory Index (regressions 1

– 6). The significance level on Concentration falls to ten percent level when including Fraction

of Entry Applications Denied, but data limitations on Fraction of Entry Applications Denied cuts

the sample from 989 to 583 observations. Furthermore, Concentration remains negatively

associated with crises at the one percent significance level when controlling for state or foreign

ownership of banks (regressions 7 and 8). In terms of broad measures such as Banking freedom

or general indictors of Economic freedom and institutional development (KKZ_composite),

Concentration continues to enter the crisis regress negatively and significantly at the one percent

level (regression 9-11). The regressions in Table 4 do not include GDP per capita because (i) the

regulatory/institutional variables are highly correlated with the level of development and (ii)

GDP per capita is often used to proxy for institutional development. However, including GDP

per capita in Table 4 does not change the conclusions on concentration.

        Beyond Concentration, the Table 4 results indicate that tighter entry restrictions and more

severe regulatory restrictions on bank activities boost bank fragility. These are consistent with

the results obtained by Barth et al. (2004), who examine the impact of entry restrictions and

regulatory restrictions on bank activities on crises in a purely cross-country investigation that

does not control for bank concentration. A higher fraction of entry applications denied – a proxy

for tighter entry regulations – leads to higher levels of fragility in the banking system. This is

consistent with the argument that restricted entry reduces the efficiency of the banking system,

also making it more vulnerable to external shocks. Similarly, we find that restrictions on bank

activities increase crisis probabilities. This result indicates that overall these restrictions prevent




                                                  25
banks from diversifying outside their traditional business, reducing their ability to reduce the

riskiness of their portfolios.

        Overall, the results do not provide support for Basel II’s emphasis on capital regulations

and more stringent regulations. We do not find that stricter capital regulations or greater official

supervisory power lowers the probability that a country will suffer a systemic crisis. While it is

natural and appropriate to question these results because of the timing issues emphasized above,

we are unaware of cross-country research that finds that banking system stability is enhanced by

countries adopting official supervisory and regulatory regimes that impose stricter capital

regulations or more stringent prudential regulations. Indeed, a growing body of evidence

suggests that strengthening official supervisory power can actually increase corruption in lending

and reduce banking system efficiency (Barth et al., 2005; Beck, et al., 2004; Demirguc-Kunt,

Laeven, and Levine, 2004). Finally, confirming earlier research, we also see that state ownership

is associated with greater fragility, albeit significant only at ten percent (Caprio and Martinez-

Peria, 2000).




                                                 26
         Furthermore, the results in Table 4 suggest that openness, competition, and institutional

development foster greater banking system stability. Countries with greater freedoms in banking

(Banking Freedom) and generally more competitive economic systems (Economic Freedom) are

less likely to experience banking crises (regressions 9 and 10). This finding suggests that

concentration is not simply proxying for the degree of competition in the banking industry.

Better institutional environment is also associated with a lower probability of systemic crisis

(regression 11). The evidence is consistent with theories that emphasize the stabilizing effects of

openness and competition, but inconsistent with the many models that stress the destabilizing

effects from competition.13



         II.D.2. Costs of Banking Crises

         We also assessed whether countries with concentrated banking systems have bigger,

more costly banking crises. If (i) concentrated banking systems are more likely to have too-big-

to-fail policies and (ii) too-big-to-fail policies induce greater risk-taking and (iii) too-big-too fail

policies can operate for only some fixed period of time, then this suggests that crises will be

larger, though less frequent, in concentrated banking systems. If this were the case, then our

findings that (a) concentration is associated with a lower probability of suffering a systemic crisis

and (b) concentration is associated with greater bank-level stability may provide a misleading

impression of the concentration-stability relationship.

         Thus, in Table 5, we examine the relationship between banking system concentration and

the costs of banking crises. To include countries that suffered no crises in the sample, we use a

13
  Boyd and De Nicolo (2005) stress that competition exerts a stabilizing impact on banks because more competitive
banks charge lower interest rates to firms and these lower rates reduce the likelihood of default. This prediction is
consistent with our results. However, Boyd and De Nicolo (2004) use bank concentration as an indicator of bank
competition. Thus, they stress that concentration will exert a destabilizing impact on banks, which is inconsistent
with our results.


                                                         27
Tobit model, where zero implies that the country did not experience a banking crisis. We use

three different measures of banking crisis costs. The first two measures are from Klingebiel and

Honohan (2003). The last is the Boyd and Smith (2005) measure of the cost of the banking

crises.

          As shown in Table 5, we find no evidence for the contention that more concentrated

banking systems have more costly crises. Concentration does not enter significantly at the five

percent level in any of the regression. It enters with a negative coefficient across the different

cost measures. Given the lack of a robust relationship, however, we do not draw the conclusion

that concentration reduces both the likelihood and the size of crises.



III. Why is Concentration Stabilizing? Additional Evidence from Crisis Data

          Although the finding of a negative relationship between banking system concentration

and the likelihood of suffering a systemic crisis is consistent with the concentration-stability

view (Tables 3 and 4), the results do not distinguish among possible explanations of this finding.

Why is concentration stabilizing? This section explores the validity of different explanations for

why bank concentration lowers banking system fragility.



          A. Is it market power and bank profits?

          One possible argument is that the level of bank concentration proxies for the degree of

competition in the banking industry. According to this market power view, powerful banks

(either directly or through policymakers) restrict competition, which boosts bank profits, lowers

incentives for risk taking, and thus reduces systemic risk. Thus, the finding of a negative

relationship between banking system concentration and systemic crises is consistent with the




                                                    28
view that banking sector concentration increases banking system stability by reducing the

openness and competitive of the banking industry.

        In contrast to this market power explanation of how concentration promotes banking

system stability, however, note that concentration remains negatively associated with crises even

when controlling for regulatory restrictions on bank activities and measures of the openness and

competitiveness of the banking industry and the economy more generally. Thus, to the extent

that these variables adequately control for competition, the findings suggest that something else

besides market power is driving the negative relationship between bank concentration and bank

fragility.

        The findings on bank regulations, banking freedom, economic freedom, and institutional

development also run counter to the view that competition intensifies fragility. Restrictions on

competition and openness -- such as regulatory impediments to the entry of new banks, or

regulatory barriers to banks engaging in non-lending services, or general indicators of the

openness of the banking industry or the overall economy – do not reduce the probability of

suffering a systemic banking crisis (Table 4). Thus, the findings that (i) concentration lowers

banking system fragility and (ii) low competition raises banking system fragility imply that

concentration is not proxying for the degree of competition in the banking industry.

        However, the measures of bank regulation, bank freedom, economic freedom, and

institutional development may not sufficiently control for competition in banking. Thus, given

the difficulty in adequately controlling for the competitive environment using regulatory

indicators, some may view the Table 4 results as too weak to discard the market power

explanation of why concentration is stabilizing.




                                                29
           B. Is it diversification?

           Next, consider the argument that banks in more concentrated banking systems are more

diversified than banking systems composed of many small banks. If this argument is correct and

if we include good measures of bank diversification in the systemic crises regressions, then this

should drive out the significance of bank concentration.

           To proxy for the diversification channel, we use three measures. First, we use Mean

bank size, which equals total bank assets divided by the number of banks. 14 The presumption is

that larger banks tend to be more diversified. While clearly problematic, bank-level data on each

bank’s asset holdings are impossible to obtain. So, we use Mean bank size in trying to assess

why concentration is associated with lower levels of banking system fragility. If mean bank size

does not drive out the significance of concentration, this weakens the argument that concentrated

banking systems have larger, better diversified banks than less concentrated banking systems

with smaller banks. However, since bank size does not directly measure diversification, finding

that mean bank size drives out concentration provides only suggestive support for the

diversification argument.

           Second, we include an indicator of regulatory restrictions on banks’ ability to diversify

risk abroad. Specifically, No foreign loans equals one if banks are prohibited from making

foreign loans and zero otherwise. In many countries, it may be impossible for banks to

sufficiently diversify their asset holding domestically. Thus, restrictions on investing abroad

may doom domestic banks to holding excessively risky assets. Indeed, countries with both small

banks and regulatory restrictions on those banks lending abroad may have especially unstable

banks. Again, if we control for these measures of diversification and they drive out the

significance of concentration in the systemic crisis regressions, then this provides “smoking gun”
14
     Using the mean bank size of the largest three banks does not change our results.


                                                           30
evidence that concentration is associated with banking system stability because concentration is

associated with more diversified banks.

           A third potential indicator of bank diversification is the size of the economy. The

presumption, albeit questionable, is that larger economies are more diversified and therefore

offer banks easier means to hold diversified loan portfolios. Thus, we include the level of GDP

in attempting to dissect the negative relationship between concentration and crises.15

           The results in Table 6 provide suggestive support for the view that concentrated banking

systems are composed of bigger, more diversified banks that are hence less prone to systemic

failure. As the results in Table 6 show, the significance of the concentration coefficient drops to

ten percent when we control for bank size and completely disappears when we control for the

size of the economy (regressions 1 and 2). These findings are consistent with the view that part

of the reason that concentration enhances stability is that concentrated systems are composed of

bigger, better-diversified banks. Regression 3 indicates that including the No Foreign Loans

does not alter the findings on banking system concentration. In regression 4, the concentration

effect becomes completely insignificant when including the (i) mean bank size, (ii) no foreign

loans, and (iii) the interaction term between bank size and no foreign loans. This result in

column 4 indicates that countries with larger banks become significantly more prone to systemic

crises if they prohibit their banks from investing abroad. This finding on the interaction between

bank size and regulatory restrictions on foreign loans runs counter to our prediction that

restrictions on foreign lending would be particularly destabilizing for small (presumably less

diversified) banks. Nevertheless, while these measures of diversification are highly imperfect,

including these proxies for diversification drives out the significance of banking system

concentration and suggests that the diversification explanation has some merit.
15
     Replacing GDP by M2 to control for the size of the financial system does not change our results.


                                                           31
        C. Is it easier monitoring?

        A third argument for why concentration is stabilizing is that (i) concentrated banking

systems tend to have a few large banks and (ii) a few large banks are easier to monitor than many

small ones. As above, if this easier monitoring argument is correct and if we include good

measures of monitoring in the crisis regressions, then this should drive out the significance of

bank concentration. Of course, there are countervailing views. Large banks may be

substantially more complex than small banks. So, supervision may be more difficult with a few,

complex banks than with a higher number of simple banks.16

        We use three measures to attempt to capture empirically the ease of monitoring banks.

First, we use the No. of banks, which equals the number of banks in the economy. The easier

monitoring argument relies on the presumption that concentrated banking systems have a few

large banks and this is crucial in explaining better monitoring and greater banking system

stability. Second, Activity Restrictions equals regulatory restrictions on the ability of banks to

engage in securities market, insurance and real estate activities as well as restrictions on banks

owning non-financial firms. The presumption is that greater regulatory restrictions will make it

easier to monitor banks. So, to the extent that regulatory restrictions are correlated with bank

concentration, this would help account for the negative relationship between concentration and

systemic crises. Third, Cash-flow is the fraction of a bank’s total cash-flow rights held by each

bank’s main owner, averaged across each country’s banks. As suggested by La Porta et al (1999,

2002), countries where laws and regulations are ineffective at protecting the rights of small


16
  As pointed out to us by Mark Carey and Rene Stulz, there is another dimension to this monitoring argument. If
monitoring skills are scare and there are economies of scope in monitoring, then concentrated banking systems may
facilitate monitoring. However, the scarcity of monitoring skills, and hence the benefits of concentration, may
different across countries.


                                                       32
shareholders will tend to have corporations that do not rely on small shareholders to exert

corporate control and instead have concentrated cash-flow rights to induce the main owner to

exert sound corporate governance. In terms of banks, Caprio, Laeven, and Levine (2004) show

that a bank’s major owner tends to have higher cash-flow rights in countries where the

institutions underlying monitoring of banks are weak, such as weak shareholder protection laws

or ineffective bank supervision and regulation. These weak institutions discourage diffuse

ownership and produce concentrated ownership of banks. Thus, we use each country’s average

cash-flow rights across banks as an additional proxy of each country’s monitoring regime. If

including cash-flow rights eliminates the significance of concentration, concerns would naturally

arise about the endogeneity of cash-flow rights. But, if including cash-flow rights does not alter

the results on concentration, then this simply represents an additional, if flawed, robustness

check.

         The results presented in Table 6 do not provide support for the easier monitoring view of

why concentration reduces the likelihood of suffering a systemic crisis. Including the No. of

banks, reduces the significance of Concentration to ten percent, but the significance level is

restored once we also control for Activity Restrictions. Including Cash-flows does not alter the

findings on Concentration either. No. of banks and Activity Restrictions do not enter the crises

regressions significantly. Cash-flow enters positively, which is consistent with the view that in

countries with weak legal and corporate governance institutions and ineffective bank supervision

and regulation the ownership structure adjusts such that cash-flow becomes concentrated in order

to boost monitoring incentives. However, the resultant outcome is still associated with a higher

likelihood of suffering a crisis. For the purposes of this paper, the point is that including proxies

for the monitoring regime does not alter the results on Concentration significantly. This




                                                 33
suggests, to the extent that these are reasonable proxies, that Concentration is not a simple proxy

for easier monitoring.



IV. Conclusions

       To summarize, using a cross-country, time-series panel of data on systemic banking

crises, we find that greater bank concentration is associated with a lower likelihood of suffering a

crisis. We never find that concentration increases fragility. While subject to the qualifications

stressed in the Introduction and throughout the paper, the negative relationship between

concentration and crises is robust to including various control variables, including indicators of

the macroeconomic environment, the international environment, the domestic banking

environment, bank supervisory and regulatory policies, and indexes of overall economic freedom

and institutional development. Furthermore, reverse causality does not seem to be driving the

concentration-stability findings. Thus, the data on systemic crises are more consistent with the

concentration-stability view than with the concentration-fragility view.

       In searching for the mechanisms underlying the concentration-stability result, we find no

support for the view that banking system concentration is a proxy for a less competitive banking

environment. We draw this conclusion for two reasons. First, when we include regulatory and

institutional measures of the degree of competition in banking and the overall economy, we find

that crises are less – not more – likely in competitive regulatory and institutional environments.

Second, even when we control for these regulatory and institutional measure of the degree of

competition, we continue to find that concentration is negatively associated with systemic crises.

To the extent that we have good measures of the competitive environment, these findings suggest




                                                34
that banking system concentration is a proxy for something else besides banking industry

competition.

       Furthermore, we find suggestive support that concentrated banking systems have more

diversified banks, but not evidence that concentrated banking systems with a few large banks are

easier to monitor and hence more stable than less concentrated banking systems. On monitoring,

none of our measures of the ease of monitoring enters significantly and including them in the

analyses did not alter the coefficient on bank concentration. On diversification, the data indicate

that part of the reason concentrated banking systems lower the probability of suffering a systemic

crisis is that concentrated banking systems tend to have larger, better-diversified banks with a

correspondingly lower probability of failure. We draw this tentative conclusion because the

concentration-crisis link weakens appreciably when we include proxies for diversification. We

emphasize, however, that these proxies are aggregate indicators and do not directly measure

individual bank asset diversification, and hence we view these results as suggestive and hope that

they stimulate cross-country, bank-level research into this important policy issue.



References


Allen, Franklin, 1990. “The Market for Information and the Origin of Financial Intermediation.”
       Journal of Financial Intermediation 1, 3-30.

Allen, Franklin and Douglas Gale, 2000. Comparing Financial Systems. Cambridge and London:
       MIT press.

Allen, Franklin and Douglas Gale, 2003. “Competition and Financial Stability.” Journal of
        Money, Credit, and Banking 36 (3 Pt.2), 433-480.

Bank for International Settlement, 2001. “The Banking Industry in the Emerging Market
       Economies: Competition, Consolidation, and Systemic Stability”, BIS Paper 4.




                                                35
Barth, J. R., G. Caprio Jr. and R. Levine (2001a), “The Regulation and Supervision of Banks
        Around the World: A New Database”, In: Brooking-Wharton Papers on Financial
        Services, Eds: Litan, R. E. and R. Herring, Washington, DC, Brookings Institution: 183-
        250.

Barth, James R., Gerard Caprio Jr., and Ross Levine, 2001, “Banking Systems Around the
        Globe: Do Regulation and Ownership Affect Performance and Stability?” In: F. Mishkin
        (ed.), Financial Supervision and Regulation: What Works and What Doesn’t, Chicago,
        IL: Chicago University Press, 31-88.

Barth, James R., Gerard Caprio Jr., and Ross Levine, 2004, “Bank Supervision and Regulation:
        What Works Best?” Journal of Financial Intermediation, 13: 205-248.

Barth, J. R., G. Caprio Jr. and R. Levine (2005), Rethinking Bank Supervision and Regulation:
        Until Angels Govern, Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, forthcoming.

Beck, Thorsten; Demirgüç-Kunt, Asli; Levine, Ross, 2000, “A New Database on the Structure
       and Development of the Financial Sector” The World Bank Economic Review 14, 597-
       605.

Beck, Thorsten; Demirgüç-Kunt, Asli; Levine, Ross, 2003. “Law, Endowments, and Finance”.
       Journal of Financial Economics 70, 137-181.

Beck, Thorsten; Demirgüç-Kunt, Asli; Levine, Ross, 2004. “Bank Supervision and Corruption in
       Lending,” mimeo, which is a revised and renamed version of “Bank Supervision and
       Corporate Finance,” National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper Series, No.
       9620 (April 2003).

Besanko, D. and Thakor, A.V., 1993. “Relationship Banking, Deposit Insurance and Bank
      Portfolio”, in: Mayer, C. and Vives, X. (eds.): Capital Markets and Financial
      Intermediation, Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 292-318.

Boot, A.W. and Greenbaum, S., 1993. “Bank Regulation, Reputation, and Rents: Theory and
       Policy Implications”, ”, in: Mayer, C. and Vives, X. (eds.): Capital Markets and Financial
       Intermediation, Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 292-318.

Boyd, J.H., and De Nicolo, G., 2005. “The Theory of Bank Risk-Taking and Competition
       Revisited” Journal of Finance, forthcoming.

Boyd, J. H. and S. Graham, 1991. Investigating the Banking Consolidation Trend, Federal
       Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review, Spring, 1-15.

Boyd, J. H. and S. Graham (1998). “Consolidation in US Banking,” in Y. Amihud and G. Miller
       (eds.), Bank Mergers and Acquisitions, Norwell, MA. Kluwer, pp. 113-135.




                                               36
Boyd John H., and David E. Runkle, 1993. “Size and Performance of Banking Firms: Testing
      the Predictions of Theory.” Journal of Monetary Economics 31, 47-67.

Boyd John H., and Edward C. Prescott, 1986. “Financial Intermediary-Coalitions.” Journal of
      Economic Theory 38, 211-232.

Calomiris, Charles W., 2000. U.S. Bank Deregulation in Historical Perspective. Cambridge
      University Press.

Calomiris, Charles W., and Joseph R. Mason, 2000. “Causes of Bank Distress During the Great
      Depression”, National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper No. 7919,
      Cambridge, MA.

Caminal, Ramon and Matutes, Carmen, 2002. “Market Power and Banking Failures”,
      International Journal of Industrial Organization 20, 1341-61.

Caprio, Gerard, Jr., and Daniela Klingebiel, 1999, “Episodes of Systematic and Borderline
       Financial Distress”, mimeo, The World Bank.

Caprio, Gerard, Jr., Luc Laeven, and Ross Levine, 2003, “Governance and Bank Valuation”
       National Bureau of Economic Research, Working No. 10158, Cambridge, MA.

Caprio, Gerard, Jr., and Maria Soledad Martinez-Peria, 2000. “Avoiding Disaster: Policies to
       Reduce the Risk of Banking Crises.” Discussion Paper. Egyptian Center for Economic
       Studies.

Carkovic, Maria and Ross Levine, 2002. “Finance and Growth: New Evidence and Policy
      Analyses for Chile,” In Norman Loayza and Raimundo Soto, Editors, Economic Growth:
      Sources, Trends, and Cycles, Santiago, Chile: Central Bank of Chile, pp. 343-376.

Carletti, Elena and Hartmann, Philipp, 2003. “Competition and Stability: What’s Special about
        Banking?”, in Mizen, P (ed.): Monetary History, Exchange Rates and Financial Markets:
        Essays in Honor of Charles Goodhart, Edward Elgar.

Chan, Yuk-Shee, Stuart Greenbaum, and Anjan Thakor, 1992. “Is Fairly Priced Deposit
       Insurance Possible?” Journal of Finance 47, 227-245.

Chong, Beng Soon, 1991. “Effects of Interstate Banking on Commercial Banks’ Risk and
      Profitability”, Review of Economics and Statistics 73, 78-84.

Claessens, Stijn, Demirguc-Kunt, Asli and Harry Huizinga, 2001. “How Does Foreign Entry
       Affect Domestic Banking Markets?” Journal of Banking and Finance, 25(5), 891-911.

Cole, R. A. and Gunther, J.W., 1995. “Separating the Likelihood and Timing of Bank Failure.”
       Journal of Banking and Finance 19(6), 1073-89.




                                              37
Cordella, T. and Yeyati, E.L., 2002. “Financial Opening, Deposit Insurance, and Risk in a Model
       of Banking Competition”, European Economic Review 46, 471-485.

Demirgüç-Kunt, Asli, 1989. "Deposit-Institution Failures: A Review of Empirical Literature,"
      Economic Review, Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, Vol. 25, No.4.

Demirgüç-Kunt, Asli, and Enrica Detragiache, 1998, “The Determinants of Banking Crises in
      Developing and Developed Countries”, IMF Staff Papers, 45 (1), pp. 81-109.

Demirgüç-Kunt, Asli, and Enrica Detragiache, 1999, “Financial Liberalization and Financial
      Fragility”, in B. Pleskovic and J.E. Stiglitz (Eds.) Proceedings of the 1998 World Bank
      Conference on Development Economics, Washington, DC, The World Bank.

Demirgüç-Kunt, Asli, and Enrica Detragiache, 2002, “Does Deposit Insurance Increase Banking
      System Stability? An Empirical Investigation.” Journal of Monetary Economics, 49 (7),
      pp.1373-1406.

Demirgüç-Kunt, Asli, Laeven, Luc and Ross Levine, 2004, “Regulations, Market Structure,
      Institutions, and the Cost of Financial Intermediation.” Journal of Money, Credit and
      Banking 36: 593-622.

De Nicoló, Gianni, 2000. “Size, Charter Value and Risk in Banking: An International
      Perspective.” International Finance Discussion Paper #689, Board of Governors of the
      Federal Reserve System.

De Nicoló, Gianni, Batholomew, Philip, Zaman, Jahanara, and Zephirin, Mary, 2003. “Bank
      Consolidation, Conglomeration and Internationalization: Trends and Implications for
      Financial Risk.” IMF Working Paper #03/158.

Diamond, Douglas W., 1984. “Financial Intermediation and Delegated Monitoring.” Review of
      Economic Studies 51, 393-414.

Dick, Astrid, 2003. “Nationwide Branching and Its Impact on Market Structure, Quality and
       Bank Performance.” Journal of Business, forthcoming.

Easterly, William and Ross Levine. 1997, “Africa’s growth tragedy: policies and ethnic
       divisions.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 112, 1203-1250.

Easterly, W., Levine, R. 2003. “Tropics, Germs, and Crops: How Endowments Influence
       Economic Development,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 50, 3-39.

Flannery, Mark J., 1989. “Capital Regulation and Insured Banks’ Choice of Individual Loan
       Default Risks.” Journal of Monetary Economics 24, 235-258.




                                               38
Gonzales-Hermosillo, B; C. Pazarbasioglu, and R. Billings, 1997. “Banking System Fragility:
      Likelihood Versus Timing of Failure – An Application to the Mexican Financial Crisis,”
      IMF Staff Papers.

Group of Ten, 2001. Report on Consolidation in the Financial Sector, Bank for International
      Settlements: Basel, Switzerland.

Hellman, Thomas, Kevin Murdock, and Joseph E. Stiglitz, 2000, “Liberalization, moral hazard
      in banking and prudential regulation: Are capital controls enough?” American Economic
      Review 90(1), 147-165.

Hughes, Joseph P. and Mester, Loretta, 1998. “Bank Capitalization and Cost: Evidence of Scale
      Economies in Risk Management and Signaling”, Review of Economics and Statistics 80,
      314-25.

International Monetary Fund, 2001. Financial Sector Consolidation in Emerging Markets,
        Chapter V, International Capital Market Report.

Jayaratne, Jith and Strahan, Philip, 1998.”Entry Restrictions, Industry Evolution, and Dynamic
       Efficiency: Evidence From Commercial Banking.” Journal of Law and Economics 41
       239-75.

Kaminsky, Graciela, and Reinhart, Carmen, 1999. “The Twin Crises: The Causes of Banking and
      Balance of Payments Problems.” American Economic Review 89, 473-500.

Kane, Edward J., 1989. The S&L Insurance Mess: How Did It Happen? Washington: Urban
       Institute Press.

Kaufman, D., Kraay, A., Lobaton, P.Z. 1999. “Governance Matters.” World Bank Policy
      Research Department Working Paper No. 2196.

Keeley, Michael C., 1990. “Deposit Insurance, Risk and Market Power in Banking”, American
       Economic Review 80, 1183-1200.

La Porta, R., Lopez-de-Silanes, F., Shleifer, A., Vishny, R.W., 1997. “Legal determinants of
       external finance.” Journal of Finance 52, 1131-1150.

La Porta, R., Lopez-de-Silanes, F., Shleifer, A., Vishny, R.W., 1999. “The Quality of
      Government.” Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization 15, 222-279.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, 2002. “Government Ownership of
       Banks.” Journal of Finance, 57(1), 265-301.

Lindgren, Carl-Johan, Gillian Garcia, and Matthew I. Saal, 1996, Bank Soundness and
       Macroeconomic Policy, (Washington: International Monetary Fund).




                                               39
Macey, J.R., O’Hara, M., 2003, “The corporate governance of banks,” FRBNY Economic Policy
      Review 9, 91-107.

Matutes, Carmen and Vives, Xavier, 1996. “Competition for Deposits, Fragility and Insurance”,
      Journal of Financial Intermediation 5, 184-216.

Matutes, Carmen and Vives, Xavier, 2000. “Imperfect Competition, Risk Taking and regulation
      in Banking”, European Economic Review 44, 184-216.

Merton, Robert C., 1977.” An Analytic Derivation of the Cost of Deposit Insurance and Loan
      Guarantees: An Application of Modern Option Pricing Theory.” Journal of Banking and
      Finance 1, 3-11.

Mishkin, Frederic S., 1999. “Financial Consolidation: Dangers and Opportunities.” Journal of
      Banking and Finance 23, 675-691.

O’Hara, Maureen and Shaw, W., 1990. “Deposit Insurance and Wealth Effects: The Value of
      Being ‘Too Big to Fail’,” Journal of Finance 45, 1587- 1600..

Ramakrishnan, Ram and Anjan V. Thakor, 1984. “Information Reliability and A Theory of
      Financial Intermediation.” Review of Economic Studies 51, 415-432.

Sharpe, William F., 1978. “Bank Capital Adequacy, Deposit Insurance and Security Values.”
       Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 13, 701-718.

Smith, B.D., 1984. “Private Information, Deposit Interest Rates, and the ‘Stability’ of the
       Banking System”, Journal of Monetary Economics 14, 293-317.

Stiglitz, Joseph E., 1972. “Some Aspects of the Pure Theory of Corporate Finance: Bankruptcies
        and Takeovers.” Bell Journal of Economics 3, 458-82.

Stulz, R. and R. Williamson, 2003. “Culture, Openness, and Finance.” Journal of Financial
        Economics 70, 313-49.

Sutton, John. 1991. Sunk Costs and Market Structure. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Sutton, John. 1998. Technology and Market Structure. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Tirole, Jean. 1988. The Theory of Industrial Organization. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Williamson, Stephen D., 1986. “ Costly Monitoring, Financial Intermediation, and Equilibrium
       Credit Rationing.” Journal of Monetary Economics 18, 159-179.




                                                40
                 Table 1. Bank Concentration and Competition and Banking Crises

GDP per capita is in constant dollars, averaged over the entire sample period, 1980-97. Crisis period denotes the years in which
each country experienced a systemic banking crisis and the duration of said crisis. Concentration is a measure of concentration in
the banking industry, calculated as the fraction of assets held by the three largest banks in each country, averaged over 1988-97.
Sources are in the data appendix.

                        GDP per capita           Crisis Period             Concentration
 Australia                  17913                                              0.65

 Austria                    25785                                              0.75

 Bahrain                     9398                                              0.93

 Belgium                    24442                                              0.64

 Benin                        362                 (1988-90)                    1.00

 Botswana                    2781                                              0.94
 Burundi                      186                                              1.00

 Cameroon                     790             (1987-93, 1995-98)               0.95

 Canada                     18252                                              0.58

 Chile                       3048                 (1981-87)                    0.49

 Colombia                    1802                 (1982-85)                    0.49

 Congo                        940                                              1.00

 Ivory Coast                  843                 (1988-91)                    0.96

 Cyprus                      9267                                              0.88

 Denmark                    31049                                              0.78

 Dominican                   1426                                              0.65
 Republic
 Ecuador                     1516                 (1995-97)                    0.40

 Egypt                        905                                              0.67

 El Salvador                 1450                   (1989)                     0.84

 Finland                    23304                 (1991-94)                    0.85

 France                     24227                                              0.44

 Germany                    27883                                              0.48

 Ghana                        356                 (1982-89)                    0.89

 Greece                     10202                                              0.79

 Guatemala                   1415                                              0.37

 Guyana                       653                 (1993-95)                    1.00

 Honduras                     694                                              0.44

 India                        313                 (1991-97)                    0.47

 Indonesia                    761                 (1992-97)                    0.44




                                                                 41
               GDP per capita    Crisis Period    Concentration
Ireland            13419                              0.74

Israel             13355          (1983-84)           0.84

Italy              17041          (1990-95)           0.35

Jamaica            1539           (1996-97)           0.82

Japan              35608          (1992-97)           0.24

Jordan             1646           (1989-90)           0.92

Kenya               336             (1993)            0.74

Korea              6857             (1997)            0.31

Lesotho             356                               1.00

Malaysia           3197         (1985-88, 1997)       0.54
Mali                260           (1987-89)           0.91

Mauritius          2724                               0.94

Mexico             3240         (1982, 1994-97)       0.63

Nepal               179           (1988-97)           0.90

Netherlands        22976                              0.76

New Zealand        15539                              0.77

Nigeria             251           (1991-95)           0.83

Norway             28843          (1987-93)           0.85

Panama             2824           (1988-89)           0.42

Papua New          1024           (1989-97)           0.87
Guinea
Peru               2458           (1983-90)           0.69

Philippines        1070           (1981-87)           0.49

Portugal           8904           (1986-89)           0.46

Senegal             562           (1988-91)           0.94

Sierra Leone        260           (1990-97)           1.00

Singapore          20079                              0.71

South Africa       3680             (1985)            0.77

Sri Lanka           588           (1989-93)           0.86

Swaziland          1254             (1995)            0.95

Sweden             24845          (1990-93)           0.89

Switzerland        42658                              0.77




                                        42
                GDP per capita      Crisis Period           Concentration
Thailand                   1886    (1983-87, 1997)              0.54

Togo                        366                                 1.00

Tunisia                    1831                                 0.63

Turkey                     2451   (1982, 1991, 1994)            0.45

United Kingdom            16883                                 0.57

United States             24459       (1980-92)                 0.19

Uruguay                    5037       (1981-85)                 0.87

Venezuela                  3558       (1993-97)                 0.52

Zambia                      464                                 0.84




                                                       43
                                                                     Table 2. Summary Statistics and Correlations

Summary statistics are presented in Panel A and correlations in Panel B and C. Banking crisis is a crisis dummy, which takes on the value of one if there is a systemic and the value of zero
otherwise. Growth is the rate of growth of real GDP. Real interest rate is the nominal interest rate minus the contemporaneous rate of inflation. Inflation is the rate of change of the GDP deflator.
M2/reserves is the ratio of M2 to international reserves. Credit growth is the real growth of domestic credit, lagged two periods. Depreciation is the rate of change of the exchange rate. Moral
hazard is an aggregate index of moral hazard associated with varying deposit insurance schemes. Concentration is a measure of concentration in the banking industry, calculated as the fraction of
assets held by the three largest banks in each country, averaged over the sample period. Banking freedom is an indicator of the relative openness of the banking system. Sources are given in the
data appendix.

Panel A: Summary Statistics:
                                                  Mean                    Median                St.Dev.                Maximum                  Minimum               Observations
Banking crisis                                     0.04                      0.00                  0.20                    1.00                      0.00                    1230
Real GDP Growth                                    3.41                      3.45                  4.25                   23.60                   -17.15                     1216
Terms of trade change                              0.15                      0.01                 10.30                   63.24                   -51.45                     1191
Real interest rate                                 1.58                      2.68                 19.34                  151.21                  -283.00                     1160
Inflation                                         14.07                      7.75                 23.42                  350.56                   -29.17                     1220
M2/reserves                                       19.87                      6.56                 68.86                 1289.31                      0.19                    1222
Depreciation                                       0.10                      0.04                  0.22                    2.62                     -0.35                    1238
Credit Growtht-2                                   6.01                      5.09                 15.84                  115.42                   -54.62                     1203
Real GDP per capita                             7813.94                   2302.37              10299.92                45950.46                   134.54                     1222
Moral hazard                                      -1.09                     -2.49                  2.24                    3.98                     -2.49                    1238
Concentration                                      0.72                      0.77                  0.21                    1.00                      0.19                    1106
Banking freedom                                    3.36                      3.00                  0.88                    5.00                      1.00                    1184


Panel B: Correlations: Banking Crisis, Concentration, Macro Indicators, and Institutions
                           Banking     Real GDP      Terms of Real interest                                                    Credit       Real GDP        Moral      Concentra-
                             Crisis      growth    trade change    rate       Inflation M2/reserves Depreciation              Growtht-2     per capita      Hazard        tion
Real GDP growth           -0.158***       1.000
Terms of trade change       -0.032        0.029         1.000
Real interest rate        -0.079***     0.093***      -0.053*     1.000
Inflation                 0.103***     -0.117***        0.043   -0.980***        1.000
M2/reserves               0.094***     -0.117***        0.015     0.011         -0.017      1.000
Depreciation              0.171***     -0.194***        0.002   -0.561***     0.642***      -0.035     1.000
Credit Growtht-2            -0.023        0.040         0.008     0.004         -0.015   -0.097*** -0.103***                     1.000
Real GDP per capita       -0.090*** -0.084***           0.015     0.029        -0.051*     -0.053*   -0.226***                  -0.014        1.000
Moral Hazard              0.078***       -0.004         0.030     0.028         -0.037    -0.058**   -0.096***                  -0.015      0.459***       1.000
Concentration              -0.062**     -0.061**       -0.004     0.004         -0.002    0.093***     0.040                   -0.054*      -0.263***    -0.399***        1.000
Banking freedom           0.183***        0.019        -0.012     0.018         -0.022   0.098***     0.070**                   -0.020      -0.456***    -0.142***      0.257***


***,**, and * indicate statistical significance at 1, 5, and 10 percent, respectively.


                                                                                                 45
                                                                        Table 3. Banking Crisis and Concentration
The logit probability model estimated is Banking Crisis [Country=j, Time= t]= α + β1 Real GDP growthj,t+ β2 Terms of trade changej,t + β3 Real interest ratej,t + β4 Inflation j,t + β5M2/reservesj,t +
β6Depreciationj,t + β7 Credit growthj,t-2 + β8 Real GDP per capitaj,t +β9 Average concentrationj,t+ β10 G10 countries,t +εj,t. The dependent variable is a crisis dummy that takes on the value of one if
there is a systemic and the value of zero otherwise. Growth is the rate of growth of real GDP. Real interest rate is the nominal interest rate minus the contemporaneous rate of inflation. Inflation is
the rate of change of the GDP deflator. M2/reserves is the ratio of M2 to international reserves. Credit growth is the real growth of domestic credit, lagged two periods. Depreciation is the rate of
change of the exchange rate. G10 country is a dummy variable that takes the value 1 for G10 countries and zero otherwise. Concentration is a measure of concentration in the banking industry,
calculated as the fraction of assets held by the three largest banks in each country, averaged over the sample period. Banking freedom measures the relative openness of the banking and financial
system. Bank data are from the BankScope database of Fitch IBCA. The sample period is 1980-1997. Specification (1) excludes all crisis observations after the initial year of crisis. Specification
(2) includes the crisis periods (after the initial crisis year) as crisis observations. Specification (3) includes the crisis periods (after the initial crisis year) as non-crisis observations. In specification
(4) Average Concentration is replaced by the Initial Concentration, and is restricted to the actual starting date and the years following that date. Specification (5) omits real GDP per capita.
Specification (6) includes G10 country dummy and its interaction with concentration. White’s heteroskedasiticy consistent standard errors are given in parentheses. Detailed variable definitions
and sources are given in the data appendix.

                                     (1)                       (2)                       (3)                      (4)                       (5)                         (6)
 Real GDP growth                 -0.163***                 -0.088***                 -0.136***                -0.306***                 -0.164***                   -0.164***
                                   (0.035)                  (0.020)                    (0.030)                  (0.074)                  (0.035)                     (0.033)
 Terms of trade                     -0.013                   -0.008                     -0.011                   -0.034                   -0.015                      -0.012
 change                            (0.012)                  (0.007)                    (0.012)                  (0.024)                  (0.013)                     (0.012)
 Real interest rate               0.010***                  0.006**                     0.002                    0.009                 0.010***                    0.010***
                                   (0.004)                  (0.003)                    (0.004)                  (0.009)                 (0.004)                     (0.004)
 Inflation                           0.009                  0.006**                     -0.002                   -0.016                    0.009                       0.008
                                   (0.009)                  (0.003)                    (0.005)                  (0.024)                  (0.008)                     (0.009)
 M2/reserves                       0.002*                   0.002**                      0.001                    0.001                   0.002*                       0.002
                                   (0.001)                  (0.001)                    (0.001)                  (0.002)                  (0.001)                     (0.001)
 Depreciation                       0.453                     0.624                      0.706                    1.802                    0.777                       0.491
                                   (1.142)                  (0.425)                    (0.991)                  (2.696)                  (1.133)                     (1.151)
 Credit Growtht-2                  0.014*                    -0.001                     0.012                  0.028***                   0.015*                       0.014
                                   (0.009)                  (0.005)                    (0.009)                  (0.012)                  (0.009)                     (0.009)
 Real GDP per capita               -0.004*                 -0.000***                   -0.000*                  -0.006*                                               -0.002
                                   (0.002)                  (0.000)                    (0.000)                   (0.004                                              (0.002)
 Concentration                   -1.946***                 -1.479***                  -1.696**                -3.744***                  -1.607**                   -1.845***
                                   (0.797)                  (0.415)                    (0.747)                  (1.430)                   (0.805)                    (0.797)
 G10 countries                                                                                                                                                        1.011
                                                                                                                                                                     (2.332)
 G10 countries x                                                                                                                                                      -3.287
 concentration                                                                                                                                                       (5.091)


 No. of Crises                       47                       202                        47                       20                        47                          47
 No. of Observations                989                       1144                       1144                     410                       989                         989
 % crises correct                    68                        57                        64                       70                        68                           70
 % correct                           73                        66                        67                       76                        72                          72
          2
 Model χ                         47.83***                    75***                   37.37***                  40.34***                  38.19***                    46.38***
***,**, and * indicate statistical significance at 1, 5, and 10 percent, respectively.


                                                                                                       46
                                                              Table 4. Banking Crisis, Regulation and Concentration
The logit probability model estimated is Banking Crisis [Country=j, Time= t]= α + β1 Real GDP growthj,t+ β2 Terms of trade changej,t + β3 Real interest ratej,t + β4 Inflation j,t + β5M2/reservesj,t +
β6Depreciationj,t + β7 Credit growthj,t-2 + β8 Concentrationj,t+ β9 Regulatory measurej,t + εj,t. The dependent variable is a crisis dummy that takes on the value of one if there is a systemic and the
value of zero otherwise. Growth is the growth rate of real GDP. Real interest rate is the nominal interest rate minus the inflation rate. Inflation is the rate of change of the GDP deflator.
M2/reserves is the ratio of M2 to international reserves. Credit growth is the real growth of domestic credit, lagged two periods. Depreciation is the rate of change of the exchange rate.
Concentration equals the fraction of assets held by the three largest banks in each country, averaged over the sample period. Moral Hazard is an aggregate index of moral hazard associated with
variations in deposit insurance design features. Fraction of entry denied measures the number of entry applications denied as a fraction of the total received. Activity restrictions captures bank’s
ability to engage in business of securities underwriting, insurance underwriting and selling, and in real estate investment, management, and development. Required reserves is the percentage of
reserves regulators require to hold. Capital regulatory index is a summary measure of capital stringency. Official Supervisory Power is an index of the power of supervisory agency to enforce
prudential regulations on banks. State ownership is the percentage of banking system’s assets in banks that are 50% or more government owned. Foreign ownership is the percentage of banking
system’s assets in banks that are 50% or more foreign owned. Banking freedom is an indicator of relative openness of banking and financial system, while economic freedom is a composite of 10
institutional factors determining economic freedom. KKZ_composite is an aggregate measure of six governance indicators. White’s heteroskedasticity consistent standard errors are given in
parentheses. Detailed variable definitions and sources are given in the data appendix. The sample period is 1980-1997.
                                    (1)             (2)              (3)             (4)           (5)            (6)             (7)            (8)               (9)               (10)          (11)
 Concentration                   -1.467**         -2.556*       -2.285***      -2.472***     -2.847***       -2.533**       -2.796***       -2.524***      -1.953***      -1.930***      -1.881***
                                  (0.565)         (1.552)         (0.939)        (1.060)       (1.142)        (1.096)         (1.091)         (1.083)        (0.806)        (0.809)        (0.769)
 Moral Hazard                      0.037
                                  (0.075)
 Fraction of Entry Denied                        1.885***
                                                  (0.737)
 Activity Restrictions                                           0.166**
                                                                 (0.072)
 Official Supervisory                                                            -0.021
 Power                                                                           (0.166)
 Required Reserves                                                                              0.016
                                                                                               (0.016)
 Capital Regulatory Index                                                                                      -0.079
                                                                                                              (0.129)
 State ownership                                                                                                              0.015*
                                                                                                                              (0.008)
 Foreign ownership                                                                                                                            -0.005
                                                                                                                                             (0.008)
 Banking freedom                                                                                                                                           -0.506***
                                                                                                                                                             (0.165)
 Economic freedom                                                                                                                                                         -0.513***
                                                                                                                                                                           (0.225)
 KKZ_composite                                                                                                                                                                            -0.439**
                                                                                                                                                                                           (0.201)
 No. of Crises                      47              21              34              34           27             33              32             31             47              47              47
 No. of Observations                989             583             767            767           572            755             686            609            955             955            989
 % crises correct                    66              62              68             62            63             61              66             68             68              66             68
 % correct                          71              81              79              78           77             79              74             73             70              70              72
 Model χ2                        37.93***        29.34***        38.21***         38***       30.46***       37.62***        30.97***       34.15***       52.41***        47.58***       49.59***
***,**, and * indicate statistical significance at 1, 5, and 10 percent, respectively.




                                                                                                   47
                                                         Table 5. Banking Crisis and Concentration: Cost of Crises

The Tobit model estimated takes the form: Cost of crisis[Country=j]= α + β1 Real GDP growthj+ β2 Terms of trade changej + β3 Real interest ratej + β4 Inflation j + β5M2/reservesj + β6Depreciationj +
β7 Credit growthj +β8 Moral hazard indexj + β9 Concentrationj + εj. The dependent variables capture the fiscal cost of crisis. In specification (1) we focus on one variation of the Klingebiel-
Honohan fiscal cost measure, while in specifications (2) focus is on the second variation of the Klingebiel-Honohan fiscal cost measure. Specification (3) examines the Boyd and Smith measure of
cost of crisis. Growth is the rate of growth of real GDP. Real interest rate is the nominal interest rate minus the contemporaneous rate of inflation. Inflation is the rate of change of the GDP
deflator. M2/reserves is the ratio of M2 to international reserves. Credit growth is the real growth of domestic credit, lagged two periods. Depreciation is the rate of change of the exchange rate.
Moral hazard is an aggregate index of moral hazard associated with varying deposit insurance schemes. Concentration is a measure of concentration in the banking industry, calculated as the
fraction of assets held by the three largest banks in each country, averaged over the sample period. Bank data are from the BankScope database of Fitch IBCA. White’s heteroskedasticity
consistent standard errors are given in parentheses. Detailed variable definitions and sources are given in the data appendix.

                                      (1)                      (2)                         (3)
 Real GDP growth                   3.821***                 3.614***                  1.553**
                                    (0.811)                  (0.857)                  (0.814)
 Terms of trade change              -0.929*                   -0.832                   0.047
                                    (0.489)                  (0.593)                  (0.444)
 Real interest rate                  0.235                   0.591**                   -0.139
                                    (0.191)                  (0.291)                  (0.257)
 Inflation                         1.050***                 1.198***                   0.316
                                    (0.196)                  (0.272)                  (0.225)
 M2/reserves                       0.144***                  0.080**                 0.126***
                                    (0.029)                  (0.036)                  (0.029)
 Depreciation                     -57.818***              -141.172***                 -26.592
                                   (16.742)                 (32.809)                 (21.046)
 Credit Growtht-2                    0.217                    0.185                    0.087
                                    (0.141)                  (0.155)                  (0.178)
 Real GDP per capita                0.000**                   0.000                    -0.000
                                    (0.000)                  (0.000)                  (0.000)
 Moral Hazard Index                  0.408                    0.764                   1.343*
                                    (0.887)                  (0.912)                  (0.820)


 Concentration                      -8.261                  -15.006*                     -2.269
                                    (7.499)                  (9.207)                     (9.355)


 No. of obs.                          47                       49                          69

***,**, and * indicate statistical significance at 1, 5, and 10 percent, respectively.




                                                                                                   48
Table 6. Banking Crisis and Concentration: Diversification vs. Ease of Supervision

The logit probability model estimated is Banking Crisis [Country=j, Time= t]= α + β1 Real GDP growthj,t+ β2 Terms of trade changej,t + β3 Real interest ratej,t + β4 Inflation j,t + β5M2/reservesj,t +
β6Depreciationj,t + β7 Credit growthj,t-2 +β8 Real GDP per capita,t +β9 Moral hazard indexj,t + β10 Concentrationj,t + β11 Mean Bank Sizej,t+β12 No foreign loansj,t + β13 GDPj,t + β14 No. of Banksj,t +
β15 Activity Restrictionsj,t + β16 Cashflow rightsj,t +εj,t. The dependent variable is a crisis dummy that takes on the value of one if there is a systemic and the value of zero otherwise. Growth is the
rate of growth of real GDP. Real interest rate is the nominal interest rate minus the contemporaneous rate of inflation. Inflation is the rate of change of the GDP deflator. M2/reserves is the ratio of
M2 to international reserves. Credit growth is the real growth of domestic credit, lagged two periods. Depreciation is the rate of change of the exchange rate. Moral hazard is an aggregate index of
moral hazard associated with varying deposit insurance schemes. Concentration is a measure of concentration in the banking industry, calculated as the fraction of assets held by the three largest
banks in each country, averaged over the sample period. Bank data are from the BankScope database of Fitch IBCA. The sample period is 1980-1997. Mean Bank Size is given by average bank
asset size (in billions of US dollars). No foreign loans takes the value one if banks are prohibited from investing abroad and 0 otherwise. GDP is real GDP in billions of US$. No. of banks is given
in hundreds and Activity restrictions captures bank’s ability to engage in business of securities underwriting, insurance underwriting and selling, and in real estate investment, management, and
development. Both are from Barth et al database. Cashflow is the fraction of a bank’s total cash-flow rights held by each bank’s main owner, averaged across each country’s banks (Caprio et al.,
2004). White’s heteroskedasticity consistent standard errors are given in parentheses. Detailed variable definitions and sources are given in the data appendix.

                                    (1)                      (2)                     (3)                      (4)                      (5)                      (6)                      (7)
 Concentration                   -1.511*                  -1.379                  -2.381**                  -1.653                   -2.234*                -2.111**                 -3.576**
                                 (0.854)                  (0.860)                  (1.095)                  (1.119)                  (1.162)                 (1.061)                  (1.651)
 Mean Bank Size                   0.004                                                                      0.007
                                 (0.005)                                                                    (0.005)
 No foreign Loans                                                                   0.153                    -0.350
                                                                                   (0.635)                  (0.617)
 No foreign                                                                                                0.184***
 Loans*Bank size                                                                                            (0.068)
 GDP ($)                                                   0.0003
                                                          (0.0002)
 No. of banks                                                                                                                         0.008                   0.003
                                                                                                                                     (0.014)                 (0.013)
 Activity Restrictions                                                                                                                                        0.141
                                                                                                                                                             (0.103)
 Cashflow                                                                                                                                                                             0.030**
                                                                                                                                                                                      (0.014)


 No. of Crises                      47                       47                       34                      34                       34                       34                       29

 No. of obs.                       988                      989                      767                      767                      767                     767                      527

 % crises correct                   68                       72                       65                      62                       62                       68                       72

 % correct                          73                       73                       79                      79                       79                       79                       78

 Model χ2                        48.36***                48.79***                 49.43***                 43.90***                 43.90***                43.43***                 48.31***

***,**, and * indicate statistical significance at 1, 5, and 10 percent, respectively.




                                                                                                   49
                                                                   Data Appendix

Variable Name           Definition                                                         Source
Banking crisis          Dummy takes on value of one during episodes identified as a        Demirguc-Kunt and Detragiache (2001)
                        systematic banking crises
Real GDP Growth         Rate of growth of real GDP                                         WDI (World Bank)

Terms of trade change   Change in the terms of trade                                       WDI (World Bank)

Real interest rate      Nominal interest rate minus the contemporaneous rate of            IFS (IMF)
                        inflation
Inflation               Rate of change of GDP deflator                                     IFS (IMF)

M2/reserves             Ratio of M2 to international reserves                              IFS (IMF)

Depreciation            Rate of depreciation                                               IFS (IMF)

Credit growth           Rate of growth of real domestic credit to the private sector       IFS line 32d divided by GDP deflator

GDP/CAP                 Real GDP per capita                                                WDI (World Bank)

GDP                     Real GDP in billions of US dollars                                 WDI (World Bank)

Moral hazard index      Principal component indicator measuring the generosity of          DD (2002)
                        deposit insurance, based on co-insurance, coverage of foreign
                        currency and interbank deposits, type and source of funding,
                        management, membership and level of explicit coverage.
Concentration           Degree of concentration in the banking industry, calculated as     Beck, Demirguc-Kunt, Levine (2000) - Financial Structures Database
                        the fraction of assets held by the three largest banks. Averaged
                        over the 1988-97 period.
Initial Concentration   Initial degree of concentration in the banking industry.           BankScope database.

Mean Bank Size          Total banking assets divided by number of banks.                   BankScope database.

No Foreign Loans        Survey question 7.2 asks if banks are prohibited from making       Barth, Caprio, and Levine (2001) - Survey of Bank Regulation and Supervision
                        loans abroad (yes=1, no=0).
No. of Banks            No. of banks in hundreds.                                          Barth, Caprio, and Levine (2001) - Survey of Bank Regulation and Supervision

Banking Freedom         Indicator of relative openness of banking and financial system:    Index of Economic Freedom (Heritage Foundation)
                        specifically, whether the foreign banks and financial services
                        firms are able to operate freely, how difficult it is to open
                        domestic banks and other financial services firms, how heavily
                        regulated the financial system is, the presence of state-owned
                        banks, whether the government influences allocation of credit,
                        and whether banks are free to provide customers with insurance
                        and invest in securities (and vice-versa). The index ranges in
                        value from 1 (very low – banks are primitive) to 5 (very high –
                        few restrictions). Averaged over 1995-97 period.


                                                                            50
Variable Name                Definition                                                           Source
Fraction of entry denied     Number of entry applications denied as a fraction of the number      Barth, Caprio, and Levine (2001) - Survey of bank Regulation and Supervision
                             of applications received from domestic and foreign entities

Activity restrictions        Indicator of bank’s ability to engage in business of securities      Barth, Caprio, and Levine (2001) - Survey of bank Regulation and Supervision
                             underwriting, insurance underwriting and selling, and in real
                             estate investment, management, and development

Required reserves            Ratio of reserves required to be held by banks                       Barth, Caprio, and Levine (2001) - Survey of Bank Regulation and Supervision

Capital regulatory index     Summary measure of capital stringency: sum of overall and            Barth, Caprio, and Levine (2001) - Survey of Bank Regulation and Supervision
                             initial capital stringency. Higher values indicate greater
                             stringency.

Official Supervisory Power   Principal component indicator of 14 dummy variables: 1.Does          Barth, Caprio, and Levine (2001) – Survey of Bank Regulation and Supervision
                             the supervisory agency have the right to meet with external
                             auditors to discuss their report without the approval of the bank?
                             2.Are auditors required by law to communicate directly to the
                             supervisory agency any presumed involvement of bank directors
                             or senior managers in elicit activities, fraud, or insider abuse?
                             3.Can supervisors take legal action against external auditors for
                             negligence? 4.Can the supervisory authority force a bank to
                             change its internal organizational structure? 5.Are off-balance
                             sheet items disclosed to supervisors? 6. Can the supervisory
                             agency order the bank's directors or management to constitute
                             provisions to cover actual or potential losses? 7. Can the
                             supervisory agency suspend the directors' decision to distribute:
                             a) Dividends? b) Bonuses? c) Management fees? 8.Can the
                             supervisory agency legally declare-such that this declaration
                             supersedes the rights of bank shareholders-that a bank is
                             insolvent? 9.Does the Banking Law give authority to the
                             supervisory agency to
                             intervene that is, suspend some or all ownership rights-a problem
                             bank? 10.Regarding bank restructuring and reorganization, can
                             the supervisory agency
                             or any other government agency do the following: a) Supersede
                             shareholder rights? b) Remove and replace management? c)
                             Remove and replace directors?
State ownership              Percentage of banking system’s assets in banks that are 50% or       Barth, Caprio, and Levine (2001) - Survey of Bank Regulation and Supervision
                             more government owned

Foreign ownership            Percentage of banking system’s assets in banks that are 50% or       Barth, Caprio, and Levine (2001) - Survey of Bank Regulation and Supervision
                             more foreign owned




                                                                                 51
Economic Freedom        Composite of 10 institutional factors determining economic            Index of Economic Freedom (Heritage Foundation)
                        freedom: trade policy, fiscal burden of government, government
                        intervention in the economy, monetary policy, capital flows and
                        foreign investment, banking and finance, wages and prices,
                        property rights, regulation, and black market activity. Individual
                        factors are weighted equally to determine overall score of
                        economic freedom. A high score signifies an institutional or
                        consistent set of policies that are most conducive to economic
                        freedom, while a score close to 1 signifies a set of policies that
                        are least conducive. Averaged over 1995-97 period.

KK_composite            Composite of six governance indicators (1998 data): voice and         Kaufman and Kray (2000/1)
                        accountability, political stability, government effectiveness,
                        regulatory quality, rule of law, and corruption. Individual factors
                        are weighted equally to determine overall score of economic
                        freedom. Higher values correspond to better governance
                        outcomes.

G10 countries           Dummy accounting for G10 country

Growth GDP per capita   Rate of growth of real GDP per capita, averaged 1994-2001             WDI (World Bank)




                                                                            52
Variable Name                    Definition                                                           Source
Fee income                       Ratio of non-interest income to total bank assets, averaged 1994-    Bankscope database
                                 2001.
Total loan growth                Rate of growth of total loans, averaged 1994-2001.                   Bankscope database

Standard dev of GDP per capita   Standard deviation of real GDP per capita                            Calculated from real GDP per capita data taken from WDI (World Bank)

Growth GDP per capita            Rate of growth of real GDP per capita, averaged 1994-2001            WDI (World Bank)

Inflationb                       Rate of change of consumer price index, averaged 1994-2001           IFS (IMF)

Concentrationb                   Degree of concentration in the banking industry, calculated as the   Bankscope database
                                 fraction of assets held by the three largest banks. Averaged over
                                 the 1994-2001 period.

Banking Freedomb                 Indicator of relative openness of banking and financial system:      Index of Economic Freedom (Heritage Foundation), 2003
                                 specifically, whether the foreign banks and financial services
                                 firms are able to operate freely, how difficult it is to open
                                 domestic banks and other financial services firms, how heavily
                                 regulated the financial system is, the presence of state-owned
                                 banks, whether the government influences allocation of credit,
                                 and whether banks are free to provide customers with insurance
                                 and invest in securities (and vice-versa). The index ranges in
                                 value from 1 (very low – banks are primitive) to 5 (very high –
                                 few restrictions). Averaged over 1994-2001 period.

Cashflow                         Fraction of a bank’s total cash-flow rights held by each bank’s      Caprio, Laeven and Levine (2004)
                                 main owner, averaged across each country’s banks




                                                                                    53
