                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 WAGE CONTRACTS WITH INCOMPLETE
                     AND COSTLY INFORMATION



                        Joshua Aizennan




                     Working Paper No. 1150




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                   1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Canbridge MA 02138

                           June 1983




The research reported here is part of the NEER's research program
in Econonic Fluctuations. Any opinions expressed are those of the
author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                             NBER Working Paper #1150
                                                  June 1983




                   Wage Contracts with Incomplete
                       and Costly Information




                                  Abstract



    Optimal wage indexation, as derived by Gray, was subject to criticism due

to a lack of efficient use of information; failure to clear the market which

resulted in non—optimal contracts; and the lack of an explicit use of welfare

criteria. The purpose of this paper is to derive a wage contract scheme that

is free from the above criticism, but is capable of preserving the insight of

Crayts analysis. In so doing the analysis reveals the role of costs of

information collection in a world characterized by incomplete information.

The analysis focuses also on the interaction between wage indexation and

costly information collection as alternative adjustment schemes.   It is shown

that the first depends only on relative variances, whereas the second also

depends on aggregate volatility. The justification for labor contracts hinges

on the cost of information collection and last minute wage negotiation.



                                  Joshua Aizenman
                                  Department of Economics
                                  3718 Locust Walk CR
                                  University of Pennsylvania
                                  Philadelphia, PA 19104

                                  (215) 898—7409
I. Introduction

     It is well appreciated that an understanding of the structure of labor

contracts is a precondition for understanding adjustment to various macro—

policies. A labor contract that sets the money wage for a given period

introduces a short—run nominal wage rigidity. This rigidity implies that

price level changes affect real wage, inducing real effects in the short

run.1 In order to mitigate these effects, the contract might specify a

partial degree of wage indexation, and possibly also the conditions under

which wage re—negotiation would occur. The literature on wage contract

schemes has benefited from contributions by Gray (1976, 1978), Fischer (1977),

and others. However, their work has been subject to criticism due to a lack

of efficient use of information; failure to clear the labor market which

resulted in non—optimal contracts; and the lack of an explicit use of welfare

criteria.

     As Barro (1977) and Karni (1983) have pointed out, these models were

presented in the context of complete current information. They failed to use

all available information, and as a result were challenged by the literature

on ratIonal expectations. Once a contract scheme uses all avaIlable Informa-

tion it will, as Barro (1977) and Karnl   (1983)   have indicated, dominate Gray's

scheme. These models also assumed that employment is demand determined, and,

as Cukierman (1980) has pointed Out, this assumption is arbitrary. Gray's

analysis derives optimal indexation from a loss function given by the output

volatility around its full information level.2 This is a useful shortcut, but

it is open to criticism due to the lack of explicit welfare justification.

    The purpose of the current paper is to derive a wage contract scheme that

does not incur the above criticism, but is still capable of preserving the

insight of Gray's analysis. In deriving the scheme, the paper reveals the



                                     —1—
role of incomplete and costly information.3 The framework for this analysis

is a monetary economy subject to random shocks. Observed prices provide only

partial information regarding the nature of those shocks. The current in-

formation set can be improved by costly data gathering. Suppose that at the

end of period t—1, a labor contract specifies the wage applied for period t.

It specifies also the degree of wage indexation, which will update the

contract wage according to the information provided by the price signal at

period t. Because the price signal provides incomplete information, we might
                                                                    The re-
benefit by allowing wage re—negotiation under certain conditions.

negotiation will allow us to rewrite the contract for period t using improved

information. Such information was nota known in the previous period (t—l),

and can be obtained only by costly information collection (surveys, etc.).

The problem analyzed in this paper is to decide ex—ante (at the end of period

t—1) what weight the contract will allocate for each option.   Such a decision

should involve cost—benefit considerations. The presumption is that the

administrative cost of wage indexation is small relative to the cost of

current information collection and wage re—negotiation.   The paper applies

expected welfare criteria to designing the desired contract scheme. The

analysis does not address the role of risk sharing and information asymmetry

in deriving the contract scheme. These factors have been investigated by

Azariadis (1975), Baily (1977), Townsend (1982) and others. The current paper

does not negate the importance of these factors, rather demonstrates that

information collection and negotiation costs suffice to derive wage contracts

in a welfare maximization setup.

     Section 2 presents the model. Section 3 derives the desired degree of

wage indexation and wage re—negotiation.    Section   summarizes the findings.

The Appendix provides the notation used in the paper.



                                      —2—
2. The Model

        Let us take a monetary economy where the labor supply is given by:


                                  6
(1)          L Q • (W/P)

where       is the money wage and         the price level at time t. Output is given

by



(2)          Y Q' (L)h exp(v)

where v is a multiplicative productivity shock, and Lt the labor employed at

time t.

      Money supply is subject to stochastic disturbances             given by



(3)         M 14     '
                         exp(m)


        The demand for money balances Is gIven by:



(4)         M =     Y•   P '   exp(— a 1E(1tIIt))



where E(It) is the conditional expectation operator, which corresponds to

the use of information available at period t(I), and          iTt is the inflation

rate:



                =         —           .




                                             —3—
      Throughout the paper it is assumed that the information set at time

t(I) consists of the structure of the model, all variables dated t—1 and

earlier, and the current price level.

         To simplify notation, let us neglect trends in all the variables, assum-

ing that m and v are uncorrelated random variables, generated by white noise

processes:

                x N(O, 2) for x        m,v.



         As a reference point, we start with the 'non—stochastic equilibrium,"

i.e. ,    the   equilibrium in the economy if the value of all the random shocks is

zero (v =             0). Let us denote by a lowercase variable the percentage
                 m
deviation of the uppercase variable from its value in the non—stochastic
                                                      =        —
equilibrium. For example, for a variable X, x             (X       X0)/X0 where
                                                                                  is


the value of x if all the shocks are zero. To facilitate discussion, it is

useful to take a log—linear approximation of the model around its non

stochastic equilibrium, writing the model in terms        of   percentage deviations.

This is equivalent to the use of a first order approximation of a Taylor

expansion around the equilibrium.4 From eq. 2 we get that output at time t              is
given by



(6)                  h i +

         In   a flexible, full information economy we get that a competitive labor

market implies that:


                     5d
                     d1+ó
                            V


                                              —4—
where d1           ,   and    stands for the value of x in a flexible, full

information economy (x any variable). Denoting real wage by        T   ,   we get that




(8)          taW_ptd+ .vt.

       Employment and real wage depend positively on the productivity shock, and

are free from monetary considerations in a flexible, full information

equilibrium. The case of such an economy is used as a yardstick for the

analysis of a contracting economy. Under the labor contract, the wage for

period t is pre—set at the end of the previous period. The contract wage is

set at its expected money level in a flexible regime, given here by

E(WIIi). 1t1 stands for the information set at the end of t—1, which is

assumed to reflect known shocks (v_1, me_i). The contract we consider

contains two provisions that allow limited wage flexibility. First, it allows

partial indexation, at a rate of b, 0 < b < 1. Thus:



(9)          log W log E(WII_i) + b[P —


or    in a shorter notation



(9')        wb 'Pt

where we denote by x' the value of x if the wage contract binds (x           w,p,

etc.). The case b1 corresponds to a full indexation (real wage rigidity).

The case of bO     corresponds   to zero indexation (nominal wage rigidity). In

general, we expect 0 < b < 1, providing limited wage flexibility in the

contract scheme.



                                          —5—
        Second, the contract specifies conditions under which re—negotiation will

occur. The purpose of re—negotiation is to update the contract according to

information that was unknown when the contract was set and is not reflected in

the current price level. A re—negotiation is costly.        First, there might be

direct negotiation costs associated with last minute wage revisions, denoted

by C. Next, there might be the real cost of collecting the information

needed for the re—negotiation, denoted by C.         To idel this case, suppose

that the current information set at t(I) includes only the price level, the

past shocks and the structure of the model. At a real cost (Ci), the current

information set can be improved to include the value of contemporaneous shocks

                Let us denote the improved information set by
(nit,   vt).
          —        {'' v}). If a decision is made to re—negotiate, it will imply

that resources are to be devoted to improving the information set, and the re-

negotiated wage will be based upon that set

        In    the case where the labor market does not clear, employment is assumed

to be demand determined. As Cukierman (1980) has shown, this assumption is

arbitrary. The current paper demonstrates that under an optimal wage scheme

the labor market clears. Thus this assumption is not restrictive, in the

sense that alternative rules proposed by Cukierman would yield the same

optimal wage contract scheme, resulting in clearing the labor market. Let us

denote by x' the value of x if the wage contract binds, and x the value if

there is re—negotiation .         Employment is given by:



(10)            i d1[E(vI) + p(1—b)1

 (11)                  + d1   t


                                             —6—
       Notice that if the wage contract binds, employment will depend on the

                                               6 and on monetary considerations that
perceived productivity shock E(vII)
might affect the price level t• In the case of re—negotiation, it is assumed

that the wage is set at its market —         clearing   level, which reflects the

improved information. Using eq. 10 and 11               get that output is given by:

(12)       y — d2[(1—b)P + E(vIIt)1 +


(13)                 y —     c ; or




(14)
            _
            t =
                     d2  +      V + V — c
                     d
where c         (C + C)/Y0            d h/(1—h).


Notice that in case of re—negotiation output deviates from its level in the

full information, flexible equilibrium by the adjustment costs (eq.

       To complete the description of the labor contract, we should specify the

conditions under which re—negotiation is agreed to occur. A possible measure

describing the pressure towards re-negotiation is the perceIved real shock.

We define the re—negotiation pressure, denoted by               ,   as



                 —
(15)                 E(vlI)

       It is assumed that the contract specifies that if                 exceeds a threshold

value (k), re-negotiation will occur.8 As the analysis will demonstrate, the

expected welfare gain due to re—negotiation is proportional to                       (see

comment 11).      In this sense,          can be used as a measure of the re-

negotiation pressure. We can summarize the possible states of the economy by



                                              —7—
                                                           if
                                           '
                                           1' t
(16)           (y,l,t){
                t t t                                      if
                                                ,Tt)            Il<k
                                                                       information about the
        If the wage contract binds, we get incomplete
                                                       summarized by the observed price level
shocks affecting the economy (mt, vt),

        Thus



                 —
(17)                 E(vlIt)               p




(18)           p =   cov(v,


and V, stands for the variance of p'. Thus, for the case where the wage

contract binds, equilibrium in the ney market is given by



(19)           m -    p - v + d2[(1—b)p +              p .   p]   +
                                                                      a.p

Therefore



                          —                         p ÷ d2(1—b) + cZ
 (20)          p (nit         v)/El   + d2



                                                               us with
        Eq. 20 implies that observing the price level provides
 information     regarding m —        v.       Thus:




 (21)                 E(vlI) (m —              v)      P




                                                                                               is
 for p = — V         /(V + V    ).    Under the wage contract the demand for labor

 given by eq.10, whereas the supply                  is given by l (bl)p . Substituting


                                                       —8—
for Pt (from eq. 17) we get:



(22)         1 —   1   = g      ;    where g         d1 +   (1b)(d1 + 'S)IP



Alternatively, we      can present   the   excess    demand for labor as (see eq. 8,

10):




(22')        l —   1      [E(;II) —            Cd1
                                                     + S)




        Thus, under the   contract   wage the excess demand       for   labor is proportional

to the re—negotiation pressure (&). The factor of proportionality is g, and

 E(tttI) is the market clearing wage. The labor contract described above

specifies two channels of adjustment: the degree of wage indexation (b) and

re—negotiation (k). The next section derives the optimal values of each.




3.     The Optimal Contract Scheme

        In order to derive the desired contract scheme, let us find the welfare

deviation from the reference case of a full information flexible economy under

a given contract. We denote this measure by WL. Because welfare in the case

of a full information, flexible economy is independent of the contract scheme,

we can derive optimal (k,b) by minimizing expected WL.

        Under full information, the production of the contract output introduces

a welfare loss given by the triangle between the supply and demand of labor.

This loss can be approximated by




                                              —9—
            WL = q             e2
(23)




where       =        —
                               , and


                                                               '
                                                                   log   (Q Q     h)]
            q =
                     Q9+            1—h)/(2h2)     expE1
                                                                   (relative to the case of
        If re—negotiation occurs, we get welfare loss

full information) due to the adjustment cost:




(24)                     c ' Y
             WL

Thus, welfare will deviate from the case of full information by:


                         WL'        if
                                             t
(25)         WL
                         WL         if


        The contract for period t is agreed at the end of t—1, and it specifies b

and k so as to minimize the expected welfare loss due to the lack of full

information :



(26)         Mm E(WLII_i).


        Using eq. 12—14 we get that the contract output                    deviates from the

flexible, full information output by



                                          +          where
 (27)           et    d2[d +


 (28)           It
                         [(me -     v)   —
                                             Vt]    d1+
                                                           ô




                                                      —10—
       Notice that           is proportional to the forecast error of v. Therefore,

it is orthogonal to m —          v,   which is the observed information. On the other

hand, 8 is proportional to m —           v.     Thus,     is orthogonal to       Let us

denote by z the normalized value of k, i.e. z —                    and   Z'(z) and P(z) the
                                                           k/a8
standard normal cumulative distribution and density function. Using the

orthogonality of          8 and I we get that'°



(29)
                E(WLII_i)

           d    2                                          2
  q    1
                    g2V8(1—24(z)'z — 2$(—z)) + q(d2) V (1—2(—z)) + 2Yc(—z)


This equation can be broken down into three components. The first term

represents the loss in expected welfare due to the non—clearing labor market

that results from the contract. The second term is the welfare loss due to

the lack of full information. Both terms apply for those circumstances in

which the wage contract binds. (I8I < k). The third term represents the

expected welfare loss due to adjustment costs in the case of re—negotiation,

and it applies for those circumstances in which                   > k. Notice that a more

frequent re—negotiation (dk < 0) reduces the first two terms, increasing the

third.

       To gain further insight, consider figure 1. The two solid curves

represent the demand and supply of labor in a "non—stochastic" equilibrium.

Under shocks (vs, m.), the full information demand shifts upward by v, to

D'. Due        to   the lack of full information, the perceived demand shifts upward

only by 8 E(vJI), to D.                    is the excess demand for labor resulting

from the contract wage (conditional on                  and q      corresponds to the

welfare loss relative to the full information case, described by the shaded



                                              —11-—
area. The value of the real contract wage (ti)                              is   affected by the indexation

arrangement. The optimal policy should design an indexation scheme that will

equate the real contract wage (ti)                   to    the perceived equilibrium real wage

  (E(;II)).
Optimal Indexation

       From eq. 29 we conclude that the optimal indexation which minimizes the

welfare loss is:



(30)           b—i—                    1+a
                            (1           V/V +       1+S


       There are two forces working towards setting optimal indexation. For a

monetary shock full indexation (b1) is desirable becasue it preserves the

real wage. For a real shock partial indexation (b                                   +   ) isdesirable
because It will generate a real wage that is equal to the wage under a

flexible equilibrium. Optimal indexation Is set so as to balance those two

opposing     forces according to their relative importance. Thus a higher Vm/Vv

implies a higher importance of monetary                    shocks,     pushing indexation upward.

Aggregate volatility, and             the   cost of information collection are not reflected

in optimal indexation because they do not affect the                             relative   Importance of

various shocks.

       Optimal     indexation      is set so as to minimize the expected cost of the non—

clearing     of the labor market (the first term in eq. 29). It is capable of
eliminating this cost completely (g"O for bb*). It is useful to note that b*
is equal to the indexation proposed by Gray. It is derived here, however, in
a framework where the use of information is optimal. The optimality is
reflected     in the fact that under the proposed scheme the labor market clears

(t      E(tII)).         Any   further      change can be obtained only by spending real



                                                      —12—
resources in information collecting and re—negotiation.

Optimal re—negotiation

       We now consider the possibility of government regulation of contract

provision. Suppose that wage indexing is prohibited. This implies that g is

given by:



             g0 - d1 + (&4.d1)(! -                              + n+
(31)                                             d2)/(1                   d2)


From eq. 29 we get that optimal wage re—negotiation (k*) is given by:12




                                                                          Vv V   in
                                                                62
                                                                          V +V
(32')        k
                        0                                                  in  V




             z* —   1         1
                                                 V IcY d+6  _________ ______)2 —
                                                                                      V
                                                                                      .—  Tn
(32')                       _____
                            ____________

                               V           (1+—)
                                              V                       q               V
                    g0           V                V                              d2       V




Thus from    32,   32' we get:



                        *                               *
                   3k                              3k
             a. ac—>0                       b.                                  <0
(33)                                                  in    V        given
                                                            in

                                                            V
                                                                V




        Re—negotiation is desirable if the expected gain exceeds the cost
involved. Increase in aggregate volatility (a uniform increase in the

variance of all shocks) implies that the potential benefit more frequently

justifies re—negotiation (eq. 33b). This is because the cost of lack of full



                                                            —13—
                                         with aggregate volatility. This works as
information increases monotonically

to increase the benefit of re—negotiation, which sets the wage according to

the improved information set. Naturally, a higher cost of information

collection or last minute re—negotiation reduces the desirability of re-

negotiation. Notice that if the adjustment cost Cc) is small relative to the

variance of the real shock forecast error (c Y0 < q
                                                                (d2)2 V1) we get k* —   0,

nullifying the role of pre—set wage contracts.           In such a case, all trades

                                                      insight into the determination of
take place in spot markets. To gain further

optimal information collection and re—contracting, let us consider how
                                                     affects expected welfare. This is
increasing the frequency of re—negotiation
                                                     and benefit of lowering
done by deriving the expected marginal cost

 z(z— k/c7). The expected cost of re—negotiation and information collection

is given by the third term in eq. 29. Thus, the expected marginal cost is:



(34)      MC   m   y   c •(2    4(z)).




The expected benefit of re—negotiation and
                                                     information collection is given by

 the first two terms in eq. 29. Thus, expected marginal benefit is



                          2
                                g z2      .                    4Kz).
 (35)     MB    q •(d2)        d1 +           V8+ V1) •2


 The expected marginal benefit and cost can be broken down into the marginal

 benefit and marginal cost weighted by the change in the probability of re-

 negotiation resulting from d(—z) (i.e.         2     4(z)). Figure 2 plots the

 unweighted marginal cost and marginal benefit (          MC/(2'P); MBI(21)). 13 z

 corresponds to the optimal re—negotiation.           To shaded area weighted by the

 marginal probability (2$), corresponds to the welfare gain attributed to



                                              —14—
information collection and re—negotiation. Higher cost c results in an upward

shift of the marginal cost curve, implying less frequent re—negotiation.

Higher aggregate volatility (dVm > 0 for a given VmIVv) shifts the marginal

benefit up, encouraging re—negotiation.

       Starting with an economy where wage indexation is prohibited, allowing a

limited indexation has the effect of reducing g0.    In terms of figure 2, it

shifts the marginal benefit curve to the right, which in turn reduces the
frequency of re—negotiation. In this sense, wage re—negotiation and wage
indexation   are substitutes for each other. Allowing for unregulated wage

indexation will result in setting optimal indexatlon at b*, which in turn

implies that the marginal benefit curve is given by the flat dotted line in

figure 2.

       Consequently, in a covarlance stationary economy free from regulations

regarding wage indexation, re—negotiation agreements and contracts with

optimal indexation are mutually exclusive regimes. Wage contracts with

optimal indexation dominates re—negotiation if and only if the cost of

information collection and re—negotiation is large relative to a volatility

measure:


                      d22) V• •VVm
(36)        c>--—(
               Y     d + V m+Vv
                o      1




       The relevant volatility measure is the variance of the real shock

forecast error (V). If the above condition does not hold, continuous re-

negotiation will dominate a contract regime. In such a case the labor market

behaves as a spot market. In both regimes, the labor market clears

continuously. If eq. 36 is satisfied, any regulation which prevents the use

of optimal indexation (b*) gives rise to the simultaneous use of re—



                                      —15—
negotiation and wage contracts; and will occasionally imply disequilibrium in

the labor market.
                                                          structure can result
     Notice that an unexpected change in the covariance

in a transitory period in which we use a wage indexatlon that was optimal in a

previous regime. In such a case, we might get a transitory disequilibrium in
                                                covariance structure. It should
the labor market, resulting from an unstable

be noted, however, that allowing for the adjustment costs of learning the new
                                                structure in an extended model.
structure might preserve the market clearing

Its formulation is left for future study.



4. concluding Remarks

     This paper has focused on how costly information collection and costly
                                                       of wage contracts. It
last minute wage negotiation affect the flexibility

considers the case where a wage contract allows for limited flexibility by

specifing partial wage indexation and the conditions under which wage re-

negotiation will occur. The economy is subject to random shocks. Observed
                                           regarding the nature of those
prices provide only partial information

 shocks. The current information set can be improved by costly data gatheridg

 (surveys, research, etc.). Indexation makes use of the information embodied
                                                    make use of the information
 in the price signal, whereas wage re—negotiation
                                                  The analysis derives the
 that can be obtained only by costly research.

 contract scheme which will minimize the welfare loss due to imperfect

 information at the time of the contract negotiation.    A higher volatility in

 the shocks affecting the economy has the effect of increasing wage re-
                                         information collection reduces it. Wage
 negotiation, whereas a higher cost of

 indexation proves to depend on measures of relative (and not absolute)

 volatility of the various shocks. It is not affected by the cost of



                                         —16—
information collection. Wage indexation increases with the importance of

monetary, relative to real, disturbances. It is the same as the indexation

scheme proposed by Gray, but it is derived in a setup which uses all available

information, resulting in a clearing labor market. The final justification

for labor contracts with optimal wage re—negotiation hinges on the cost of

information collection and last minute wage negotiation.

     tn a covariance stationary economy, free from regulation regarding wage

indexation, re—negotiation agreements and contracts with optimal indexacion

are mutually exclusive regimes. Wage contracts with optimal indexation

dominates re—negotiation if (and only if) the cost of information collection

and re—negotiation is large relative to a volatility measure.   If this

condition does not hold the labor market behaves as a spot market. If this

condition is satisfied, any regulation which prevents the use of optimal

indexation gives rise to the simultaneous use of re—negotiation and wage

contracts.



                                   Comments




1.    For studies that emphasize these effects see, for example, Fischer

      (1977) and Taylor (1979).

2.    Flood and Marion (1982) and Marston (1982) use such a loss function to

      derive optimal wage policy in an open economy. Aizenman (1982) applies

      this loss function to derive optimal wage re—negotiation. The above

      studies use a modified version of models used by Gray (1976) and Fischer

      (1977).

3.    In some respects, this paper can be viewed as extending Barro's (1977)

      analysis for the case of costly and incomplete information.



                                     —17—
4.     It is assumed that the variances of the shocks are small enough to make

       such   an approximation useful.

5.     To simplify exposition, it is assumed that investment in improving the

       information set is found in conjunction with re—negotiation. Modifying

       this assumption will not change the nature of the results reported in

       the paper. This is because the only observable current information is

       the price level. Optimal indexation allows us to use this information
                                                              welfare only if it
       efficiently. Therefore, re—negotiation can improve

       is based upon information that is not contained in the price signal.

       Thus, investment in information must accompany
                                                         re—negotiation. If the

       costs of re—negotiation are high relative to the costs of information

       collection, we expect investment in information to precede the decision

       related to re—negotiation. Modeling such a sequence can be added

       without difficulty and without affecting the main results.

6.     This is because the producer demands labor such as to equate product
                                                     Because he does not observe
       wage with the perceived marginal product.

              he uses E(vlI).

 7.    The cost c is assumed not to affect the marginal product of labor. Thus

              — c is a logarithm-ic approximation of the output around the non—

       stochastic equilibrium.

 8.    A related analysis of a price adjustment ndel is developed in Barro

        (1972).

 9.     Because of lack of full information, the best that we can do is to use
        the information available at the   contract negotiation time (In_i).

 10.    To derive eq. 29 we use the fact that



              (v'r•)'   1z   2 exp(—x2/2)dx =



                                          —18—
          (v'1T) f[exp(_x2/2)—(x exp(—x2/2))ldx



            1—2'(—z)—2z4(z).



11.   For a known value of           the expected benefit form re—negotiation is:


                             d                  2
          E(q eII) q(            +   )   I ()           +




           It is proportional to i3 .           Thus,       can be used as a measure of

      re—negotiation pressure.

12.   k* — 0 if the expression in the squareroot is negative.

13.   Figure 2 corresponds to the assumption that c                > q(d2)2 V1




                                          —19--
                                     Appendix Notation



                                                                  the
      Uppercase variables denote levels, lowercase letters denote

logarithmic deviation of the uppercase variable from the "non—stochastic

equilibrium."



                        price level at time t

                —       real   output at time   t
                —       inflation           —

                        money wage

                        real wage

                        productivity shock

                =       money supply shock

                —       information    set at time t



                        expected value of x, conditional on
E(xIIt)
                —       the    level of variable x that corresponds to the non—
X0
                        stochastic equilibrium.

                —              —
                         (X        x0)/X0
b               —       the    degree of wage indexation

 x                       the value of x in a flexible, full information equilibrium.

 x'                      the   value of x if the wage contract binds.

 x               —       the value of x if the wage is re—negotiated
                         variance of x
                                                                        functions.
 (z), (z)           a    the standard normal cumulative and density
                    =    labor/wage supply elasticity


                                                —20—
h           —   output/labor   supply elasticity

d1 1/(1h)       labor/wage demand elasticity

            =   h/(1—h)
d2

                re—negotiation pressure      E(vlI)




                                    —21—
                                      References

Aizenman, J.     "Wage Re—Negotiation in a Closed and Open Economy", manuscript,

    University of Pennsylvania, 1982.

Azariadis, C.      "Implicit Contracts and Underemployment Equilibria", J.P.E. 83,

    no. 6 (December 1975): 1183—1202.

Baily, M.N. "On the Theory of Layoffs and Unemployment", EconometriCa 45

    (July 1977): 1043-63.
                                           Price Adjustment", R.E.S. 39 (January
Barro, R.J. "A Theory of Monopolistic

    1972): 17—26.
                     Term Contracting, Sticky Prices and Monetary Policy",
______________ "Long
    J.M.E. 3(1977) 305—316.

Cukierman, A.      "The Effects of Wage Indexation on Macroeconomic Fluctua-

     tions: A Generalization", J.M.E. 6(April 1980): 140—147.

Fischer, S.      "Wage—Indexation and Macroeconomic Stability", J.M.E., supplement

     (Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series, vol. 5): 107—147.

Flood, R.P. and N. Marion "The Transmis8iOfl of Disturbances Under Alternative

     Exchange-R.ate Regimes with Optimal Indexing".    Q.J.E. (1982): 43—66.

                                                                          1976):
 Gray, J.A.     "Wage Indexation: A Macroeconomic Approach" J.M.E. (April

     22 1—35.

                  "On Indexation and Contract Length," J.P.E. (February 1978):

     1—18.

 Karni, E.      "On Optimal Wage Endexation", J.P.E. 91, (April 1983): 282—292.

 Marston, R.C. "Real Wages and the Terms of Trade: Alternative Indexation

     Rules for an Open Economy", NBER Working Paper 41046 (December 1982).

 Taylor, J.B. "Staggered Wage Setting in a Macro Model". A.E.R. 69 (May

     1979): 108—13.



                                          —22—
Townsend, R.M.   Optimal Multiperiod Contracts and the Gain From Enduring

    Relationships Under Private Information". J.P.E. 90, no. 6 (December

    1982): 1166—1186.




                                     —23--
        log (W /P)

                     D\


 log(W0/P0) +
                         Y


    00
og(W /P )+E(    t

 log(W0/P0)+ T't
                                                  A
    log(W0 /P0)




                     1
                                              ,E (vt!
                                                         \
                     6                                   1

                                           - *1
                                                        -ç
                                                             log L



                                       Fl gurel
                             LABOR MABXET EQUILIBRIUM
MC    MB
24    2q




                               • MB

                                24




     MC
     24




                        *             z
                    z




                 Figure 2

           OPTIMAL RE-NEGOTIATION
