NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

LAW, ENDOWMENTS, AND PROPERTY RIGHTS
Ross Levine
Working Paper 11502
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11502
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2005

Harrison S. Kravis University Professor, Department of Economics, Brown Unviersity, Providence, RI
02912; and the National Bureau of Economic Research. I thank Daron Acemoglu, Thorsten Beck, Maria
Carkovic, Bill Easterly, James Hines, Luc Laeven, Kenneth Sokoloff, Andrei Shleifer, Timothy Taylor, and
Michael Waldman for very helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by Ross Levine. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Law, Endowments, and Property Rights
Ross Levine
NBER Working Paper No. 11502
July 2005
JEL No. N01, K4, O00
ABSTRACT
While scholars have hypothesized about the sources of variation in property rights for over 2500
years, it is only very recently that researchers have begun to test these theories empirically. This
paper reviews both the theory and empirical evidence supporting and refuting the law and
endowment views of property rights. The law view holds that historically determined differences in
national legal traditions continue to shape cross-country differences in property rights. The
endowment view argues that during European colonization, differences in climate, crops, the
indigenous population, and the disease environment influenced long-run property rights.

Ross Levine
Department of Economics
Brown University
64 Waterman Street
Providence, RI 02912
and NBER
rlevine@csom.umn.edu
(From August 1, 2005)

Private property rights are crucial for personal welfare and economic development. Adam
Smith (1776) stressed that private contracting is a critical prerequisite for the voluntary, mutually
beneficial exchanges that foster specialization, innovation, and economic growth. Hayek (1960,
p. 140) argued that protecting private property rights is vital for preventing coercion, securing
liberty, and enhancing personal welfare. More recently, a growing body of empirical work
demonstrates a strong positive association between the degree to which countries protect private
property and economic development (Knack and Keefer, 1995; Hall and Jones, 1999). 1
The security of property rights, however, is not a natural occurrence; rather, it is an
outcome of policy choices and social institutions. Any government strong enough to define and
enforce property rights is also strong enough to abrogate those rights (North and Weingast,
1989). Thus, protection of property rights requires finding a balance between: 1) an active
government that enforces property rights, facilitates private contracting, and applies the law
fairly to all, and 2) a government sufficiently constrained that it cannot engage in coercion and
expropriation. Besides the explicit codes and formal enforcement organizations associated with
defining, defending, and interpreting private property rights and contracts, property rights are
also shaped by the “moral and ethical” norms governing human interactions.2 Thus, in this
paper, the term “property rights” refers to the degree to which a broad set of policies, legal and
political systems, and informal norms define and protect private property, apply the law equally
to all, and limit government interference in private contracting.

1

For views that critique the beneficial effects of private property, see Muller (2002). For example, Hegel feared that
private property and the market could create an unhealthy desire for accumulation and foster want-creating firms in
an unsatisfying cycle of consumption and product creation. Karl Marx saw private property and the market as forces
for manipulating behavior and exploiting people, at the expense of true personal liberty.
2
North (1981, p.201-202) notes: “Institutions are a set of rules, compliance procedures, and moral and ethical
behavioral norms designed to constrain the behavior of individuals … .”

1

This paper describes two views of what leads a society to greater or lesser protection of
property rights. The law view stresses that differences in legal traditions formed centuries ago in
Europe and spread via conquest, colonization and imitation around the world continue to account
for cross-country differences in property rights. The endowment view argues that differences in
natural resources, climate, the indigenous population, and the disease environment affected the
construction of institutions and these self-sustaining institutions continue to shape property rights
today. These views are not mutually exclusive, nor do they exhaust the possible explanations of
cross-country differences in property rights. Although I mention alternative views, I focus
mainly on the law and endowment views.
I focus on property rights and avoid detailed discussions of the structure of political
systems.3 While democracy may help in the formation and maintenance of the rule of law, it
may also lead to discriminatory, coercive behavior by the majority. In contrast, an authoritarian
government may adopt equality before the law as a guiding principle. In describing the law and
endowment views of the formation of national approaches to property rights, this paper discusses
political economy factors, but I do not compare and contrast specific political systems.

Law and Property Rights

The law, property rights and contracting are inseparable. Statutes define property rights.
At a broader level, legal systems consist of the entire apparatus of courts, procedures, and
institutions associated with enforcing property rights. Court systems differ in their ability and

3

Plato (360 BC [1992]), for example, draws a sharp contrast between democracy and equality before the law, which
he defines as equal laws for elites and the public.

2

willingness to recognize and enforce complex private contracts, to verify intricate clauses that
trigger specific actions, and to facilitate innovative commercial and financial arrangements.
What I will call the “law view” argues that differences in legal tradition cause differences
in property rights. This argument requires both a theory running from exogenous differences in
legal tradition to current differences in property rights, as well as empirical support for the
theory. Since the law view argues that legal traditions formed centuries ago continue to shape
property rights today, I begin with a brief review of the historical evolution of legal systems.

Historical Background and Themes
The literature on the historical development of legal systems typically draws a sharp
distinction between civil law and common law countries. The French legal system is typically
used as the main example of a civil law system, while Great Britain offers the main example of a
common law system. Legal scholars also emphasize differences between French, German, and
Scandinavian civil law systems that I describe while tracing the historical background of these
legal traditions.4
The French Civil Code of 1801 involved a substantive break from French legal tradition.
Napoleon sought a legal system that empowered the state and minimized the independent role of
judges by making the state the sole source and interpreter of the law. The Napoleonic Code
strove both to eliminate jurisprudence -- the law created by judges in interpreting statutes and
adjudicating disputes -- and to impose strict procedural formalism on court processes to eradicate
judicial discretion (Schlesinger, Baade, Damaska and Herzog, 1988). At least two key motivating
forces drove these changes. While France’s legal system evolved from the fifteenth century
onward as a regionally diverse amalgamation of local law, the texts from Emperor Justinian’s
4

This section relies on Beck, Demirguc-Kunt, and Levine (2001) and Beck and Levine (2003b).

3

codification of Roman law in the sixth century, and judicial decisions, the growing corruption of
judges roused reformers to minimize the role of judges. Furthermore, Napoleon sought to unify
and strengthen the state by codifying the law and eliminating the role of judges in interpreting
and hence making law.5
There are conflicting views on whether the Napoleonic Code successfully eliminated
jurisprudence. Merryman (1985, 1996) argues that the Napoleonic doctrine is a theoretical
deviation from a French legal history seeped in jurisprudence. Even the lead draftsman of the
Napoleonic Code recognized that the legislature could not revise the Code quickly enough or
draft the laws clearly enough to handle changing and complex contractual relationships
efficiently. From this perspective, the practicalities of a dynamic economy in conjunction with
France’s judicial history both compelled and permitted France to circumvent rigidities with the
Code. In contrast, Glaeser and Shleifer (2002) argue that antagonism toward the courts produced
a comparatively static, rigid legal system in France that relies on “bright-line-rules.” Johnson,
La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer (2000) argue that these simple rules and excessive
judicial formalism impeded the ability of judges to apply the law fairly to new situations.
Like Napoleon, Otto von Bismarck used codification to unify and strengthen the German
state. Unlike France, however, Germany in the 1860s and 1870s had not experienced the same
degree of judicial corruption in terms judges using their powerful positions to extract bribes and
to promote their personal interests. Jurisprudence thus remained an accepted part of the German

5

In legal systems, Napoleon had a predecessor in Emperor Justinian (emperor of the eastern Roman Empire), who
had Roman law codified in the sixth century and also sought to place the state – in the form of himself -- above the
law, making his pronouncements the sole source of law. According to Hayek (1960, p. 167), “Thereafter, for a
thousand years, the conception that legislation should serve to protect the freedom of the individual was lost.”
Justinian also attempted to eliminate jurisprudence. This step was also a bold switch from Roman legal tradition,
where judicial decisions were largely responsible for adapting the law from the needs of a small farmer community
to the needs of a world empire. Thus, Justinian asserted for himself not only a monopoly over law-making, but also
over legal interpretation (Dawson, 1968, p. 22). Nevertheless, this “Justinian deviation” did not last; jurisprudence
and local customs played a leading role in shaping the law in Europe over subsequent centuries.

4

legal tradition after codification. As stressed by Merryman (1985, p. 31), codification under
Bismarck was not meant to abolish prior law or eliminate judicial discretion. Thus, while
codification helped unify the country and strengthened the central state, Germany did not adopt
the same degree of antagonism toward judges as France did.
Scandinavian civil law was developed relatively independently from the other legal
traditions between 1600 and 1800. Zweigert and Kotz (1988) argue that it is less closely linked
to Roman law than the French or German legal traditions. They also stress that Scandinavian
civil law embraces jurisprudence and emphasizes a strong independent judiciary to a much
greater degree than the French civil law.
The historical development of the British common law is different both in terms of
jurisprudence and the balance of power between the state and the courts. At the start of the
1600s, British law was predominately a law of private property. However, during the
seventeenth century, the Crown attempted to reassert feudal prerogatives and abrogate private
property rights. Tensions between property owners and the Crown came to a peak after James II
took the throne in 1685. The courts and Parliament sided with property owners against the
Crown. In what became known as the Glorious Revolution in 1688, leaders in Britain’s
Parliament invited the Dutch prince William of Orange and his consort Mary (daughter of James
II) to take the throne, on the condition that they agree to a Bill of Rights giving Britain’s
Parliament supremacy over its royalty and stating that all British citizens had certain civil and
political rights. Unlike the situation in France before the revolution of 1789 in which a corrupt
judiciary fomented hostility toward the courts, the legal system in England was viewed more
favorably and judges were granted greater discretion and independence after the Glorious

5

Revolution.6 Indeed, a defining trait of British common law is that judges regularly interpret and
shape the law as new circumstances arise.
The French, British and, to a lesser degree, German legal systems spread throughout the
world via conquest, colonization and imitation. Furthermore, the Napoleonic Code heavily
shaped legal systems in Portugal and Spain and hence their colonies. Furthermore, former
colonies tended to look to their former rulers for examples in establishing legal institutions
(Zweigert and Kotz, 1988). Similarly, colonization brought the British common law to all parts
of the globe. The German (and Austrian and Swiss) civil codes developed contemporaneously
and influenced legal systems in Czechoslovakia, Hungary, and Greece. China, Japan, and Korea
relied on the German civil code in developing their own commercial and company law.

The Law and Property Rights View
The law view holds that historically determined differences in the origin of legal traditions
help to explain existing differences in national approaches to private property rights. More
specifically, Hayek (1960) and La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer and Vishny (1998) stress
that compared to the British common law, the French civil law places comparatively less
emphasis on private property rights, less emphasis on judicial independence and discretion, and
more emphasis on the rights of the state. Indeed, the civil law can be viewed as a proxy for the
intent to build institutions that further the power of the state (La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes,
Shleifer and Vishny, 1999). From this perspective, governments in French civil law countries
tend to (a) enjoy greater latitude in their abilities to funnel resources toward politically
advantageous ends, even if this abrogates private property rights and preexisting contracts, and
(b) have difficulty credibly committing to not interfere in private contractual arrangements. Thus,
6

I focus on the courts and ignore religious tensions underlying the Glorious Revolution.

6

the law view argues that French civil law countries will have weaker protection of private
property rights than common law countries.
Furthermore, many influential scholars argue that legal systems that embrace
jurisprudence, such as British common law systems, tend to adapt more efficiently to the
changing contractual needs of an economy than legal systems that adhere rigidly to formalistic
procedures and codified law, such as French civil law countries. Posner (1973) argues that
legislatures are unlikely to modify the law quickly to facilitate private contracting, while judges
are more likely to adapt the law in socially efficient ways. Rubin (1977) and Priest (1977) argue
that in common law systems, inefficient laws are routinely re-litigated, which pushes the law
toward more efficient outcomes. From this perspective, common law countries are more likely to
have efficiently flexible legal systems that support private contracting and respond to the
changing needs of the economy. In contrast, the Napoleonic doctrine’s distrust of judges, rigid
adherence to formal procedures, and reliance on legislative changes may hinder the ability of the
law to adapt efficiently to facilitate private agreements.
Merryman (1996) stresses that exportation of the French civil law to its colonies had
more pernicious effects on property rights and private contracting than the Code’s effect on
France and other European countries that adopted the Napoleonic Code. He argues that while
colonies imported the inflexibility associated with antagonism toward jurisprudence and reliance
on judicial formalism, most did not learn how the French circumvented the adverse attributes of
the Code. Furthermore, Merryman argues that given the Napoleonic Code’s goal of minimizing
judicial discretion, judges do not enjoy the same exalted position as in common law countries.
Thus, the static, formalistic theory of the Napoleonic Code may become self-fulfilling as
talented, innovative individuals choose other careers. Once “bright line” rules become the

7

accepted norm, it is very difficult to break this pattern and develop courts that focus on fairly
defending property rights and facilitating private contracting.

Countervailing Views
The law view of property rights has strong critics. I first discuss criticisms based on
comparative legal and political studies and later, after reviewing recent regression evidence,
discuss criticisms of these statistical tests. At a basic level, Ekelund and Tollison (1980) argue
that simply because the courts in England sided with Parliament against the Crown during the
Glorious Revolution does not mean that common law countries will necessarily be disposed to
protect property rights and promote private contracting better than civil law countries. In
addition, North (1981), North, Summerhill, and Weingast (1998), and Landes (1998) argue that
European countries brought national institutions – besides legal traditions -- that have had an
enduring influence on property rights. From this perspective, the British exported better
economic and political institutions, not just a common law system.
Furthermore, some researchers challenge the view that common law courts are more
effective at producing socially efficient laws than civil law systems. Galanter (1974) and Tullock
(1980) note that only the wealthy have the resources to re-litigate cases until they obtain
privately efficient outcomes, which suggests that the “flexibility” of the common law will not
necessarily support efficient contracting for all. Moreover, the common law relies on judges
setting precedents in individual cases which then constrain and guide future decisions. Backhaus
(1977), Blume and Rubinfeld (1982), Epstein (1975), Rubin (1982), and Zweigert and Kotz
(1998) provide numerous examples where adherence to judicial precedent has hindered the
efficient evolution of the law. Moreover, the common law relies on judges, but if judges are

8

corrupt or inept, then government may better reflect society’s interests (Glaeser and Shleifer,
2002). These arguments suggest that simply knowing whether the country has a civil or common
law system will not provide much information on the effectiveness of property rights institutions.
At a broader level, some question whether it is appropriate to categorize countries as
simply having British, French, or German legal systems and whether the distinguishing
characteristic brought by European colonists was a legal system or whether they brought some
other national trait that explains property rights. As noted above, the French legal system in
France operates differently from those in many of its former colonies (Dawson, 1960, 1968;
Merryman, 1985, 1996), so it may be misleading to categorize all as simply “French legal origin”
countries. Others note differences between the French and Spanish civil law and describe
differences across Latin American systems, which sheds doubt on categorizing them all as
French legal origin countries (Zweigert and Kotz, 1988). Franks and Sussman (1999) describe
differences between the legal systems in the United Kingdom and the United States, which
challenges the usefulness of classifying them together as “common law” countries. Furthermore,
Berkowitz, Pistor and Richard (2002) question whether legal origin per se is important and
instead argue that the manner in which national legal systems were obtained – through conquest,
colonization, or imitation – profoundly influenced the effectiveness of the law in protecting
property rights.
Finally, some scholars accept Cicero’s dictum that the “law stands mute in the midst of
arms” and argue that political (and military) institutions ultimately determine the degree to which
any legal system effectively protects private property, applies the law equally to all, and limits
government interference in private contracting (Pound, 1991; Roe, 1994; Pagano and Volpin,
2001; Rajan and Zingales, 2003; Haber, Maurer Razo, 2003). Although this political view does

9

not reject the importance of legal institutions, it rejects the notion that exogenous differences in
legal origins shape property rights institutions today.

Regression Results on the Components of the Law and Property Rights View
La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny (1997, 1998) ignited a burgeoning crosscountry empirical literature on the implications of countries having different legal origins. They
classify countries as having British, French, German, or Scandinavian legal origins based on the
source of each country’s company or commercial code. They (and others) then examine the
impact of legal origin on legal codes, financial contracting, the operation of financial markets,
corporate finance, the degree to which legal systems operate efficiently and fairly, individual and
political freedom, and private property rights protection. In reviewing the empirical evidence, I
focus on differences between British and French legal origin countries for two reasons. First, the
law and property rights view focuses most clearly on these two categories of legal systems. In
addition, there are only five Scandinavian legal origin countries (Denmark, Finland, Iceland,
Norway and Sweden) and six German legal origin countries (Austria, Germany, Japan, Korea,
Switzerland and Taiwan).
Since shareholder protection laws and the operation of financial markets clearly reflect
the effectiveness of property rights, I start by briefly reviewing the vast law and finance literature
before discussing more direct examinations of the linkages between legal origin and property
rights. La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer and Vishny (1997, 1998) show that French civil law
countries have weak shareholder protection laws compared to British common law countries.
This relationship holds even when controlling for each country’s level of economic development.

10

They also show that French civil law countries tend to have contracting environments that are
less conducive to financial development than British common law countries.7
Rather than examining shareholder protection laws, La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes and
Shleifer (2005) analyze data on the operation of securities markets. They find that French legal
origin countries tend to have comparatively weak information disclosure rules and to rely more
on state regulators to vet firms issuing securities (also see Barth, Caprio and Levine, 2005). This
finding is consistent with the view that the common law emphasizes private contracting while the
French civil law gives more discretion and power to the state.
Empirical research also finds a strong link from legal origin to corporate valuations,
corporate finance, and the efficiency of capital allocation. For instance, French legal origin
countries with less effective investor protection laws tend to make shareholders and creditors
more reluctant to invest in firms, which drives down the price of corporate securities and
increases the cost of capital to firms (Claessens, Djankov, Fan and Lang, 2002; La Porta, Lopezde-Silanes, Shleifer and Vishny, 2002; Caprio, Laeven and Levine, 2003). Legal systems
influence the effectiveness of property rights protection and hence the ability of firms to raise
capital and grow (Kumar, Rajan and Zingales, 2001; Claessens and Laeven, 2003; Beck,
Demirguc-Kunt and Maksimovic, 2005). Legal origin also affects the efficiency of the
contracting environment, which in turn helps determine the efficiency of capital allocation
(Wurgler, 2000; Beck and Levine, 2002). These results support the law and property rights view.
Recent research constructs databases on specific attributes of legal systems and traces the
linkages from legal origin, to these legal system attributes, to the property rights system in
general. Djankov, La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes and Shleifer (2003) construct a measure of judicial
7

Beck, Levine and Loayza (2000), Levine (1998, 1999), and Levine, Loayza, and Beck (2000) extend this work by
tracing the effect of legal origin through the financial contracting environment and on to economic growth. They
find that legal origin influences economic growth by affecting the operation of the financial system.

11

formalism, where their formalism index is greater the more a country relies purely on statutory
law rather than on jurisprudence and general assessments of fairness; the more the legal system
demands written rather than oral inputs; the more the legal system requires specialists, rather
than layman; and the more procedural steps are involved in resolving disputes. They show that
British common law countries tend to have lower values of the judicial formalism index than
French legal origin countries. Furthermore, they find that countries with lower values of the
judicial formalism index tend to have more efficient and fair judicial proceedings as measured by
surveys of firms around the world. These results support the law view.
Beck, Demirguc-Kunt and Levine (2003b, 2005) examine why legal origin matters for
financial contracting. They use both measures of overall financial development and firm-level
survey data of the obstacles that firms face in raising capital, including collateral requirements,
paperwork, interest rates and corruption. They show that jurisprudence, as measured by the
degree to which judicial decisions (case law) are a source of law, is more important for
explaining both overall financial development and firm financing obstacles than the
independence of the judiciary from the executive and legislative branches.8
In terms of linking the law with liberty, La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Pop-Eleches and
Shleifer (2004) show that British common law countries tend to have legal systems that enjoy
greater independence from the government and rely more on jurisprudence than French civil law
countries. Moreover, they find that both judicial independence and jurisprudence are associated
with greater economic and political freedom. In bringing new data to bear on an old issue, this
research provides empirical support for Hayek’s (1960) prediction concerning the linkages
between legal tradition and individual liberty.
8

Consistent with the emphasis on legal system adaptability, Acemoglu and Johnson (2003) find that legal formalism
lowers stock market development. Klerman and Mahoney (2005) provide historical evidence regarding the positive
impact of judicial independence on stock markets in London.

12

The security of property rights involves both facilitating private contracting and limiting
government coercion and expropriation. While the work reviewed thus far explores the
relationship between legal origin and these two components of property rights, Acemoglu and
Johnson (2003) seek to examine the separate effects of (1) private contracting efficiency and (2)
freedom from political coercion on income per capita.9 Since the goal of this essay is to assess
the impact of the law and endowment views on property rights, I do not describe this work here
and simply note that assessing the linkages between economic development and the components
of property rights is an important, though complex, challenge for researchers.

Regression Results on Private Property
Beck, Demirguc-Kunt, and Levine (2003a) examine the relationship between legal origin
and measures of private property rights protection while controlling for other explanations of
cross-country differences in property rights. They measure property rights in 1997 using an index
from the Heritage Foundation that ranges from one to five, where higher values signify that the
country more effectively enforces laws that protect private property. This index does not measure
specific statutes governing property rights, the design of particular enforcement mechanism, nor
explicit clauses in national constitutions concerning equality before the law. Rather, the property
rights index is a measure of “outcomes;” it is an assessment of the degree to which the country
protects property rights and facilitates private contracting. In Beck, Demirguc-Kunt, and

9

This line of inquiry is important because it will provide information on the comparative impact of the two
components of property rights on economic development and therefore foster better public policies. This line of
inquiry is extraordinarily complex because private contracting efficiency and freedom from government
expropriation may be inextricably interconnected. Thus, it may be exceptionally difficult to identify confidently the
independent effect of each component of property rights on economic development. To measure the contracting
environment, Acemoglu and Johnson use the measures of judicial formalism from Djankov, La Porta, Lopez-deSilanes and Shleifer (2003). To measure government coercion, they use a measure of constraints on the executive
from the Polity IV database. They find that the constraints variable enjoys a particularly strong link with economic
development.

13

Levine’s core results, they restrict their sample to former colonies with French or British legal
origins to simplify comparisons with research on the endowment view of property rights.
However, they show that their results are robust to using alternative measures of property rights
or to using the full sample of 103 countries.
They find a strong negative relationship between a country having a French civil law
tradition and its level of property rights.10 Figure 1 charts the average value of the property rights
variable for French and British law countries. British law countries have an average property
rights value of 3.6, while French civil law countries have an average value of 3. In Table 1, the
regression in the first column presents an ordinary least squares regression in which the property
rights variable is the dependent variable and the explanatory variable is a dummy variable that
takes on the value one if the country has a French legal tradition and zero otherwise. (As noted,
all the countries in this core calculation are either of French or British legal origins.) The
coefficient on French legal origin suggests that switching a country from a French civil law to a
British common law tradition would boost the property rights index by almost one, which is
large considering that the sample mean value of property rights is about three with a standard
deviation of one. This conceptual experiment is a bit ludicrous, because it is difficult to imagine
an exogenous change in legal heritage while holding everything else constant, but it does
illustrate that legal origin has an economically meaningful relationship with property rights.
Beck, Demirguc-Kunt, and Levine (2003a) also control for other country characteristics
that may affect property rights.11 An extensive literature argues that religion shapes national
10

Beck, Demirguc-Kunt, and Levine (2003a) confirm their results using other property rights measures, but
Acemoglu and Johnson (2004) present specifications in which the relationships between legal origin and some
property rights indexes are not robust.
11
Numerous studies find that countries in sub-Saharan Africa and Latin America perform more poorly than
countries in other regions, even after controlling for many explanatory factors. The results in Table 1 hold when
including dummy variables for sub-Saharan Africa and Latin America. While Africa enters the property rights
regression negatively and significantly, the coefficient on French legal origin remains large and significant. It may

14

views regarding property rights and the role of the state (Stulz and Williamson, 2003). For
example, Landes (1998) and Putnam (1993) argue that the Catholic and Muslim religions tend to
foster “vertical bonds of authority” that limit the security of property rights and private
contracting.12 Thus, Table 1 also includes the variables Catholic, Muslim, and Other Religion –
each of which equals the fraction of the population that is Catholic, Muslim, or of another (nonProtestant) religion. The Protestant share of the population is omitted (and therefore captured in
the regression constant). The religion data are from La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer and
Vishny (1999). The regression in the second column shows that none of these religion variables
are statistically significant, and that controlling for religious composition does not change the
finding of a strong negative relationship between French legal origin and property rights.
Merryman (1996) suggests that colonies may have a difficult time creating wellfunctioning legal systems. A longer period of independence may provide greater opportunities
for countries to develop sound property rights institutions and eliminate inefficiencies from their
colonial past. The independence variable equals the fraction of years since 1776 that a country
has been independent. The third regression shows that an independence variable is positively
associated with property rights, but adding this variable actually strengthens the magnitude of the
relationship between French legal origin and property rights.
Ethnic heterogeneity is often cited as a factor that may lead governments to use their
coercive power to extract resources for small elites. For example, Easterly and Levine (1997)
find that in highly ethnically diverse economies, the group that comes to power tends to
be inappropriate to include continent dummy variables, because continent dummies do not explicitly proxy for an
economic explanation of why countries have worse property rights institutions. Also, Latin America is primarily a
French legal-origin continent, so that including continent dummies may weaken the link between legal origin and
property rights without offering an alternative explanation. Also, the regression results are not meant to assess the
robustness of the control variables. Rather, the regression results assess the robustness of the findings on legal
origin when controlling for other potential explanations of cross-country differences in property rights.
12
Also, see Tabellini (2004), who examines the relationship between historically determined differences in culture
and differences in economic development across regions in Europe today.

15

implement policies that expropriate resources from other ethnic groups – a pattern which
suggests that ethnically diverse economies have a lower probability of creating sound, credible
property rights. Easterly and Levine create a data series on ethnic fractionalization that measures
the probability that two randomly selected individuals from a country are from different
ethnolinguistic groups. The fourth regression in Table 1 indicates that although ethnically diverse
countries tend to have lower levels of property rights, the negative relationship between French
legal heritage and property rights continues to hold with little change in magnitude.
Finally, many critics of the law and property rights view hold that political systems
influence both the functioning of legal institutions and the security of property rights. From this
perspective, legal origin per se is a relatively unimportant exogenous determinant of crosscountry differences in property rights. For instance, Finer (1997) and Damaska (1986) argue that
governments with few checks on executive power and with minimal legitimate competition will
be more responsive to and efficient at implementing the interests of small elites than more
competitive political systems with checks and balances on executive discretion.13 Other research
suggests that laws relevant to property rights have varied over time in certain countries, although
legal origin does not change. For example, Rajan and Zingales (2003) find empirically the
financial contracting environment in Europe changed substantively over the nineteenth and
twentieth centuries. Along similar lines, Franks, Mayer and Rossi (2003) and Aganin and Volpin
(2003) show that although laws governing investor protection varied substantially over the
twentieth century in the United Kingdom and Italy, respectively. Thus, these authors question the
usefulness of legal origin as an explanatory variable, and instead stress that political forces play a
leading role in accounting for variation in the financial contracting environment.
13

De Long and Shleifer (1993) show that during the 800years prior to the Industrial Revolution, more absolutist
governments (as measured by the discretionary power of the prince) are associated with slower growth (as measured
by city growth) than less absolutist regimes.

16

Beck, Demirguc-Kunt and Levine (2003a) control for political factors by including
measures of political competition and of checks and balances on executive and legislative power.
They include a variable for legislative competition, which is an index of the degree of
competitiveness during the last legislative election, ranging from 1 (non-competitive) to 7 (most
competitive). They also include checks, which measures the number of influential veto players in
legislative and executive initiatives.14 These measures are computed over the period 1990-1995.
Adding these proxies for the political system to the regressions does not change any of the results
reported in Table 1.

Endowments and Property Rights

The endowment view stresses that the distribution of property affects how legal and
political systems protect private property, apply the law equally to all, and limit government
interference in private contracting. Very unequal distributions of wealth make it difficult to
protect individuals from coercion by economic and political elites and by the government itself.
The endowment view emphasizes that the distributions of wealth and people during the initial
phases of European colonization have had an enduring influence over property rights.
Building on this reasoning, the endowment view highlights factors that influenced the
distributions of wealth and people during the early stages of colonization -- including differences

14

Although these authors also confirm their results (1) using measures of political openness and competition from
the POLITY III database and (2) using instrumental variables to extract the exogenous component of the current
political system, they note that many readers will not view these results with political variables as providing strong
support for the law view. Measuring the operation of a political system with a couple of index numbers is quite
imprecise. Furthermore, legal origin, legal institutions, political institutions and property rights are closely
intertwined. For these reasons, finding that these indicators of the political regime do not drive out the French legal
origin variable provides at best weak support for the law view, and if these indicators did drive out the French legal
origin variable, such a finding would not necessarily invalidate the importance of legal tradition in shaping both
political and legal institutions and hence property rights.

17

in geography, disease, minerals, indigenous population, and crops. The endowment view also
argues that property rights are self-propagating – they endure over the centuries even when the
importance of the original endowments for economic activity declines. In this section, I review
descriptions of how endowments shape property rights institutions. Engerman and Sokoloff
(1997) emphasize endowments that involve mining and crops, while Acemoglu, Johnson, and
Robinson (2001) emphasize endowments that involve the prevalence of disease at the time of
European settlement.15 Furthermore, both Engerman and Sokoloff (2002) and Acemoglu,
Johnson, and Robinson (2002) stress people: The concentration of the indigenous population and
population density affected the formation of policies toward property rights.

The Endowment View
Engerman and Sokoloff (1997, 2002) stress natural resource endowments related to
mining and crops in a comparison of development patterns between the northern parts of North
America on the one hand and Latin America and the southern parts of North America on the
other.16 In much of Latin America, the Spanish granted mining monopolies to a fortunate few.
The ruling elite also enjoyed huge land holdings for farming and ranching. In much of the
Caribbean, Brazil, and the southern United States, the land was particularly conducive to crops
with economies of scale, such as sugar cane, tobacco and cotton, which encouraged slave labor
and large scale plantations. Europeans seized Africans and shipped them to the Americas to work
the mines and plantations in the Caribbean, Colombia, Brazil, Venezuela, the southern United

15

Many others have emphasized the impact of endowments on economic development (for example, Beckford,
1972; Cain and Hopkins, 1993; Chasteen, 2000; Crosby, 1989; Diamond, 1997; Gann and Duignan, 1962; Jones,
1981; McNeill, 1963; Robinson and Gallagher, 1961; Taylor, 2001). Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson and
Engerman and Sokoloff, however, provide conceptual arguments and empirical evidence running from endowments
to various policies and property rights. I borrow liberally from Easterly’s (2006) summary of this literature.
16
For an overview of the Engerman and Sokoloff thesis, see their paper in the Summer 2000 issue of this journal.

18

States, and elsewhere. The result was extreme inequality in which the elites did not permit the
development of institutions that fostered equality before the law; rather, the elites created
institutions to maintain their hegemony.
In contrast, the natural resource endowments in the northern part of North America were
more suitable for crops like wheat and corn which were efficiently produced on small-scale
farms. These crops promoted the growth of family farming and a large middle class, rather than
the extreme income inequality associated with plantations and mining in the southern part of
North America, the Caribbean, and South America. For example, only 2.4 percent of households
in Mexico owned land in 1910, while the percentage was closer to 75 percent in the United
States. The northern part of the New World, therefore, had a greater tendency to create more
egalitarian institutions than in southern parts.17 For instance, Canada and the northern United
States adopted universal male suffrage and public education much earlier than in other parts of
the western hemisphere.
In short, the Engerman and Sokoloff story runs from particular crop and mineral
endowments to the degree of economic inequality. With extreme inequality, the elite created
institutions to protect their positions by limiting the opportunities of the masses. With a more
equal distribution of wealth, the northern part of the New World created more egalitarian
institutions. Equality before the law and sound property rights institutions were ultimately more
conducive to industrialization in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries.
Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson (2001, 2002) also search through colonial history for
evidence on the determinants of property rights. Three critical building blocks form their
17

Engerman and Sokoloff recognize that there was also more European migration to North America than to Latin
America. However, they stress that Latin American states discouraged European immigration because it would
threaten the privileged position of the owners of mines and plantations. In contrast, the northern part of the United
States permitted immigration because there was abundant land for family farms, which made new immigrants less
threatening. Thus, they argue that the patterns of immigration were shaped by the natural resource endowments.

19

endowment view. First, Europeans employed different colonization strategies. At one end of the
spectrum, called the “settler colony,” Europeans settled and created institutions to define and
enforce property rights, facilitate private contracting, and limit the ability of the state to
expropriate private property or intervene in private arrangements. Leading examples of this
“settler colony” strategy include the former colonies of Australia, Canada, New Zealand, and the
United States. At the other end of the spectrum, Europeans sought to extract as much wealth
from the colony as possible in the form of gold, silver, and slaves. In these “extractive colonies,”
Europeans did not settle and they did not develop institutions to support property rights for all;
rather, they developed institutions to enrich and protect the elite. Examples of extractive colonies
include the Congo, the Ivory Coast, much of the Caribbean, and Brazil.
Second, Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson argue that the mortality rates of early
European migrants along with the density of the indigenous population shaped which
colonization strategy was chosen. In areas where disease produced high mortality rates,
Europeans tended not to settle and instead established extractive colonies. For instance, in the
first year of the Sierra Leone Company, 72 percent of the Europeans died. In the 1805 Mungo
park expedition in Gambia and Niger, all of the Europeans perished. In more hospitable places,
Europeans formed settler colonies. For example, the Pilgrims decided on the American colonies
rather than Guyana partially because of high mortality rates in Guyana. Indeed, the European
press published information on colonial mortality rates, so that potential migrants had
information on cross-colony mortality (Curtin, 1964, 1989, 1998). Similarly, sparsely populated
areas enabled and encouraged Europeans to settle in large numbers and create settler institutions.
In contrast, a large indigenous population both discouraged European settlement and made
extractive institutions more profitable because colonizers could force the indigenous population

20

to work in mines and plantations. Thus, European mortality and indigenous population density
affected colonization strategies and the entire apparatus of political and legal institutions that
colonizers created to define and enforce property rights.
Third, they argue that the property rights created by European colonizers endured after
the end of colonization. Settler colonies with political and legal systems that efficiently and
equitably protect private property rights and contracting tended to maintain these institutions
after colonization. In extractive colonies, postcolonial rulers tended to assume control of the preexisting tools designed to enrich the elite and then exploit these colonial institutions in the postcolonial regime. Young (1994) provides numerous country examples of how post-independence
rulers used pre-existing institutions to expropriate resources. Thus, according to the endowment
view, differences in endowments shaped the initial formation of property rights and the initial
systems for defining, defending, and interpreting property rights have had long-lasting
ramifications on property rights and private contracting today.
Easterly (2006) notes that expected riches from crops and minerals (the Engerman and
Sokoloff story) sometimes trumped the disease environment (the Acemoglu, Johnson, and
Robinson story) in triggering European migration, and stresses that the crucial issue is how
crops, minerals, and disease interacted to shape the initial degree of inequality. He notes that
from 1630 to 1780, net British emigration to low mortality New England was zero! In contrast,
over this period, 35 percent of British migrants settled in the Caribbean, 45 percent in the
American south, and 20 percent in the Middle Atlantic. Similarly, Easterly notes that the French,
Dutch, and Portuguese settled in high mortality areas in the tropics and subtropics. There were
large financial incentives to settle in high mortality environments. Engerman and Sokoloff show
that whites in the southern colonies were 50 percent wealthier than whites in New England, and

21

whites in Jamaica were more than thirteen times richer than whites from the southern colonies in
1774. While the possibility of becoming very wealthy on sugarcane, tobacco, and cotton
plantations worked by slaves sometimes outweighed the risk of disease and death, the resultant
high degree of inequality between whites and slaves fostered extractive institutions. Similarly,
while low mortality rates in New England attracted fewer Europeans than the Caribbean, greater
equality exerted a quite different effect on property rights.
The different endowment-based explanations need not be mutually exclusive. Where
colonists established “extractive colonies” either because the environment was inhospitable to
Europeans, or because the geography and composition of the indigenous population fostered
large plantations and mining operations, Europeans did not construct institutions focused on
limiting government coercion and facilitating private contracting. Rather, they established
institutions to protect and promote the welfare of the privileged. Where colonists settled in large
numbers and where the geography fostered small-scale farming and a burgeoning middle class,
Europeans were much more likely to develop sound property rights institutions. Both sets of
authors stress that these initial institutions endured after colonization and continue to influence
property rights institutions and economic activity today (Engerman, Mariscal and Sokoloff,
1998; Coatsworth, 1999).

Regression Evidence
In turning to cross-country regression results, I focus on the Acemoglu, Johnson, and
Robinson (2001, 2002) endowment story because they compile a broad cross-country database
on settler mortality rates. The empirical approach is similar to the earlier work of La Porta et al.
(1997, 1998), who also use colonial history -- specifically the transplantation of legal systems --

22

as predictors of the modern property rights environment. Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson
(2001) focus on settler mortality in the colonies rather than on who colonized them.
Rather than using cross-country regressions, Engerman and Sokoloff (1997, 2002)
provide detailed evidence on migration, voting rights, public education, and patenting costs
during the colonization of the New World. For example, consistent with the endowment view,
Engerman and Sokoloff (2005) show that sparsely populated areas with few indigenous people
tended to have more equal distributions of wealth that produced more egalitarian suffrage rules
than areas with higher concentrations of indigenous people or slaves. As another example,
Engerman, Mariscal, and Sokoloff (2002) show that cross-regional patterns of public education
across the New World are consistent with the view that the initial endowments of crops and
minerals shaped public policies in predictable ways. As a final example, patenting fees in the
northern United States were less than one-tenth of the cost of obtaining a patent in much of Latin
America, where patenting fees were between 2.5 and 9.5 times the average annual wage (Khan
and Sokoloff, 2004). These detailed studies of the process of colonization provide evidence
consistent with the view that the cross-colony distribution of crops, minerals, and population
density drove institutional development in the western hemisphere.
To measure the natural endowments related to disease and mortality, Acemoglu, Johnson,
and Robinson (2001) compile data on the death rates experienced by European settlers and
soldiers. From disparate data sources, Curtin (1989, 1998) pieces together data on the mortality
rates of European soldiers over the period 1817-1848. He adds similar data on soldier mortality
during the second half of the nineteenth century. To fill in gaps in the data, Acemoglu, Johnson,
and Robinson (2001) use Gutierrez’s (1986) data on the mortality rates of bishops in Latin
America from 1604 to 1876 based on Vatican records. Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson

23

construct a measure of annualized deaths per thousand settlers. There is extraordinary crosscountry variation. Some countries have settler mortality rates greater than 100 per 1000 settlers,
including Angola, Cameroon, Congo, Cote d’Ivoire, Gambia, Ghana, Jamaica, Kenya, Mali,
Niger, and Panama. Other countries had settler mortality rates of less than 20 per 1000 settlers,
including Australia, Canada, Hong Kong, Malaysia, Malta, New Zealand, Singapore, South
Africa, and the United States. Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson find that settler mortality rates
are negatively associated with the percentage of the population of European descent (both in
1900 and 1975).
Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson (2001) also find that settler mortality explains crosscountry differences in property rights. In particular, countries with higher values of settler
mortality tend to have both a greater risk today that the government will expropriate the property
of private foreign investment and also fewer formal and informal constraints on executive power.
(Data on the risk of expropriation is collected by Political Risk Services. Data on constraints on
executive power is from the Polity III database, which is available at the Inter-University
Consortium of Political and Social Research.) Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson use crosscountry regressions to show that the disease environments encountered by the Europeans help
explain property rights today. Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson compute that settler mortality
accounts for about one quarter of the cross-country variation in measures of the current level of
property rights. They go an additional step and find that the component of these measures of
property rights explained by settler mortality is very strongly linked with current levels of
economic development. Thus, they stress that endowments affect property rights, which in turn
influence economic development.

24

Beck, Demirguc-Kunt and Levine (2003a) provide complementary evidence on the
endowment view using the Heritage Foundation measure of property rights defined above. After
breaking the settler mortality measure into quartiles, Figure 2 charts the relationship between the
settler mortality and property rights indicators. On average, countries with lower settler mortality
have higher values of the property rights index. Table 2 presents cross-country regression results
which control for various country traits. Following Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson (2001),
Settler Mortality is measured as the log of the annualized deaths per thousand European soldiers
in European colonies in the early nineteenth century. Settler Mortality has a negative and
statistically significant correlation with Property Rights. In terms of economic size, the estimated
coefficients suggest that if Mexico had the same settler mortality rate as the United States (15 per
1000 instead of 71), then this would reduce the property rights gap between the U.S. and Mexico
by 25 percent, raising property rights in Mexico to 3.5 from 3 (relative to the U.S. level of 5).18
These results hold when adding the same control variables used in Table 1. The exception is that
when including a dummy variable for whether a country is in sub-Saharan African, the
correlation between Settler Mortality and Property Rights becomes statistically insignificant.
Settler mortality rates were extremely high in much of sub-Saharan Africa. This finding may
suggest that one characteristic of sub-Saharan African explaining its poor growth performance is
the poor level of property rights, which in turn could be due to the incentives faced by European
settlers to establish extractive colonies.

18

To compute this, note that the regressions are run using the logarithm of settler mortality. So, a change in settler
mortality from 71 to 15 involves a drop in the logarithm of settler mortality of about 1.6. Using an estimated
coefficient on the logarithm of settler mortality of -0.34, this implies an increase in property rights of 0.54.

25

Countervailing Views
Two main sets of critical questions have been posed to the endowment view. One set of
criticisms questions the cause and effect relationship. In the endowments theory, endowments
affect property rights, which in turn affect economic growth. But perhaps endowments affect
economic growth in a direct way, which then affects property rights. The second set of criticisms
questions the data on settler mortality. The first major critique of the endowments view stresses
that natural resource endowments directly influence work effort and prospects for economic
development. For instance, Machiavelli (1519 [1987]) argues that in fertile, tropic lands where it
is easy to pick food from the trees, people become lazy and unproductive. Montesquieu (1748
[1990]) and Landes (1998) argue that in hot, humid climates people become lethargic and
enervated. Similarly, Kamarck (1978), Bloom and Sachs (1998) and Sachs (2001) argue that
tropical environments have low soil fertility, many crop pests, and other factors that produce
poor agricultural yields, which in turn directly hinders economic development. They also stress
that tropical locations lead to underdevelopment because of (1) the ecological conditions that
foster the growth and spread of infectious diseases, (2) the lack of coal deposits, and (3) high
transport costs. These arguments challenge the causal chain running from endowments, to
colonization strategy, to property rights and on to the level of economic development. Instead,
this critique argues that the logical chain runs from endowments to economic development to the
efficiency with which political and legal systems define and enforce private property rights.
However, some evidence suggests that endowments do influence economic development
by affecting property rights. Easterly and Levine (2003a) test whether endowments only
influence economic development indirectly by influencing property rights, or whether

26

endowments also influence economic developments directly.19 They find that endowments –
such as measures of settler mortality rates, whether the country is in a tropical environment, and
the types of crops and minerals in the country – shape property rights directly, which in turn
influence economic development. They find no evidence, however, that endowments affect
economic development beyond the channel through property rights. Furthermore, they find no
evidence that macroeconomic policies over the period 1960-95 influenced economic growth over
this period, after accounting for the growth effects of how endowments affect property rights.
Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson (2002) present additional evidence that the causal
channel runs from endowments to private property to economic development. They note that
former colonies with greater population density in 1500 had several distinguishing features: 1)
they were richer than thinly populated areas (since population density is a good proxy for
income); 2) they attracted fewer European settlers than less densely populated areas; and 3) they
established extractive institutions, since Europeans did not settle there. Moreover, they note that
the endowment view makes an additional testable prediction: There should be a reversal of
fortunes. Initially rich, densely populated areas will attract few European settlers, but these
settlers will create extractive institutions that thwart economic development. In contrast, initially
poor areas without many indigenous people will attract lots of European settlers that construct
sound property rights institutions and grow quickly. Consistent with the endowment view,
Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson (2002) present evidence of a “Reversal in Fortunes.”

19

They run a two-stage least squares regression where the first-stage regresses measures of property rights
protection (and other measures such as the rule of law, corruption, political openness and competitiveness)on
endowments. In the second stage, the dependent variable is gross domestic product per capita and the regressors
included the predicted component of property rights from the first stage along with various control variables. They
also run a test of overidentifying restrictions, where the null hypothesis is that the instruments do not explain gross
domestic product per capita beyond their affect on property rights. They do not reject the null hypothesis.
Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson (2001) also provide these overidentifying tests using their settler mortality data.

27

However, controversy continues. Przeworski (2004a, b) does not find a reversal of
fortunes using new income data (and expanding the sample beyond the western hemisphere) and
also does not find that past political systems like democracy and dictatorship predict current
institutions. These observations question whether the political systems planted by European
settlers are the cause of international differences in property rights today.
Glaeser, La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes and Shleifer (2004) dispute the third building block
of Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson’s (2001) endowment view, which holds that early
European settlers planted property rights institutions that have endured to today. They argue that
the Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson methodology suffers from the econometric problem that
settler mortality is not a valid instrument for institutions, since settlers brought with them not
only institutions but also themselves, their culture, and other attributes that may still matter
today. In particular, they stress that Europeans brought educated people and schools, and these
factors are what endured after colonization, not political institutions governing property rights.20
Easterly (2006) notes that colonies with a higher percentage Europeans tended to have more
highly educated people, which fostered economic growth and the creation of better institutions.
However, in colonies with few Europeans, the population was not as highly educated and this
fostered slower growth and the absence of property rights protection. These observations
challenge the logical chains of the endowment view.
The second major concern about the endowment view is the trustworthiness of the settler
mortality data. Much of the data used to measure settler mortality are based on observations in
20

Glaeser, La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes and Shleifer (2004) find that education predicts changes in political
institutional outcomes (such as the level of democracy), but these political outcome indicators do not predict
changes in education, which leads the authors to question the causal mechanisms underlying the third building block
of Acemoglu, Johnson, Robinson’s endowment view. Acemoglu, Johnson, Robinson and Yared (2005), however,
question the validity of the econometric specifications in Glaeser, La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes and Shleifer. They
argue that when one includes time dummy variables in the panel specification with education, then the results
support the Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson view.

28

the nineteenth century, one to two centuries after Europeans first arrived in many of these
colonies. Thus, some may question whether the settler mortality data accurately capture the
endowments encountered by early European settlers.21
The empirical validity of the endowment theory does not hinge solely on the settler
mortality data. First, the evidence produced by Engerman and Sokoloff and others linking natural
resource endowments with patenting costs, suffrage laws, public education and migration does
not rely on settler mortality data, but still provides empirical evidence consistent with some
theories of how endowments influence property rights. Second, other recent work has used
latitude as a proxy for endowments: that is, whether the country is in a high-disease, poor
agricultural tropical environment, or in a less disease-plagued, higher yielding temperate climate
(Hall and Jones, 1999; Beck, Demirguc-Kunt, and Levine, 2003; Easterly and Levine, 2003).
Clearly, latitude is a highly imperfect indicator of endowments – but at least it is measured with a
high degree of accuracy! Beck, Demirguc-Kunt, and Levine run regressions similar to those in
Tables 1 and 2, and find that latitude has a positive, large, and statistically significant
relationship with the property rights index, both before and after inserting the other control
variables. Finally, without relying on settler mortality data, Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson
(2002) and Engerman and Sokoloff (2005) find evidence consistent with the view that the
distribution of the indigenous population during colonization influenced the construction of
political and suffrage systems in ways that have had an enduring effect on property rights. These
finding are consistent with the endowment view, but as noted above, some researchers challenge
whether a strong correlation between endowments and property rights should be interpreted as
confirming the causal chain running from endowments to property rights.

21

Furthermore, in as yet unpublished papers, Albouy (2004) questions the coding of the Acemoglu, Johnson and
Robinson (2001) settler mortality data, while Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson (2005) have drafted a rebuttal.

29

Law and Endowments: Similarities, Differences, and a Horserace
According to both the law and endowment views of property rights, exogenous factors
shaped the formation of property rights centuries ago, but these views differ on the crucial
historical conditions that shaped property rights. From the law point of view, the critical
“exogenous” event is the identity of the colonizer. If a land was colonized by the British, it got
the common law. If the French, Portuguese, Spanish, Belgian, or Dutch were the colonizers, then
the country became a French legal origin country. According to the endowment view, however,
the identity of the colonizer is irrelevant. The endowment view stresses that disease, geography,
and the composition of the population created incentives for the establishment of distinct
property rights – and these incentives should operate regardless of the nationality of the
colonizer. These two theories are substantially different, but they are not contradictory: Both
may operate.
Beck, Demirguc-Kunt, and Levine (2003a) run a statistical race between the law and
endowment views. They use the same measure of property rights as a dependent variable, but
then use both French legal origin and settler mortality as explanatory variables, along with the
same set of control variables appearing in Tables 1 and 2. Table 3 presents some results.
French legal origin enters all of the regressions with a relatively large magnitude and is
statistically significant at the 1 percent level. Settler mortality is also statistically significant at
the 1 percent level in all regressions. For both legal origin and settler mortality, the size of the
estimated coefficients falls in absolute terms by about 20 percent from those estimates in Tables
and 1 and 2 that do not include both legal origin and settler mortality. In an alternative
calculation, Beck, Demirguc-Kunt, and Levine (2003a) use latitude as a proxy for natural

30

endowments, rather than settler mortality, and find that it is statistically significant in all of these
regressions. The results suggest strongly that the inherited legal system matters for property
rights today, and suggest further that the natural resource endowments encountered by colonizers
matter for property rights, too.

Conclusion

Property rights affect individual liberty and national prosperity. While scholars have
hypothesized about the sources of variation in property rights for over 2500 years, researchers
have begun to test these theories empirically only recently. Researchers have made enormous
strides in empirically assessing different theories of the determinants of property rights, but these
investigations are in their nascent stages. The law and endowment views offer compelling
theories of how legal heritage and natural resource endowments shape property rights today and
each view provides empirical support. I see no reason to reject either explanation but believe
that considerably more work is needed on each.
In closing, I speculate on research directions. In terms of the law view, many French civil
law developing countries rank very highly in terms of property rights, like Chile, Morocco,
Philippines, and Turkey. Why does the civil law operate effectively in some countries and not
others? At a broader level, there is some evidence that legal systems that embrace jurisprudence
have better property rights and better financial systems. Although this finding is consistent with
the argument that jurisprudence facilitates the efficient adaptability of the law, we do not have
direct cross-country measures of “adaptability.” Furthermore, legal systems and political systems
are intimately related, but I do not believe that the interplay between legal and political

31

institutions in influencing private property rights has been adequately clarified at a theoretical or
empirical level. In terms of endowments, we need to provide more information on the
relationship between endowments and the initial construction of rules, procedures, and policies
by Europeans for a broad cross-section of countries. Can we then empirically trace the evolution
of these initial institutions through time to assess the hypothesis that the initial institutions
endured for centuries? Finally, do the law and endowments interact? Is the French civil law
particularly pernicious when accompanied by endowment-generated political institutions that
thwart socially efficient change?

32

References
Acemoglu, Daron and Simon Johnson. 2003. “Unbundling Institutions,” NBER WP# 9934.
Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James A. Robinson. 2001. “The Colonial Origins of
Comparative Development: An Empirical Investigation,” American Economic Review,
91(5), pp. 1369-401.
Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James A. Robinson. 2002. “Reversal of Fortune:
Geography and Development in the Making of the Modern World Income Distribution,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117(4), 1231-1294.
Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James A. Robinson. 2005. “A Response to Albouy’s ‘A
Reexamination Based on Improved Settler Mortality Data’,” MIT (Economics
Department), mimeo.
Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, James A. Robinson, and Pierrre Yared. 2005. “From
Education to Democracy?” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings,
forthcoming.
Aganin, Alexander and Paolo Volpin. 2003. “History of Corporate Ownership in Italy,” London
Business School mimeo.
Albouy, David. 2004. “The Colonial Origins of Comparative Development: A Reexamination
Based on Improved Settler Mortality Data,” University of California, Berkeley, mimeo.
Backhaus, Jurgen G. 1998. “Efficient Statute Law.” in New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics
and Law. Peter Newman, ed. London: MacMillan, pp. 24-28.
Barth, James, Gerard Caprio, and Ross Levine. 2005. Rethinking Bank Regulation: Till Angels
Govern. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press, forthcoming.
Beck, Thorsten, Asli Demirgüç-Kunt, and Ross Levine. 2001. “Legal Theories of Financial
Development.” Oxford Review of Economic Policy, 17, pp. 483-501.
Beck, Thorsten, Asli Demirgüç-Kunt, and Ross Levine. 2003a. “Law, Endowments, and
Finance.” Journal of Financial Economics, 70, pp. 137-81.
Beck, Thorsten, Asli Demirgüç-Kunt, and Ross Levine. 2003b. “Law and Finance. Why Does
Legal Origin Matter?” Journal of Comparative Economics, 31, pp, 653-75.
Beck, Thorsten, Asli Demirgüç-Kunt, and Ross Levine. 2005 “Law and Firms’ Access to
Finance.” American Law and Economics Review, 7, pp.211-252.
Beck, Thorsten, Asli Demirgüç-Kunt, and Vojislav Maksimovic. 2005. “Financial and Legal
Constraints to Firm Growth: Does Firm Size Matter?” Journal of Finance, forthcoming.

33

Beck, Thorsten and Ross Levine. 2002. “Industry Growth and Capital Allocation: Does Having a
Market- or Bank-based System Matter?” Journal of Financial Economics, 64,147-180.
Beck, Thorsten and Ross Levine. 2005. “Legal Institutions and Financial Development.” in
Handbook of New Institutional Economics. Claude Menard and Mary Shirley, Eds., The
Netherlands: Springer.
Beck, Thorsten, Ross Levine, and Norman Loayza. 2000. “Finance and the Sources of Growth.”
Journal of Financial Economics, 58, pp. 261-300.
Beckford, George L. 1972. Persistent Poverty: Underdevelopment in Plantation Economies of
the Third World, (The University of the West Indies Press, Reprint Edition, 2000).
Berkowitz, Daniel, Katharina Pistor, and Jean-Francois Richard. 2002. “Economic Development,
Legality, and the Transplant Effect.” European Economics Review, 47, pp. 165-195
Bloom, David E. and Jeffrey D. Sachs. 1998. “Geography, Demography, and Economic Growth
in Africa,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2, 207-273.
Blume, Lawrence E. and Daniel L. Rubinfeld. 1982. “The Dynamics of the Legal Process.”
Journal of Legal Studies, 11, pp. 405-419.
Cain, Philip J. and Anthony G. Hopkins. 1993. British Imperialism: Innovation and Expansion
1688-1914. New York, NY: Longman.
Caprio, Gerard, Luc Laeven, and Ross Levine. 2003. “Governance and Bank Valuation,”
University of Minnesota mimeo.
Chasteen, J.C., 2000. Born in Blood and Fire: A Concise History of Latin America. (WW
Norton, New York).
Claessens, Stijn, Simeon Djankov, Joseph P.H. Fan, and Larry H.P. Lang. 2002. “Expropriation
of Minority Shareholders in East Asia.” Journal of Finance, 57, pp. 2741-71.
Claessens, Stijn and Luc Laeven. 2003. “Financial Development, Property Rights, and Growth.”
Journal of Finance 58, 2401-2436.
Coatsworth, John H. 1993. “Notes on the Comparative Economic History of Latin America and
the United States,” in Walter L. Bernecker and Hans Werner Tobler, eds., Development
and Underdevelopment in America: Contrasts in Economic Growth in North and Latin
America in Historical Perspective, Walter de Gruyter, New York.
Crosby, Alfred W. 1989. Ecological Imperialism: The Biological Expansion of Europe, 9001900. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Curtin, Philip D., 1964. The Image of Africa. (University of Wisconsin Press, Madison, WI.).
Curtin, Philip D., 1989. Death by Migration: Europe’s Encounter with the Tropical World in the

34

Nineteenth Century. (Cambridge University Press, New York, NY).
Curtin, Philip D., 1998. Disease and Empire: The Health of European Troops in the Conquest of
Africa. (Cambridge University Press, New York, NY).
Damaska, Mirjan R. 1986. The Faces of Justice and State Authority: A Comparative Approach to
the Legal Process. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
David. Rene and John E.C. Brierley. 1985. Major Legal Systems in the World Today. London:
Stevens and Sons.
Dawson, John P. 1960. A History of Lay Judges. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Dawson, John P. 1968. The Oracles of the Law. Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Law
School (Reprinted in 1986 by William S. Hein & Co., Inc. Buffalo, New York).
De Long, J. Bradford and Andrei Shleifer. 1993. “Princes and Merchants: European City Growth
before the Industrial Revolution.” Journal of Law and Economics, 36, pp. 671-702.
Demirgüç-Kunt, Asli and Vojislav Maksimovic. 1998. “Law, Finance, and Firm Growth.”
Journal of Finance, 53, pp. 2107-2137.
Diamond, Jared. 1997. Guns, Germs, and Steel. New York, NY: W.W. Norton.
Djankov, Simeon, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer. 2003.
“Courts.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118, pp. 457-522.
Easterly, William. 2002. “Inequality Does Cause Underdevelopment: New Evidence from
Commodity Endowments, Middle Class Share, and Other Determinants of Per Capita
Income.” Center for Global Development, Working Paper #1, January.
Easterly, William. 2006. The White Man’s Burden: The Wacky Ambition of the West to
Transform the Rest, New York, NY: Penguin, forthcoming.
Easterly, William and Ross Levine. 1997. “Africa’s Growth Tragedy: Policies and Ethnic
Divisions.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112, pp. 1203-1250.
Easterly, William and Ross Levine. 2003. “Tropics, Germs, and Crops.” Journal of Monetary
Economics, 50, pp. 3-39.
Ekelund, Robert B. and Robert D. Tollison. 1980. “Economic Regulation in Mercantile England:
Heckscher Revisited.” Economics Inquiry, 18, pp. 567-599.
Engerman, Stanley L., and Kenneth L. Sokoloff. 1997. “Factor Endowments, Institutions, and
Differential Paths of Growth among New World Economies,” in How Latin America Fell
Behind. Stephen Haber, ed. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, pp. 260-304.
Engerman, Stanley L., and Kenneth L. Sokoloff. 2002. “Factor Endowments, Inequality, and
Paths of Development among New World Economies.” Economia 3 (Fall): 41-102.
35

Engerman, Stanley L. and Kenneth L. Sokoloff. 2005. “The Evolution of Suffrage Institutions in
the New World.” Journal of Economic History, forthcoming.
Engerman, Stanley L., Elisa Mariscal, Kenneth L. Sokoloff. 1998. Schooling, suffrage, and the
persistence of inequality in the Americas, 1800-1945. Unpublished working paper.
Department of Economics, UCLA.
Epstein, Richard A. 1975. “Unconscionability: A Critical Reappraisal.” Journal of Law and
Economics, 18, pp. 293-315.
Finer, Samuel. 1997. The History of Government. Vol. I-III. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Franks, Julian, Colin Mayer, and Stefano Rossi. 2003. “The Origination and Evolution of
Ownership and Control,” Oxford Financial Research Centre Working Paper No.
1003-FE-01.
Franks, Julian and Oren Sussman. 1999. “Financial Innovations and Corporate Insolvency,”
London Business School unpublished working paper.
Galanter, Marc. 1974. “Why the ‘Haves’ Come Out Ahead: Speculation on the Limits of Legal
Change.” Law and Soc. Rev., 9, pp. 95-160.
Gann, Lewis H. and Peter Duignan. 1962. White Settlers in Tropical Africa. Maryland: Penguin.
Glaeser, Edward and Andrei Shleifer. 2002. “Legal Origins.” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
117, pp. 1193-1230.
Glaeser, Edward L., Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer. 2004.
“Do Institutions Cause Growth?,” Journal of Economic Growth, 9, 271-303.
Gutierrez, Hector. 1986. La mortalite des eveques latino-americains aux XVIIe et XVII siecles,
Annales de Demographie Historique, 29-39.
Haber, Stephen, Armando Razo, and Noel Maurer. 2003. The Politics of Property Rights:
Political Instability, Credible Commitments, and Economic Growth in Mexico.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Hall, Robert E. and Charles I. Jones. 1999. Why do Some Countries Produce so Much More
Output per Worker than Others?, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114(1), pp. 83-116.
Hayek, Friedrich A. 1960. The Constitution of Liberty, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Johnson, Simon, John McMillan, and Christopher Woodruff. 2002b. “Property Rights and
Finance. American Economic Review, 92, pp. 1335-56.
Johnson, Simon, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer. 2000.
“Tunneling.” American Economic Review (Papers and Proceedings), 90, pp. 22-27.

36

Jones, Eric L. 1981. The European Miracle: Environments, Economies, and Geopolitics in the
History of Europe and Asia. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Kamarck, Andrew M. 1976. The Tropics and Economic Development. Baltimore, MD: John
Hopkins University Press.
Khan, B. Zorina and Kenneth L. Sokoloff. 2004. The Innovation of Patent Systems in the
Nineteenth Century: A Comparative Perspective, National Bureau of Economic
Research, Working Paper.
Klerman, Daniel M. and Paul G. Mahoney. 2005. The Value of Judicial Independence: Evidence
from 18th Century England, American Law and Economic Review, 7, pp. 1-27..
Knack, Steven and Philip Keefer. 1995. “Institutions and Economic Performance: Cross-Country
Tests Using Alternative Measures,” Economics and Politics, 7, 207-227.
Kumar, Krishna B., Raghuram G. Rajan, and Luigi Zingales. 2001. “What Determines Firm
Size?” University of Chicago unpublished working paper.
Landes, D., 1998. The Wealth and Poverty of Nations (W.W. Norton, New York, NY).
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Cristian Pop-Eleches, and Andrei Shleifer. 2003.
“Judicial Checks and Balances,” Journal of Political Economy, 112(2), 445-470.
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer. 2005. “What Works in
Securities Laws?” Journal of Finance, forthcoming.
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny. 2002.
“Investor Protection and Corporate Valuation.” Journal of Finance, 57, pp. 1147-1170.
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W Vishny. 2000b.
“Agency Problems and Dividend Policies around the World.” Journal of Finance, 55, 133.
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny. 2000a.
“Investor Protection and Corporate Governance.” Journal of Financial Economics, 58, 327.
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny. 1999.
“The Quality of Government.” Journal of Law, Economics and Organization, 15, pp.
222-279.
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny. 1998.
“Law and Finance.” Journal of Political Economy, 106, pp. 1113-1155
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny. 1997.
“Legal Determinants of External Finance.” Journal of Finance, 52, pp. 1131-1150.

37

Levine, Ross. 1998. “The Legal Environment, Banks, and Long-run Economic Growth.” Journal
of Money, Credit, and Banking., 30, pp. 596-620.
Levine, Ross. 1999. “Law, Finance, and Economic Growth.” Journal of Financial
Intermediation, 8, pp. 36-67.
Levine, Ross. 2003. “Bank-based or Market-based Financial Systems: Which Is Better?” Journal
of Financial Intermediation, 11, pp. 398-428.
Levine, Ross, Norman Loayza, and Thorsten Beck. 2000. “Financial Intermediation and Growth:
Causality and Causes.” Journal of Monetary Economics, 46, pp. 31-77.
Machiavelli, N. 1519 [1987]. Discourses on Livy. New York, NY: Oxford University Press .
Mahoney, Paul. 2001. “The Common Law and Economic Growth: Hayek Might Be Right.”
Journal of Legal Studies, 30, pp. 503-525.
McNeill, William H. 1963. The Rise of the West: A History of the Human Community. Chicago,
IL: University of Chicago Press.
Merryman, John H. 1985. The Civil Law Tradition: An Introduction to the Legal Systems of
Western Europe and Latin America. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Merryman, John H. 1996. “The French Deviation.” The American Journal of Comparative Law,
44, pp. 109-119.
Montesquieu, Charles de Secondat. 1748 [1990]. The Spirit of Laws. Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press.
Muller, Jerry Z. 2002. The Mind and Market: Capitalism in Modern European Thought. New
York, NY: Alfred A. Knopf.
North, Douglass C. 1981. Structure and Change in Economic History, New York, NY: W.W.
Norton.
North, Douglass C., William Summerhill, and Barry Weingast. 2000. “Order, Disorder, and
Economic Change: Latin America Versus North America.” In Bruce Bueno de Mesquita
and Hilton L. Root, eds., Governing for Prosperity. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Pagano, Marco, and Paolo Volpin. 2001. “The Political Economy of Finance.” Oxford Review of
Economic Policy, 17, 502-519.
Plato, 360 B.C. [1992]. The Republic, (translated by G. M. Grube), New York, NY: Hackett
Press..
Priest, George L. 1977. “The Common Law Process and the Selection of Efficient Rules.”
Journal of Legal Studies, 6, pp. 65-82.
Posner, Richard A. 1973. Economic Analysis of the Law. Boston, MA: Little-Brown.
38

Pound, John. 1991. “Proxy Voting and the SEC.” Journal of Financial Economics, 29, 241-285
Przeworski, Adam. 2004a. “The Last Instance: Are Institutions the Primary Cause of Economic
Development?” New York University, mimeo.
Przeworski, Adam. 2004b. “Geography vs. Institutions Revisited: Were Fortunes Reversed?”
New York University, mimeo.
Putnam, R., 1993. Making Democracy Work: Civic Traditions in Modern Italy. (Princeton
University Press, Princeton, NJ).
Rajan, Raghuram and Luigi Zingales. 2003. Saving Capitalism from the Capitalists: Unleashing
the Power of Financial Markets to Create Wealth and Spread Opportunity, New York:
Crown.
Robinson, Ronald E. and John Gallagher. 1961. Africa and the Victorians: The Official Mind of
Imperialism. London: MacMillan.
Roe, Mark J. 1994. Strong Managers Weak Owners: The Political Roots of American Corporate
Finance. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Rubin, Paul H., 1977. “Why Is the Common Law Efficient?” Journal of Legal Studies, 6, 51-64.
Rubin, Paul H., 1982. “Common Law and Statute Law.” Journal of Legal Studies, 11, 205-33.
Sachs, Jeffrey. 2001. Tropical underdevelopment, National Bureau of Economic Research
Working Paper 8119.
Schlesinger, Rudolph B., Hans W. Baade, Mirjan R. Damaska, and Peter E. Herzog. 1988.
Comparative Law. Case-Text-Materials. New York: The Foundation Press, Inc.
Smith, Adam. 1776. The Wealth of Nations, New York, NY: Random House, 2000.
Sokoloff, Kenneth L. and Stanley L. Engerman. 2000. “History Lessons: Institutions, Factor
Endowments, and Paths of Development in the New World.” Journal of Economic
Perspectives. 14(3): 217-32.
Stulz, Rene, and Rohan Williamson. 2003. “Culture, Openness, and Finance.” Journal of
Financial Economics
Tabellini, Guido. 2004. “Culture and Institutions: Economic Development in the Regions of
Europe,” IGIER, Bocconi University mimeo.
Taylor, Alan. 2001. American Colonies, New York, NY: Viking Press.
Tullock, Gordon. 1980. Trials on Trial. New York: Columbia University Press.
Wurgler, Jeffrey. 2000. “Financial Markets and the Allocation of Capital.” Journal of Financial
Econonomics, 58, pp. 187-214.
39

Young, Crawford. 1994. The African Colonial State in Comparative Perspective (Yale
University Press, New Haven CT).
Zweigert, Konrad and Hein Kötz. 1998. An Introduction to Comparative Law. New York:
Oxford University Press.

40

Figure 1
Legal Origin and Property Rights

Property Rights
4
3.5
3
2.5
2
1.5
1
French Legal Origin

British Legal Origin

Note: The figure charts the average value of Property Rights for countries with either a French
and British legal tradition. Property Rights reflects the degree to which the government enforces
laws that protect private property (Source: Heritage Foundation). It ranges from one to five, with
higher numbers indicating better property rights enforcement. The French Legal Origin and
British Legal Origin classifications are based on their Commercial/Company law.
Source: La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer and Vishny (1999).

41

Figure 2: Settler Mortality and Property Rights
Property Rights
4
3.5
3
2.5
2
1.5
1
Very Low Settler
Mortality

Low Settler
Mortality

High Settler
Mortality

Very High Settler
Mortality

Note: The figure charts the average value of Property Rights for countries in each quartiles of
Settler Mortality. Property Rights reflects the degree to which the government enforces laws that
protect private property (Source: Heritage Foundation). The four Settler Mortality categories are
as follows: very low settler mortality rates (between 9 and 68 deaths per thousand), low settler
mortality rates (between 69 and 80 deaths per thousand), high settler mortality rates (between 81
and 270 deaths per thousand), and very settler mortality rates (greater than 270 deaths per
thousand) Property Rights reflects the degree to which the government enforces laws that protect
private property (Source: Heritage Foundation). It ranges from one to five, with higher numbers
indicating better property rights enforcement.
Source: Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson (2001).

42

Table 1
Property Rights and Legal Origin
(dependent variable: property rights on a one to five scale)

(1)
French Legal Origin
Catholic
Muslim
Other Religion
Independence
Ethnic Fractionalization
2

Adjusted R
Obs

(2)

-0.947*** -1.065***
-0.002
-0.005
-0.007

(3)

(4)

-1.103*** -0.995***

0.692**
-0.813**
0.198
69

0.182
69

0.232
69

0.253
69

Note: The estimated regression: Property Rights = α + β1 French Legal Origin + β2X + u.
Property Rights reflects the degree to which government enforces laws that protect private
property, with higher numbers indicating better enforcement. French Legal Origin is a dummy
variable that takes on the value one for countries with French civil law tradition, and zero
otherwise. The regressions also include a vector of control variables, X. Catholic, Muslim, and
Other Religion indicate the percentage of the population that is Catholic, Muslim, or religions
other than Catholic, Muslim, or Protestant. Independence is the percentage of years since 1776
that a country has been independent. Ethnic Fractionalization is the probability that two
randomly selected individuals in a country will not speak the same language. Regressions
estimated using ordinary least squares. The constant is not reported. The symbols *, **, ***
indicate significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent levels, respectively.
Source: Beck, Demirguc-Kunt, and Levine (2003a).

Table 2
Property Rights and Endowments
(dependent variable: property rights measured on a scale from one to five)
(1)

(2)

(3)

Settler Mortality
-0.349*** -0.339*** -0.377***
Catholic
-0.015*
Muslim
-0.012
Other Religion
-0.01
Independence
-0.336
Ethnic Fractionalization
Adjusted-R2
0.177
0.194
0.175
Obs
69
69
69

(4)
-0.338***

-0.102
0.166
69

Note: The estimated regression: Property Rights = α + β1 Settler Mortality + β2X, + u. Property
Rights reflects the degree to which government enforces laws that protect private property, with
higher numbers indicating better enforcement. Settler Mortality is the log of the annualized
deaths per thousand European soldiers in European colonies in the early 19th century. The
regressions also include a vector of control variables, X. Catholic, Muslim, and Other Religion
indicate the percentage of the population that is Catholic, Muslim, or religions other than
Catholic, Muslim, or Protestant, respectively. Independence is the percentage of years since 1776
that a country has been independent. Ethnic Fractionalization is the probability that two
randomly selected individuals in a country will not speak the same language. Regressions
estimated using ordinary least squares. The constant is not reported. The symbols *, **, ***
indicate significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent levels, respectively.
Source: Beck, Demirguc-Kunt and Levine (2003a).

1

Table 3
Property Rights, Law, and Endowments
(dependent variable: property rights measured on a scale from one to five)

(1)
French Legal Origin
Settler Mortality
Catholic
Muslim
Other Religion
Independence
Ethnic Fractionalization
Adjusted-R2
Obs

(2)

(3)

-0.781*** -0.853***
-0.279*** -0.277***
-0.004
-0.003
-0.008

(4)

-0.856*** -0.833***
-0.251*** -0.232**

-0.256
0.304
69

0.281
69

0.299
69

-0.398
0.307
69

Note: The estimated regression: Property Rights = α + β1 Settler Mortality + β2X, + u. Property
Rights reflects the degree to which government enforces laws that protect private property, with
higher numbers indicating better enforcement. Settler Mortality is the log of the annualized
deaths per thousand European soldiers in European colonies in the early nineteenth century. The
regressions also include a vector of control variables, X. Catholic, Muslim, and Other Religion
indicate the percentage of the population that is Catholic, Muslim, or religions other than
Catholic, Muslim, or Protestant, respectively. Independence is the percentage of years since 1776
that a country has been independent. Ethnic Fractionalization is the probability that two
randomly selected individuals in a country will not speak the same language. Regressions
estimated using ordinary least squares. The constant is not reported. The symbols *, **, ***
indicate significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent levels, respectively.
Source: Beck, Demirguc-Kunt, and Levine (2003a).

2

