                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        A THEORY OF GROWTH AND VOLATILITY AT
                            THE AGGREGATE AND FIRM LEVEL

                                              Diego Comin
                                              Sunil Mulani

                                          Working Paper 11503
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w11503


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       June 2005




We are thankful to Ted Rosenbaum and Kristy Mayer for their excellent research assistance. The paper has
also benefited from comments from Phillipe Aghion, Robert Barro, Susanto Basu, Will Baumol, Jess
Benhabib, Christian Broda, Steve Davis, Jonathan Eaton, Humberto Ennis, John Fernald, Raquel Fernandez,
Mark Gertler, Andreas Hornstein, Boyan Jovanovic, John Leahy, Thomas Phillippon, Jaume Venture,
seminar participants at Stern, the New York Fed, San Francisco Fed, Richmond Fed, Catolica University,
Yale, Chicago GSB, IV Bank of Portugal Conference in Macroeconomics, the Productivity and Macro NBER
Summer Institute. Comin thanks the C.V. Starr Center for Applied Economics for its financial assistance.
The views expressed in this paper solely reflect those of the authors. The views expressed herein are those
of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by Diego Comin and Sunil Mulani. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
A Theory of Growth and Volatility at the Aggregate and Firm Level
Diego Comin and Sunil Mulani
NBER Working Paper No. 11503
July 2005, Revised November 2006
JEL No. D9, E3, L1

                                            ABSTRACT

        This paper presents an endogenous growth model that explains the evolution of the first and
second moments of productivity growth at the aggregate and firm level during the post-war period.
Growth is driven by the development of both (i) idiosyncratic R&D innovations and (ii) general
innovations that can be freely adopted by many firms. Firm-level volatility is affected primarily by
the Schumpeterian dynamics associated with the development of R&D innovations. On the other
hand, the variance of aggregate productivity growth is determined mainly by the arrival rate of
general innovations. Ceteris paribus, the share of resources spent on development of general
innovations increases with the stability of the market share of the industry leader. As market shares
become less persistent, the model predicts an endogenous shift in the allocation of resources from
the development of general innovations to the development of R&D innovations. This results in an
increase in R&D, an increase in firm-level volatility, and a decline in aggregate volatility. The effect
on productivity growth is ambiguous.

        On the empirical side, this paper documents an upward trend in the instability of market
shares. It shows that firm volatility is positively associated with R&D spending, and that R&D is
negatively associated with the correlation of growth between sectors which leads to a decline in
aggregate volatility.



Diego Comin                                             Sunil Mulani
Department of Economics                                 Analysis Group, Inc.
New York University                                     10 Rockefeller Plaza, 15th Floor
269 Mercer Street, 725                                  New York, NY 10020
New York, NY 10003                                      smulani@analysisgroup.com
and NBER
diego.comin@nyu.edu
1         Motivation
The literature on endogenous growth has made substantial progress in the past 15 years. In spite
of these advances, however, there remains much to be learnt about the determinants of long-run
productivity growth. In our opinion, the existing literature suﬀers from important limitations.
        State-of-the-art models (Aghion and Howitt [1998, Ch. 12], Dinopoulos and Thompson [1998],
Jones [1995], Kortum [1997], Peretto [1998], Segerstrom [1998] and Young [1998]) predict a positive
relationship between the growth rate of productivity and the share of research & development (R&D)
in GDP. However, this prediction does not seem to be true for aggregate data from the post-war
United States (US). Figure 1 illustrates the smoothed growth rate of productivity as well as the
evolution of the share of private R&D in GDP as measured by the National Science Foundation
(NSF). No clear relationship seems to exist between the two variables.1 Comin [2004] also concludes
that R&D expenditures, as defined by the NSF, only give a partial picture of growth. In particular,
he calibrates a general model of innovation and finds that NSF R&D expenditures can account for
only a small fraction of the average productivity growth in the US during the post-war period.
        The lack of relationship between R&D and growth is also present at the sector level. In par-
ticular, Jones and Williams [1998] find no significant relationship between R&D intensity and TFP
growth at the sector level in the US once sector-level fixed eﬀects are introduced. At the firm level,
however, Griliches [1980, 1986] and Griliches and Mairesse [1984] have examined the eﬀect of these
same measures of R&D intensity on productivity and TFP growth and have observed a strong
positive association even after including firm-level fixed eﬀects.
        This paper builds an endogenous growth model that enhances our understanding of the deter-
minants of productivity growth at the aggregate and firm level. In particular, the model provides
an explanation for the varying relationship between R&D and productivity growth at diﬀerent ag-
gregation levels described above. Our model builds on the Schumpeterian growth models of Aghion
and Howitt [1992] and Grossman and Helpman [1991, Ch. 4] and introduces a new type of innova-
tions that we denote as general innovations (GIs, henceforth). Like the standard R&D innovations
modelled in Romer [1990] and Aghion and Howitt [1992], general innovations are also non-rival.
However, two important properties diﬀerentiate GIs from R&D innovations. First, a firm that de-
    1
        Examination of TFP growth or output growth results in similar conclusions. In addition, the upward trend in
R&D also holds for the share of scientists and engineers in employment and for total R&D expenses in the US and in
the OECD. When public R&D expenditures are included into the R&D series, the increase in R&D intensity during
the post-war period prevails, although it is more abrupt.


                                                            1
velops a general innovation cannot appropriate the benefits other firms enjoy when they adopt it.
This is the case because general innovations - such as managerial and organizational innovations,
improved process controls, product development, testing practices and pre-production planning,
new personnel and accounting practices, financial innovations, the use of electricity as the source
of energy in a plant, etc. - are not embodied in a product and therefore are hard to patent and
relatively easy to reverse-engineer.2,3 As a result, (i) the inventor of a GI cannot sell it to other
firms and (ii) he only benefits from it because the eﬃciency of production of his firm improves by
using the new GI.
       A second important property of GIs is that, since they provide solutions to problems that aﬀect
firms in most sectors, their development improves the productivity of many firms across many
diﬀerent sectors. This contrasts with the productivity improvements associated with new R&D
innovations, which are, for the most part, confined to a specific sector.
       These two properties of GIs have interesting implications. First, a firm’s incentives to develop
a GI depends on its productivity gain from implementing the innovation. These productivity gains
are larger for more valuable firms. As a result, general innovations are typically developed by more
valuable, leading firms.
       In equilibrium, there is a negative relationship between resources spent on R&D and resources
spent on the development of general innovations. Since (1) R&D leads to turnover in market leaders
and to a decline in the value of leading firms and (2) the private return to a GI increases in the
value of the firm, a force that leads the economy to invest more in R&D (such as a R&D subsidy)
induces a decline in the rate of development of GIs.
       This trade oﬀ between R&D and GIs accounts for the trends observed in productivity growth at
the aggregate level. Productivity growth increases with the development of both R&D and general
innovations. Since an increase in R&D intensity leads to a decline in the arrival rate of general
innovations, however, the actual relationship between R&D and productivity growth is ambiguous.
       Firm level growth depends on the growth of aggregate demand and, in particular, on the change
in the firm’s market share. GIs aﬀect all firms in a relatively symmetric way since they are easier to
   2
       See Table 1 for a longer, albeit incomplete, list of general innovations. For a description of the innovations, see
Appendix 2.
  3
    Hellwig and Irmen [2001] and Boldrin and Levine [2000] have also highlighted the importance of innovations that
are not patentable. The innovations that they model, however, diﬀer from our GIs in that they are embodied and
innovators accrue revenues from the sale of goods that embody the innovation, as is the case in standard endogenous
growth models.



                                                             2
copy. Therefore, they do not have significant eﬀects on market shares. R&D investments, instead,
lead firms to develop new products that replace the current leading products, resulting in significant
changes in relative demand and market shares. As a result, firms that engage more intensively in
R&D investments are more likely to obtain the capital gains associated with becoming the market
leader. This explains the positive association between R&D investments and growth at the firm
level.
       A second limitation of the endogenous growth literature is to ignore the model’s implications
for the second moments of the growth process, as though their determinants were orthogonal to
the first moments’ determinants.4 We believe, however, that the model’s predictions for the second
moments of the growth process impose some important restrictions that should be used to test the
growth models. Since both R&D and GIs arrive randomly over time, our model has implications
for the evolution of the volatility of productivity growth at the firm and aggregate levels.
       Two recent strands of the literature have characterized the evolution of volatility at the aggregate
and firm level. McConnell and Perez-Quiros [1999] and Stock and Watson [2003] have shown that
the volatility of aggregate variables such as output, hours worked and labor productivity growth
has declined during the post-war period. When exploring the evolution of the volatility of these
same variables in publicly traded firms, Comin and Mulani [2006], Comin and Philippon [2005] and
this paper find that it has doubled during the post-war period.
       Our model helps understand these opposite trends in firm and aggregate volatility. R&D inno-
vations lead to substantial firm-level volatility since incumbents incur losses while entrants enjoy
capital gains. An increase in R&D intensity leads to turnover in the market leader and increases
firm-level volatility. However, since R&D innovations are to a large extent sector specific, they have
only a minor eﬀect on aggregate volatility. Aggregate volatility is primarily aﬀected by the arrival
rate of general innovations because these determine the co-movement of growth across sectors by
causing simultaneous fluctuations. Hence, a decline in investments in the development of GIs leads
to a decline in aggregate volatility.
       In addition to developing a new model of endogenous growth and volatility, this paper also
provides empirical evidence of the forces and mechanisms emphasized by the model. First, it
documents an increase in the subsidies to R&D innovations over the post-war period. Second, it
   4
       There exists literature that has attempted to explore the eﬀects of exogenous increases in aggregate volatility on
growth (Ramey and Ramey [1995], Barlevy [2003]). A key diﬀerence between that literature and this paper is that
here volatility (both aggregate and firm-level) is endogenous to analysis.



                                                             3
shows a very significant increase in the market turnover rate during the same period. Third, it
provides evidence that market turnover and firm volatility have increased by more in sectors where
R&D intensity has increased by more. Fourth, it shows that there has been a substantial decline in
the correlation of productivity growth across sectors, also during the post-war period. As shown by
Comin and Philippon [2005], this decline is responsible for a majority of the decline in aggregate
volatility. Fifth, this paper establishes that R&D is negatively associated with aggregate volatility
by showing that sectors that experienced greater increases in R&D also experienced greater declines
in the correlation between their own growth and the rest of the economy’s. Thus, the increase in
R&D leads to lower aggregate volatility.
    While there must be other forces that have contributed to the trends in the volatility of listed
firms and, specially, in aggregate volatility, the mechanisms emphasized in our model are quanti-
tatively significant. A calibration of the model shows that it can account for (1) the lack of an
aggregate relationship between R&D and productivity growth, (2) 75 percent of the increase in the
firm volatility of listed firms and, (3) over 40 percent of the decline in aggregate volatility.
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the formal model and undertakes
the comparative statics exercises. Section 3 discusses and evaluates predictions of the model in both
qualitative and quantitative terms. Section 4 concludes.



2     Model
The following describes an endogenous technological change model that delivers endogenous growth
and endogenous volatility at the aggregate and firm-level. To maximize the clarity of exposition, we
present the basic trade oﬀ between R&D and general innovations in the context of a one sector model.
We then extend this basic framework to a multisector economy to understand the determinants of
the co-movement of growth across sectors, which is essential for the evolution of aggregate volatility.


2.1    Basic set up
Preferences
    The representative consumer enjoys a utility flow that is linear on the units of final output
consumed, ct . The present discounted value of utility is represented as
                                             Z ∞
                                        U=        ct e−rt dt,                                      (1)
                                                 0


                                                     4
where r denotes the instantaneous discount rate. Consumers inelastically supply a mass of L units
of labor. They also pay some lump sum of taxes, Tt .
       Production
       We initially assume the economy is comprised of one sector that competitively produces ys units
of output with price ps . Output is produced by combining m + 1 intermediate goods, where m
is a constant. Each intermediate good is produced by one and only one producer. Intermediate
goods can be of two types. The good with highest quality, q, is the leading intermediate good.
Consumers perceive this as a diﬀerentiated intermediate good because of its superior technical
properties. The rest of the producers cannot compete with the leading intermediate good and must
produce standard, undiﬀerentiated intermediate goods.
       Let xl denote the number of units of the leading intermediate good employed to produce output.
Similarly, let xfi denote the number of intermediate goods employed from the ith standard producer.
Then the production function can be expressed as:
                                           Ã            Ãm    !α !1/α
                                           ¡ l ¢α        X f
                                   ys = q β x + (1 − β)    xi         ,                                           (2)
                                                                    i=1

where q is the quality of the leading intermediate good, β < 1 is the market share of the leading
intermediate good, and α ∈ (0, 1) is the elasticity of substitution between the leading good and the
composite of standard intermediate goods.5
       The production of a unit of intermediate good requires a units of labor. a declines with the
eﬃciency of the production process, h, such that

                                                       a = 1/h                                                    (3)

       Innovation
       Intermediate good producers can undertake two types of innovations. First, they can attempt
to develop an intermediate good of a quality higher than q. In particular, after spending a share
                                                                      nq
nqi of aggregate output, they face a probability λqi = λ̄ 1−sR&D
                                                             i
                                                                 over an instantaneous time-interval
dt of developing a new leading good with quality δ q q (δ q > 1).6 In this formulation, λ̄ measures
the probability of succeeding in the development of a superior intermediate good per fraction of
output spent on R&D. sR&D denotes a R&D subsidy that is financed by the lump sum taxes paid by
   5
       Note that this formulation incorporates an externality from the quality of the leading intermediate good to the
productivity of the standard intermediate goods.
   6
     Griliches [1984] finds evidence in favor of the linearity of the R&D production technology using firm-level data.


                                                           5
consumers. When a standard intermediate good producer succeeds in his R&D eﬀorts, he becomes
the new leading intermediate good producer, and the former market leader becomes a standard
intermediate good producer.7
       Second, intermediate goods producers can also invest in improving the production process of
their intermediate good (i.e. reducing the cost of production, a). Specifically, he can invest a share
                                                                        h¡    ¢ρ
nhi of aggregate output and face an instantaneous probability λhi = λ̄ nhi h , with 0 < ρh < 1,
of successfully increasing h to δ h h, with δ h > 1. We denote this type of production improvements
                                                                              ³     ´1
                                                                                   h ρ
as general innovations. For future reference, it is useful to define c(λ) ≡ λ/λ̄ h as the share
of aggregate output that a producer must invest to face a probability λ of developing a general
innovation.
       These two types of innovations diﬀer in their appropiability. Firms that invent a new product
or improve the quality of an existing product can patent the innovation and extract a substantial
fraction of the surplus enjoyed by other firms from such an innovation. On the other hand, firms
that develop GIs, such as improvements in management practices, cannot appropriate the benefits
experienced by other firms that use the innovations. Appropriating this surplus is impossible because
GIs are easy to reverse engineer and because they are diﬃcult to patent, since most of them are
not embodied in a good. These characteristics are reflected in the assumption that all producers
immediately (and costlessly) adopt GIs.
       A second diﬀerence between the two types of innovations that will be important in the multisector
extension is their applicability. The impact of new or improved goods is often restricted to a small
number of sectors, whereas GIs , such as improvements in management or in the organization of
production mentioned above, can be applied to many diﬀerent economic activities across a wide
array of sectors.
       Government
       The government collects lump sum taxes from the consumers to finance the exogenous R&D
subsidy at every instant.
   7
       This formulation of the R&D dynamics has several interesting features. First, the lower demand elasticity of the
leading intermediate good is instrumental in generating cross-sectional variation in sales per worker. Second, by not
having to carry around the distribution of qualities for intermediate goods, we make substantial progress towards
an analytical solution of the model. Third, the absence of entry and exit simplifies the computation of firm-level
moments.




                                                            6
2.2        Analysis
We start by exploring the pricing problem of intermediate good producers. The leading intermediate
good producer faces an isoelastic demand function and sets a price, plx , equal to the marginal cost
times a markup given by the inverse of the elasticity of demand (i.e. 1/α). Bertrand competition
between standard intermediate good producers brings the price of standard intermediate goods,
pfx , down to their marginal cost of production. These arguments are reflected in the following
expressions, where w denotes the wage rate.
                                                               aw
                                                       plx =                                                   (4)
                                                                α
                                                       pfx   = aw                                              (5)

       The price of sectoral output is then given by
                                                                     wa
                                                        ps =            ,                                      (6)
                                                                     ξq
          h       1             1
                                   i 1−α
                                      α
where ξ ≡ (βαα ) 1−α + (1 − β) 1−α       . Expression (6), together with the choice of numeraire,
determines the wage rate.
       Plugging the prices into the demand functions, we can solve for the share of each producer’s
sales in nominal output:8
                                                             µ ¶ 1
                                          plx xls   1    αβ 1−α
                                                  =         α      ≡ κl                                        (7)
                                          ps ys     α     ξ
                                                        µ        ¶ 1
                                         pfx xfsi     1 1 − β 1−α
                                                    =          α     ≡ κf                                      (8)
                                         ps ys        m      ξ

       To explore the investment decisions, it proves useful to introduce some notation. Let vl and vf
denote, respectively, the market value of the leading and standard intermediate good firms, both
divided by nominal output.
   8
       Combining the demands for each intermediate good and the labor market clearing condition, allows us to solve
for the number of units of each each type of intermediate good sold:
                                                                 1
                                        xl    =      £                        ¤L
                                                    a 1 + ((1 − β)α/β)1/(1−α)
                                                       ((1 − β)α/β)1/(1−α)     L
                                        xfi   =      £                       ¤
                                                    a 1 + ((1 − β)α/β)1/(1−α) m




                                                                 7
       Producers of standard intermediate goods can try to develop a new leading intermediate good
by undertaking R&D investments. The share of output invested by standard intermediate good
producers in developing R&D innovations is determined by the following arbitrage condition:
                                 Marginal Cost      Expected Mg. Benefit from R&D Innovations
                                 z }| {                             z       }|    {
                                                                            l   f
                                 (1 − sR&D ) =                      λ̄(δ q v − v )                              (Lq)

       The left-hand side in (Lq) is the private cost of investing one percent of output in R&D, whereas
the right-hand side is the expected marginal benefit from such an investment. With probability λ̄
the follower experiences a capital gain given by the diﬀerence between the value of succeeding in
developing a new leading good, δ q vl , and the value of a follower in the absence of such an innovation,
vf .
       As shown in Appendix 1, the optimal pricing and R&D investment decisions of standard interme-
diate good producers imply that, in the symmetric equilibrium, the value of standard intermediate
goods firms, v f , is zero. Intuitively, since they charge a price equal to the marginal cost of pro-
duction, they incur losses equal to the cost of undertaking innovations. The linearity in the R&D
technology implies that the losses from the R&D investments are exactly compensated by the ex-
pected capital gains from becoming market leaders, making the net value of a standard intermediate
good producer zero.
       The current market leader can also invest in R&D innovations. He faces the same marginal cost
of innovation as followers, but the expected marginal benefit is λ̄(δ q − 1)vl instead of λ̄δ q vl . Since
vl > vf = 0, equation (Lq) implies that the expected marginal benefit of R&D innovations for the
leader is lower than the marginal cost of conducting these innovations. As a result, the market
leader does not conduct R&D innovations in equilibrium.9
       The market leader does, however, have incentives to develop general innovations that reduce
the marginal cost of producing intermediate goods for all producers. In an interior solution, the
optimal investment in GIs by the leader results in the following equality:
                                    Marginal Cost       Mg. Benefit from General Innovations
                                       z }| {                       z }| {
                                       c0 (λh )     =               (δ h − 1)vl                                 (Lh)
   9
       This result is standard in Schumpeterian models. In this case, it simplifies the algebra since it implies that
there are two endogenous variables instead of three. It is important to emphasize, however, that this result is not
critical for the implications of the model in any way. Put diﬀerently, had we altered the setting so that leaders also
conducted R&D innovations in equilibrium, it would be simple to characterize situations where all the results from
our analysis continue to hold.


                                                                8
      The left-hand side of (Lh) is the cost of increasing the probability of developing a general
innovation by one percent, whereas the right-hand side is the market leader’s private benefit from
the arrival of a GI. This is given by the market value of the leader times the gain in productivity
from the arrival of the GI, δ h − 1. Note that, since GIs cannot be sold, their private return is
proportional to the value of the firm that develops them.10 Followers, in principle, can also come
out with general improvements in productivity. In equilibrium, however, since the private value of
these innovations is proportional to the value of the firm, and vf is equal to zero, followers do not
undertake general innovations.11
      To close the model, we just need to determine the value of the market leader, vl , which is given
by the following asset equation:

                               rvl = (1 − α)κ l − c(λh ) + λh (δ h − 1)v l − λq v l                  (9)

      Equation (9) says that the expected income generated by a license on the leading product
during a unit interval, rv l , is equal to the instantaneous profit flow net of the costs of investing in
GI, (1−α)κ l −c(λh ), plus the expected capital gain from succeeding in developing a GI, λh (δ h −1)v l ,
minus the expected capital loss from being replaced as market leader by a standard intermediate
good producer, λq vl .
      Solving for vl yields the following expression:
                                            l   (1 − α)κ l − c(λh )
                                           v =                       ,                              (10)
                                               r + λq − λh (δ h − 1)
where the numerator reflects the profit flow and the denominator reflects the time preference, r,
the creative destruction eﬀect, λq , and the expected gains from the development of GIs, λh (δh − 1).
      The optimal investments in R&D (i.e. equation Lq) and general innovations (i.e. equation Lh)
govern the dynamics of the economy. Note in particular that, since there is no state variable, the
economy converges immediately to the new equilibrium (λh , λq ) following any perturbation in a
parameter.
      We are interested in exploring the comparative statics of the investment intensities in R&D and
GIs with respect to the R&D subsidy (sR&D ) and the eﬃciency of R&D investments (λ̄). To this
end, we isolate v l from condition (Lq) and obtain that vl = (1 − sR&D )/(λ̄δ q ). Plugging this back
in condition (Lh) results in the following expression for λh :
                                                      (1 − sR&D )(δh − 1)
                                         c0 (λh ) =                       .                         (11)
                                                             λ̄δ q
 10
      This result parallels the logic of the span of control model in Lucas [1978].
 11
      Table 1 and Appendix 2 provide evidence that GIs are developed mostly by market leaders.

                                                           9
   The convexity of c(.) implies that the arrival rate of GIs, λh , decreases with sR&D and with λ̄.
Intuitively, increases in sR&D and λ̄ reduce the marginal private cost of developing an embodied
innovation. Restoring the equilibrium in the arbitrage condition requires a decline in the value of the
market leader. This decline in v l reduces the marginal private return from investing in developing
GIs. As a result, the arrival rate of GIs (λh ) declines.
   To explore the response of λq to increases in sR&D and λ̄, we substitute the expression for v l in
the arbitrage equation (Lq) as follows:

                                                     (1 − α)κ l − c(λh )
                                (1 − sR&D ) = λ̄δ q                                                (12)
                                                    r + λq − λh (δ h − 1)

   Increases in sR&D and λ̄ require a decline in v l to restore the arbitrage condition. The Envelope
Theorem implies that ∂v l /∂λh = 0. Therefore, an increase in λq is the only way to bring down vl
and restore the arbitrage condition.
   The arrival rate of R&D innovations, λq , depends both on the exogenous parameters sR&D and
λ̄ and on the share of output private agents spend on R&D, nq . To determine whether increases in
                                                                                             λ̄
sR&D and λ̄ lead to increases in the share of private R&D expenditures, we substitute           n
                                                                                          1−sR&D q
                                                                                                     for
λq in (12) and rearrange as follows:

                                     λ̄      δ q [(1 − α)κ l − c(λh )]
                              1=                                                                   (13)
                                 1 − sR&D r + 1−sλ̄ nq − λh (δ h − 1)
                                                    R&D


   Increases in sR&D or λ̄ increase the productivity per share of sectoral output spent on R&D
today, but also increase the productivity of the followers that will try to take over tomorrow’s
leader. These two forces are the same; the only diﬀerence between them is the timing. The new
market leader benefits from the higher productivity of R&D expenses earlier than the producers
that will take over in the future. Therefore, as long as the eﬀective discount rate net of the turnover
rate (i.e. r − λh (δh − 1)) is positive, the first force dominates and the share of private R&D expenses
in GDP, nq , increases with sR&D and λ̄. We define this parametrization as Condition 1.
   Condition 1: r > λh (δ h − 1), where λh is defined in (11).
   Proposition 1 summarizes our findings thus far.

Proposition 1 In response to increases in sR&D or λ̄, the arrival rate of general innovations, λh ,
declines while the arrival rate of R&D innovations, λq , increases. Further, if Condition 1 holds, the
share of GDP spent on private R&D, nq , also increases.


                                                   10
       It follows from Proposition 1 that sR&D and λ̄ cause the rate of R&D-driven and general innova-
tions to move in opposite directions. This negative co-movement between R&D-driven and general
innovations is one of the two key elements driving the post-war dynamics of growth and volatility at
the aggregate and firm level. To introduce the second key element, we need to extend the analysis
into a multisector setting.


2.3        Multisector economy
To move from the one-sector to the multisector economy, we need to determine how sectoral output
is aggregated and the applicability of innovations across sectors.
       The multisector economy is composed of N sectors. As above, sectoral output, ys , is produced
according to (2). Final output, y, results from competitively aggregating the N sectoral outputs in
the following Cobb-Douglas way:12
                                                        Y
                                                        N
                                                   y=         ys1/N                                          (14)
                                                        s=1

       In terms of the innovations’ applicability across sectors, we assume that R&D innovations are
sector-specific while, for the time being, general innovations diﬀuse freely and immediately to all
the sectors in the economy. This diﬀerence in the innovation’s applicability is founded on both a
priori knowledge and empirical evidence. Innovations in management, sales, personnel, distribution
and similar fields can be applied to virtually all sectors of the economy because firms in all sectors
need to manage, sell, motivate and coordinate workers and distribute their products and services.
Hence, the generality of GIs. In contrast, R&D innovations eventually lead to the creation or
improvement of a product that increases the productivity of a sector-specific task. Thus, R&D
innovations are mostly sector-specific. In the empirical section, we explore the generality of GIs
and R&D innovations by estimating the eﬀect of R&D on the correlation of growth across sectors.
The evidence presented there supports the greater generality of GIs over R&D innovations.
       The generality of GIs implies that the development of a new GI leads both sectoral and aggregate
output to increase by a factor of δ h . The sector specificity of R&D innovations implies that the
development of a R&D innovation in sector s leads to an increase in ys by a factor δ q , but leads to
an increase in aggregate output by only a factor of δ 1/N
                                                      q   .
       We denote the arrival rate of R&D innovations in sector s by λqs . λh continues to denote the
  12
       The Cobb-Douglas nature of the aggregate production function implies that the nominal output of each sector
represents a 1/N share of GDP, regardless of the number of R&D and GIs developed in the sector.


                                                         11
arrival rate of GIs in the economy. Following the same logic as in the one-sector version, we can
derive arbitrage and optimal investment in GIs equations very similar to (Lq) and (Lh).13 For the
sake of brevity, we relegate the details of the derivations to Appendix 1. We can also use an asset
equation similar to (9) to determine the market value of the producer of the leading intermediate
good in any given sector as

                                                       (1 − α)κ l − c(λh /N)
                                   vl =                                                                         (15)
                                          r + λqs (1 − (δ 1/N
                                                          q   − 1)(N − 1)) − λh (δh − 1)

        This expression diﬀers from the value of the leader in the one-sector economy in two important
aspects. First, now GIs are also developed in other sectors. Therefore, the leader in sector s incurs
only in the cost of developing a fraction 1/N of the GIs developed in the economy, but benefits
from an arrival rate of λh . Second, now the leader in sector s benefits from the increase in aggregate
demand associated with the development of R&D innovations in the other sectors. This reduces
the eﬀective discount rate by the term (λqs (δ 1/N
                                               q   − 1)(N − 1)).
        As before, the arbitrage and optimal investment in GIs equations together with the expression
for vl , govern the dynamics of the economy. Given the similarity to the one-sector model, it is not
surprising that we can specify conditions such that sR&D and λ̄ cause λqs and λh to move in opposite
directions. For brevity’s sake, these conditions are specified in Appendix 1, and are assumed to
hold henceforth. As before, λh declines with sR&D and λ̄. The important diﬀerence with respect
to the one sector economy is that, since some GIs are developed in other sectors, ∂v l /∂λh > 0 at
the optimum. In this context, it could be the case that, in response to increases in sR&D or λ̄, the
decline in λh is large enough to necessitate a decline (rather than an increase) in λqs to equalize
the marginal cost with the expected marginal benefit from R&D innovations. We regard this as a
pathological case and impose conditions, stated in Appendix 1, that rule it out.
        Next, we compute the first and second moments of the growth rates of output and productivity
at the aggregate and firm level and explore their evolution in response to increases in sR&D and λ̄.
        Aggregate moments
        Growth is the result of both embodied and general innovations. For any given sector s, the
growth rate of the sector’s output (or productivity), γ ys , is equal to the number of embodied
   13
        The only diﬀerence that the multisector context introduces in the R&D arbitrage condition is that, because of
the sectoral specificity of R&D innovations, the capital gain from the development of a R&D innovation now becomes
δ 1/N
  q   v l , instead of δ q v l .




                                                             12
innovations in the sector times the log of their eﬀect on sectoral output, plus the number of general
innovations developed in the entire economy times their eﬀect on sectoral output. Formally,

                              γ ys = γ y/ls = #qs ∗ ln(δ q ) + #h ∗ ln(δ h ),

where #qs is the number of new embodied innovations developed in the sector during the period,
and #h is the number of new general innovations developed in the economy.
   The growth rate of the economy, γ y , is the average of the sectoral growth rates:
                                    PN                 PN
                                      n=1   γ yn        n=1     #qn
                    γ y = γ y/l =                  =                  ∗ ln(δ q ) + #h ∗ ln(δ h ).
                                        N                   N
Given the Poisson arrival rates of new technologies, the average growth rate and average variance
of the growth rate of output at the sector and aggregate level are as follows:

                                Eγ ys = λqs ln(δ q ) + λh ln(δ h )                                  (16)
                                    Eγ y = λqs ln(δ q ) + λh ln(δ h )                               (17)
                                V γ ys = λqs (ln(δq ))2 + λh (ln(δ h ))2                            (18)
                                         λq
                                 V γ y = s (ln(δ q ))2 + λh (ln(δ h ))2                             (19)
                                         N
   Several conclusions can be drawn from these expressions. (i) Aggregation does not aﬀect the
expected growth rate of productivity since aggregate and sectoral expected growth rates (expressions
17 and 16, respectively) coincide. (ii) Increases in sR&D or λ̄ have ambiguous eﬀects on expected
growth. In particular, these parameter changes lead to increases in λqs and declines in λh and hence
to an ambiguous eﬀect on the average growth rate of productivity both at the aggregate and sector
levels. (iii) The variance of sectoral growth (expression 18) also responds ambiguously to increases
in sR&D and λ̄. (iv) However, this ambiguity disappears when we explore their eﬀect on the variance
of aggregate growth (expression 19). R&D-driven innovations are sector specific and are averaged
away at the aggregate level. Hence, their eﬀect on aggregate volatility is smaller than on sectoral
volatility. General innovations, on the other hand, are adopted across the economy. Thus, their
impacts are the same at the aggregate and sectoral level. As a result, , for N suﬃciently large,
the decline in aggregate volatility driven by the decline in λh dominates the increase in volatility
associated with the higher λqs , and aggregate volatility declines in response to increases in sR&D
and λ̄. (v) Hence, aggregation does aﬀect the second moments of the growth rate of productivity,
(expressions 18 and 19).

                                                        13
       Firm-level moments
       Expected firm-level sales growth − denoted by Eγ salesi − is aﬀected by the rates of arrival of
general innovations and R&D innovations in the economy through their eﬀects on aggregate growth,
Eγ y . In addition, producers of standard intermediate goods expect a higher growth rate of sales
than market leaders because they invest in R&D, and with probability λqs /m, they will take over
the market leader and his sales. Conversely, the current market leader does not invest in R&D and
with probability λqs will be taken over by a follower, experiencing a loss in sales. As can be observed
below, the distribution of the expected growth rate of sales per worker − denoted by Eγ salesi/Li −
only diﬀers from the distribution of the growth rate of sales in the size of the capital gain/loss from
market turnover. Hence, at the firm level, the model predicts a positive relationship between R&D
intensity and expected growth both of sales and sales per worker.
                                     ⎧
                                     ⎨ Eγ − λq ln(βm/((1 − β))) for i = l
                                            y    s
                         Eγ salesi =
                                     ⎩ Eγ + λq /m ln(βm/((1 − β))) for i = f
                                          y   s

                                                  ⎧
                                                  ⎨    Eγ y − λqs ln(1/α) for i = l
                                 Eγ salesi/Li =
                                                  ⎩ Eγ + λq /m ln(1/α) for i = f
                                                      y   s


       The firm-level volatility of the growth rates of sales and sales per worker depends on the vari-
ance of the aggregate growth rate of the economy and the risk of turnover in the market leader.
Expressions (20) and (21) present the average variances of the growth rate of sales and sales per
worker.14
                                                               µ         ¶µ               ¶2
                                                            1 + β(m − 1)           βm
                        var(γ salesi ) = var(γ y ) +     λqs                 ln(         )              (20)
                                                                 m               (1 − β)
                                                          µ              ¶
                                                            1 + β(m − 1)
                                                        q
                      var(γ salesi /L )) = var(γ y ) + λs                  (ln(1/α))2                   (21)
                                                                 m
       The variance of aggregate output in the US data is approximately two orders of magnitude
smaller than the variance of firm-level volatility. Hence, the quantitatively important term is the
latter, which is driven by the turnover rate, λqs . An increase in sR&D or λ̄ leads to higher turnover, λqs ,
both directly and through the increased investments in the development of R&D-driven innovations
that it triggers. In this way, sR&D and λ̄ increase firm-level volatility.
  14
       Firm-level variances are weighted by the share of firm sales.




                                                            14
3     Discussion and Evidence
We have just shown that the model predictions are consistent with the facts described in the
introduction. It predicts the lack of a clear relationship between R&D intensity and productivity
growth at the aggregate level, the positive association between them at the firm level, the upward
trend in firm-level volatility and the downward trend in aggregate volatility. In this section, we do
three things. First, we describe the increase in R&D subsidies during the post-war period. Second,
we discuss further theoretical predictions of the model and bring them to the data in order to
further check for the empirical relevance of the mechanisms described in the model. Third, we
conduct calibration exercises to assess the power of the model to generate the dynamics of volatility
and growth observed in the data.


3.1    Driving forces
The R&D tax policy in the United States has been implemented through three main initiatives
(Hall [1995]). The expensing rules for R&D, introduced in 1954, allowed US firms to expense most
R&D expenditures against corporate income for tax purposes. The Economic Recovery Tax Act
of 1981 allowed US firms to allocate all R&D expenses against income earned within the United
States, even if a substantial part of their revenue was generated from foreign sales. In addition, the
act introduced the Federal R&D tax credit which allowed firms to deduct from corporate income
taxes, in proportion to the established credit rate, a portion of qualified R&D expenditures that
exceeded a certain level.
    State-level R&D tax credits followed soon after when, in 1982, Minnesota became the first state
to introduce such a credit. Since then the number of states oﬀering a R&D tax credit has steadily
increased, and 31 states currently oﬀer some form of a tax credit on general, company funded R&D.
Not only has the number of states oﬀering a tax credit increased, but the average value of these
credits has also grown. Wilson [2005] calculated the eﬀective value of all state-level credits for
every year since their inception, taking into account the statutory credit rate, the base amount and
whether the credit itself was taxable. He found that the eﬀective average value of the state-level
tax credits has grown approximately four-fold since their inception in 1982. Hall and Wosinka
[1999] examined the benefit of these federal and state tax credits for US firms. They calibrated the
eﬀective R&D subsidy to range between .4 and .6 depending on whether the firm is subject to state
taxation and whether it is eligible for the tax credits.


                                                  15
       The increasing level of R&D subsidies leads, in our specification of the R&D technology, to an
increasing turnover rate. In addition to the direct eﬀect, R&D subsidies also induce higher private
R&D expenses, according to Proposition 1. There is a literature devoted to test this prediction,
which concludes that R&D tax credits have lead to a substantial increase in the share of private
R&D in GDP both in the US (Hall [1993], Mamuneas and Nadiri [1996]) and in other OECD
countries (Bloom, Griﬃth and Van Reenen [2002]).
       It is important to emphasize that R&D subsidies apply only to R&D expenses. According to the
NSF, “R&D consists of activities carried on by persons trained, either formally or by experience, in
the physical sciences such as chemistry and physics, the biological sciences such as medicine, and
engineering and computer science. R&D includes these activities if the purpose is to do one or more
of the following things:
       1. Pursue a planned search for new knowledge [...]. (Basic research)
       2. Apply existing knowledge to problems involved in the creation of a new product or process
[...]. (Applied research)
       3. Apply existing knowledge to problems involved in the improvement of a present product or
process. (Development).”15
       The NSF also presents a list of activities closely related to our GIs, which are explicitly excluded
from the definition of R&D. Among these we find social science expenditures, defined as those
“devoted to further understanding [of] the behavior of groups of human beings or of individuals as
members of groups [in the following areas]: personnel, economics, artificial intelligence and expert
systems, consumer, market and opinion, engineering psychology, management and organization,
actuarial and demographic...”
       Therefore, investments in developing general innovations (by-and-large) do not benefit from
R&D subsidies.16,17
  15
       Process innovation refers to the development of new industrial processes such as those that lead to the production
of steel or chemical products. In our context, this is the same as standard R&D that leads to a new product or an
improved version of an existing product.
  16
     Rationalizing R&D subsidies goes beyond the scope of this paper. Though R&D has some positive externalities,
political considerations may also be involved. Congress, for example, has repeatedly failed to renew the Federal R&D
tax credit for longer than one or two years. One rationale for this is that keeping the credit temporary can be used
as a carrot for business, and it encourages corporations to make financial contributions to their representatives every
year in order to preserve this feature of the tax law (New York Times, October 28, 1998).
  17
     Though harder to quantify, the growing trend of outsourcing services or the production of certain components
has made it easier for followers to figure out how to improve the products and services provided by market leaders.


                                                            16
3.2     Productivity growth
Our model predicts an ambiguous eﬀect of R&D on productivity growth at the aggregate and sector
level. On the one hand, R&D has a positive eﬀect on the development of patentable R&D innova-
tions while on the other, it has a negative eﬀect on the number of GIs developed in the economy.
Abdih and Joutz [2005] provide details about the relationship between R&D and growth. They
estimate cointegration relationships between R&D labor, patent applications (i.e. R&D output),
and TFP. They find that, while there is a strong and significant positive relationship between R&D
labor and patent applications, there is no statistical relationship between patents and TFP. That
is, R&D investments produce patents but patent growth fails to have an eﬀect on TFP growth.
The lack of a relationship persists after allowing for diﬀerent leads and lags. These results support
the view presented by our model, as Abdih and Joutz [2005] recognize. In particular, their findings
constitute indirect evidence in favor of the joint hypothesis that GIs are an important source of
productivity growth and that R&D dampens the development of GIs.
    We are not the first ones to highlight the importance of general innovations for productivity
growth. After studying the importance of the innovations introduced during the last century in
the US, Mokyr [2002] claims that “much of the productivity increase in the twentieth century
was the result of the perfection of production techniques and process innovation. [...] These led
to a continuous transformation in organizational methods, most obviously in mass production in
manufacturing techniques but eventually in services and agriculture as well.”
    Unfortunately, direct measures on the intensity of investment in general innovations are not
available. This makes it diﬃcult to directly test the negative eﬀect of R&D on the development
of general innovations. One imperfect substitute to this exercise consists of creating a list of GIs
and noting that most of them were introduced either before World War II or between the 50’s and
early 60’s when firm turnover was low. Table 1 provides our (very incomplete) list of GIs, most
of which were developed before 1970 by large firms that dominated their markets.18 Below, we
conduct a more systematic test of the negative eﬀect of R&D on GIs investments based on the
sectoral variation in second moments.
This diﬀusion of knowledge beyond the boundaries of market leaders has increased the productivity of private R&D
expenses, λ̄. These changes in the flow of knowledge are unlikely to have a significant impact on the productivity of
investments in developing GIs. This is the case because those that now more easily acquire knowledge are followers,
and followers develop a small share of all the general innovations developed in the economy.
  18
     A brief description of each technology and why it qualifies as a general innovation is relegated to Appendix 2.



                                                         17
3.3        Firm volatility19
As described in section 2, our model rationalizes the increase in firm-volatility observed by Comin
and Mulani [2006] and Comin and Philippon [2005] in the COMPUSTAT sample. Figure 2 illustrates
the time series of the volatility of productivity growth at the aggregate and firm level. The left axis
plots the standard deviation of 10-year centered rolling windows of annual productivity growth.
The right axis plots the evolution of the same variable averaged for firms in the COMPUSTAT data
base.20 The opposing trends are evident.
       It is worth making two remarks about the increase in the volatility of publicly traded firms.
First, as shown in Comin and Mulani [2006], the increase in firm volatility in the COMPUSTAT
sample is qualitatively and quantitatively robust to conditioning on a firm-level fixed eﬀect, the age
of the firm and the size of the firm. To further control for the possibility that the upward trend in
firm volatility is driven by a change in the composition of the COMPUSTAT sample, we estimate
the following specification for the standard deviation of the growth rate of sales and sales per worker
in the firm i over a ten year window (σ it ).

                                                                  X              X
                         σ it = φ ln(ageit ) + γ ln(salesit ) +       αc Dic +       β τ Dτ t + ²it
                                                                  c              τ

       In this spefication we denote by ageit and salesit the age and real sales of firm i in year t. Dic
is cohort fixed eﬀect which takes a value of 1 for the firms of cohort c and 0 for the rest. Dτ t is a
year fixed eﬀect which takes a value of 1 if τ = t and zero otherwise. To compute the equivalent of
a weighted measure of residual firm volatility we weight observations by the share of real sales in
total sales. Figure 3 reports the evolution of the estimates of β τ for the volatility of the growth rate
of real sales and real sales per worker. It is quite evident from this figure that the upward trends
in firm volatility persist after including the cohort eﬀects.21 Hence, the increase in firm volatility is
not driven by a change in the composition of firms in the COMPUSTAT sample.
       In our model, the increase in firm volatility is driven by an increase in the turnover of market
  19
       Consistent with the data, the cross-sectional distribution of firm sizes, measured by employment or by relative
sales, in the model is constant over time. However, we are more interested in the statistics of growth rates rather
than levels.
  20
     For each firm in COMPUSTAT, we compute its volatility in a given year as the centered standard deviation of
10 consecutive annual growth rates of sales per worker. The firm volatility measure plotted in Figure 2 is the average
volatility across firms.
  21
     The upward trends are completely robust to including cohort-specific age and size eﬀects in the regression.



                                                           18
leaders, λqs . Comin and Philippon [2005] show that various measures of the turnover rate have
increased very significantly.22 Figure 4, for example, plots a measure of the inverse of the turnover
rate for the sample of firms in the COMPUSTAT database. Specifically, for each two digit sector
and year, firms are ranked by the level of sales per worker. After creating a vector of percentiles for
every year in the post-war period, persistence in rankings is measured by computing the correlation
between the vectors of rankings in two years, five and ten years apart (i.e. 1950 with 1955 and 1950
with 1960). Repeating the same exercise for all the years in the post-war period results in a time
series for the turnover in market leadership.23
       Both of these statistics indicate that there has been an increase in market turnover. In the
early 50s, the correlation of rankings was 0.9 for the 5-year-apart measure and 0.8 for the 10-year-
apart measure. These correlations have declined in a fairly monotonic manner reaching 0.71 and
0.66, respectively, at the end of the sample in 2002. These numbers can be used to compute,
approximately, the turnover rates in our model, λqs .24 In the mid 50’s, λqs was approximately two
percent while, in the mid 90s, it was 2.5 to 3 times higher. Comin and Philippon [2005] conduct
similar exercises using other measures of market leadership, such as profit rates and market value.
Specifically, they compute the probability that a firm currently ranked in the top 20th percentile
of its sector by profit rates or market value is not in the top 20th percentile in five years. These
exercises imply that the turnover rate has increased by a factor of five or six during the post-war
period.
       These estimates of λqs can be used to calibrate the ability of the model to account for the upward
trend in firm volatility. Recall that the variance of the growth rates of sales and sales per worker
at the firm level depends on the variance of aggregate growth, var(γ y ), and on the turnover rate as
follows:
                                                          "µ            ¶µ               ¶2 #
                                                                1 + β(m − 1)      βm
                      var(γ salesi ) = var(γ y ) + λqs                      ln(         )                           (22)
                                                                     m          (1 − β)
                                                        ∙µ              ¶             ¸
                                                      q    1 + β(m − 1)             2
                    var(γ salesi /L )) = var(γ y ) + λs                   (ln(1/α))                                 (23)
                                                                m
       In the US, var(γ y ) is approximately two orders of magnitude smaller than the variance of firm-
  22
       In particular, Comin and Philippon [2005] document a five-fold increase in the probability that a firm currently
in the top fifth of profits or market capitalization in the sector drops from the top fifth in the next five years.
  23
     This measure of turnover is unlikely to be aﬀected by entry into the COMPUSTAT sample. This is the case
because when there are more firms in sample, it is more likely that a firm is taken over by some other firm, but the
decline in the percentile associated with this decline in the ranking will be smaller if there were fewer firms in sample.
  24
     See Appendix 3 for the formal derivation.

                                                           19
level growth and hence irrelevant to the evolution of firm-level volatility. Our previous estimates
imply that the turnover rate in COMPUSTAT in 1950, λqs1950 , was approximately two percent. We
can then calibrate the terms in square brackets in (22) and (23) to match the initial firm volatility in
COMPUSTAT.25 Based on the direct estimates in Comin and Philippon [2005] and on the evolution
of the private R&D intensity in the US, the turnover rate at the end of the sample, λqs2000 , is at
least between 2.5 and 3 times larger than the initial turnover rate.26 Therefore, the model predicts
an increase in firm-level variance by at least a factor of 2.5 or 3. Since in the data, firm variance
has increased by a factor of approximately four in the post-war period, the model can explain at
least 62 to 75 percent of the increase in the variance of firm-level growth.

       Cross-sectional variation in relationship between R&D and firm volatility
       In addition to having implications for the evolution of firm-volatility, our model has testable
predictions about the cross-sectoral relationship between R&D and firm volatility. In our model,
variation in R&D intensity comes from variation in either sR&D or λ̄. Our analysis above implies
that in sectors where R&D intensity has increased more (i.e. because sR&D or λ̄ have increased by
more), we should observe larger increases in firm volatility and in the turnover rate. In addition,
in other countries where R&D has increased, we should observe a similar increase in firm volatility.
As we shall see next, the data supports these predictions.
       Comin and Philippon [2005] build a panel of annual R&D intensities, turnover rates and average
firm volatility in 35 two-digit sectors that cover the US economy from 1950 until 1996. For each
sector, they compute the ratio of R&D expenses to total sales, the median and average standard
deviation of a 10-year rolling window of growth in sales and sales per worker, and the persistence
in the rankings of sales per worker as in Figure 4. Then they estimate the following regressions:

                                   λqit = α0i + α1 t + β ∗ (R&D/Sales)it + ²it
                                   σ it = α0i + α1 t + β ∗ (R&D/Sales)it + ²it

       These specifications include both a sector-level fixed eﬀect and a time trend to reduce the
possibility of spurious correlations between R&D and volatility. In all the cases, they find a positive
  25
       This implies that the sales and sales per worker of market leaders are approximately 70 percent higher than sales
and sales per worker of market followers.
  26
     Private R&D intensity in the US has increased by a factor of three. In addition, R&D subsidies have increased
and the eﬃciency of R&D expenses has increased. The linearity of the production function for R&D innovations
implies that the turnover rate must have increased by, at least, a factor of three.


                                                            20
and statistically significant association between R&D and firm volatility and between R&D and
turnover. These estimates are robust to substituting the time trend for time dummies and to
controlling for other forces, such as the development of financial markets, that may contribute to
firm volatility. Furthermore, the estimated coeﬃcient is economically significant. The increase in
R&D intensity accounts for 60 percent of the increase in firm volatility.
      The mechanisms described in our model may also explain the volatility dynamics in other coun-
tries. Parker [2006] and Thesmar and Thoenig [2004] have found similar upward trends in the
volatility of publicly-traded companies in the UK and France. Interestingly, the periods studied by
these authors are periods where, as in the US, there was (i) an important increase in R&D subsidies,
(ii) an important increase in private R&D intensity and (iii) a decline in aggregate volatility.
      Evolution of firm volatility in privately-held firms
      In empirical evaluation of the model’s predictions for firm-level volatility, we have restricted our
attention to the sample of publicly traded firms. One reason for this is the scarcity of data on
privately held firms. A more substantive reason is that the R&D-driven Schumpeterian dynamics
that drive firm volatility in our model, most likely, are only relevant for publicly traded firms. This
is the case because R&D expenses of publicly traded firms represent 95 percent of total private R&D
expenses in the US. Non-publicly traded firms represent between 40 and 50 percent of aggregate
value added, but conduct a very small part of total R&D.27 As a result, one would expect that the
increased market turnover associated with the increase in R&D expenses would not be a significant
factor in explaining the firm volatility of privately held firms.
      Davis et al. [2006] have recently analyzed the evolution of employment volatility for US privately
held firms since late 1970s. They find that the volatility of non-publicly traded firms has declined
during this time. It is obvious that our model does not explain the evolution of volatility for privately
held firms. This is the case because (i) the volatility of privately held firms is not significantly
aﬀected by R&D, and because (ii) there are other factors that are relevant to explaining the volatility
 27
      One reason why privately held firms may not engage in R&D is because their λ̄ is very low.




                                                         21
of privately held firms that are orthogonal to our model.28,29 In this sense, the relevant test of our
theory of firm volatility is clearly the positive conditional correlation observed above between R&D
and the volatility of publicly held companies.
       It is important to note that, even though our model has nothing to say about the evolution of
the volatility of privately held firms, it has important implications for the evolution of aggregate
volatility. This is the case because the evolution of aggregate volatility in the US is critically
linked to the evolution of the covariance of growth between firms rather than the evolution of
firm-level variance. This conclusion follows from two findings. First, as shown in Comin and
Philippon [2005], a variance covariance decomposition of aggregate volatility illustrates that the
component that explains all the decline in the variance of aggregate growth is the covariance of
growth between sectors rather than the variance of growth within sectors. Second, this holds a
fortiori when disaggregating all the way until reaching the firm level. Comin and Mulani [2006]
conduct a variance-covariance decomposition of growth in the aggregate sales in COMPUSTAT
and find that (i) the covariance of growth between firms is 10 times larger than the firm variance
component and (ii) the variance of the COMPUSTAT aggregate is driven entirely by the covariance
of growth between firms. Following Gabaix [2005], it is natural to hypothesize that, this conclusion
would hold a fortiori if we included privately-held firms which are significantly smaller than publicly
  28
       There are many important diﬀerences between publicly and privately held companies. One very signifiant
diﬀerence is size. In 2001, 50 percent of U.S. employees worked for firms with 500 employees or more. In the
COMPUSTAT sample, instead, over 99 percent of employees worked for firms with over 500 employees. These
large firms represented almost 80 percent of all firms in our COMPUSTAT sample. To explain the decline in the
volatility of privately-held firms, it is necessary to consider mechanisms that drive down firm volatility and that are
particularly relevant for privately held firms. One such force may be the improvement of financial markets that now
allow privately-held firms to better insure their risks. Exploring this or any other hypothesis is beyond the scope of
this paper.
  29
     One possible criticism is that the NSF underestimates the R&D conducted by privately held companies, specially
firms that are not operating yet because they are in the venture capital stage. Though it is possible that the R&D
series is not perfect, it is unlikely that the bias due to mismeasuring R&D conducted by privately held firms is
significant. According to the National Venture Capital Association, in 1996 venture capital investments represented
$10 Billion. Of course, this is significantly higher than the average during the post-war period and only a small
fraction of this was employed in R&D. An upper bound of the R&D share in book equity based on R&D intensive
firms in COMPUSTAT would be 10 percent. Hence, the unmeasured R&D from venture capital would be less than
$1 Billion. Total private R&D in the US during 1996 was $134 Billion, which makes insignificant the potential bias
in total private R&D expenditures. Indeed, the BEA does not even include this in the list of measurement biases
encountered in the construction of the Research and Development Satellite Accounts (Okubo et al. [2006]).



                                                          22
traded.
       As we shall show next, our model provides a testable theory for the determinants and evolution
of the covariance of growth in the economy.


3.4       Sectoral co-movement
To gain further insight into the evolution of aggregate volatility in our model economy, we can
conduct a variance-covariance decomposition of the variance of aggregate growth. Recall that
         PN
           n=1    γ yn
γy ≡          N
                         . Therefore,
                                                     V (γ ys ) N(N − 1)
                                        V (γ y ) =            +         cov(γ yn , γ yn0 )           (24)
                                                       N         N2
where cov(γ yn , γ yn0 ) denotes the covariance between the growth rates of two generic sectors n and
n0 .
       In expression (24), as the number of sectors, N, increases, the importance of the sectoral variance
in aggregate variance declines, and aggregate volatility increasingly depends on the covariance of
growth across sectors. Sectoral variance, V (γ ys ), depends on the arrival rate of embodied innovations
developed in the sector, λqs , and the arrival rate of general innovations developed in the economy, λh .
The sectoral covariance, on the other hand, is equal to λh (ln(δ h ))2 and depends solely on the hazard
rate for general innovations. Therefore, as the number of sectors increases, the variance of aggregate
growth increasingly depends on the intensity of general innovations while the arrival rate of R&D-
driven innovations becomes less relevant. Further, increases in sR&D or λ̄ lead, unambiguously, to
declines in the average covariance of growth across sectors and, if the number of sectors in the
economy is large, they also induce declines in aggregate volatility.
       The covariance of sectoral growth can be trivially decomposed into the product of the standard
deviations and correlation of sectoral growth:
                                              q
                          cov(γ ys , γ ys0 ) = V (γ ys )V (γ ys0 ) ∗ corr(γ ys , γ ys0 )

       When looking at actual data, the variance of growth in a sector typically depends on factors such
as the sector size and age. To filter out these eﬀects, it is useful to explore the model implications
for the correlation of growth across sectors. The correlation of growth between sectors s and s0
depends on λh and λqs as follows:

                                                                         λh (ln(δ h ))2
                                        corr(γ ys , γ ys0 ) =                                        (25)
                                                                λqs (ln(δ q ))2 + λh (ln(δ h ))2

                                                                   23
       Note that the sectoral correlation is increasing in λh and decreasing in λqs . It follows from our
previous analysis that increases in sR&D and λ̄ lead to declines in the correlation of sectoral growth.

       Has the correlation of sectoral growth declined?
       To explore empirically the evolution of the correlation of growth across sectors, we proceed as
follows. First, corr([γ s,τ ]t+5           t+5
                             t−4 , [γ j,τ ]t−4 ) is defined as the correlation between the annual growth rate

in sectors s and j during the 10-year period centered at t. Then, for every sector s, the average
correlation with the rest of the sectors is computed as follows:
                                           X       ωsec
                                                     j
                                   sec
                               corrs,t =          P      sec
                                                             corr([γ s,τ ]t+5           t+5
                                                                          t−4 , [γ j,τ ]t−4 ) ,         (26)
                                           j6=s
                                                       ω
                                                  h6=s h


where ω sec
        j   denotes the average share of sector j 0 s sale in the total sales of the economy. Finally,
aggregate correlation is defined as a weighted average of the sectoral correlations:
                                                         X
                                              corrta =        ωsec   sec
                                                               s corrs,t
                                                          s

Figures 5 and 6 show a clear downward trend in the average correlation, corrta , of productivity and
TFP growth across sectors during the post-war period.30 Comin and Philippon [2005] show that
the decline in the correlation of sectoral growth is driven by a decline in the covariance of growth
across sectors, as opposed to a decline in the variance of sectoral growth. This evidence provides
further support for our model, which predicts an unambiguous decline in the covariance of growth
across sectors and an ambiguous evolution of the variance of growth at the sector level in response
to increases in sR&D and λ̄.

       Imperfect diﬀusion of GIs
       The basic version of the model predicts no cross-sectional variation in the correlation of growth
between sectors because GIs are adopted immediately in all sectors. Now we enrich the model
by relaxing the assumption that GIs are applicable to all sectors in the economy. Specifically, we
introduce two new assumptions: (i) the intermediate goods producers of a given sector can freely
adopt all general innovations developed in the sector and (ii) the random variable that determines
whether a general innovation is suitable to be adopted in a sector other than the one in which it
was developed follows a Bernoulli distribution that is independent across sectors and innovations.
       Let ψ denote the probability that a general innovation is adopted in a sector other than the
one in which it was developed. The previous assumptions imply that the arrival rate of general
  30
       See Comin and Philippon [2005] for more on this downward trend.

                                                           24
                                                           h
innovations in sector n is equal to λhn + ψ(N − 1)λ(−n) , where λhn denotes the rate of development of
                           h
GIs in sector n, and λ(−n) denotes the average rate of development of GIs in the sectors other than
n.31 The covariance of growth in two sectors, n and n0 , depends on how frequently they adopt the
same GIs. Clearly, the probability of such a coincidence is higher for the technologies developed in
either of the sector than for technologies developed in other sectors. Specifically, the probability
that a technology developed in n (or n0 ) is suitable for adoption in n0 (or n) is ψ. The probability
that a technology developed in a sector other than n and n0 is suitable for adoption in n and n0 is
ψ 2 < ψ. Thus, the covariance between the growth in sectors n and n0 is
                                       h                             h
                                                                             i
                   cov(γ yn , γ yn0 ) = ψ(λhn + λhn0 ) + ψ 2 (N − 2)λ−(n,n0 ) (ln(δ h ))2 ,
            h
where λ−(n,n0 ) denotes the average rate of development of general innovations in the sectors other
than n and n0 . Averaging over all the sectors n0 , the average covariance of the growth of sector n
with the growth of other sectors is
                               h       h                    h
                                                                i
                       covn = ψ(λhn + λ(−n) ) + ψ 2 (N − 2)λ(−n) (ln(δ h ))2                                  (27)

       To explore the cross-section variation in this covariance, suppose, for example, that the eﬃciency
of investments in the development of embodied innovations, λ̄, varies across sectors. We know that,
in sectors with higher values of λ̄, leading firms have fewer incentives to develop GIs. Given the
imperfect diﬀusion of GIs, those sectors with a higher λ̄ adopt fewer GIs and co-vary less with the
rest of the sectors. Hence, there is a negative cross-sectoral relationship between λ̄ and the average
covariance of a sector. We also know from our previous analysis that there is a positive relationship
between λ̄ and R&D intensity. Therefore, the model implies a negative cross-sectional relationship
between R&D intensity in a given sector and the average covariance of growth in that sector.
       Using the same logic as in section 2.4, it follows that the variance of growth in sector n is
                                                                     h
                                  varn = λqn (ln(δ q ))2 + (λhn + ψλ̄−n ) (ln(δh ))2                          (28)

       The average correlation of growth between sector n and the other sectors, then, is
                                                         covn
                                              corrn = √                                                       (29)
                                                       varn var−n
  31
       If GIs do not diﬀuse perfectly across sectors, sectors that develop fewer GIs also implement fewer GIs. As a
result, the model predicts that in sectors with more R&D investments, the contribution to growth from GIs will be
lower. Since R&D investments have a direct positive eﬀect on growth, the resulting relationship between R&D and
growth will be ambiguous. This is consistent with the insignificant relationship between R&D intensity and TFP
growth found by Jones and Williams [1998] in a panel of sectors.

                                                         25
where var−n is the average variance across sectors other than n. Given the negative eﬀect of λ̄ on
covn and the positive eﬀect of λ̄ on varn , the model implies a negative cross-sectional relationship
between R&D intensity in sector n and the sectoral correlation of growth (expression 29).
       This prediction is very important because it allows us to test (albeit indirectly) the negative
eﬀect R&D has on investments in the development of GIs. To test this prediction, we estimate the
following specification:

                                            sec
                                        corrs,t = αs + βt + γRDs,t + ²st                                        (30)
          sec
where corrs,t is defined in expression (26), and RDs,t denotes the R&D intensity in sector s at time
                                                                              sec
t. The first and seventh columns in Table 2 report the estimate of γ when corrs,t is measured by
the correlations of productivity and TFP growth, respectively. In both cases, R&D is associated
with a significant decline in correlation. Specifically, the estimates of γ are −3.3 for productivity
and −2.5 for TFP growth, with p − values of two percent. This implies that the increase in R&D
is associated with a decline of between 7.5 and 10 percentage points of the 10 and 25 percentage
point decline observed in the sectoral correlation of TFP or productivity growth. These estimates
are robust to replacing the time trend with year dummies.
       Columns 2 and 8 of Table 2 replace R&D intensity with a sector’s firm-level volatility as the
explanatory variable. Consistent with the model, higher firm-level volatility in a sector is also
associated with lower correlation of sectoral growth with other sectors.32 This shows that the trends
in firm and aggregate volatility are not simply a coincidence: A common component can account
for an important part of both trends. This is not the case in current models of firm heterogeneity33
because the interactions between firms embedded in these models are not adequate: most of them
are partial equilibrium models and treat firms as independent entities. Even though more recent
versions of these models have incorporated general equilibrium interactions, they seem insuﬃcient
to generate the co-movement patterns that drive the diverging trends in volatility. In this sense,
our model emphasizes a particular mechanism that introduces strong interactions between firms
and that has aggregate implications for first and second moments of growth.
  32
       These results are robust to restricting the sample to private sectors, using other variables to measure firm
volatility, using the median instead of the average to measure the firm volatility in the sector, using a measure of
turnover in the sector as the independent variable instead of a measure of firm volatility and including a time trend
or no trend at all instead of the year fixed eﬀects.
  33
     For example, Bertola and Caballero [1990] and Gabaix [2005].




                                                         26
       In principle, the estimated eﬀect of R&D on sectoral correlation could be driven by omitted
variable bias. For example, it could be argued that R&D intensity may be related to the sensitivity of
sectors to aggregate shocks. However, to the extent that this sensitivity has not changed significantly
over time, this eﬀect should be captured by the sector fixed eﬀect. One kind of aggregate shock that
has been related to the decline in aggregate volatility is oil price shocks. To test if the omission of
the sensitivity of the sector to oil prices is biasing our estimates of γ towards significance, we run
regression (30), controlling for the share of energy in the sector. Columns 3, 4, 9 and 10 show that
including the share of energy in the control set has no eﬀect on the estimates of the eﬀect of R&D
or firm volatility on sectoral correlation. Further, in columns 5, 6, 11 and 12, we show that these
results hold when we restrict our sample to the sectors other than the energy sector.
       Another explanation for the decline in aggregate volatility is proposed by Thesmar and Thoenig
[2004]. Building on Arrow [1971], they claim that financial innovation can lead to greater risk
taking by firms, but also to fewer aggregate credit crunches. Their analysis implies that sectors
that benefit more from financial innovation are going to experience larger declines in their correlation
with the rest of the economy because of the lower exposure to credit crunches and binding collateral
constraints (Bernanke, Gertler and Gilchrist [1996]). Lower exposure to financial stress will lead
to lower aggregate volatility. Comin and Philippon [2005] empirically explore this hypothesis by
including in regression (30) two additional controls that proxy for the degree of financial dependence
in the sector: the amount of debt and equity issued in the sector, each divided by the total sales in the
sector. In contrast to R&D, both measures of financial market dependence are positively associated
with the correlation of sectoral growth (although this relationship is statistically insignificant).
Therefore, improvements in financial markets do not seem to be a major force decreasing aggregate
volatility. More importantly for our purposes, the negative eﬀect of R&D on the correlation of
sectoral growth is not driven by the omission of measures of external financial dependence.
       In summary, the existing theories proposed to explain the decline in aggregate volatility do not
seem to be driving the negative relationship between R&D and the correlation of sectoral growth.
This reinforces the view that, as suggested by our model, this relationship is causal.34
  34
       Philippon [2003] argues that an increase in competition in the goods market leads firms to adjust their prices
faster, which reduces the impact of aggregate demand shocks. While intuitively appealing, Philippon [2003]’s is a
within-sector explanation with no implication for the evolution of sectoral co-movement.




                                                          27
3.5       Calibration
Section 3.3 showed econometric evidence in favor of the model’s mechanisms. In what follows, we
use a calibration to assess the model’s quantitative ability to generate the observed evolutions of
aggregate growth and volatility. One way of doing this would be to calibrate all the parameters
of the technology to develop general innovations and use them in the model along with the evolu-
tion of R&D-style innovations to pin down the evolution of λh . However, the lack of independent
                                        h
information to calibrate ρh and λ̄ makes this route unfeasible.
      Alternatively, we assume that the post-war decline in the correlation of productivity growth
across sectors is driven by the decline in the development of general innovations. We then use this
information to pin down the evolution of λh and explore the model’s implications for the evolution
of productivity growth and aggregate volatility in 1950 and 2000.
      Specifically, we use the following 6-step procedure:35

        (i) Calibrate the initial turnover rate, λqs1950 , to match the initial correlation of rankings
        in Figure 4. As shown in Appendix 3, this yields an estimate for λqs1950 of two percent.

        (ii) Using the value of λqs1950 and the initial correlation and variance of sectoral growth
        (0.5 and 0.0005, respectively), pin down the values for λh1950 ∗ (ln(δ h ))2 , λqs1950 ∗ (ln(δ q ))2
        and ln(δ q ).

        (iii) Using the average initial growth rate of productivity (0.025), calibrate ln(δ h ) and
        λh1950 .

        (iv) Calibrate the final turnover rate, λqs2000 , to 2.5 times the initial turnover rate (i.e.
        five percent).

        (v) Using the final correlation of sectoral growth (0.25) and the calibrated value of ln(δ h ),
        compute the final arrival rate for general innovations (λh2000 ).

        (vi) With this information and the number of sectors (35), compute the final expected
        growth rate of productivity, Eγ y2000 , and the initial and final variance of aggregate
        productivity growth (V γ y1950 , V γ y2000 ).


      Table 3 shows the actual data, as well as the model’s predictions for the final expected growth
rate of labor productivity and the initial and final standard deviations of aggregate productivity
growth.
 35
      A more detailed explanation of this calibration is presented in Appendix 3.

                                                          28
                                        Moment                   Data          Model
                                        Eγ y2000                 0.02          0.017
                                        V γ y1950                4*10-4        2.56*10-4
                                        V γ y2000                1.44*10-4     1.44*10-4
                                        Increment in V γ y       -2.56*10-4    -1.12*10-4

                                                             Table 3

       This simple calibration illustrates two things. First, the model can easily explain the lack of
a relation between R&D and productivity growth at the aggregate level. Despite the substantial
increase in R&D expenses, the model predicts a small decline in expected productivity growth for
the year 2000.36 Second, the mechanisms emphasized by the model can account for a significant
fraction of the decline in aggregate volatility. The model underpredicts the initial level of aggregate
volatility; however, this is not surprising given that the only type of aggregate disturbances are
technology shocks, a scenario that is clearly unrealistic. The predicted decline in the variance of
aggregate productivity growth, however, represents over 40 percent of the observed decline in aggre-
gate volatility. This estimate must be taken with caution because of the identification assumption
that the decline in the co-movement of sectoral growth is entirely driven by the decline in the de-
velopment of general innovations. However, this assumption may not be far from the truth, given
the important negative eﬀects of R&D on sectoral correlation that we estimated above. Moreover,
this rough estimate of the contribution of our endogenous technological change mechanisms to the
decline in aggregate volatility are consistent with Stock and Watson [2003]’s conclusion: after con-
sidering the eﬀects of a more active monetary policy and lower commodity price shocks, 50 percent
of the decline in aggregate volatility must be due to less volatile technology shocks.



4        Conclusion
A thorough understanding of the forces that drive growth in the US is an essential prerequisite for
undertaking informed policy recommendations. This paper has presented a new growth theory for
the US that is superior to current models because it overcomes two hurdles that we believe any valid
theory must overcome. First, it explains the relationship between R&D and productivity growth
  36
       This calibration implies that about 90 percent of aggregate productivity growth was driven by general innovations
in 1950. This fraction declined to 67 percent by 2000.



                                                            29
at the firm-level, as well as the lack of a relationship between the two at the sector and aggregate
level. Second, it explains the evolution of the second moments of productivity growth at the firm
and aggregate level. In particular, it explains the diverging trends in aggregate volatility and in the
volatility of publicly traded firms, and the fact that the decline in aggregate volatility is due to a
decline in the correlation of sectoral growth.
   In addition to being consistent with these facts, this paper has also provided evidence on the
importance of the mechanisms emphasized by the model. In particular, it has showed that firm
volatility and market turnover are positively associated with R&D. Perhaps most importantly, it has
showed that sectors that have experienced higher increases in R&D have also experienced greater
declines in the correlation of their growth with the rest of the economy. This indicates that there is
a strong connection between aggregate and firm volatility. Furthermore, it supports the view that
this connection operates mainly through the eﬀect of R&D on the decline in the co-movement of
growth across sectors. By no means does this imply that all of the decline in aggregate volatility
(or increase in firm volatility) is driven by this common component associated with R&D; however,
it does show that this component is an important piece of the puzzle.
   Finally, our model suggests that sectoral co-movement is driven by the development of general
innovations, and the decline of their importance in growth is at the root of the observed dynamics
for the first and (to some extent) second moments of aggregate productivity growth. Since general
innovations are, by-and-large, not included in the NSF measure of R&D and since there is no
measure of the investments made to develop them or the number of general innovations developed,
we are unable to directly explore the determinants of general innovations. Instead, in this paper,
we have evaluated our theory of general innovations by exploring the validity of its implications for
the second moments of growth. In this way, studying the second moments of the growth process
can make up for the current lack of data on general innovations.




                                                  30
References
 [1] Aghion, P. and P. Howitt [1992] “A Model of Growth Through Creative Destruction”
    Econometrica 60, 323-351.

 [2] Aghion, P. and P. Howitt [1998] Endogenous Growth Theory, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

 [3] Arrow, K. [1971]: Essays in the Theory of Risk-Bearing. Chicago: Markham.

 [4] Barlevy, G. [2004]: “The Cost of Business Cycles under Endogenous Growth.” American
    Economic Review

 [5] Baumol, W. [2002]: The Free-Market Innovation Machine, Princeton University press,
    Princeton.

 [6] Bernanke, B., M. Gertler, and S. Gilchrist [1996]: “The Financial Accelerator and the
    Flight to Quality”, The Review of Economics and Statistics, LXXVIII, 1-15.

 [7] Bertola, G. and R. Caballero [1990]: “Kinked Adjustment Costs and Aggregate Dynam-
    ics,” in NBER Macroeconomics Annual, ed. by O. J.Blanchard and S. Fischer, Cambridge MA:
    MIT Press.”

 [8] Bloom, N., R. Griﬃth, and J. Van Reenen [2002]: “Do R&D Tax Credits Work?
    Evidence From a Panel of Countries 1979-97” Journal of Public Economics 85, no. 1: 1-31.

 [9] Boldrin, M. and D. Levine [2000]: “Growth Under Perfect Competition”, mimeo

[10] Bresnahan, T. and M. Trajtenberg [1995]: “General Purpose technologies: “Engines of
    Growth”?”, Journal of Econometrics 65: 83-108.

[11] Comin, D. [2004]: “R&D? A Small Contribution to Productivity Growth”. Journal of Eco-
    nomic Growth, Vol. 9, N. 4, (Dec). pp: 391-421.

[12] Comin, D. and S. Ludvigson [2006]: “A Schumpeterian Theory of the Value Premium”,
    NYU mimeo.

[13] Comin, D. and S. Mulani [2004]: “Diverging Trends in Aggregate and Firm-level Volatil-
    ity.” The Review of Economics and Statistics, (May).



                                              31
[14] Comin, D. and T. Philippon [2005]: “The Rise in Firm-Level Volatility: Causes and
    Consequences” NBER Macroeconomics Annual.

[15] Davis, S., J. Haltiwanger, R. Jarmin, J. Miranda [2006]: “Volatility and Dispersion in
    Business Growth Rates: Publicly Traded versus Privately Held Firms”, NBER wp #12354.

[16] Dinopoulos, E. and P. Thompson. [1998]: “Schumpeterian Growth without Scale Eﬀects”
    Journal of Economic Growth, 3(4), pp.313-35.

[17] Gabaix, X. [2005]: “The Granular Origins of Aggregate Fluctuations”, MIT mimeo

[18] Griliches, Z. [1980] “Returns to Research and Development Expenditures in the Private Sec-
    tor,” in J.W. Kendrick and B. Vaccara, eds, New Developments in Productivity Measurement,
    NBER, Studies in Income and Wealth, Vol. 44, 1980, 419-454, Chicago: University of Chicago
    Press.

[19] Griliches, Z. [1986] ”Productivity, R&D, and Basic Research at the Firm Level in the 1970s,”
    American Economic Review, March 1986, vol. 76(l), l4l-l54.

[20] Griliches, Z. and J. Mairesse [1984] “Productivity and R&D at the Firm Level” in R&D,
    Patents, and Productivity Z. Griliches Ed. Chicago University Press.

[21] Grossman, G. and E. Helpman [1991], Innovation and Growth in the Global Economy,
    Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

[22] Hall, B. [1993]: “R&D Tax Policy During the 1980s: Success or Failure?” Tax Policy and
    the Economy.Vol. 7. Cambridge and London: MIT Press, pp.1-35.

[23] Hall, B. [1995]: “Eﬀectiveness of Research and Experimentation Tax Credits: Critical Liter-
    ature Review and Research Design” Report prepared for the Oﬃce of Technology Assessment,
    Congress of the United States.

[24] Hall, B. and M. Wosinka [1999]: “The California R&D Tax Credit: Description, History,
    and Economic Analysis A Report to the California Council on Science and Technology.”

[25] Hansen, L., J. Heaton, and N. Li [2005]: “Consumption Strikes Back?: Measuring Long
    Run Risk”, U. Chicago mimeo.



                                               32
[26] Hellwing, M. and A. Irmen [2001]: “Endogenous Technical Change in a Competitive
    Economy“, Journal of Economic Theory 101, 1-39.

[27] Jones, C. [1995]: “R&D-Based Models of Economic Growth” Journal of Political Economy,
    103(Aug.) pp. 759-784.

[28] Jones, C. [1999]: “Growth: With or Without Scale Eﬀects.” American Economic Review
    Papers and Proceedings, 89(2) pp. 139-146.

[29] Kortum, S. [1997]:“Research, patenting and Technological Change.” Econometrica, 65(6),
    pp. 1389-1419.

[30] Mamuneas, T., and I. Nadiri. [1996]: “Public R&D Policies and Cost Behavior of the US
    Manufacturing Industries.” Journal of Public Economics 63, no. 1: 57-81.

[31] McConnell, M. and G. Perez-Quiros [2000]: “Output Fluctuations in the United States:
    What Has Changed Since the Early 1980’s?” American Economic Review 90, no. 5 (December):
    1464-76.

[32] Mokyr, J. [2002]: “Innovation in a Historical Perspective: Tales of Technology and Evolu-
    tion”, Technological Innovation and Economic Performance, Ed. by B. Steil, D. Victor and R.
    Nelson. Princeton University Press.

[33] Okubo, S., C. Robbins, C. Moylan, B. Sliker, L. Schultz, L. Mataloni [2006] “Bureau
    of Economic Analysis/National Science Foundation R&D SATELLITE ACCOUNT: PRELIM-
    INARY ESTIMATES” BEA mimeo.

[34] Parker, M. [2006]: “Diverging trends in aggregate and firm-level volatility in the UK” Bank
    of England mimeo.

[35] Peretto, P. [1998]: “Technological Change and Population Growth” Journal of Economic
    Growth, 3(4), pp.283-311.

[36] Ramey, G. and V. Ramey [1995]: “Cross-Country Evidence on the Link Between Volatility
    and Growth.” American Economic Review 85(5), Dec. pp1138-51

[37] Segerstrom, P. [1998]: “Endogenous Growth Without Scale Eﬀects.” American Economic
    Review

                                                 33
[38] Stock, J. and M. Watson [2003]: “Has the business cycle changed and why?” NBER
    Macroeconomics Annual, M. Gertler and K. Rogoﬀ Ed. Cambridge.

[39] Thesmar, D., and M. Thoenig [2004]: “Financial Market Development and the Rise in
    Firm Level Uncertainty,” CEPR wp # 4761.

[40] Wilson, D. [2005]: “Beggar thy neighbor? the in-state vs. out-of-state impact of state R&D
    tax credits”, mimeo.




                                              34
    Appendix 1: Mathematical Details
    First order conditions for the multisector case

    In the symmetric equilibrium, the conditions that determine the investment in R&D and GIs by each type of
firm are the following:



                                                  1 − sR&D        = λ̄(δ 1/N
                                                                         q   vl − vf )                            (LqM)
                                                   c0 (λh /N ) = (δ h − 1)v l                                     (LhM)

    Proof that v f = 0
    The arbitrage condition for R&D implies that
                                          µ                        ´¶
                                      λqs −(1 − sR&D ) ³ 1/N l   f
                                   0=                 + δq v − v      .                                             (31)
                                      m          λ̄
                 λqs (1−sR&D )
    Note that          mλ̄
                                 is equal to the cost of R&D investments for the follower.
    In the symmetric equilibrium, the value of a standard intermediate good producer can be expressed as:
            λqs (1 − sR&D ) λqs 1/N l               m − 1 1/N
 rv f = −                  + (δ q v − v f ) + λqs (      )(δ q − 1)v f + λqs (N − 1)(δ 1/N
                                                                                       q   − 1)v f + λh (δ h − 1)v f (32)
                   mλ̄      m                        m
Plugging expression (31) into (32) yields:
                                        m − 1 1/N
                          rvf = λqs (        )(δ q − 1)v f + λqs (N − 1)(δ 1/N
                                                                           q   − 1)v f + λh (δ h − 1)v f
                                         m
    This equation implies that v f = 0.¤
    Multisector
    As in the one sector model, λh declines with λ̄ and sR&D . To show this, we just have to combine equations (LqM)
and (LhM) to obtain the following expression for λh :
                                                                  (δ h − 1)(1 − sR&D )
                                                  c0 (λh /N ) =                                                     (33)
                                                                          λ̄δ 1/N
                                                                              q

    Plugging in the functional form specified for c(.), results in the expression for the rate of arrival of general
innovations:
                                                         Ã                      h
                                                                                          ! 1−ρ
                                                                                             ρh
                                                                                              h
                                                     h       (1 − sR&D )ρh λ̄ (δ h − 1)
                                            λh = N λ̄                                                               (34)
                                                                      λ̄δ 1/N
                                                                          q




    Plugging back the expression for λh (34) into equation (LqM) and using expression (15) allows us to solve for
the arrival rate of embodied innovations at the sector level, λqs :
                                     ∙ 1/N                                          ¸
                                       λ̄δq            l          h
                                      1−sR&D (1 − α)κ − r + λ (δ h − 1) (1 − ρh /N )
                               λqs =                                                                                (35)
                                                  1 − (δ 1/N
                                                         q   − 1)(N − 1)


                                                                     35
     Substituting in (34) for λh we obtain
                   h                    i                      h               £                ¤ρ i1/(1−ρh )
                                                                     h
                    λ̄δ 1/N
                        q   /(1 − sR&D ) (1 − α)κ l + (N − ρh ) ρh λ̄ (δ h − 1) (1 − sR&D )/(λ̄) h            −r
           λqs =                                                                                                                                (36)
                                                              1 − (δ 1/N
                                                                     q   − 1)(N − 1)

     Diﬀerentiating with respect to sR&D or λ̄ it follows that λqs increases with these parameters iﬀ Condition 2 holds.
                               Ã                          ! 1/(1−ρ )
                                                                  h ³           ´
                                   ρh θh (δh −1)(1−sR&D )             N −ρh
                     (1−α)κ l −                1/N                    1−ρh
                                            q
                                           θ δq
     Condition 2:                             1/N                                   >0
                                        1−(δ q −1)(N −1)
                                                                                                            λqs (1−sR&D )
     Private R&D expenditures as a share of aggregate output, nq , is equal to                                     λ̄
                                                                                                                          .   Multiplying expression
(36) by (1 − sR&D )/λ̄ and diﬀerentiating with respect to sR&D or λ̄ it follows that nq increases with these parameters
iﬀ
                                                                    µ                              ¶ 1−ρ
                                                                                                      ρh

                                              (N −ρh )(δ h −1)λ̄h       (1−sR&D )ρh λ̄h (δ h −1)        h
                                        r−         (1−ρh )                       1/N
                                                                              λ̄δq
                                                                                                            >0
                                                        1 − (δ 1/N
                                                               q   − 1)(N − 1)

     Using the expression for λh in equilibrium (34) this can be expressed as Condition 3
                          (N −ρh )(δh −1)
                     r−λh    N (1−ρh )
     Condition 3:        1/N                > 0.
                     1−(δq −1)(N−1)
     Proposition 2 summarizes the conclusions from this analysis.

Proposition 2 In response to increases in sR&D and λ̄, the arrival rate of general innovations, λh declines; if
Condition 2 holds, the arrival rate of R&D innovations, λqs , increases; if Condition 3 holds, the share of GDP spent
in private R&D, nq , increases.




                                                                           36
   Appendix 2: Discussion of General Technologies
   We present here several examples of inventions that meet the two criteria that characterize our
notion of general technologies. First, while these innovations originated in a particular context, the
general nature of the idea underlying them meant they were applied to many economic activities
across industries and sectors. Second, the disembodied nature of these innovations meant that they
could not be patented. As a result, firms could not appropriate the benefit from these innovations
when competitors, whether within or across industries, adopted them. As the model predicts, in
many cases, these GIs were undertaken by the market leaders.
   I. Production Design
        A. Mass production of cars and Ford’s assembly line
   Mass production first originated in the automobile industry in the United States in 1901. Amer-
ican car manufacturer Ransome Eli Olds (1864-1950) invented the basic concept of the assembly
line and mass produced the first automobile, the Curved Dash Oldsmobile. Henry Ford (1863-1947)
invented an improved version of the assembly line by installing the first conveyor belt-based assem-
bly line in his car factory in Ford’s Highland Park, Michigan plant, around 1913-14. The assembly
line reduced production costs for cars by reducing assembly time.
   The philosophy of mass production was simple. Fixed overhead costs were spread out over
larger and larger volumes of production, thus lower and lower prices became possible. This strategy
that characterized mass production was to become the defining characteristic of American industry
throughout the twentieth century. The Ford Motor Company was of course, at the time, one of the
top two car manufacturers in the country.
        B. Scientific Management
   Scientific management is the study of relationships between workers and machines. Frederick
Taylor, regarded as the Father of Scientific Management, published Principles of Scientific Manage-
ment in 1911, in which he proposed work methods designed to increase worker productivity. Taylor
realized that organization productivity could be increased by enhancing the eﬃciency of production
processes. This involved breaking down each task to its smallest unit and to figure out the one best
way to do each job. Emphasis was laid on ensuring the worker indulged in only those motions es-
sential to the task. Taylor looked at interaction of human characteristics, social environment, task,
and physical environment, capacity, speed, durability, and cost. The overall goal was to remove
human variability.
   The results were profound. Productivity under Taylorism went up dramatically. In a famous


                                                 37
experiment on the output of a worker loading pig iron to a rail car, Taylor increased the worker’s
output from 12 to 47 tons per day. New departments arose such as industrial engineering, personnel,
and quality control. There was also growth in middle management as there evolved a separation of
planning from operations. Rational rules replaced trial and error; management became formalized
and eﬃciency increased. This model, based on merit and unquestioned authority, was a dramatic
improvement over earlier models of organization.
        C. Management Consulting
   McKinsey and Co. was one of the first management consulting firms established in 1923 in
Chicago. While the consulting industry had originated before then, the introduction of McKinsey’s
innovative approach to analyzing and solving problems constituted an important general technol-
ogy. The McKinsey way of consulting can be decomposed in the following three steps. First the
consultant gathers as much factual information about the client’s organization as possible. Second,
after a thorough analysis of the facts, an initial hypothesis is determined, to be tested with the
client. Finally, a set of recommendations are presented to the client. These recommendations are
limited to what can be realistically done given the resources of the client, the consulting firm and
the amount of time required. Further, the recommendations are proposed along with milestones to
be achieved as intermediate steps towards the ultimate target.
        D. Multi-Divisional Structure
   Faced by stiﬀ competition from Ford Motors, General Motors, at the time the leading car
manufacturer in the country, helped pioneer the Multi-divisional organizational structure in the
1920’s. The organization was divided into several divisions, each responsible for the production of
the car and its marketing to the assigned market segment. Each was to have its own managerial
team with complete autonomy over its operational decisions. The central oﬃce’s role would be
restricted to evaluate each divisions performance and coordinate overall strategy. The system helped
General Motors transition from a chaotic organization into a streamlined and eﬃcient competitor
in the automobile industry. As a result of the organizational change, GM’s market share grew
to 45 percent in 1940 from 11 percent in 1921. The multi-divisional structure has since become
a standard organizational feature of the corporate world, enabling many companies to eﬃciently
produce a wide array of products.
        E. Just-in-Time Manufacturing
   Toyota, the leading automobile manufacturer in Japan and one of the largest car manufacturers
in the world, introduced the ‘Just-in-Time’ system of manufacturing in the 1950’s. Elimination of


                                                38
the inventories meant that Toyota had to tighten coordination between successive stages of pro-
duction. The lack of inventories to buﬀer disruptions between adjacent stages of production meant
improvements in the reliability of every step of the process. The new system meant fewer interrup-
tions in the production process, faster identification of flaws in the cars and better communication
with suppliers. The success of its manufacturing system has helped it and other corporations achieve
world success in their respective industries.
   II. Human Resources Management
        A. The Hawthorne Studies
   Beginning in 1924 and continuing until 1933, the Western Electric Company sponsored a series
of experiments for studying worker productivity and morale at its Hawthorne Works near Chicago.
As a market leader — the company was the manufacturing arm of AT&T, the leading long distance
provider for most of the 20th century — the company initiated these studies to determine the eﬀect
of working conditions on productivity.
   The studies collectively highlighted the importance of positive worker attitude and provided
information about factors other than physical working conditions that contribute to productivity.
In particular, researchers found that a group norm regarding the rate of productivity significantly
aﬀects individual performance, and that informal authority from influential group members often
overrode formal authority from the supervisor. A major outcome of the interviews was to teach
supervisors how to handle employee complaints. Smaller work groups and greater freedom were
found to be the greatest drivers of the observed increase in productivity. These findings on the
relationship between improvements in productivity and better employee morale were applied to a
wide ranging group of employment settings.
        B. Industrial Psychology
   Industrial psychology involved the testing of morale and eﬃciency at businesses, industrial and
military organizations. Edwin A. Fleishman (1953) undertook what was a typical project of its time
at the International Harvester Company, one of the leading industrial corporations in the United
States. Fleishman studied the relationship of training programs on the leadership of supervisors
and their sensitivity to and consideration of the needs and feelings of subordinates. While super-
visors showed an initial response to the training program by being more considerate towards their
subordinates, in due course, they reverted back to their original behavior. The reversal of the be-
havior was attributed to the culture or climate of the department the subjects came from. In what
came to be known as a critical point in organizational change, the study highlighted the diﬀerence


                                                39
between focusing on the individual and focusing on contextual variables (such as group norms and
organizational culture).
        C. Survey Feedback
   The organizational survey feedback method first showed up in the late 1940’s. Questionnaires
were being used to systematically assess employee morale and attitudes in organizations. Floyd
Mann’s study in 1957, guided by Rensis Likert, went a long way in developing what we now know
as the Survey Feedback method. The method involved data collection by questionnaire to determine
employee’s perceptions of the management of the organization. The second aspect of the method
was reporting the results back to the employees who answered the questionnaire. Once the results
of the survey had been conveyed, managers, using the help of the subordinates, would chart out
a plan to undertake positive changes in areas of concern as reflected in the survey results. The
study emphasized that the eﬀectiveness of the method relied on what the manager did with the
information from the survey. Positive changes occurred when the manager discussed the results
with his subordinates
        D. Sensitivity Training
   Sensitivity training refers to small group discussions where the primary, almost exclusive source
of learning is the behavior of the group members themselves. Participants receive feedback from one
another regarding their behavior in the group. Sensitivity training, also known as T-groups, became
the earliest tool of what came to be known as organizational development. Kurt Lewin discovered
the concept when undertaking a training workshop in Connecticut in 1946. He was asked to conduct
a workshop that would help improve community leadership in general and interracial relationships
in particular. Lewin brought in trainers and researchers and along with the participants engaged in
lectures, role play and general group discussions. In the evenings, the trainers and researchers would
evaluate the events of the day. The workshop acquired its significance however when participants
happened to observe and participate in the evaluations as well. Participants began to object to the
interpretation of their behavior on several occasions. The observation by the participants resulted in
the three-way discussion among the researchers, trainers and participants. The participants in turn
became more sensitive to their own behavior in terms of how they were being perceived by others
and the impact their behavior was having on others. Carl Rogers labeled this mode of learning as
“perhaps the most significant social invention of the century”.
   III. Credit/banking
   Improvements in the credit and banking sector have, both directly and indirectly, resulted in


                                                 40
improvements in businesses across all sectors of the economy.
        A. Credit card
   The credit card industry began in the United States in the 1930s when oil companies and hotel
chains began issuing credit cards to customers for purchases made at their own gas stations and
hotels. The bank credit card was introduced in the 1950s. While store or book credit allowed
irregular repayment and installment loans required regular repayment, the credit cards of the early
1950s combined both types of credit. In 1951, Franklin National Bank released the first revolving
charge card. At the time, it was one of the largest banks in the United States. Using the revolving
card a customer could borrow money, repay it and borrow again as long as the borrower remained
under their credit limit. The organizations that are now called Visa and MasterCard sprang up to
create interchange, a nation-wide system designed to settle credit card transactions between banks,
merchants and customers.
   Today, with help from Visa and MasterCard, financial institutions are marketing credit cards
to people all over the world. Credit cards have allowed consumers to carry debt, something that
previously required a bank loan — a much more intensive process than a credit-card approval. Credit
cards have been the primary instrument that fueled international consumerism and high consumer
debt, each of which has spurred multiple trickle-down industries.
        B. Credit Reporting
   In Manhattan during the 1830s, Lewis Tappan developed extensive credit records while handling
credit in his brother’s wholesale silk business. He then extended this aspect of the business to other
suppliers who needed information. He contracted with agents and correspondents throughout the
country to “gossip” about the solvency, prospects, and character of local businesses. He established
R. G. Dun & Co. (which later on merged with its biggest rival Bradstreet to form Dun & Bradstreet,
the largest credit reporting entity in the world), an information hub that could rapidly service new
inquiries and add new information and in the process helped found the business of credit reporting
in the United States. The credit reporting system and improvements in the same have helped
firms minimize risk. With access to the credit history of their customers, firms could target only
consumers meeting their criteria of their acceptable levels of risk. It has helped institutions reduce
bad debts and streamline their bottom lines.
        C. ERMA and MRCI
   During the 1950s, Bank of America, one of the largest banks in the nation at the time, ini-
tiated the Electronic Recording Method of Accounting computer processing system or ERMA, a


                                                 41
project to computerize the banking industry. ERMA computerized the manual processing of checks
and account management and automatically updated and posted checking accounts. MICR, the
magnetic ink character recognition, was also part of ERMA. MICR allowed computers to read spe-
cial numbers at the bottom of checks that allowed computerized tracking and accounting of check
transactions. These inventions led to a more eﬃcient banking system.
        D. Electronic money
   The widespread use of electronic currency began with the automated clearinghouse (ACH), set
up by the US Federal Reserve in 1972 to provide the US Treasury and commercial banks with
an electronic alternative to check processing. Payments made today in nearly all of the deposit
currencies in the world’s banking systems are handled electronically through a series of inter-bank
computer networks.
   Although banks have been able to move currency electronically for decades, only recently has
the average consumer had the capability to use electronic transfers in any meaningful way. The
increasing power and decreasing cost of computers – coupled with advancements in communication
technology that make global interaction available at vastly reduced costs – have together made the
digital transfer of funds a reality for millions of individuals around the world.
   IV. Computer / Software / Internet
   While innovations in this category clearly exhibit the characteristics of general technologies,
they are included in the NSF’s definition of Basic Research. In this sense, they are exceptions to
the rule: general technologies are not R&D.
        A. Arpanet
   Arpanet was created during the Cold War to meet the need for large powerful computers in the
country that were networked with each other to overcome geographic diﬀerences. Four computers
were the first connected in the original ARPAnet. As the network expanded, diﬀerent models of
computers were connected, creating compatibility problems. The solution rested in a better set
of protocols called Transmission Control Protocol/Internet Protocol (TCP/IP) designed in 1982.
To send a message on the network, a computer broke down its data into IP (Internet Protocol)
packets, like individually addressed digital envelopes. TCP (Transmission Control Protocol) ensured
the packets were delivered from client to server and reassembled in the right order. Several other
innovations occurred under ARPAnet - email (or electronic mail), the ability to send simple messages
to another person across the network (1971); telnet, a remote connection service for controlling a
computer (1972); and file transfer protocol (FTP), which allowed information to be sent from one


                                                  42
computer to another in bulk (1973). Each of these inventions has made it significantly easier for
businesses to communicate and share information both across and within each other.
        B. Fortran
   John Backus and a group started to design the FORmula TRANslator System, or FORTRAN
at IBM in 1954. IBM has of course been the leading computer technology corporation of the
20th century. Prior to the introduction of FORTRAN, computers were slow and unreliable and
all programming was done in machine or assembly code. The authors of FORTRAN claimed that
the resulting code would be as eﬃcient as handcrafted machine code. Work on FORTRAN was
completed in 1957 and for many years after, FORTRAN dominated programming, and was the
common tongue for computer programmers.
        C. Computers
   Conrad Zuse invented the first freely programmable computer, the Z1 Computer, in 1936. How-
ever, the computers that are an integral part of all commercial activity today are the result numerous
related innovations since then. From the creation of the transistor in 1947, the first commercial com-
puter in 1951 to the introduction of the integrated circuit in 1958 and the microprocessor in 1971,
several innovations have come together to integrate the use of computers in our lives. This general
technology has had an unparalleled impact on all commercial activity — from the organization of
businesses, to record keeping, to communication and the speedy automation of otherwise time con-
suming tedious tasks. Every business regardless of industry has adopted the use of computers in
order to improve production and increase eﬃciency.
        D. Internet Search Engines
   The first Internet search engine, called ‘Archie’, was created in 1990 by Alan Emtage, a student
at McGill University. Since then numerous search engines have enabled people to search for and
gather information in a more inexpensive and convenient manner than ever before. Information is
used to produce virtually any good and service. Search engines increase the eﬃciency in the process
of gathering information. Thus, search engines increase productivity in a wide range of sectors.
Whether innovations in search engines are appropriable is more debatable. Clearly, they are not
embodied and non-patentable. However, the eﬀectiveness of the search engine and the advertising
revenues depend in part on the number of users. Since users may respond to innovations in the
search engine a part of the revenues created by these innovations will be appropriable. Having
said that, we still believe that, the lack of patents makes the concept of search engines a general
innovation.


                                                 43
   V. Trade
   The introduction of malls and department stores constitute a general technology because im-
provements in the distribution of goods and services benefited a variety of industries in the economy.
        A. The Mall
   The first shopping mall was the Country Club Plaza, founded by the J.C. Nichols Company
and opened near Kansas City, MO, in 1922. J.C. Nichols Company was a prominent commercial
and residential real estate developer. The first enclosed mall called Southdale opened in Edina,
Minnesota in 1956. In the 1980s, giant mega malls were developed. Mega malls revolutionized the
retail industry. The geographical concentration of hundreds of stores oﬀering goods and services
catering to every walk of life meant consumers could now indulge in a one-stop shopping experience.
Since their inception, mega malls have helped all retail outlets, independent of their industry, cater
to a much larger population of consumers.
        B. Department Stores
   In 1877, John Wanamaker opened ”The Grand Depot”, a six story round department store in
Philadelphia. He is credited with creating the first White Sale, modern price tags, and the first
in-store restaurant. He also pioneered the use of money-back guarantees and newspaper ads to
advertise his retail goods. Along with the retail giants of the day including, Marshall Field in
Chicago, Alexander T. Steward in New York, Wanamaker was one of the first to discover the vast
power of buying wholesale and how it could cut costs to reduce retail prices.
        C. Internet Shopping
   Shopping on the internet has opened a new portal for doing business for virtually every type
of business in every industry. Every day, millions of dollars are transacted in exchange for every
imaginable product or service through the internet. The wide applicability of this invention is
evident. Similar to internet search engines, shopping on the internet is also not perfectly non-
appropriable. Specific websites that create a brand image in creating a market for purchase and
sale of goods and services (e.g. ebay, shopping.com) are able to extract a revenue stream from the
transactions. However, the concept of a website used to create a virtual marketplace for transactions
is a general innovation because it is not patentable and any individual or business is free to create
such a website.
   VI. Marketing
        A. Coupons
   Coupons were first introduced in 1895 by Asa Candler, owner of the Coca-Cola Company, one of


                                                 44
the largest manufacturer, distributor and marketer of nonalcoholic beverages at the time in the US.
Candler placed coupons in newspaper for a free Coke from any fountain - to help promote the new
soft drink. Today coupons are an integral part of promotion campaigns for every business. Cut-out
coupons are included in newspapers as an advertising tool. They are also embedded in products
so as to encourage repeat purchases. Over the years, coupons have been adopted as marketing
tool across industries to help businesses build a brand image and target their customers in a more
eﬃcient manner.
        B. Mail Order Catalog
   Aaron Montgomery Ward invented the idea of a mail order catalog. As a traveling salesman, he
realized that his rural customers could be better served by mail-order, a revolutionary idea at the
time. The first catalog consisted of a single sheet of paper with a price list, 8 by 12 inches, showing
the merchandise for sale with ordering instructions. Today, mail-order catalogs are an integral part
of major retail businesses. They have helped businesses across sectors to tap into the market of
consumers who are unwilling or unable to access the retail outlets. Serving as an eﬀective marketing
medium, mail order catalogs have opened up new segments of consumers previously unavailable to
these businesses.
   VII. Chemical Engineering
   Arthur D. Little, Inc., one of the first consulting firms founded in 1886 that became a pioneer and
industry leader in the chemical consulting industry, introduced the concept of the ‘unit operations’ in
1915. It referred to activities such as mixing, heating, filtering, verizing among others that featured
in any chemical process. Chemical engineering research was directed towards the improvement of
such processes. The concept of unit operations was instrumental to the success of Pre-production
Planning. Pre-production made possible the transition from the confines of the laboratory to large
scale production and was critical to the development of chemical engineering. In its stages of infancy,
chemical engineering research was applied to the paper and pulp industry and contributed to the
at the time new sulfite process of converting wood pulp into paper. In more recent times, advances
in the field have had a substantial impact across several sectors, perhaps most noticeably on the
petrochemical industry.




                                                  45
   Appendix 3: Discussion of Calibration
   In this appendix, we discuss in greater detail the calibration conducted in section 3.5 to explore
the model predictions for aggregate volatility and growth. In particular, we explain each of the 6
steps.
   (i) and (iv) calibrate the turnover rates (λqs1950 and λq2000 ) to match the initial corre-
lation of rankings in figure 4.

   We proceed in two steps. First, we use the model to compute the productivity percentiles of the
leader and the followers in a sector. Second, we use the model to compute the expected correlation
of the percentiles over time as a function of λqs .
   At any given moment in time, the market leader has higher productivity than the m followers.
These in turn have the same level of sales per worker. The percentile of the leader pl = 1/(2(m+1)),
while the percentile of the followers pf = (m + 2)/(2(m + 1)). Let’s denote by −  →pt the (m + 1) x 1
vector that contains the percentile of each firm at year t. The mean and variance of − →
                                                                                       p are constant
                                                                                         t
                                                      2
and given by μp = 0.5 and V arp = m/(2(m + 1)) , respectively.
   The correlation of percentiles between years t and t + 1 is given by the following expression:
                                        Cov(−
                                            →
                                            pt , p−−→
                                                   t+1 )
                  Corr(−→pt , p−−→
                                t+1 ) =                                                        (37)
                                           V arP
                                          £Pm+1                                  ¤
                                        E    i=1 (pit − μp )(pit+1 − μp )/(m + 1)
                                      =                                            ,
                                                          V arp
where E denotes the expectation of p−−→ conditional on −
                                        t+1
                                                         →p.  t

    With probability         no firm will take over the market leader and p−−
                      1 − λqs ,                                              →                      →
                                                                                                    −
                                                                            t+1 will be the same as pt .
              P                                     Pm+1
In this event, m+1
               i=1 (pit −μp )(pit+1 −μp )/(m+1) =
                                                                    2
                                                      i=1 (pit −μp ) /(m+1) = V arp . With probability

λqs , one firm will take over the market leader and they will swap their percentiles at year t + 1. For
the market leader, (pit − μp ) = −m/(2(m + 1)), while for the followers, (pit − μp ) = 1/(2(m + 1)).
Hence,
                                                ∙                                     ¸
             −
             →     −−→             q           q m−1         1        2       m
         Cov( pt , pt+1 ) = (1 − λs )V arp + λs                    −
                                                  m + 1 (2(m + 1))2 m + 1 (2(m + 1))2
                                              2λqs V arp
                          = (1 − λqs )V arp −
                                              m(m + 1)
                                   q
                          ' (1 − λs )V arp ,

where the last approximation holds when m is suﬃciently large. Substituting into (37), it follows
that
                                            pt , p−−
                                       Corr(−
                                            →       →            q
                                                   t+1 ) ' (1 − λs )


                                                      46
   It also follows that for small λqs ,

                                               pt , p−−
                                          Corr(−
                                               →       →             q
                                                      t+5 ) ' (1 − 5λs ).


                      pt , p−−
   Since in 1950 Corr(−
                      →       →                         q                                            → −−→
                                                                                                     −
                             t+5 ) ' 0.9, we calibrate λs1950 to 0.02. Similarly, since in 2000 Corr( pt , pt+5 ) ∈

(0.7, 0.75), we calibrate λqs2000 to (0.05, 0.06).

   (ii) Using the value of λqs1950 and the initial correlation and variance of sectoral
growth, pin down the values for λh1950 ∗ (ln(δ h ))2 , λqs1950 ∗ (ln(δ 1/N
                                                                       q   ))2 and ln(δ 1/N
                                                                                        q   ).
   In the multisector version of the model, we have seen that the variance of sectoral growth and
the correlation of sectoral growth are given by the following expressions:



                                       V γ ys = λqs (ln(δ1/N
                                                         q   ))2 + λh (ln(δ h ))2                       (38)
                                                             (δ h )2 λh
                             corr(γ ys , γ ys0 ) =                                                      (39)
                                                     (δ 1/N
                                                        q   )2 λqs + (δ h )2 λh

   It follows that:
                                      λqs (ln(δ 1/N
                                                q   ))2 = V γ ys /(1 + Φ),

where
                                                   corr(γ ys , γ ys0 )
                                            Φ≡                           .
                                                 1 − corr(γ ys , γ ys0 )
  It also follows from (38) and (39) that λh (ln(δ h ))2 = ΦV γ ys /(1 + Φ) and (trivially) ln(δ 1/N )=
q                                                                                                q
  q       1/N 2  q
 λs (ln(δ q )) /λs .
   We calibrate corr(γ ys , γ ys0 )1950 to 0.5 (figure 7) and Vγ ys (1950) to 0.0005 both computed using
the Jorgenson and Stiroh 35-KLEM dataset. That pins down λqs1950 (ln(δ 1/N
                                                                       q   ))2 , λh1950 (ln(δh ))2 and
ln(δ 1/N
     q   ), which is assumed to be constant.

   (iii) Using the average initial growth rate of productivity, calibrate ln(δ h ) and λh1950 .
   The expected growth rate of the economy is given by the following expression:

                                       Eγ y = λqs ln(δ 1/N
                                                       q   ) + λh ln(δ h )                              (40)

   It follows that:
                                                        λh (ln(δ h ))2
                                       ln(4h) =                            .                            (41)
                                                     Eγ y − λqs ln(δ 1/N
                                                                     q   )


                                                        47
Further, once ln(δ h ) is known, λh = λh (ln(4h))2 / (ln(δ h ))2 . We use BLS data reported in figure 1
to calibrate Eγ y1950 to 0.025 and then use expression (41) to pin down ln(δ h ) and λh1950 .
   (v) Using the final correlation of sectoral growth and the calibrated value of ln(δ h ),
compute the final rate of arrival of general innovations (λh2000 ).
   From expression (39), it follows that

                                      λh = Φλqs (ln(δ 1/N
                                                      q   ))2 /(ln(δ h ))2 .

Substituting in (i) Φ2000 , which we set to 0.25 based on figure 7, (ii) λqs2000 ,which we have set to
0.05 based on the discussion above and (iii) the calibrated values of ln(δ 1/N
                                                                           q   ) and ln(δ h ), we can pin
down λh2000 .

   (vi) With this information and the number of sectors (35), compute the final ex-
pected growth rate of productivity (Eγ y2000 ), the initial and final variance of aggregate
productivity growth (V γ y1950 , V γ y2000 ).

   This follows by evaluating the following two expressions at λqs1950 , λh1950 , λqs2000 , λh2000 .

                                  Eγ y = λqs ln(δ 1/N
                                                  q   ) + λh ln(δ h )
                                         λqs
                                  V γy =     (ln(δ 1/N
                                                    q  ))2 + λh (ln(δ h ))2
                                         N




                                                       48
                  0.035                                                                                                                                                                               0.025




                  0.030

                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.020


                  0.025



                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.015
                  0.020




                  0.015
                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.010



                  0.010


                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.005

                  0.005




                  0.000                                                                                                                                                                               0.000
                                         1953      1956      1959      1962      1965      1968      1971      1974      1977      1980     1983     1986     1989     1992     1995     1998

                                                                     Smoothed Productivity Growth (Left Axis)                          Private R&D/GDP (Right Axis)




Figure 1: Evolution of (Smoothed) Productivity Growth and Private R&D share in GDP. Note: Pro-
ductivity growth series obtained from the BLS. The productivity growth series has been smoothed
with a Band-Pass filter that keeps fluctuations associated with cycles of period greater than 30
years. Private R&D expenses comes from the NSF.



                                        0.024                                                                                                                                                   0.22




                                        0.022
                                                                                                                                                                                                0.2



                                         0.02
                                                                                                                                                                                                0.18
                  Standard Deviations




                                                                                                                                                                                                       Standard Deviations




                                        0.018

                                                                                                                                                                                                0.16

                                        0.016


                                                                                                                                                                                                0.14
                                        0.014



                                                                                                                                                                                                0.12
                                        0.012




                                         0.01                                                                                                                                                   0.1
                                                1952      1955      1958      1961      1964      1967      1970      1973      1976      1979     1982     1985     1988     1991     1994

                                                                 Aggregate Productivity Growth (Left Axis)                         Firm-level Productivity Growth (Right Axis)




Figure 2: Evolution of the Aggregate and Firm-level Volatility of productivity. Note: Aggregate
productivity growth comes from the BLS. Firm-level sales per worker obatined from COMPUSTAT.
Firm and aggregate volatility series are computed as indicated in the text.

                                                                                                                                       49
                                    0.25




                                     0.2
               Standard Deviation




                                    0.15




                                     0.1




                                    0.05




                                      0
                                           1956     1959     1962     1965      1968      1971      1974       1977      1980      1983      1986     1989     1992     1995     1998    2001

                                                                                                       sales           sales per worker




Figure 3: Firm-level Volatility of Sales and Productivity after controlling for compositional change.
Note: Ploted series are the coeﬃcients of year dummies in a volatility regression after controlling
for age, size and cohort eﬀects. Source: COMPUSTAT.


                                      0.95




                                      0.90




                                      0.85




                                      0.80




                                      0.75




                                      0.70




                                      0.65




                                      0.60
                                             1950     1953     1956      1959      1962      1965          1968       1971      1974      1977      1980     1983     1986     1989     1992    1995

                                                                                       Correlations after 5 years                      Correlations after 10 years




   Figure 4: Correlations of firm percentiles by sales per worker. Note: Source COMPUSTAT.


                                                                                                                         50
                   0.6


                  0.55


                   0.5


                  0.45


                   0.4


                  0.35


                   0.3


                  0.25


                   0.2


                  0.15


                   0.1
                         1953   1956   1959   1962   1965     1968     1971   1974        1977     1980      1983   1986   1989

                                                      New Jorgenson Dataset          Old Jorgenson Dataset




Figure 5: Evolution of Sectoral Correlation of Productivity Growth. Note: Data source Jorgenson
and Stiroh KLEM data sets.




                  0.25




                  0.20




                  0.15




                  0.10




                  0.05




                  0.00
                         1953   1956   1959   1962   1965     1968     1971   1974        1977     1980      1983   1986   1989

                                                     New Jorgenson Dataset           Old Jorgenson Dataset




Figure 6: Correlation of Sectoral TFP Growth. Note: Data source is KLEM Jorgenson and Stiroh
data set.


                                                                       51
                                                        Table 1
                                            Examples of General Innovations

Innovation                                          Date                              Importance                             Market Leader

Management and Production Design

Mass Production                                     1900     Fixed costs spread out over larger volumes meant lower costs.       Yes

Ford Assembly Line                                  1913     Shorter assembly time resulted in lower production costs.           Yes

Scientific Management                               1911     Used a scientific approach to production processes to
                                                             improve productivity.
McKinsey Management Consulting                      1923     Introduced a streamlined approach to consulting services.

Multi-Divisional Structure                         1920's    Introduced the idea of autonomous divisions responsible for         Yes
                                                             pursuing goals, independent of each other.
Just-in-Time Manufacturing                         1950's    Improved synergies between adjacent production processes to         Yes
                                                             minimize inventories.

Human Resource Management

Hawthorne Studies                                1924-1933 Highlighted the importance of the relationship between the            Yes
                                                             employee morale and productivity.
Industrial Psychology                            1940's-50's Emphasized contextual variables for purposes of training and        Yes
                                                             positive organization change.
Survey Feedback                                    1940's    Highlighted the importance of sharing feedback with
                                                             employees.
Sensitivity Training                                1946     Focused on the importance of open discussion in small
                                                             groups.

Credit/Banking

Credit card                                         1950     Helped businesses and consumers undertake credit                    Yes
                                                             transactions in a more extensive and systematic manner.
Electronic Recording Method of Accounting          1950's    Helped computerize the banking industry.                            Yes

Magnetic Ink Character Recognition                 1950's    Allowed computerized tracking and accounting of check               Yes
                                                             transactions.
Electronic Money                                    1972     Introduced an electronic alternative to check processing.           Yes


Computer / Software / Internet

Hypertext                                           1945     Basis of the eventual World Wide Web.

Arpanet                                             1969     Enabled the exchange of information over large geographic
                                                             distances.
Fortran                                             1957     High-level programming language that made for improved              Yes
                                                             scientific, engineering and mathematical applications.
Computers                                           1936     Enabled the automation of an assortment of functions.
Internet Search Engines                             1990     Greatly reduced cost and increased convenience of gathering
                                                             of information.
Internet Shopping                                  1990's    Provided firms with a new avenue to conduct their business.

Trade

Mall                                                1922     Started the modern-day one-stop shop for all consumers.             Yes

Department Store                                    1877     Improved the efficiency of retail and distribution.

Marketing

Coupons                                             1895     Effective promotion/marketing tool.                                 Yes

Mail order catalog                                  1872     Enabled businesses to target consumers that did not access to
                                                             retail outlets.

Chemical Engineering

Chemical Engineering                               1920's    Improved the design and control of similar operations at            Yes
                                                             plants in several different industries.
Table 2: R&D, Firm-level Volatility and Sectoral Co-movement

                                                                                    Dependent variable

                                    correlation in sectoral productivity growth                                  correlation in sectoral TFP growth

R&D                       -3.28                   -3.11                  -3.39                   -2.49                   -3.11                 -3.1
                          (1.42)                  (1.44)                 (1.45)                  (1.09)                  (1.06)               (1.07)

Firm level volatility                -0.297                  -0.287                  -0.27                    -0.237               -0.239                -0.25
                                     (0.122)                 (0.121)                (0.121)                   (0.083)              (0.084)              (0.085)

Energy share                                      -0.49      -0.35       -0.077     0.076                               -0.057     0.065      -0.18     -0.038
                                                  (0.37)     (0.36)      (0.36)     (0.36)                              (0.19)     (0.18)     (0.24)    (0.22)

N                         1011        1011        1011        1011        982         982        1011          1011      1011       1011       982        982

Sectors                    All         All         All         All         Non-energy             All           All       All        All          Non-energy


Notes:
Newey-West standard errors are reflected in parentheses.
Firm volatility is measured by the sectoral average of the firm-level variance of the growth rate of sales.
All regressions include sector and year fixed effects.
