NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WHY DO FIRMS BECOME WIDELY HELD?
AN ANALYSIS OF THE DYNAMICS OF
CORPORATE OWNERSHIP
Jean Helwege
Christo Pirinsky
René M. Stulz
Working Paper 11505
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11505
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2005

Stulz: Associate Professor, University of Arizona; Assistant Professor, Texas A&M University; Reese Chair
of Banking and Monetary Economics, Ohio State University, NBER and ECGI. We thank Bilal Ertruk and
Carrie Pan for research assistance. We are grateful for comments from Rudi Fahlenbrach, Bernadette
Minton, Ingrid Werner, Karen Wruck, and seminar participants at Ohio State. The views expressed herein
are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
©2005 by Jean Helwege, Christo Pirinsky and René M. Stulz. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Why Do Firms Become Widely Held? An Analysis of the Dynamics of Corporate Ownership
Jean Helwege, Christo Pirinsky and René M. Stulz
NBER Working Paper No. 11505
July 2005
JEL No. G30, G32, D0
ABSTRACT

We consider IPO firms from 1970 to 2001 and examine the evolution of their insider ownership over
time to understand better why and how U.S. firms that become widely held do so. In our sample, a
majority of firms has insider ownership below 20% after ten years. We find that a firm's stock market
performance and trading play an extremely important role in its insider ownership dynamics. Firms
that experience large decreases in insider ownership and/or become widely held are firms with high
valuations, good recent stock market performance, and liquid markets for their stocks. In contrast
and surprisingly, variables suggested by agency theory have limited success in explaining the
evolution of insider ownership.

Jean Helwege
Eller College of Management
The University of Arizona
1130 E. Helen Street
P.O. Box 210108
Tucson, AZ 85721-0108
helwege@eller.arizona.edu
Christo Pirinsky
Department of Finance
306 H Wehner Bldg.
4218 Texas A&M University
College Station, TX 77843
cpirisnky@mays.tamu.edu

René M. Stulz
Fisher College of Business
Ohio State University
806A Fisher Hall
2100 Neil Avenue
Columbus, OH 43210-1144
and NBER
stulz@cob.osu.edu

1. Introduction
Most firms start their life with concentrated ownership. Yet, the typical large established U.S. firm
has fairly dispersed ownership. How do firms evolve so that many of them end up with dispersed
ownership? Why does that evolution take place? There has been much recent research on the
determinants of insider or managerial ownership.1 However, this research focuses on understanding why,
at a point in time, insiders or managers own a larger fraction of shares in some firms than in others. The
evolution of ownership as firms mature has not been the object of much study in the U.S.2 As a result, we
know little about the dynamics of insider ownership following a firm’s IPO. In this paper, we attempt to
understand these dynamics better.
The stylized fact that large U.S. corporations are much more likely to have dispersed ownership than
comparable corporations in most other countries (see La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer, 1999,
LLS) plays a central role in much of modern corporate finance. In the U.S., observers since Berle and
Means (1932) have been concerned that diffuse ownership facilitates entrenchment by managers and
these concerns have led to a large literature on agency costs and governance. An intense controversy has
evolved over the issue of whether firms in which managers own more shares perform better and have
higher valuations (see Himmelberg, Hubbard, and Palia, 1999, Demsetz and Villalonga, 2001, and
McConnell, Servaes, and Lins, 2005). Cross-country comparisons of corporate ownership raise the
question of what it is that makes the U.S. and a few other countries unique in having dispersed ownership.
Is it differences in politics, as argued by Roe (2003)? Or is it because of better legal protection of
investors, as argued by LLS? A recent paper by Becht and de Long (2005) concludes with the statement:
“We wish that we knew.” Investigating the dynamics of ownership following a firm’s IPO in the U.S.
should help us understand better these issues.
1

See, for instance, Demsetz and Villalonga (2001) and Himmelberg, Hubbard, and Palia (1999) for recent papers
that make ownership structure endogenous.
2
One paper that follows ownership beyond the years immediately following the IPO is Mikkelson, Partch, and Shah
(1997). Their focus differs from ours. Though they document the evolution of insider ownership for firms with IPOs
from 1980 through 1983 for the ten years following the IPO, they are mostly concerned about how ownership
explains performance.
1

We follow a large sample of firms over time to understand why and how their ownership becomes
more dispersed following their IPO. Our database includes all firms that have an IPO from 1970 to 2001.
We are able to follow the ownership of these firms from 1986 through 2001. LLS consider two
definitions of widely held firms. With their first definition, a firm is widely held if there is no controlling
blockholder who owns more than 20% of the votes. Rather than focusing on the largest blockholder, we
consider the holdings of the officers and directors of the firm, whom we call insiders as is common
practice, so that a firm meets the 20% standard when its insiders own less than 20% of the shares. We find
with our dataset that insiders control less than 20% of the cash flow rights in half the firms ten years after
their IPO. With this measure, therefore, the road to diffuse ownership is quick for the typical firm. The
more restrictive definition of diffuse ownership used by LLS is that there is no controlling blockholder
who owns more than 10% of the votes. Strikingly, insiders own less than 10% of the shares in roughly a
quarter of the firms five years after their IPO. However, the 10% standard is one that is not met by the
typical firm in our sample in any year within thirty years of its IPO. Because our sample drops in size
over time, so that by thirty years, less than 3% of the IPO firms are still in the sample, it is difficult for us
to evaluate when half the firms eventually meet this stricter standard.
Insider ownership is defined as the ratio of shares held by insiders over the total number of shares the
firm has outstanding. Insider ownership can therefore fall because the numerator of the ratio falls or the
denominator increases. Increases in the denominator take place when the firm issues shares to raise cash,
to pay for acquisitions, to deliver shares upon exercise of stock options and warrants, and conversion of
convertible debt. As long as the participation of insiders in equity issues is less than their proportional
holdings of shares, their proportional ownership drops when new shares are issued.
In a study for the U.K., Franks, Mayer, and Rossi (2004) find that increases in the number of shares
due to mergers play a central role in ownership dilution in the U.K. We find that the evolution of
ownership in our sample is different: sales of shares by insiders are as important, on average, in
explaining the decrease in insider ownership as issuance of new shares by the firm. Further, share issues
2

in primary offerings and to pay for mergers constitute only a fraction of the increase in shares for our
firms. This result could be at least partly explained by the importance of option compensation in the U.S.3
Insiders reduce their ownership of the firm when the costs of doing so are less than the benefit. The
benefit is that insiders can diversify their portfolio and grow the firm faster because firm growth is less
dependent on their co-investment. The costs are that the value of the shares falls if insiders control a
smaller share of cash flows than the firm value maximizing ownership share. To the extent that insiders
care about control separately from the value of their stake, a reduction in their proportional holdings also
decreases their ability to influence the decisions of the firm and to resist takeovers. The literature has
several theories that help understand why optimal holdings by insiders may fall as a firm matures so that
it becomes worthwhile for insiders to reduce their fractional holdings of a firm’s shares. These theories
are not mutually exclusive, so that we would not be surprised to find some support for each, but we want
to investigate whether some of these theories describe the data better than others.
The main ideas found in the literature can be summarized as follows:

1) Moral hazard. From Jensen and Meckling (1976) onward, agency theory predicts that ownership
will be more concentrated when controlling insiders find it easier to take advantage of outside or
minority shareholders. Corporate insiders have a multitude of ways to benefit from their control of the
firm and make the stake of minority shareholders worth less. The literature has focused on shirking,
perk consumption, investment choice, and tunneling as the main vehicles for insiders to benefit from
their control position.4 As the ownership of insiders increases, their actions become better aligned
with the interests of minority shareholders but they also bear more risk. With this agency view, we
would expect firms to become widely held for two reasons. First, some types of agency problems

3

See Fama and French (2005) for evidence that option exercises can substantially increase the number of shares
outstanding.
4
See, for instance, Shleifer and Vishny (1997).
3

become less important. Second, new ways of managing agency problems become cost effective as the
firm becomes larger.5

2) Adverse selection. Leland and Pyle (1977) model retention of shares by insiders as a signal of firm
quality when information asymmetries are high. As shown by Myers and Majluf (1984), if insiders
maximize the wealth of existing shareholders, they will choose to sell equity only if they can do so at
an advantageous price. This adverse selection makes it expensive to sell shares when information
asymmetries are important. Maug (2001) and Subrahmanyam and Titman (1999) point out that it
becomes advantageous for firms to have outside shareholders, and hence to have more dispersed
ownership, when information from outside the firm becomes more important to managers in making
their decisions. With these models, more dispersed ownership becomes advantageous when the
informational advantage of insiders becomes less important. We would therefore expect firms to
become widely held when more is known about them and information asymmetries have become less
important.

3) Timing. There are two strands of research in the literature that imply insiders would be concerned
about the market for the firm’s shares when they choose to increase the supply of shares available for
trading, either through sales of their own shares or through issuance of new shares. First, a number of
authors argue that it pays for firms to time the sale of new shares when they are advantageously
priced (window of opportunity hypothesis).6 Since insiders decide when the firm sells shares, they
can also time sales for their own account. The evidence of Clarke, Dunbar, and Kahle (2004) on
secondary equity issues is consistent with the ability of insiders to gain from the timing of the sale of

5

See Fama and Jensen (1983).
See Baker and Wurgler (2002). Schultz (2003), Pastor and Veronesi (2005), and Benninga, Helmantel, and Sarig
(2005) review the evidence for IPOs and provide models of timing that rely on the efficient market hypothesis.
Baker and Stein (2004) review evidence for SEOs and propose a model of timing that does not rely on the efficient
market hypothesis.
4
6

their shares. Second, there is a literature claiming that the demand for shares can be downwardsloping, in which case making more shares available for trading would lead to a decrease in price.7
When the market for shares for a firm becomes deeper and more liquid, the demand for shares
becomes more elastic, so that it becomes less costly for insiders to sell shares in the market. Empirical
evidence shows that the cost of selling a block of shares for a small firm can be large.8

We investigate how the variables that are influential in these theories play a role in the evolution of
insider ownership for firms and in the process whereby some firms become widely held and others not.
We use two different approaches. First, we examine the determinants of significant decreases in insider
ownership, where we define a significant decrease in insider ownership to be a decrease of at least 5%.
Second, we estimate a hazard rate model of becoming widely held. We estimate this model for the two
definitions of widely-held firms used by LLS.
We find that stock market variables play an extremely important role in the process that leads firms to
become widely held. First, firms with greater stock market turnover are more likely to see the ownership
share of insiders fall and are more likely to become widely held. Second, firms with high book-to-market
ratios are less likely to see an increase in ownership dispersion. Third, the likelihood that insiders will
decrease their ownership share significantly increases with the firm’s recent stock market performance.
Hence, firms move towards dispersed ownership when the market for their shares is liquid in the sense
that a large block of shares can be sold without too much of a discount. Strikingly, the moral hazard and
information asymmetry variables seem to be largely irrelevant in predicting large changes in insider
ownership. This is even more so in a regression where we use lagged changes for most of the explanatory
variables. In that regression, ownership is expected to decrease significantly when it is high and when the
stock has performed well.
7

Bagwell (1991) reviews the literature and discusses the implications of downward-sloping demand curves for
corporate finance. The more recent literature combines diversity of opinion with limits of arbitrage. See, for
instance, Baker, Coval, and Stein (2005) for a model and a review of the evidence.
8
See Keim and Madhavan (1996), for instance.
5

The moral hazard and information asymmetry variables are slightly more informative in the hazard
models that predict whether a firm is likely to become widely held in a particular year. The hazard models
predict that firms are more likely to meet the 10% threshold in a given year after not having met it if they
have VC financing, are large, have a low book-to-market ratio, have low cash flow, report R&D
expenditures, have low leverage, have low volatility, have high lagged and contemporaneous stock
returns, and have high turnover. Stock return volatility is often used as a proxy for information
asymmetries and agency problems, but high stock return volatility also makes it costly for insiders to have
a large stake. Our evidence suggests that the latter effect is less important than the former. We would
expect R&D to make it less likely that a firm becomes widely held, so that its coefficient in the hazard
model is surprising. We find no evidence that firms with more hard assets are more likely to become
widely held, which seems inconsistent with the moral hazard and information asymmetry theories.
The paper proceeds as follows. In Section 2, we present our database. We explain its construction and
provide summary statistics for cohorts of IPO firms. In Section 3, we investigate the evolution of inside
ownership and the time it takes for firms to become widely-held in our sample using the definitions from
LLS. In Section 4, we examine the determinants of large changes in ownership. We also show how these
changes take place. In Section 5, we provide estimates of hazard models of firms going from being
concentrated to being widely held. We conclude in Section 6.

2. Data
Our analysis involves tracking the evolution of firms’ insider ownership as they mature. This exercise
is more sensibly done using firms’ data from the time of the IPO onward, given that it is quite difficult for
the insiders to sell shares in any major way while the firm is still private.9 We identify IPOs using data
from 1970 through 2001 provided by Securities Data Corporation (SDC). We include only common

9

This is particularly true if we count venture capitalists as insiders, which is highly likely given that they often hold
a seat on the board of directors.
6

stock offerings and we eliminate any IPOs in SDC that are flagged as reverse LBOs, spinoffs, rights
offerings, or unit offerings. This process leaves us with 9,057 IPOs.
SDC data on IPOs are matched with CRSP using 6-digit cusips. Based on SIC codes reported in
CRSP, we also exclude regulated utilities (SIC codes 4900-4949) and financial institutions (SIC codes in
the 6000 range), on the assumption that the relation between fundamental characteristics and firm
ownership differ for these firms because of regulatory constraints.10 In cases where trading prices are
available on CRSP prior to the IPO date reported by SDC, we exclude the firm, on the assumption that the
IPO information is incorrect. Because our sample dates to 1970 and includes many NASDAQ firms, we
allow a firm to be in the data even if its first price in CRSP is substantially after the IPO. Otherwise,
CRSP coverage of NASDAQ firms, which begins in 1972, would greatly reduce the sample. This
procedure yields a total 6,319 IPO firms. We match SDC data to CRSP daily and monthly returns data
and use CRSP to obtain data on prices, returns, share volume, and shares outstanding.
We obtain data on insider ownership from Compact Disclosure, which is a CD-Rom product that is
produced each month. Compact Disclosure attempts to provide information on all firms that file with the
SEC and have assets in excess of $5 million. Because the differential information in each CD-Rom from
one month to the next is fairly small and we do not have access to all the CDs, we only use the October
CDs to produce the dataset. We have October CDs available from 1987 to 2002.11 Compact Disclosure
contains text versions of SEC filings and has the ability to create summary reports of many variables.
The main variable of interest for our analysis is the ratio of insiders’ holdings of common shares over
total shares outstanding (obtained from CRSP). Insiders are defined as officers and directors of the firm in
Compact Disclosure. Our insider ownership variable is therefore the same as the one used, for instance,
in Himmelberg, Hubbard, and Palia (1999). Obviously, our ownership data is only as good as the proxy

10

See Demsetz and Lehn (1985) for evidence of the importance of regulation for corporate ownership.
For 1988 and 1995, we sample ownership in November instead of in October, and for 1987 we use the CD from
January 1988.
7

11

data reported to the SEC. The proxy data may lead us to understate inside ownership if insiders disavow
blocks they effectively control.
Researchers have compared ownership data from Compact Disclosure to ownership data from other
data sources as well as from proxies. Anderson and Lee (1997) find that Corporate Text dominates
Compact Disclosure as a data source, but these two data sources are better than Spectrum or Value Line.
The disadvantage of Corporate Text for our study is that it covers primarily NYSE and AMEX firms
before 1995 and is therefore unsuitable for our sample, in which NYSE-listed firms represent only 15% of
our firm-years. Anderson and Lee (1997) conclude that the advantage of Corporate Text over Compact
Disclosure is due to a significant extent to firms with dual class shares. In the reported results, we use
firms with dual class shares. We investigate whether our results are affected by these firms. As Gompers,
Ishii, and Metrick (2004) point out, there is no easy way to identify dual-class firms. To identify these
firms in our sample, we follow their method and classify as dual-class firms those firms that have
multiple CUSIP numbers that differ in their 7th and 8th digits.12 Our sample includes 5.94% of firm-year
observations from firms that have dual class shares according to this criterion. We estimate our
regressions without these firms and find that our results are not affected by them. While Anderson and
Lee (1997) use a panel of firms for 1992, McConnell, Servaes, and Lins (2005) compare ownership from
Compact Disclosure to ownership obtained directly from proxies for a sample of 200 randomly selected
firms from 1992 through 1997. They find that the correlation coefficient between the two ownership
sources is 0.92.
Compact Disclosure reports the number of shares held by insiders as of a certain date and it also
reports shares outstanding, but the latter is often as of another date. When Compact Disclosure reports
the proxy date, we obtain the total number of shares from CRSP for the same month as the date of the

12

They use two additional criteria. One uses new issues from SDC and the other uses information from the Investor
Responsibility Research Center (IRRC).
8

proxy. If Compact Disclosure reports more than one proxy date, we take the latest date reported.13 For
example, if a CD-Rom dated October 1993 has two proxy filings, one from March 1993 and another from
March 1992, as well as a 10-K from June 1993, we assume the ownership data are as of March 1993.
Since for a typical (October) CD, the latest proxy date is either from the beginning of the corresponding
year or from December of the previous year, we assign the ownership information to the previous
calendar year. In the above example, we assume that ownership for the 1992 calendar year is given by the
data of March 1993.14
Our sample of insider ownership data spans the years 1986-2001. Consequently, we are able to track
ownership from 1986 onward. The insider ownership of a firm that had an IPO in 1972 would therefore
be tracked from 1986. For some firms we can track ownership from the time of the IPO onward for more
than a decade. For other firms, the first year of ownership data may be up to 16 years after the IPO.
Compact Disclosure is matched to CRSP using 6-digit cusips. Once the ownership data and CRSP
are matched, we match this data to the IPO data via cusips. Our final sample contains 5,281 firms for
which at least one year of Compustat data and ownership data are available.
Table 1 provides information on our sample for different IPO years. Not surprisingly, the number of
IPOs varies sharply over time. We have a large number of IPOs in the first few years of the sample
period, but then there is a dramatic lull in the IPO market until the early 1980s. The market slows down
towards the late 1980s before rebounding again in the early 1990s. It slows down sharply at the end of
our sample period. For the IPOs before 1986, we lose a large number of observations when we require
CRSP data and then many more observations when we merge with Compact Disclosure. The latter is
mostly due to the fact many IPO firms from the 1970s and early 1980s do not survive until 1986, the first

13

This matching procedure results in insiders owning more than 100% of the shares for 549 firm-years out of 27,512
firm-years. We eliminate these cases in our analysis.
14
If Compact Disclosure doesn't report a proxy date for a particular firm but it reports insider ownership for that
firm, we compute the insider ownership share as the ratio of the number of shares held by insiders over the number
of shares outstanding at the end of the previous year. For instance, if the October 1993 CR-Rom reports insider
ownership without a proxy date, we divide insider ownership by shares outstanding at the end of 1992 and use that
ratio as our insider ownership measure for 1992.
9

year with information about insider ownership. As a result, for the 1970s, we lose more than threequarters of the IPO firms. After 1986, we still lose a substantial number of firms when we merge with
CRSP and drop utilities and financial firms, but merging with Compact Disclosure has a minimal impact
on sample size.
We use data from SDC to determine if an IPO is venture-backed. SDC is also the source of data on
seasoned equity offerings (SEOs) and mergers (especially those involving stock swaps). We also rely on
daily data in CRSP to obtain estimates of idiosyncratic volatility from market model regressions, the
exchange on which the firm is listed, and for calculating the daily turnover of the NYSE firms and of the
Nasdaq firms. All remaining data are obtained from Compustat.

3. When do firms become widely held?
In this section, we investigate the path to dispersed ownership for the firms in our sample. We
conduct our investigation using two different samples: the continuous ownership data sample and the
whole sample. The continuous sample includes firms with continuous ownership data from the IPO to the
year when they have their first missing observation or the year when they first become widely held.15 By
construction, this sample includes firms with IPOs from 1986 onward. Though many of our results use
only the continuous sample, we also report some results that use all our firms, including firms that had
their IPO between 1970 and 1985 and for which ownership data is available only after 1985. This sample
(we call it the whole sample) uses data from any IPO firm that has data on Compustat, CRSP, and
Compact Disclosure. The benefit of using the whole sample is that it allows us to track ownership of
firms up to 31 years after their IPO. In contrast, a firm in the continuous sample can be tracked no more
than 16 years from its IPO.
Figure 1 shows the distribution of insider ownership changes for firms in the whole sample. It is
immediately obvious that many more changes in ownership are negative than positive. The mean change
15

We also use a sample where we add firms to the continuous sample that have gaps in their data not exceeding two
years. Our results also hold for this sample.
10

in ownership is -2.07% per firm-year and the median is -0.30%. Both figures are statistically different
from zero. The distribution is only slightly skewed to the left (the skewness is -0.37) and has high
kurtosis (14.52).
Table 2 also uses the whole sample. It provides statistics on insider ownership in event time starting
with the first year following the IPO. For instance, we find that in year 5 after the IPO the median insider
ownership is 21.11%. It is interesting to note that the comparable figure for that year reported by
Mikkelson, Partch, and Shah (1997) is 28.6%, substantially higher than our estimate, but their median
ownership after 10 years is 17.9%, which is very close to our estimate of 18.33%. Our estimate is based
on a sample with roughly 15 times as many observations as their sample of IPOs from 1980 through
1983. Another useful benchmark for our ownership data is the work of Holderness, Krozner, and Sheehan
(1999). They examine insider ownership across 4,200 exchange-listed firms in 1995. They find that
average insider holdings are 21% and median insider holdings are 14%. Consequently, the average and
median insider holdings of our IPO firms match the average and median of the population after 25 years.
Viewed from this perspective, it takes a long time for the ownership of IPO firms to look like the
ownership of the population of firms.
Average insider ownership is 38.22% at the end of the first year after the IPO and falls steadily over
time, nearly dropping in half over thirty years. However, the sample size falls sharply over time. While
we have 3,878 firms in year 1, we end up having only 70 firms in year 30. The second column provides
the 25th percentile of the distribution. We see that by year 5, a quarter of the sample’s ownership level is
below the 10% threshold. The level of ownership for this percentile drops by almost three quarters over
thirty years. The median holdings fall more quickly than the mean holdings, indicating that the
distribution of ownership is skewed to the right. The 75th percentile falls less sharply than the 25th
percentile, since it drops by less than half over thirty years.
LLS call firms widely held if the controlling shareholder controls less than 10% of the votes with one
threshold or less than 20% of the votes with the other. Our ownership measure is slightly different since
11

we focus on ownership of cash flow rights by insiders. We follow their approach and compute the fraction
of firms where insiders own less than 10% of cash flow rights (WH10) and the fraction of firms where
they hold less than 20% (WH20). We find that only one firm in 8 meets the 10% standard and slightly
more than one firm in 5 meets the 20% standard at the end of the year after the IPO. This shows that using
these thresholds it is infrequent for a firm to be widely held shortly after its IPO. However, the fraction of
firms that are widely held grows steadily. With the 20% standard, the median firm is widely held shortly
before year 10. For the 10% standard, it takes much longer for the median firm to be widely held. In fact,
after 30 years, the median firm is not widely held, but after that the number of firms in our sample
becomes quite small and hence not useful to reach robust conclusions. It follows from Table 2 that firms
become widely held fairly quickly on average using a 20% standard, but not using a 10% standard. In
light of the results of Holderness, Krozner, and Sheehan (1999), this may not be surprising since median
firm ownership is higher than 10% in their sample of 1995 firms. Nevertheless, close to one third of firms
are widely held after the tenth year following their IPO using the 10% standard.
Figure 2 provides another way to look at how firms become widely held over time. In that figure, we
use the continuous sample to show the change in insider ownership over time relative to ownership at the
time of the IPO. We exclude all firms that were widely held at the time of the IPO relative to the 10%
threshold, as they are unlikely to exhibit much change in inside ownership. The figure also shows that the
change in insider ownership is much larger in earlier years following the IPO than later. When we split
the sample period for the continuous sample into two subperiods of similar length, we find similar results
for both subperiods.
Another useful way to look at the data is to ask the question of how likely it is for a firm with
concentrated ownership entering year n after its IPO to become widely held in that year. Table 3 provides
estimates of such conditional probabilities. The Table includes only firms in the continuous sample as the
whole sample includes firms that might become widely held in the year or years for which we have no

12

data. With this sample, the number of firms that could become widely held after year 10 is less than 100
for each threshold.
The probability of becoming widely held at the 10% threshold is 10% or higher in only three years. In
contrast, the probability of becoming widely held at the 20% threshold is 10% or higher in most years.
This reflects the fact that a firm is much more likely to meet the 20% threshold than the 10% threshold.
There is no evidence that the probability of becoming widely held decreases monotonically over time, but
the highest probability is in year 1 for both thresholds. We see that each year we lose firms from our
sample. Except for the early years, we typically lose more firms than there are firms becoming widely
held.

4. How do large changes in the ownership share of insiders take place?
In this section, we investigate the nature of large inside ownership changes and the determinants of
such changes. As noted by Zhou (2001), insider ownership typically does not change much from year to
year. In our data, the mode of the distribution of changes is 0%. To understand changes in the ownership
share of insiders, we therefore analyze how significant changes in ownership take place and firm
characteristics that are correlated with such changes. We define a significant change in ownership as a
reduction in the ownership share of insiders of 5% of the firm’s equity or more. We use 5% because it
corresponds to the regulatory threshold for the definition of a block holding (Rule 13d-1(a) of the
Securities Exchange Act). So, a drop in the ownership share of insiders from 40% to 33% would
correspond to a significant reduction in insider ownership but a drop from 40% to 37% would not.
The ownership share of insiders can change because the number of shares held by insiders falls and/or
because the number of shares outstanding for the corporation increases. To account for the changes due to
each factor, we use the following decomposition of the change in the ownership share of insiders. Define
∆αt to be the change in the ownership share of insiders from t to t+1, St to be the number of shares held by

13

insiders at date t, and Nt the firm’s number of outstanding shares at date t. The ownership share of insiders
at t, αt, is equal to St/Nt. With this notation, we have:

⎛S ⎞ ⎛S ⎞ S
S − ∆S ∆S St +1 St +1
∆α t = ⎜ t +1 ⎟ − ⎜ t ⎟ = t +1 − t +1
=
+
−
N
N
N
N
N
N
Nt
t +1
t
t
t +1
⎝ t +1 ⎠ ⎝ t ⎠
∆S St +1 N t St +1 N t +1 ∆S St +1∆N
=
+
−
=
−
N t N t +1 N t N t N t +1
N t N t +1 N t
=

(1)

∆S
∆N
− α t +1
Nt
Nt

The first term in the last line of equation (1) is the change in α explained by changes in the number of
shares held by insiders (the numerator of the fractional ownership formula). The second term is the
change in inside ownership brought about by a change in the number of shares outstanding (the
denominator of the fractional ownership formula).
We use equation (1) to understand better how ownership changes. Table 4 shows the distribution of
significant changes in the ownership share of insiders. We find that both the average and median changes
in insider ownership are large in years in which insider ownership decreases by at least 5%. In particular,
the mean decrease is 15%. Using our decomposition, we find that on average the change in insider
ownership due to sales by insiders is slightly higher than the change in insider ownership due to the
increase in the number of shares. The number of shares outstanding can increase because of a variety of
reasons. For instance, it increases when the firm issues shares, when it pays for a merger with shares, and
when executives exercise stock options. It follows, therefore, that mergers are a less important contributor
to the reduction of the insider ownership share than sales of shares by insiders. This result contrasts
sharply with the conclusion of Franks, Mayer, and Rossi (2004) for the U.K. The relative importance of
sales by insiders is greater when we consider medians.
We also collect information on secondary offerings from SDC. These are likely to be sales of stock
by the insiders in a public offering, although they could be sales by blockholders who do not have a seat
14

on the board of directors. To be conservative, we use secondary offerings for the three-year window
centered on the year of significant insider ownership change. This window ensures that we include all
secondary offerings that could possibly be related to the change in insider ownership. Using a three-year
window provides an upper-bound to the change in ownership that can be accounted for by secondary
offerings. We find that secondary offerings account for a small fraction of the change in inside ownership
on average.
To consider more directly the role of share issues and the reason for such issues, we investigate the
change in shares outstanding brought about by equity issues and mergers around the years in which
insider ownership changes by more than 5%. We again use a three-year window. We find that shares
issued through SEOs and mergers represent a small fraction of the increase in shares. This result is
surprising. An obvious worry is that SDC does not record some of the seasoned issues and mergers of the
firms in our sample because these firms are too small for their transactions to be noticed. Thus, we
investigate whether the results are different if we split our sample into large and small firms. We find that
Table 4 is very similar if we only include the large firms in our sample. It seems, therefore, that a more
likely explanation for our results on SEOs and mergers is that options, private equity placements, and
convertible conversions play an important role for firms that have recently completed their IPO.

5. Why do firms have large changes in ownership?
We now consider why firms have large changes in insider ownership that bring them closer to being
widely held. Is it because of changes in optimal insider ownership that are consistent with the moral
hazard and information asymmetry theories discussed in the introduction or because of windows of
opportunity that enable insiders to sell shares and firms to issue shares at prices they find advantageous?
In this section, we estimate probit regressions where the dependent variable takes value one if the firm
experiences a decrease in insider ownership of at least 5% during a period. Therefore, the coefficient on a
variable that makes it more likely that a firm experiences such an insider ownership decrease should be
15

positive. Note that our regressions include lagged insider ownership as an explanatory variable, so that we
are examining the relation between the explanatory variables and the probability of a large decrease in
insider ownership conditional on a given level of insider ownership. The sample uses any IPO firm with
data on Compustat, CRSP, and Compact Disclosure that is not widely-held at the beginning of the year
using the 10% threshold.
The variables that the theories deem important and the proxies we use for them are as follows:

1. Level of insider ownership. If it is costly for insiders to bear firm risk, they are more likely
to decrease their holdings if their holdings are large. We therefore expect a positive
coefficient on this variable.
2. Venture capital. VCs typically hold a seat on the board of directors (Baker and Gompers,
2003), which means they are classified as insiders according to our data source, Compact
Disclosure. Given that VCs aggressively cash out within a few years of the IPO (Field and
Hanka, 2001), IPOs with VC backing would be more likely to experience substantial
decreases in insider ownership. We expect a positive coefficient on this variable.
3. Firm size. We expect larger firms to have fewer information asymmetries. The relation
between size and moral hazard is unclear. Larger firms are more monitored by institutional
shareholders, analysts, the press, and regulators. However, they are less likely to be taken
over and atomistic shareholders find coordination costs prohibitive. We use two size proxies.
First, we use the logarithm of total assets. Second, we use a dummy variable if a firm has
market value of equity greater than the 25th percentile of NYSE firm. The dummy variable is
used to capture a potential threshold effect where firms become more monitored as they stop
belonging to the “small-firm” asset class.
4. Book-to-market ratio. Lower book-to-market ratio firms have more intangibles, so that the
information asymmetry theories would predict that such firms should have higher insider
16

ownership. A low ratio could indicate that the firm has high growth opportunities. High
growth opportunities suggest more discretion on the part of management, which would lead
to higher optimal insider holdings, but might also correspond to greater alignment of
incentives between insiders and outside shareholders if insiders are empire-builders, which
would lead to lower optimal insider holdings (see Stulz, 1990). Finally, window of
opportunity theories would predict that firms are more likely to become diffusely held when
their valuation is high.
5. Hard assets. We use the ratio of property, plant and equipment to total assets as our measure
of hard assets. There is less scope for discretionary spending in firms with more hard assets
(Gertler and Hubbard, 1993). Moral hazard theories therefore predict a positive coefficient on
our proxy for hard assets.
6. Funding needs. Firms with less operating cash flow and more capital expenditures have
greater funding needs, so that we would expect insider ownership to drop. Otherwise, if
insider ownership is maintained constant, the firm is restricted in its ability to raise equity by
the wealth constraints of the insiders. Further, Jensen (1986) expects higher agency costs for
firms with higher free cash flow for given insider ownership. We therefore expect optimal
insider ownership to be higher with higher free cash flow, so that the coefficient on free cash
flow is expected to be negative both because of moral hazard considerations and because of
funding considerations. We use EBITDA as our cash flow measure. For given investment
opportunities, an increase in EBITDA corresponds to an increase in free cash flow.
7. Capital expenditures. Free cash flow falls with capital expenditures, so that we would
expect firms with higher capital expenditures to be more likely to raise equity and see their
insider ownership fall. Yet, greater capital expenditures mean more discretion for insiders, so
that greater ownership would be required to insure that this discretion is used to benefit

17

shareholders. This tension makes the sign of the coefficient on capital expenditures
undetermined.
8. R&D spending. R&D spending differs from other capital expenditures in that it is associated
with more managerial discretion and greater information asymmetries. Firms with R&D
spending therefore should have higher optimal insider ownership (see Crutchley and Hansen,
1989, and Himmelberg, Hubbard, and Palia, 1999). We follow Himmelberg, Hubbard, and
Palia (1999) and use a dummy variable for firms that report R&D spending and a level
variable which is R&D spending divided by total assets. We therefore expect a negative
coefficient on a dummy variable that takes value one for firms that report R&D spending and
a negative coefficient on the level variable.
9. Dividends. Dividends reduce the intensity of agency problems by leaving fewer resources
under the discretion of management and reduce information asymmetries through signaling.
We therefore expect dividend payers to have lower optimal insider holdings and hence the
coefficient on a dummy variable that takes value one if a firm pays dividends to be negative.
10. Leverage. Leverage controls agency problems (see Jensen, 1986, and Stulz, 1990) so that we
expect more highly levered firms to be more diffusely held in equilibrium. Further, firms with
high leverage are more likely to be firms that have too much debt, so that we would expect
them to issue equity. As they issue equity, insider ownership falls, so that these
considerations suggest a negative coefficient on leverage. However, if insiders are concerned
about control, they will choose high leverage precisely so that they can afford a large
proportional stake in the firm’s cash flows, leading to a positive association between leverage
and ownership (see Stulz, 1988).
11. Volatility. Volatility reduces the expected utility of insiders for a given stake in their firm, so
that it makes them more likely to sell. However, volatility should also make them less likely
to sell since information asymmetries are more important with greater volatility. Some
18

authors also use volatility as a proxy for diversity of opinion and we would expect firms to be
less likely to increase their float if diversity of opinion is higher.16 It follows that the
coefficient on volatility is ambiguous. However, if information asymmetries can be
neglected, the coefficient on volatility is unambiguously negative. We use the volatility of the
residual of a one-year market model regression as our measure of volatility.
12. Turnover. Turnover is often used as a proxy for liquidity. Greater turnover means that the
market for shares is deeper, so that sales by insiders have less of a price impact and insiders
are more likely to sell shares.17 Because volume is measured differently on Nasdaq and on the
NYSE, we use separate turnover variables for Nasdaq firms and NYSE firms.18 Note that
Nasdaq-listed firms represent 86% of the firm-year observations in our sample.
13. Past and contemporaneous returns. Greater past returns mean that the firm has performed
well, so that moral hazard considerations imply lower equilibrium insider holdings because
insiders have built a reputation. Further, high past performance is associated with a deeper
market for a firm’s stock.19 Individuals are generally contrarian investors.20 We would
therefore expect insiders who do not act on the behalf of institutions to be more likely to sell
following high returns.

Table 5 compares firm characteristics at the end of year t-1 (except for contemporaneous returns) for
the firms that experience a decrease in insider ownership of more than 5% in year t with those that do not.
Strikingly, most differences are significant. Since means can be influenced by outliers, we pay more
attention to medians. As predicted, we find that firms that experience large decreases in insider ownership

16

See Moeller, Schlingemann, and Stulz (2005) and Baker, Coval, and Stein (2005).
Turnover is sometimes used as a proxy for differences of opinion or information asymmetries (see, for instance,
Dierkens, 1991, and Chen, Hong, and Stein, 2001). These considerations would predict a negative coefficient on
turnover.
18
See Atkins and Dyl (1997).
19
See Chordia, Huh, and Subrahmanyam (2004).
20
See, for instance, Kaniel, Saar, and Titman (2004) and the references therein.
19
17

in a given year have more insider ownership the year before, a lower book to market ratio, higher
turnover, and higher contemporaneous and past returns.21 The difference in contemporaneous and past
returns is particularly striking since the firms with significant changes outperform those without such
changes by more than ten percent in the current year and in the previous year. Firms experiencing large
decreases in firm ownership are smaller when size is measured by the book value of assets than other
firms. This is most likely due to the fact that larger firms have lower insider ownership to start with.
Further, the firms that decrease ownership have a lower ratio of property, plant, and equipment to assets,
greater volatility, lower leverage, are more likely to report R&D expenses, have higher R&D expenses,
and are less likely to pay dividends. The univariate comparisons show that capital market variables have
the predicted effects, but the comparisons for firm fundamentals do not always correspond to the
predictions. The explanation for the mixed results for the comparisons of the fundamental characteristics
could be that correlations among these characteristics obscure their true relationship with the probability
of significant changes in ownership. We therefore turn to multiple regressions to examine whether that is
the case.
Table 6 estimates probit regressions to investigate the impact of these variables on the probability of
firms experiencing sizeable changes in insider ownership. We define a sizeable insider change to be one
where insider ownership falls by 5% or more for a firm with insider ownership in excess of 10% at the
beginning of the year. When considering whether a drop in insider ownership of 5% or more takes place
in the t-th year following the IPO, all our explanatory variables are from year t-1 except for
contemporaneous firm, industry, and market returns. The other explanatory variables could be directly
affected in year t by the change in ownership. This seems impossible for industry and market returns and
the existence of a direct impact on calendar-year firm returns is questionable. It seems reasonable
therefore to consider our explanatory variables to be predetermined rather than determined jointly with
the change in ownership. The first regression is a pooled regression that uses all firm-years. The next five
21

Note that the raw sample has firms with negative book-to-market, but these firms drop out as we impose our
various data requirements so that they are not in the sample used to estimate our regressions.
20

regressions are regression estimates for each year for the first five years following the IPO. The last
regression uses all firm-years for firms past the fifth year from their IPO. The regressions for the
subsamples allow the explanatory variables to affect the probability of large changes in insider ownership
differently depending on the level of maturity of the firm.
We find that firms with larger insider ownership and firms with venture capital investors are more
likely to experience a large drop in insider ownership as predicted. Firm size predicts larger drops in
insider ownership, but this effect seems restricted to the early years only. The dummy variable is never
significant. Book-to-market always has a negative coefficient which is significant in all years but year 5.
Property, plant, and equipment is significantly negative in one regression and significantly positive in
another. Our cash flow measure has a negative coefficient in all regressions, so that insiders not pushed
by financing needs are less likely to sell shares. Alternatively, it could be that firms with high cash flow
have more agency problems as in Jensen (1986). However, it seems that the ability to generate cash plays
a more important role than the demand for cash to invest. Capital expenditures do not affect the
probability of large decreases in insider ownership. The coefficient on R&D expenditures is positive and
significant in five regressions, while the dummy variable for firms that report R&D is significantly
negative in two regressions. Leverage is significantly negative in one regression and significantly positive
in another. Volatility is significant and positive in year one, but in no other year. Turnover for NYSE
firms is significant in the pooled regression and in one other regression, whereas turnover for Nasdaq
firms is significant in all regressions but one. Finally, turning to returns, the firm’s return is always
positive and significant and the lagged return is positive and significant in every regression but one. The
contemporaneous industry return is also positive and significant, but the lagged industry return is almost
never significant. The market return mostly does not seem to affect the probability of large decreases in
ownership, though the coefficient in the pooled regression is positive and significant for the
contemporaneous market return.

21

The evidence presented in Table 6 indicates that the initial level of insider ownership, funding needs,
book-to-market, turnover, and contemporaneous and lagged firm returns are the main drivers of large
decreases in insider ownership. The other variables, which play a role in the moral hazard and information
asymmetry theories, are generally not significant. The message is very much that insider ownership falls
when the shares trade at a high price relative to the book value of their assets and relative to their past
value, and when the market for the shares is more liquid. The variables emphasized by the moral hazard
and information asymmetry theories seem of second-order importance.
There is a large literature in finance which relates Tobin’s q to managerial ownership.22 Tobin’s q is
closely related to the inverse of book-to-market. This literature often focuses on the existence of a nonlinear relation between q and managerial ownership where an increase in managerial ownership leads to a
higher q at least for low levels of managerial ownership. There is a great deal of debate as to whether q is
high because insider ownership is high or whether a high q is associated with higher optimal insider
ownership. Tobin’s q is negatively related to the book-to-market coefficient. In this paper, we therefore
add a different consideration, namely that a high q leads to a subsequent decrease in managerial
ownership. At least for firms close to their IPO, this result seems difficult to square with the argument
that a high q leads to a high optimal amount of insider ownership.
In Table 6, a firm’s explanatory variables reflect past cumulative changes in these variables. In table
7, we use instead the lagged change in these variables (i.e., the change from t-2 to t-1) with two
exceptions. First, returns are flow variables already, so it would make no sense to difference them.
Second, we keep the level of insider ownership to investigate whether a high level predicts a decrease in
insider ownership. We do the same for the VC variable. By using lagged changes, we lose the regression
for year 1 that we were able to estimate in Table 6. The only variables that are consistently significant are
the level of insider ownership, firm returns, and lagged firms returns, and contemporaneous industry
returns. The higher a firm’s insider holdings, the more likely the firm is to experience a large drop in

22

See Demsetz and Villalonga (2001) for a review of this literature.
22

insider holdings. As before, firms are more likely to experience a large drop in insider holdings if they
perform well. None of the variables that proxy for moral hazard problems or information asymmetries are
consistently significant. The pooled regression that uses the whole sample has mixed results. Increases in
R&D expenses make it more likely that a firm will experience a large drop in insider ownership in
contrast to agency theory predictions, but an increase in plant, property, and equipment also makes such a
drop more likely in conformity with these predictions. Overall, the regressions seem therefore most
consistently supportive of windows of opportunity theories. However, surprisingly, changes in turnover
are not significant.
We explored the robustness of our conclusions by changing the explanatory variables in our
regressions. We were concerned that market variables are correlated with variables that are important for
the moral hazard and information asymmetry theories. We therefore re-estimated our regressions without
any of the market variables. Doing so had no impact on our conclusions. The regressions we report have
neither time nor industry dummies. We added such dummies, but doing so had no impact on our
conclusions because these dummies are generally not significant. Finally, we estimated the regressions
using only one size variable and one R&D variable. Doing so does not affect our conclusions.

6. Estimating the conditional probability that a firm will become widely-held
In the previous section, we studied the probability that insiders in a firm would decrease their
proportional holdings substantially. We saw that the evidence is mostly supportive of theories that
emphasize capital market considerations. Insiders sell when they get a good price and the market for the
stock is good, causing insider ownership to fall over time. In this section, we focus on the probability that
a firm becomes widely held in one year given that it was not widely held the year before. To study this
issue, we estimate a hazard model.
A hazard function is similar to a logit function in that it estimates the probability of an event
occurring. In our case, we consider the event of becoming widely held, where we define widely held as
23

having less than 10% insider ownership (or, alternatively less than 20% insider ownership). A hazard
function differs from a logit in that it combines multiple periods together in one estimation procedure.
Moreover, the estimation procedure focuses on the conditional probability of becoming widely held (i.e.,
given that the firm was not widely held last period, what is the probability it will be this period?). Hazard
functions have been used in a variety of applications in finance, such as estimating the probability of bank
failure, prepayment of residential mortgages, predicting bankruptcy or default, and of a firm starting an
ADR program.23
One can apply a variety of different hazard function models to estimate the conditional probability of
becoming widely held. We apply the proportional hazard function of Cox (1975), which is a semiparametric approach that does not specify the parameters of the baseline hazard function. Rather, the
approach of a proportional hazard model is to estimate the covariates that shift a baseline hazard function
up or down. If a covariate has a significant positive coefficient, it means firms with above average values
of that factor are more likely to become diffusely held. Likewise, a significant negative coefficient
implies a downward shift of the baseline hazard function, or a lower probability of becoming widely held.
One receives a sense of the baseline hazard function from the data presented in Table 3. In fact, the
probabilities in Table 3 constitute what is known as the Kaplan-Meier estimate of the hazard function,
which is considered a good approximation of the baseline hazard. The idea of the Kaplan-Meier estimate
is to report the conditional probability of an event occurring in each interval, where the probability is
conditional on having survived up to the beginning of the interval. In the case of the Kaplan-Meier
estimator, the probability is approximated by the frequency of events. In our case, it is the fraction of
firms that become widely held during the interval, conditional on not having been widely held before.
An important aspect of this calculation involves the use of data from firms that do not provide
complete data. Suppose we observe a firm’s inside ownership from the year of the IPO and each year

23

See Lane, Looney and Wansley (1986), Whalen (1991) and Helwege (1996), Schwartz and Torous (1993),
McDonald and Van de Gucht (1999), Shumway (2001), and Doidge, Karolyi, Lins, Miller, and Stulz (2005).
24

thereafter for five years. This firm is not widely held at any point while we have data for it and we cease
to observe its insider holdings after five years. This is an example of a censored observation. Censored
observations contribute to the estimation by being included in the group of firms at risk of becoming
widely held. Table 3 shows the number of firms at risk of being widely held at the beginning of the year
(but are not yet widely held), including firms that may not be observed two or ten years later. In order for
this step to be considered proper in the estimation of a hazard function, we must have confidence that the
censored observations are randomly missing. For example, we would be very suspicious of a dataset
where 90% of the observations dropped out the year before they became widely held. Likewise, we
would doubt the results using a sample where firms were more likely to drop from the sample the longer
they were not widely held. Thus, we consider why we cease to observe firms’ data in the sample after
some length of time. The reasons are likely to be bankruptcy, mergers, failure to be included in one of
our databases (Compact Disclosure, CRSP or Compustat, probably due to size but also possibly due to
distress), and poor matching of datasets due to identifiers changing over time. The bankrupt firms cannot
become widely held if they liquidate; the firms that disappear because of a merger with a public firm may
become widely held as a result of the acquisition; the firms acquired by a private firm are much less likely
to become widely held; and the remaining missing observations are probably truly randomly missing. We
believe the overall impact is a set of missing observations that are random vis-à-vis the probability of
becoming widely held.
Table 8 shows the results of the hazard model estimation. We use the same explanatory variables as
in Table 6 except for insider ownership. It does not make sense to use insider ownership since our
dependent variable is a step function of insider ownership. As before, we use the 10% and 20% thresholds
for the definition of a widely-held firm. We report the number of events and the number of censored
observations. It is immediately apparent, but not surprising given the results in Table 3, that the number
of censored observations is large compared to the number of events. For the 10% threshold, 90.39% of the
observations are censored observations. Recall that variables with positive coefficients shift the baseline
25

hazard function upward, meaning firms with high values of these characteristics are more likely to
become widely held.
We first turn to the results that hold irrespective of the definition of a widely held firm we adopt. As
expected, firms with VC investments, larger firms, firms with a lower book-to-market ratio, firms with
lower cash flow, firms with greater turnover, and firms with higher contemporaneous returns are more
likely to become widely held irrespective of the definition of a widely held firm used. However, the
threshold size variable is never significant. The coefficient on the book-to-market ratio seems inconsistent
with the claims in the literature that a high Tobin’s q leads to greater insider ownership. Surprisingly, the
ratio of plant, property, and equipment to assets has a negative significant coefficient. Further, firms that
report R&D are more likely to become widely held, which appears to be inconsistent with the predictions
of the moral hazard and information asymmetry models. The coefficient on R&D expenses is not
significant. The coefficient on dividends is insignificant for the 10% threshold, but significantly positive
at the 20% threshold.
The coefficient on leverage is significantly negative. Models that emphasize entrenchment by insiders
are consistent with a negative coefficient, since in such models insiders would want high leverage so that
they can afford a large fraction of the votes (see Stulz, 1988). With moral hazard theories, we would
expect that higher leverage decreases ownership concentration since higher leverage keeps managers on a
tighter leash (see Jensen, 1986, and Stulz, 1990). The evidence does not seem supportive of these
theories. However, if high leverage is the outcome of financial distress, insiders would find it costly to
decrease their ownership shares in a way that decreases leverage because doing so would involve issuing
equity precisely when the underinvestment problem of Myers (1978) is likely to be severe. From a
window of opportunity perspective, insiders might also think that their firm is undervalued when leverage
is high, so that they would be reluctant to take actions that decrease their ownership share.

26

The coefficient on volatility is significantly negative so that high volatility firms are less likely to
become widely held. Volatility plays a dual role in the theories considered in this paper.24 High volatility
forces insiders to bear more risk, which makes it more valuable for them to decrease their stake. However,
high volatility also means greater information asymmetry and greater managerial discretion, which makes
it costly for insiders to decrease their stake. Our evidence is consistent with Demsetz and Lehn (1985)
who state that “noisier environments should give rise to more concentrated ownership structures” (p.
1159). In their empirical work, volatility is positively correlated with ownership concentration.
Himmelberg, Hubbard, and Palia (1999) do not find a relation between ownership and volatility when
they allow for firm fixed effects, but find a negative relation when they do not. As with our probit
regression, turnover is strongly positively related to the probability of becoming widely held.
The contemporaneous return on the firm’s stock is positively related to the probability that the firm
will become widely held, but the lagged return is not. The insignificant coefficient on lagged return
suggests that the windows of opportunity theory may not be an important determinant of the probability
of becoming widely held since with that theory, firms would issue equity and insiders would sell after the
firm has had high returns, but any strong conclusion should be tempered by the fact that contemporaneous
returns have a significant positive coefficient. However, if there is an optimal level of insider ownership
that is not trivial, firms that already have low insider ownership are unlikely to dilute the stake of insiders
further just because of the existence of a window of opportunity since that might lead them to have too
little insider ownership. In contrast, firms that have substantial insider ownership may have been waiting
for the right conditions to dilute the stake of the insiders, but these firms are unlikely to become widely
held.
We examined the robustness of our conclusions from the hazard function estimates in a variety of
ways. In particular, we extended the sample to include firms for which insider ownership data was
missing up to three years. We also used industry dummy variables and only lagged variables. Finally, we
24

Prendergast (2002) shows that the empirical evidence on the relation between volatility and optimal managerial
ownership is ambiguous and that on theoretical grounds the relation is complex.
27

used only one size variable and one R&D variable. Our main conclusions are robust to these alternative
specifications.

7. Conclusion
In this paper, we show that insider ownership falls steadily following the IPO. While half the firms
have less than 20% insider ownership 10 years after the IPO, we have no post-IPO year in our sample
where more than half the firms have more than 10% insider ownership. Nevertheless, compared to most
countries, the fraction of firms with less than 10% of insider ownership is large as it exceeds 30% 10
years after the IPO.
Surprisingly in light of the U.K. evidence, a major factor for the evolution of the ownership structure
of U.S. firms is that insiders sell shares in substantial amounts, so that ownership becomes more diffuse
about as much because of a reduction in shares held by insiders as because of an increase in shares
outstanding. Moreover, the dilution that occurs via SEOs and mergers is only a fraction of the total
dilution associated with increased shares outstanding.
We use two different approaches to understand why firms become widely held. With the first
approach, we investigate the determinants of large decreases in ownership. Firms experience such large
decreases mostly because the stock has a good market. In particular, the firm is highly valued by the
markets, its stock market performance has been good, and its stock has enough liquidity so that more
shares can be sold with limited market pressure. Further, when we try to explain the likelihood of large
drops in insider ownership with recent changes in firm characteristics, the firm’s contemporaneous and
lagged stock-price changes are the only consistently significant variables. With the second approach, we
estimate a hazard model that allows us to understand the determinants of a firm’s conditional probability
of becoming widely held. Again, we find that highly valued firms and high turnover firms are more likely
to become widely held. With this approach, we estimate the probability that a firm will end up with

28

diffuse ownership. We find that some variables emphasized by moral hazard and asymmetric information
models significantly affect this probability in the predicted direction, but some do not.
Our results show that the market for a firm’s stock and its stock’s market performance are critical
determinants of the evolution of its ownership. One might be tempted to conclude that it is so because
these variables capture better the extent to which moral hazard and asymmetric information problems
affect a firm. Such a conclusion finds little support in regressions without market variables, but it is
possible that the variables we and the literature have used to proxy for moral hazard and asymmetric
information problems do a poor job of capturing these problems. The evidence is much more supportive
of a view that insiders sell shares and reduce their holdings when they can do so without putting too much
pressure on the stock price by selling shares. Whether firms end up with really low insider ownership
through that process does depend on variables that capture moral hazard and asymmetric information
problems. Our regressions make stock market liquidity a key determinant of the composition of a firm’s
ownership. To the extent that liquidity is more easily obtained for smaller stocks in the U.S. than in most
other countries, our results help understand why firms in the U.S. are more likely to be widely held.

29

References
Anderson, R. C., and D. S. Lee, 1997, Ownership studies: The data source does matter, Journal of
Financial and Quantitative Analysis 32, 311-329.
Atkins, A.B., and E.A. Dyl, 1997, Market structure and reported trading volume: NASDAQ versus the
NYSE, Journal of Financial Research 20, 291-304.
Bagwell, L.S., 1991, Shareholder heterogeneity: Evidence and implications, American Economic Review
81, 218-221.
Baker, M., J. Coval, and J.C. Stein, 2005. Corporate financing decisions when investors take the path of
least resistance, unpublished paper, Harvard Economics Department, Cambridge, MA.
Baker, M., and P. A. Gompers, 2003, The determinants of board structure at the initial public offering,
Journal of Law and Economics 46, 569-598.
Baker, M., and J. Stein, 2004, Market liquidity as a sentiment indicator, Journal of Financial Markets 7,
271-299.
Baker, M., and J. Wurgler, 2002, Market timing and capital structure, Journal of Finance 57, 1-32.
Becht, M., and B. de Long, 2005, Why has there been so little blockholding in America?, unpublished
paper, University of California at Berkeley, Berkeley, CA.
Berle, A, and G. Means, 1932, The modern corporation and private property, McMillan, New York, NY.
Benninga, S., Helmantel, and O. Sarig, 2005, The timing of initial public offerings, Journal of Financial
Economics 75, 115-132.
Chen, J., H. Hong, and J. C. Stein, 2001, Forecasting crashes: Trading volume, past returns, and
conditional skewness in stock prices, Journal of Financial Economics 61, 345-381.
Chordia, T., S.-W. Huh, and A. Subrahmanyam, 2004, The cross-section of expected trading activity,
unpublished working paper, UCLA, Los Angeles, CA.
Clarke, J., C. Dunbar and K. Kahle, 2004, The long-run performance of secondary equity issues: A test of
the windows of opportunity hypothesis, Journal of Business 77, 575-603.
Cox, D., 1975, Partial likelihood, Biometrika 62, 269-276.
Crutchley, C.E., and R.S. Hansen, 1989, A test of the agency theory of managerial ownership, corporate
leverage, and corporate dividends, Financial Management (Winter), 36-46.
Demsetz, H., and K. Lehn, 1985, The structure of corporate ownership: Cause and consequences, Journal
of Political Economy 93, 1155-1177.
Demsetz, H., and B. Villalonga, 2001, Ownership structure and corporate performance, Journal of
Corporate Finance 7, 209-233.
30

Dierkens, N., 1991, Information asymmetry and equity issues, Journal of Financial and Quantitative
Analysis 26, 181-200.
Doidge, C., A. Karolyi, K. Lins, D. Miller and R. Stulz 2005, Private benefits of control, ownership, and
the cross-listing decision, unpublished working paper, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH.
Fama, E., and K. French, 2005, Financing decisions: Who issues stock?, Journal of Financial Economics,
549-582.
Fama, E., and M.C. Jensen, 1983, Separation of ownership and control, Journal of Law and Economics
26, 302-325.
Field, L. C., and G. Hanka, 2001, The expiration of IPO share lockups, Journal of Finance 56, 471-500.
Franks, J., C. Mayer, and S. Rossi, 2004, Ownership: Evolution and Regulation, unpublished working
paper, London Business School, London, U.K.
Gertler, M. and R. G. Hubbard, 1993, Corporate financial policy, taxation, and macroeconomic risk, Rand
Journal of Economics 24, 286-303.
Gompers, P., J. Ishii, and A. Metrick, 2004, Incentives vs. control: An analysis of the U.S. dual-class
companies, unpublished working paper, The Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA.
Helwege, J., 1996, Determinants of savings and loan failures: Estimates of a time-varying proportional
hazard function, Journal of Financial Services Research 10, 373-392.
Himmelberg, C. P., R. G. Hubbard and D. Palia, 1999, Understanding the determinants of managerial
ownership and the link between ownership and performance, Journal of Financial Economics 53, 353384.
Holderness, C., R. Kroszner, and D. Sheehan, 1999, Were the good old days that good? Changes in
managerial stock ownership since the great depression, Journal of Finance 54, 435-469.
Jensen, M. C., 1986, Agency costs of free cash flow, corporate finance, and takeovers, American
Economic Review 76, 323-329.
Jensen, M. C., and W. H. Meckling, 1976, Theory of the firm: Managerial behavior, agency costs and
ownership structure, Journal of Financial Economics 3, 305-360.
Kaniel, R., G. Saar, and S. Titman, 2004, Individual investor sentiment and stock returns, unpublished
working paper, University of Texas, Austin, TX.
Keim, D.B., and A. Madhavan, 1996, The upstairs market for large-block transactions: Analysis and
measurement of price effects, Review of Financial Studies 9, 1-36.
La Porta, R., F. Lopez-De-Silanes and A. Shleifer, 1999, Corporate ownership around the world, Journal
of Finance 54, 471-517.
31

Lane, W.R., S.W. Looney, and J.W. Wansley, 1986, An application of the Cox proportional hazards
model to bank failure, Journal of Banking and Finance 10, 511-532.
Leland, H. E., and D. H. Pyle, 1977, Informational asymmetries, financial structure, and financial
intermediation, Journal of Finance 32, 371-387.
Maug, E., 2001, Ownership structure and the life-cycle of the firm: A theory of the decision to go public,
European Finance Review 5, 167-200.
McConnell, J., H. Servaes, and K. Lins, 2005, Changes in equity ownership and changes in the market
value of the firm, unpublished working paper, London Business School.
McDonald, C.G., and L.M. Van de Gucht, 1999, High-yield bond default and call risks, Review of
Economics and Statistics 18, 409-419.
Mikkelson, W., M.M. Partch, and K. Shah, 1997, Ownership and operating performance of companies
that go public, Journal of Financial Economics 44, 281-307.
Moeller, S., F. Schlingemann, and R.M. Stulz, 2005, Does investor diversity of opinion, information
asymmetry, or uncertainty resolution affect acquirer returns?, unpublished working paper, Fisher
College of Business, The Ohio State University.
Myers, S.C., and N.S. Majluf, 1984, Corporate financing and investment decisions when firms have
information that investors do not have, Journal of Financial Economics 13, 187-221.
Pastor, L, and P. Veronesi, 2005, Rational IPO waves, Journal of Finance, forthcoming.
Prendergast, C., 2002, The tenuous trade-off between risk and incentives, Journal of Political Economy
110, 1071-1102.
Roe, M., 2003, Political Determinants of Corporate Governance, Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Schultz, Paul, 2003, Pseudo market timing and the long-run underperformance of IPOs, Journal of
Finance 58, 483-518.
Schwartz, E.S. and W.N. Torous, 1993, Mortgage prepayment and default decisions: A Poisson
regression approach, American Real Estate and Urban Economics Association 21, 431-449.
Shleifer, Andrei and Robert W. Vishny, 1997, A survey of corporate governance, Journal of Finance 52,
737-783.
Shumway, T., 2001, Forecasting bankruptcy more accurately: A simple hazard model, Journal of
Business 74, 101-124.
Stulz, R. M., 1988, Managerial control of voting rights: Financing policies and the market for corporate
control, Journal of Financial Economics 20, 25-54.
Stulz, R. M., 1990, Managerial discretion and optimal financing policies, Journal of Financial Economics
26, 3-28.
32

Subrahmanyam, A., and S. Titman, 1999, The going-public decision and the development of financial
markets, Journal of Finance 54, 1045-1082.
Whalen, G., 1991, A proportional hazards model of bank failure: An examination of its usefulness as an
early warning tool, FRB Cleveland - Economic Review 27, 21-31.
Zhou, X., 2001, Understanding the determinants of managerial ownership and the link between ownership
and performance: comment, Journal of Financial Economics 62, 559-571.

33

Table 1
Description of the IPO Sample
The first column shows the number of IPOs in SDC Platinum that went public between 1970 and 2001,
excluding unit offerings, rights offerings, reverse LBOs, and spin-offs. The second column reports the
subset of these firms that are in CRSP from 1986 to 2001, excluding utilities and financial firms (based on
SIC codes reported in CRSP). The third column reports the number of firms with non-missing insider
ownership information in Compact Disclosure for at least one year over the 1986 – 2001 period.

Year

Sample from SDC
Platinum

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979
1980
1981
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
Total

218
238
467
91
8
6
39
27
35
59
125
278
88
521
243
245
524
380
217
172
152
277
419
638
491
485
749
537
352
506
363
107
9,057

Sample after
Sample after
merging with
merging with
CRSP and
Compact Disclosure
excluding utilities requiring one year of
and financials
ownership data
109
167
365
48
6
5
29
16
27
43
88
223
83
412
175
164
308
227
95
102
96
201
258
382
336
401
587
375
224
400
315
52
6,319

34

27
58
104
16
3
3
10
5
13
21
47
124
46
331
132
143
280
209
90
101
86
198
253
376
331
396
570
367
211
384
301
45
5,281

Table 2
Distribution of the Levels of Insider Ownership Following an IPO
Shares held by insiders as a percent of outstanding shares. The WH10 (WH20) column presents the
fraction of firms with a percentage insider ownership less than 10% (20%) of total number of shares
outstanding (widely held firms). The initial sample is from SDC Platinum and covers all firms that went
public between 1970 and 2001, excluding unit offerings, rights offerings, reverse LBOs, spin-offs,
utilities and financial firms. Insider ownership is sampled annually from Compact Disclosure from 1986
to 2001.
Mean

Q25

Median

Q75

WH10

WH20

Number of
Firms

Year1

38.22

20.57

38.13

55.34

12.43

24.27

3878

Year3

30.50

12.76

26.46

46.01

19.68

39.77

3460

Year5

27.27

9.58

21.11

41.48

26.54

48.14

2634

Year10

24.15

7.52

18.33

35.52

31.73

52.71

958

Year15

24.57

8.07

18.26

35.28

33.27

54.16

517

Year20

23.19

6.23

16.59

34.76

37.05

53.57

224

Year25

20.25

5.02

14.68

29.27

42.86

63.27

98

Year30

21.83

5.93

16.48

33.95

37.14

60.00

70

Year32

15.40

4.04

8.88

22.49

50.00

58.33

12

35

Table 3
Probability that a Firm’s Ownership will Become Diffuse in a Given Year after its IPO
The random variables, T 10 and T 20 , are defined as the first down-crossing by the percentage of insider
ownership of the threshold barriers of 10 percent and 20 percent, respectively. The conditional probability
that a firm will become widely-held over year k, conditional on not being widely held prior to that year,
Pr{T 10 = k | T 10 ≥ k} , is obtained by dividing the number of all firms that become widely held over year
k by the total number of firms that are ‘k-years old’ and that were never widely held up to this point. The
sample includes only firms that went public between 1986 and 2001 with non-missing insider ownership
information from the year of the IPO until they exit the sample. The IPO sample is from SDC Platinum
and excludes unit offerings, rights offerings, reverse LBOs, spin-offs, utilities and financial firms. Insider
ownership is sampled annually from Compact Disclosure over the 1986–2001 period. The table also
reports the total number of firms, the number of firms becoming widely held, and the number of firms
leaving the sample each year due to censoring.
Year

Pr{T 10 }

Total
Number
of Firms

Number
of Firms
Becoming
Widely
Held

Number
of Firms
Leaving
the
Sample

Pr{T 20 }

Total
Number
of Firms

Number
of Firms
Becoming
Widely
Held

Number
of Firms
Leaving
the
Sample

1

0.12

3878

482

530

0.24

3878

941

456

2

0.06

2866

166

635

0.15

2481

362

523

3

0.07

2065

135

541

0.13

1596

201

418

4

0.07

1389

93

344

0.13

977

126

232

5

0.08

952

74

219

0.10

619

64

142

6

0.05

659

35

181

0.09

413

39

101

7

0.07

443

30

104

0.10

273

27

64

8

0.08

309

24

86

0.06

182

11

55

9

0.05

199

9

72

0.05

116

6

44

10

0.05

118

6

39

0.06

66

4

25

11

0.14

73

10

19

0.03

37

1

8

12

0.07

44

3

7

0.11

28

3

5

13

0.00

34

0

4

0.10

20

2

3

14

0.10

30

3

6

0.07

15

1

3

15

0.05

21

1

6

0.18

11

2

2

36

Table 4
How Do Large Drops in Insider Ownership Take Place?
A large drop in insider ownership is defined as a drop of at least five percentage points of insider
ownership defined as the percent of shares owned by insiders. The change in insider ownership is
decomposed into two parts, the first one due to the change in number of shares held by insiders (changes
in the numerator of fractional ownership) and the second one due to the change in total number of shares
outstanding (changes in the denominator of fractional ownership). The fraction of shares sold in
secondary offerings, as well as the fraction of shares issued in SEOs and to pay for mergers, are obtained
from SDC. We compute these fractions over a three year window centered in the year for which the firm
experiences a drop in insider ownership that exceeds 5%.

Change in
ownership
share
Mean
1%
Q1
Median
Q3
99%

-0.15
-0.63
-0.19
-0.11
-0.08
-0.05

Changes in numerator
Due to
Due to
change in
secondary
shares held
share sales
by insiders
in SEOs
-0.08
-0.60
-0.14
-0.07
-0.02
0.46

-0.02
-0.28
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

37

Changes in denominator
Due to
Due to
change in
SEOs and
the number
mergers
of shares
-0.07
-0.64
-0.09
-0.02
-0.00
0.04

-0.01
-0.15
-0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

Table 5
Firm Characteristics of Firms Experiencing a Large Ownership Drop and of Other Sample Firms
The initial sample is from SDC Platinum and covers all firms that went public between 1970 and 2001,
excluding unit offerings, rights offerings, reverse LBOs, spin-offs, utilities and financial firms. All
variables except contemporaneous returns are measured at the end of the year preceding the large drop in
ownership. The firm characteristics are: the percentage of insider ownership at the beginning of the year
(INSD); a venture capital dummy (VC), equal to one if the IPO is venture-capital backed; the logarithm of
book-value-of-assets (LBVA) in 1970 dollars; an indicator variable for the bottom size quartile based on
NYSE-breakpoints (SZIND); book-to-market equity ratio (BME); property, plant, and equipment over
total assets (PPEA); free cash flows (FCF), defined as EBITDA over sales; capital expenditures over
assets (CEXPA); research and development expenditures over assets (RDA); an R&D dummy (RDIND),
equal to 1 if the firm has positive Research and Development expenditures for that year; a dividend
dummy (DIVIND), equal to 1 if the firm has paid a dividend in that year; leverage (LVRG), defined as
total liabilities over book value of assets; idiosyncratic volatility for year t is the residual from a market
model regression estimated using daily data for year t (VOLATILITY); average daily turnover for NYSE
traded stocks and zero, otherwise (TONYSE); average daily turnover for NASDAQ traded stocks and
zero, otherwise (TONASD); firm-, industry- and market-returns over the previous fiscal year (LAGRET,
LAGIRET, and LAGMRET); and firm-, industry- and market-returns over the current fiscal year (RET,
IRET, and MRET). (***), (**), and (*) indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level,
respectively.
Mean
Mean
Median
Median
(>5% drop) (<5% drop) (>5% drop) (<5% drop) Diff.Mean Diff.Median
INSD
VC
LBVA
SZIND
BME
PPEA
FCF
CEXPA
RDA
RDIND
DIVIND
LVRG
VOLATILITY
TONYSE
TONASD
LAGRET
LAGIRET
LAGMRET
RET
IRET
MRET

0.413
0.464
2.757
0.898
0.471
0.229
-0.099
0.077
0.089
0.526
0.169
0.415
0.048
0.040
0.717
0.217
0.179
0.164
0.230
0.163
0.145

0.356
0.356
2.813
0.889
0.648
0.258
-0.012
0.079
0.062
0.469
0.194
0.430
0.046
0.043
0.545
0.089
0.148
0.159
0.067
0.131
0.135

0.386
0.000
2.682
1.000
0.350
0.156
0.088
0.049
0.009
1.000
0.000
0.377
0.043
0.000
0.479
0.040
0.137
0.213
0.094
0.137
0.213

38

0.317
0.000
2.769
1.000
0.493
0.190
0.089
0.050
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.406
0.041
0.000
0.356
-0.051
0.110
0.213
-0.065
0.096
0.213

0.057***
0.108***
-0.057**
0.009
-0.177***
-0.029***
-0.087***
-0.001
0.027***
0.057***
-0.025***
-0.015***
0.002***
-0.003
0.172***
0.129***
0.032***
0.005**
0.232***
0.033***
0.010***

0.070***
---0.087***
---0.143***
-0.034***
-0.001***
-0.001
0.009***
-----0.029***
0.002***
0.000
0.123***
0.091***
0.027***
0.000
0.159***
0.041***
0.000

Table 6
Determinants of the Probability of a 5% or Greater Annual Drop in Insider Ownership
Probit model parameter estimates of the probability of a 5% or greater drop in insider ownership in a year
conditional on the insider ownership at the beginning of the year being greater than 10%. The pooled estimates use
all firm-year observations, whereas “Yr. 6-32” pools data in years 6 though 32. The sample includes all firms in
SDC Platinum that went public between 1970 and 2001, except unit offerings, rights offerings, reverse LBOs, spinoffs, utilities and financial firms. The independent variables are: the percentage of insider ownership at the
beginning of the year (INSD); a venture capital dummy (VC), equal to one if the IPO is venture-capital backed; the
logarithm of book-value-of-assets in 1970 dollars (LBVA); an indicator variable for the bottom size quartile based
on NYSE-breakpoints (SZIND); book-to-market equity ratio (BME); property, plant, and equipment over total
assets (PPEA); free cash flows (FCF), defined as EBITDA over sales; capital expenditures over assets (CEXPA);
research and development expenditures over assets (RDA); an R&D dummy (RDIND), equal to 1 if the firm has
positive Research and Development expenditures for that year; a dividend dummy (DIVIND), equal to 1 if the firm
has paid a dividend in that year; leverage (LVRG), defined as total liabilities over book value of assets;
idiosyncratic volatility estimated from a market model and based on daily returns (VOLATILITY); average daily
turnover for NYSE traded stocks and zero, otherwise (TONYSE); average daily turnover for NASDAQ traded
stocks and zero, otherwise (TONASD); firm-, industry- and market-returns over the previous fiscal year (LAGRET,
LAGIRET, and LAGMRET); and firm-, industry- and market-returns over the current fiscal year (RET, IRET, and
MRET). All accounting variables are sampled at the end of the previous fiscal year. The last two rows report the
number of firms experiencing a 5% or greater drop (NOBS = 1) and the number of firms that did not experience a
5% or greater drop in insider ownership (NOBS = 0). (***), (**), and (*) indicate statistical significance at the 1%,
5%, and 10% level, respectively.
Pooled
Yr.1
Yr.2
Yr.3
Yr.4
Yr.5
Yr.6-32
Intercept
INSD
VC
LBVA
SZIND
BME
PPEA
FCF
CEXPA
RDA
RDIND
DIVIND
LVRG
VOLATILITY
TONYSE
TONASD
LAGRET
LAGIRET
LAGMRET
RET
IRET
MRET

-1.427***
1.402***
0.256***
0.043***
0.019
-0.310***
-0.186**
-0.134***
0.067
0.371***
-0.083***
-0.013
-0.017
1.210*
0.177**
0.173***
0.093***
0.091*
-0.092
0.283***
0.069
0.215**

-1.311***
1.100***
0.356***
0.137***
0.048
-0.733***
-0.077
-0.051
-0.174
0.892*
-0.092
-0.005
-0.099
4.210**
0.149
0.094***
0.124**
0.127
-0.097
0.338***
0.074
0.331

-1.101***
1.416***
0.259***
0.068*
-0.101
-0.230***
-0.300
-0.120**
0.120
0.654*
-0.107
-0.114
-0.357**
-1.049
-0.195
0.174***
0.065
0.151
0.160
0.382***
0.038
0.040

-1.066***
0.693***
-0.050
0.030
0.071
-0.169**
-0.075
-0.124*
-0.100
0.883**
-0.113
0.125
-0.067
1.015
0.152
0.055
0.138**
-0.004
-0.047
0.213***
0.228
0.364

-0.796**
1.148***
0.183**
-0.086**
-0.353**
-0.202**
-0.238
-0.120*
0.526
0.526
-0.321***
0.134
0.097
1.499
0.549**
0.181**
0.191***
0.156
-0.042
0.346***
0.179
0.093

-1.683***
1.536***
0.241**
-0.025
-0.008
-0.072
0.050
-0.017
-0.081
-0.202
-0.178
-0.053
-0.022
1.581
0.102
0.310***
0.111*
0.043
0.035
0.258***
0.299
0.346

-1.524***
1.149***
0.170***
0.024
-0.009
-0.230***
0.014*
-0.091***
-0.158
0.483*
0.044
-0.029
0.417***
-0.331
0.132
0.081*
0.112***
-0.001
-0.207
0.263***
0.057
-0.042

NOBS = 1
NOBS = 0

3,460
9,712

849
1,147

616
1,338

440
1,123

333
1,051

227
901

995
4,152

39

Table 7
Determinant of the Probability of a 5% or Greater Annual Drop in Insider Ownership Using
Lagged Changes in the Explanatory Variables
Probit model parameter estimates of the probability for a 5% or greater annual drop in insider ownership conditional
on insider ownership at the beginning of the year greater than 10%. The pooled estimates use all firm-year
observations, whereas “Yr. 6-32” pools data in years 6 though 32. The sample includes all IPOs in SDC Platinum
that occurred between 1970 and 2001, except unit offerings, rights offerings, reverse LBOs, spin-offs, utilities and
financial firms. The independent variables include the percentage of insider ownership at the beginning of the year
(INSD); firm-, industry- and market-returns over the previous fiscal year (LAGRET, LAGIRET, and LAGMRET);
firm-, industry- and market-returns over the current fiscal year (RET, IRET, and MRET); and lagged changes in the
following variables: the logarithm of book-value-of-assets in 1970 dollars (DLBVA(t-1)); an indicator variable for
the bottom size quartile based on NYSE-breakpoints (DSZIND(t-1)); book-to-market equity ratio (DBME(t-1));
property, plant, and equipment over total assets (DPPEA(t-1)); free cash flow (DFCF(t-1)), defined as EBITDA over
sales; capital expenditures over assets (DCEXPA(t-1)); research and development expenditures over assets
(DRDA(t-1)); an R&D dummy (DRDIND(t-1)), equal to 1 if the firm has positive R&D expenditures for that year; a
dividend dummy (DDIVIND(t-1)), equal to 1 if the firm has paid a dividend in that year; leverage (DLVRG(t-1)),
defined as total liabilities over book value of assets; idiosyncratic volatility estimated with daily returns
(DVOLATILITY(t-1)); average daily turnover for NYSE traded stocks and zero, otherwise (DTONYSE(t-1));
average daily turnover for NASDAQ traded stocks and zero, otherwise (DTONASD(t-1)). All accounting variables
are sampled at the end of the previous fiscal year. The last two rows report the number of firms that did experience a
5% drop (NOBS = 1) and the number that did not (NOBS = 0). (***), (**), and (*) indicate statistical significance at
the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
Pooled

Yr.2

Yr.3

Yr.4

Yr.5

Yr.6-32

Intercept
INSD
VC
DLBVA(t-1)
DSZIND(t-1)
DBME(t-1)
DPPEA(t-1)
DFCF(t-1)
DCEXPA(t-1)
DRDA(t-1)
DRDIND(t-1)
DDIVIND(t-1)
DLVRG(t-1)
DVOLATILITY(t-1)
DTONYSE(t-1)
DTONASD(t-1)
LAGRET
LAGIRET
LAGMRET
RET
IRET
MRET

-1.390***
1.054***
0.259***
0.246***
-0.059
-0.082**
0.673***
-0.027
-0.357
0.699**
-0.023
0.014
-0.014
1.620*
0.006
-0.002
0.146***
0.024
0.012
0.268***
0.096
0.160*

-1.349***
1.338***
0.422***
0.181*
-0.165
-0.173
0.137
0.045
-0.447
0.968
-0.480*
0.194**
-0.063
-2.175
-0.061
0.038
0.052
0.246
0.204
0.401***
0.026
-0.075

-0.968***
0.515***
0.030
0.245**
0.194
-0.210*
-0.440
0.054
-0.067
1.713***
0.019
0.054
-0.362
4.334*
0.160
0.012
0.111*
0.011
-0.018
0.217***
0.284*
0.381

-1.241***
0.850***
0.130
0.087
-0.362*
-0.065
0.712
0.012
0.597
-0.518
0.372
0.188
0.398
1.336
0.071
0.029
0.216***
0.104
-0.080
0.329***
0.100
0.143

-1.587***
1.373***
0.207**
-0.151
-0.047
0.057
0.456
-0.027
0.278
0.467
-0.309
0.065
-0.483
0.471
0.198
0.086
0.189**
-0.007
0.163
0.229***
0.268
0.204

-1.359***
0.940***
0.227***
0.188**
-0.021
-0.112*
0.768*
-0.286***
-0.254
-0.428
0.140
-0.116
0.099
1.064
0.007
-0.017
0.155***
-0.030
-0.183
0.256***
0.011
0.028

NOBS = 1
NOBS = 0

2,294
7,760

455
1,045

406
1,030

287
887

218
871

928
3,927

40

Table 8
Hazard Rate Model for the Event of Becoming Widely Held
Estimates of a hazard rate model for the event of becoming widely held, where a firm is defined to be
widely held if its insider ownership is less than 10% (the first two columns of the table) or less than 20%
(the last two columns of the table). The sample includes only firms that went public between 1986 and
2001 with non-missing insider ownership information from the year of the IPO until they exit the sample
(continuous sample). The explanatory variables are the variables listed in Table 5.

VC
LBVA
SZIND
BME
PPEA
FCF
CEXPA
RDA
RDIND
DIVIND
LVRG
VOLATILITY
TONYSE
TONASD
LAGRET
LAGIRET
LAGMRET
RET
IRET
MRET
Number of events
Number of
censored obs.
Likelihood ratio
Chi-square test
for likelihood
ratio p-value

10%

p-value

20%

p-value

0.454
0.203
-0.104
-0.781
-0.626
-0.135
0.805
0.013
0.261
0.008
-0.384
-8.872
0.755
0.192
-0.079
0.470
-0.851
0.170
-0.017
1.011
661

0.000
0.000
0.489
0.000
0.040
0.025
0.198
0.972
0.015
0.943
0.061
0.003
0.000
0.000
0.171
0.009
0.005
0.000
0.921
0.001

0.817
0.130
-0.207
-0.600
-0.826
-0.159
0.677
-0.308
0.249
0.179
-0.572
-7.904
0.654
0.167
-0.058
0.727
-0.760
0.168
-0.170
0.902
1,081

0.000
0.000
0.106
0.000
0.001
0.000
0.187
0.309
0.002
0.040
0.001
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.204
0.000
0.002
0.000
0.206
0.000

6,925
375.01

5,145
687.72

< 0.0001

< 0.0001

41

Figure 1: Distribution of the percentage annual insider ownership changes. The initial sample is from
SDC Platinum and covers all firms that went public between 1970 and 2001, excluding unit offerings,
rights offerings, reverse LBOs, spin-offs, utilities and financial firms. Insider ownership is sampled
annually from Compact Disclosure over the 1986 – 2001.

42

Mean

Q25

Median

Q75

5%
0%
Ownership Change

-5%

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

-10%
-15%
-20%
-25%
-30%
-35%
-40%
Years Following the IPO

Figure 2: Distribution of Insider Ownership Changes Following an IPO. Distribution of insider
ownership changes (current fraction minus initial fraction of insider ownership) in event time following
an IPO. We exclude all firms that were widely held at the end of the first year following the IPO (insider
ownership less than 10%). The initial sample is from SDC Platinum and covers all firms that went public
between 1986 and 2001, excluding unit offerings, rights offerings, reverse LBOs, spin-offs, utilities and
financial firms. Insider ownership is sampled annually from Compact Disclosure over 1986 – 2001.

43

