NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

AID AND GROWTH: WHAT DOES THE CROSS-COUNTRY EVIDENCE REALLY
SHOW?
Raghuram G. Rajan
Arvind Subramanian
Working Paper 11513
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11513

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2005

We are grateful to Chris Adam, Andy Berg, Nancy Birdsall, Oya Celasun, Ajay Chhibber,
Michael Clemens, Tito Cordella, Graham Hacche, Nurul Islam, Simon Johnson, Sendhil
Mullainathan, Jonathan Ostry, Alessandro Prati, Lant Pritchett, Steve Radelet, Rodney
Ramcharan, David Roodman, Marta Ruiz-Arranz, Thierry Tressel, and especially Aart Kraay and
two anonymous referees for helpful comments. Manzoor Gill and Ioannis Tokatlidis provided
superb research assistance. This paper reflects the authors' views and not necessarily those of the
International Monetary Fund, its management, or its Executive Board.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2005 by Raghuram G. Rajan and Arvind Subramanian. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Aid and Growth: What Does the Cross-Country Evidence Really Show?
Raghuram G. Rajan and Arvind Subramanian
NBER Working Paper No. 11513
August 2005, Revised June 2020
JEL No.
ABSTRACT
We examine the effects of aid on growth in cross-sectional and panel data—after correcting for
the possible bias that poorer (or stronger) growth may draw aid contributions to recipient
countries. Even after this correction, we find little robust evidence of a positive (or negative)
relationship between aid inflows into a country and its economic growth. We also find no
evidence that aid works better in better policy or geographical environments, or that certain forms
of aid work better than others. Our findings suggest that for aid to be effective in the future, the
aid apparatus will have to be rethought.

Raghuram G. Rajan
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
raghuram.rajan@ChicagoBooth.edu
Arvind Subramanian
Peterson Institute for International Economics
1750 Massachusetts Ave, NW
Washington, DC 20036
arvind_subramanian@hks.harvard.edu

-2-

INTRODUCTION
One of the most enduring and important questions in economics is whether foreign aid helps
countries grow. There is a moral imperative to this question: it is a travesty for so many
countries to remain poor if a relatively small transfer of resources from rich countries could
set them on the path to growth. In fact, in the Millennium Declaration adopted in 2000, world
leaders state, “We will spare no effort to free our fellow men, women and children from the
abject and dehumanizing conditions of extreme poverty, to which more than a billion of them
are currently subjected” and they resolve “to grant more generous development assistance,
especially to countries that are genuinely making an effort to apply their resources to poverty
reduction.” As a result, the effort is on to mobilize billions of dollars of aid to help poor
countries, especially those with good policies and institutions.

Yet, the question of whether aid helps poor countries grow in a sustained way is still mired in
controversy. In this paper, we will re-examine (yet again!) whether aid leads to growth. 1

1

There is a voluminous literature on aid effectiveness, which is very nicely surveyed in

Clemens et. al. (2004). Some key papers, in addition to those cited below, include, Alesina
and Weder (2000), Bauer (1971), Burnside and Dollar (2000), Collier and Dollar (2002),
Dalgaard, Hansen, and Tarp (2004), Friedman (1958), Hansen and Tarp (2000), Roodman
(2004), Svensson (2003), and World Bank (1998). Our reading of this literature, and hence
the rationale for this paper, is that the existing evidence is mixed.

-3-

What does this paper add to the voluminous literature on aid effectiveness? Essentially two
things. First, most papers in the literature examine aid-effectiveness in a typically narrowly
defined setting. We attempt to examine the aid-growth relationship under a variety of
settings, using one common framework. Second, we examine carefully the issue of
endogeneity—the possibility that aid flows could go to countries that are doing particularly
badly, or to countries that are doing well, creating a spurious correlation between aid and
growth.

More specifically, the cross-country aid-growth literature has typically examined particular
aspects of the possible relationship. Burnside and Dollar (2000), for example looked at the
impact of aid on growth conditional on the quality of economic policy. Hansen and Tarp
(2001) examine the relationship in a panel framework, and more recently, Dalgaard, Hansen,
and Tarp (2004) focus on aid’s impact conditional on the country’s location (geography).
Recently, Clemens et. al. (2004) disaggregate aid into what they term short- and long-impact
aid. We examine under one framework, the robustness of the relationship across time
horizons (medium and long run) and periods (1960s through 1990s), sources of aid
(multilateral and bilateral), types of aid (economic, social, food, etc.), timing of impact of aid
(contemporaneous and varying lags (from 10-30 years)), specifications (cross-section and
panel), and samples (including and excluding outliers).

One reason to try and take a more comprehensive perspective is that the aid-growth literature
has sometimes followed a cycle in which one paper finds a result, and is followed by another
paper with a twist, either overturning or qualifying the previous result, followed by another,

-4-

and so on. This has had some undesirable effects on policy with advocates selectively using
results to bolster their preferred view on aid. Thus, our aim is not to target any particular
result or paper. 2 Rather, our approach is to say that if one were starting de novo to examine
the aid-growth relationship and attempting to do it in a comprehensive and transparent
manner, based on a reasonable (but by no means perfect) specification and mindful of the
pitfalls, what would one find. We are, no doubt, informed by the literature about where to
look.

The existing literature also may have gone down some paths that are worth re-examining.
For example, the practice of estimating growth regressions over four year periods is quite
common (see, for example, Burnside and Dollar (2000), Collier and Dollar (2003) and
Clemens et. al. (2004)). Four-year growth regressions are prone to be affected by cyclical
factors, which are hard to control for, even if the attempt is made. Moreover, the issue of key
interest is the long-run impact of aid: aid could mechanically increase output and growth in

2

This is why we do not attempt an exegesis of individual contributions as in Easterly, Levine

and Roodman (2004), Roodman (2004), or Subramanian and Kumar (2005).

-5-

the short run but this is not what economists care about. 3 If estimations without country fixed
effects are to be done at all, the appropriate horizon is long.
In particular, aid can contribute to development in two ways. It can take a capital starved
country to its ultimate steady state potential growth rate faster. Aid can also improve a
country’s ultimate steady state growth rate (for example, because foreign capital brings
know-how or encourages better governance or practices). Clearly, as we examine longer
horizons, we will incorporate more spillover effects, and effects that take time to emerge.
Since both the positive and adverse effects of aid may stem precisely from these effects (see
Rajan and Subramanian (2005)), it is hard to see how we can escape examining the long run.
No doubt one could debate what “long run” means, which is why we examine different
horizons for the cross-sectional regressions.

But cross-sectional regressions have their well-known problems. Apart from concerns about
endogeneity, outliers, model uncertainty, and measurement error, a key drawback is the
problem of unobservable heterogeneity or the omitted variable problem. In cross-country
regressions, we can never be sure whether we are controlling for all possible ways in which

3

Short-run growth regressions suffer from the problem of extra “noise” induced by cyclical,

demand-related, factors (see Kraay, 2004). See Hauk and Wacziarg (2004) who argue, based
on Monte Carlo simulations, that taking account of all the advantages and limitations of the
different estimation procedures, the pure cross-section OLS estimator that averages data over
long-periods might be the least inefficient.

-6-

countries might differ. Panel estimations have the virtue of addressing, albeit partially, the
problem of unobservable heterogeneity by incorporating country fixed effects, which means
that we essentially ask whether changes in aid over time for a country contemporaneously
affect its growth (see Hansen and Tarp, 2000). The inclusion of country fixed effects is,
however, not typical in the literature even when the focus is on four year horizons. For the
panel estimations, we report results using the Arellano-Bond and Blundell-Blond GMM
estimators, which address the potential endogeneity of the regressors, and incorporate
(implicitly) fixed effects.

Let us now turn to the second main contribution of the paper. As is well recognized, aid
flows are influenced by a country’s situation. Aid may go to countries that have just
experienced natural disasters—which would explain a negative correlation between aid and
growth. It may also go those who have used it well in the past—implying, if growth is
persistent, there will be a positive correlation between aid and growth. Since neither of these
relationships is causal, it is important to isolate the exogenous component of aid. While a
number of prior studies have attempted to “instrument” aid, we will explain later how our
methodology adds some value.

In sum, despite lying squarely in the tradition of cross-country and panel growth regressions
with all their well-known shortcomings (see Rodrik, 2005), our objective is to lay out in a
transparent and structured manner the different ways of looking at the aid-growth
relationship so that particular claims about it can be evaluated. In some ways, therefore, this
paper is an attempt at encompassing, or generalizing, past work on aid and growth. It seeks to

-7-

answer the question, “even though the cross-country regression framework may be flawed,
what does it really tell us about the impact of aid on growth?”

Our findings are relatively easy to report. We find little evidence of a robust positive
correlation between aid and growth, and this despite the fact that our instrumentation strategy
corrects the bias of conventional (ordinary least squares) estimation procedures against
finding a positive impact of aid. We find little evidence that aid works better in better policy
or institutional environments, or that certain kinds of aid work better than others. We do find
weak (and mixed) evidence that aid works better in some geographical settings, but it is hard
to see a strong rationale for this finding—and therefore are skeptical whether anything can be
generalized from this. Our broad findings hold both in cross-section and panel estimations,
across time horizons, and do not depend on whether outliers are included or excluded from
the sample.

One explanation may simply be that the effects that even the theory would predict are too
small to detect against the background noise, at least using the standard cross-sectional
technique. Certainly, the simple theoretical exercise we present later suggests that the
predicted positive effects of aid inflows on growth are likely to be smaller than suggested by
advocates, even if inflows are utilized well. If noise in the data plagues all findings, then
strong claims about aid effectiveness based on cross-country evidence are unwarranted, and
aid policies that rely on such claims should be re-examined.

-8-

However, the effects of other interventions (such as good policies) on growth are indeed
discernible in the data and are robust. If noise in the data is not the entire explanation for the
lack of a robust finding, the interesting question then is not “whether” but “why?” That is,
what is it that offsets the transfers and subsidized credit inherent in aid and prevents it from
having a robust positive effect on growth? Further research of this kind is essential to
improve aid effectiveness. This is the focus of Rajan and Subramanian (2005), in which we
move beyond the cross-country framework.

This paper is structured as follows. In Section I, we spell out in detail our strategy for
constructing plausibly exogenous instruments for aid, which we use in the subsequent
analyses. In Section II, we use these instruments to revisit the question of aid-effectiveness in
a cross-sectional framework. In Section III, we examine the key issues in a panel context,
using GMM estimation methods. In Section IV, we compare the magnitude of the aid
coefficients derived from theory with those obtained in the empirical literature, and conclude
in Section V.

I. TACKLING ENDOGENEITY: AN INSTRUMENTATION STRATEGY
We present in Table 1 the basic descriptive statistics for the data we use in our analysis.
Let us start with OLS cross-country regressions in Table 2. The dependent variable in all
cases is the average annual growth rate of per capita GDP of a country over the relevant
period. The explanatory variable of interest is the average ratio of annual external aid to GDP
over that period to that country. Our sample comprises all developing countries which have

-9-

received aid during the post-war period and for which data are available (see Appendix 3).
Because we include all countries that received aid, we do not have any sample selection
biases due to countries dropping out of the sample in later time periods because they have
graduated from aid-recipient status.

The immediate question is what other explanatory variables should we include? The aid and
growth literature includes explanatory variables that are somewhat different from the crosscountry growth literature (see for the example, the contrast between Burnside and Dollar
(2000), Collier and Dollar (2003), Clemens et. al. (2004), Hansen and Tarp (2001), and
Dalgaard, Hansen, and Tarp (2004), on the one hand and Bosworth and Collins (2003),
Sala-i-Martin et. al., 2004, on the other). In the working paper version (Rajan and
Subramanian, 2005), we followed the broader cross-country growth literature. In this paper,
however, we follow the aid and growth literature to enhance the comparability of our results
to the related literature. The results are qualitatively similar.

The next question is which particular explanatory variables to choose because even within
the aid-growth literature there is variation. We chose the four most recently published papers-Burnside and Dollar (2000), Collier and Dollar (2003), Hansen and Tarp (2001), and
Dalgaard, Hansen, and Tarp (2004)—and take the intersection set of the variables in these
four papers. This comprises: initial level of per capita income; institutional quality; financial
depth measured as the ratio of M2 to GDP; assassinations; ethnic fractionalization; trade
policy; inflation; and the ratio of budget balance to GDP. We replace assassinations by
revolutions only because the latter appears to be more robustly significant. We then add two

- 10 -

measures that are likely to be important correlates with growth; a measure for geographical
location from Bosworth and Collins (2003) (which is a combination of the average number of
frost days per month in winter and the fraction of a country’s area in the tropics) and a
measure of health (which we proxy for with life expectancy). We stress here that our results
on the aid coefficient are virtually identical even if we don’t add these two covariates: adding
them gives us a more stable and general specification. Note that one difference between our
covariates and the papers cited above is that some of them include a composite policy
measure that combines trade policy, inflation, and budget balance. It seems more general to
include them separately, rather than force a pre-specified relationship. 4

A final concern before we report results. Easterly (2004) makes the argument that many
cross-sectional regression results are driven by outliers. We tested for outliers according to
the Hadi (1992) procedure as implemented in Roodman (2003), using the instrumental
variable specifications, which constitute the core results of the paper. This procedure yielded
two outliers for one time period (1980-00) and none for the other periods. For the sake of
comparability across specifications, throughout the paper we report results for the samples
excluding these two outliers for the period 1980-00.

4

To minimize endogeneity in the cross-section regressions, the values of the potentially

endogenous explanatory variables are for the beginning of the relevant time period. Details of
how these initial values and other averages over time are constructed are presented in
Appendix 1.

- 11 -

We report OLS results in Table 2 for the following four time periods: 1960-2000; 1970-2000;
1980-2000; and 1990-2000. We therefore cover the long run (40 and 30 year horizons) as
well as the medium term (10 and 20 year-horizons). The differing estimation periods could
also give us a sense of any changes in aid effectiveness over time.

The results are quite clear. In all four cases, the estimated aid coefficient is negative and
statistically significant at conventional levels in three (1960-2000, 1970-2000, and 19802000). The magnitude in these cases suggests that an increase in aid of 1 percentage point of
GDP is correlated with lower long-run growth of approximately 0.1 percentage points per
year.

One cannot take these estimates seriously as evidence of causality because of the problem of
endogeneity. If donors are Good Samaritans and motivated by suffering in the recipient
country, the lower the growth (and the more the suffering), the greater will be the desire to
give aid to alleviate it. Thus there might be a negative correlation between aid and growth but
this does not reflect causation from aid to growth. Conversely, if donors are motivated to
give to successful recipients, one might see a positive correlation between aid and growth,
and this again would not reflect causation from aid to growth.

This problem is well recognized in the literature as is a possible solution, instrumentation, but
the instrumentation strategy typically used has limitations. Take for example, the instrument
sets used in the papers by Burnside and Dollar (2000), Hansen and Tarp (2002) and Clemens
et. al. (2004).

- 12 -

Burnside and Dollar (2000)

Hansen and Tarp (2002)

Clemens et. al. (2004)

(In Table 1)

1. Dummy for Egypt

1. Dummy for Egypt

1. Egypt dummy

2. Franc zone dummy

2. Arms Imports (t-1)

2. Arms imports

3. Central America dummy

3. Policy (t-1)

3. Policy2

4. Arms imports (t-1)

4. Policy2 (t, t-1)

4. Policy2 (t-1)

5. ln (population)

5. Policy * ln(population)

5. Policy * ln population

6. Policy * ln(population)

6. Policy * ln(initial GDP per capita)

6. Policy * initial GDP per capita

7. Policy * ln(population)2

7. Policy * ln(initial GDP per

7. Policy * initial GDP per capita2

8. Policy * ln(initial GDP per capita)

capita)2

8. Aid (t-1) * policy (t-1)

9. Policy * ln(initial GDP per capita)2

8. Policy * aid (t-1)

9. Aid2 (t-1) * policy (t-1)

10. Arms imports (t-1) * policy

9. Policy * aid2 (t-1)

10. Log repayment (t-1) * policy (t-1)

10. aid (t-1)

11. Aid (t-1)

11. aid2 (t-1)

12. Aid2 (t-1)
13. Log repayment (t-1)
14. Policy (t-1)

A variable such as arms imports could be a proxy for strategic reasons for giving aid, and
thus is plausibly orthogonal to motives for giving aid that relate to the underlying economic
situation of the recipient. Not all variables are so plausibly exogenous. For variables that are
some transformation of current or lagged endogenous (aid) and possibly exogenous (policy)
variables, the economic motivation is more difficult to understand. Moreover,
econometrically, the problem with using lagged values of endogenous variables is that they
might be predetermined but still not exogenous, especially if there is serial correlation in the

- 13 -

dependent variable. And in all these papers, the possibility of serial correlation is high
because growth is measured over a fairly short interval (i.e., growth today is depressed
because of the same shock that depressed it four years ago, which prompted aid flows four
years ago). 5

More questionable is the use of the lag of a right hand side variable (policy) as an instrument.
This amounts to claiming that contemporaneous policy affects growth directly but lagged
policy does not. For example, the exclusion restriction underlying the use of lagged policy is
that trade reform (and macroeconomic stabilization) in a time period has an important

5

Assessing the validity of the instrumentation strategy in many of these papers is rendered

difficult by the fact that first-stage results are seldom reported, nor are the exclusion
restrictions discussed. Roodman (2004) only tests the robustness of recent results reported in
a number of papers, but does not discuss endogeneity or instrumentation issues.

- 14 -

effect on growth in that time period (four years in the case of the standard specification in the
literature) but absolutely no effect four years later. 6

It is to address some of these limitations that we attempt a different instrumentation strategy,
where we construct instruments for aid. We exploit the fact that aid is often extended for
non-economic reasons. Our main identification assumption is that non-economicallymotivated aid is unlikely to be driven by economic outcomes. This notion is far from new. A
number of papers have used this to explain aid flows (Alesina and Dollar, 2001; and Barro
and Lee, 2004). But we are not aware of papers that have taken the obvious next step of
exploiting it to systematically develop instruments for aid which could be used in aid-growth
analyses.

Our key idea for instrumentation is to model the supply of aid based on donor-related rather
than recipient-specific characteristics. In other words, we base our instrument on
considerations that drive individual donors to give aid to a country other than those related to
a country’s level of income or growth. So, our construction of instruments starts from the

6

Put differently, a rationale for not using lagged policy as an instrument is that the process

which generates lagged policy may involve error terms which are correlated with the error
terms on growth in the future. Intuitively it means that countries which experience positive
policy shocks may also be experiencing positive growth shocks 4 years from now (because of
good leadership, for instance).

- 15 -

bilateral (donor-recipient) relationship and aggregates up (as Frankel and Romer (1999) have
done in the trade literature). This is in contrast to the literature that picks instruments directly
at the level of the recipient country.

Start first with how a donor would choose to allocate aid across recipients. If we make the
plausible assumption that in a fair world a donor wants to induce similar growth rates in per
capita incomes of all poor recipients then, provided the technologies of production of
recipients and capital shares are similar, the donor (as we show later in section IV) should
allocate similar amounts of aid (relative to recipient GDP) for each recipient. Of course, most
donors are likely to depart from this allocation for at least two reasons: history and
influence. The greater the extent of historic relationships between a donor and a recipient the
more likely that a donor will want to give aid. We capture historic relationships through
colonial links and commonality of language.

To capture to the effects of influence, we make the plausible assumption that donors are more
likely to want to give aid the more they expect to have influence over the recipient. One way
to proxy for influence is through the relative size of donor and recipient. The bigger the
donor is relative to the recipient, the more influence the donor is likely to have, so the ratio of
the donor population to that of the recipient could be a good proxy for influence. 7 In addition,

7

The assumption here is that the donor wants influence over the development process in a
country, a perfectly reasonable motive. It may also be that the donor seeks to guide the
political actions of a country (such as its votes in the United Nations). If, however, the donor
wants to bolster its influence over the world, there might be a tradeoff – between acquiring
smaller influence over a larger, and more powerful, developing country, and greater
(continued)

- 16 -

a donor’s influence is likely to be particularly pronounced if it is relatively large when it has
close links with the recipient (so that it not only understands the pathways of influence but
also potentially scares away other donors from seeking influence). We capture this channel
by including the interaction between relative size and colonial links. 8

An example should help fix ideas; the United Kingdom should be willing to give more aid
per capita to Uganda than to India; but it will be more willing to give aid to Uganda than to a
similar-sized country in Africa, say Senegal, because France is likely to have a significant aid
presence in the latter, thus diluting any possibility of British influence.

The aid supply decision from a donor (d) to a recipient (r) can be expressed by the following
model:

=
β 1 ' Ydrt + υdrt
Adrt / GDP
rt
=
β 0 + β 1COMLANGdr + β 2CURCOLdr + β 3COMCOLdr + β 4 COMCOLUK dr + β 5COMCOLFRAdr
+ β 6COMCOLSPAdr + β 7COMCOLPORdr + β 8 log( POPd / POPr )
+ β 9 log( POPd / POPr ) * COMCOLdr + β 10 log( POPd / POPr ) * COMCOLUK dr
+ β 11 log( POPd / POPr ) * COMCOLFRAdr + β 12 log( POPd / POPr ) * COMCOLSPAdr
+ β 13 log( POPd / POPr ) * COMCOLPORdr + υdrt
(1)

influence over a small developing country. If this last motive is important, it would reduce
the importance of our instrument in helping to predict aid flows.
8

The inclusion of the influence variables is important for generating strong instruments for
aid; the use of historic relationships alone does not yield strong enough instruments.

- 17 -

where Adrt is the aid given by donor d to recipient r in time period t. GDPrt is the recipient
country’s GDP. 9 The first three RHS variables capture historic factors: COMLANG is a
dummy that takes a value of one if the donor and recipient share a common language;
CURCOL is a dummy that takes a value of one if the recipient is currently a colony of the
donor. COMCOL is a dummy that takes a value of one if the recipient was ever a colony of
the donor. The next four variables simply disaggregate the colonial variable to capture
difference across donors in the susceptibility of their giving to colonial ties (COMCOLUK,
COMCOLFRA, COMCOLSPA, and COMCOLPOR refer in turn to colonial relationships
involving respectively France, Portugal, Spain, and the United Kingdom).

The next set of variables relate to relative size. Donor size relative to the recipient is
measured by the ratio of the logarithm of the populations of donor and recipient
( log( POPd / POPr ) ) 10 . Donor influence relative to other donors is additionally measured by

9

In order to estimate equation 1, we need to compute the country’s total (i.e. bilateral and

multilateral) aid that goes to any particular recipient. To do this, we obtain a decomposition
of multilateral aid into its underlying bilateral constituents. The OECD DAC database
contains a series called “imputed” bilateral aid, which does precisely this.
10

To minimize endogeneity-related problems, we use the initial rather than the

contemporaneous value of population.

- 18 -

the interaction of the relative population size and the colonial dummy
( log( POPd / POPr ) * COMCOLdr ).

The estimated equation is then aggregated across donors to yield a level of the fitted value of
aid-to-GDP for the recipient for that period.


 Art

 GDP  = ∑ β1 ' Ydrt
rt 

d

(2)

In Table 3, we present estimates for the model in (1). 11 Virtually all the instrumenting
variables are significant for all the time horizons, and between them the variables account for
a reasonable share (between 33 and 42 percent) of the variation in the donor allocation
decision. All the colonial relationships are significant as are the two measures of influence.
The larger the donor relative to the recipient, the greater the aid given; and this effect is
magnified, as conjectured, in cases where the donor had a colonial relationship with the
recipient. For example, for the period 1960-00, a 1 percent increase in the ratio of donor size
relative to recipient is associated with a 0.1 percent increase in the ratio of aid to GDP given
by the average donor, an amount which is increased by 0.2 percent for a U.K. colony (which

11

Throughout the paper, instruments vary according to the time horizon of the analysis. For

example, in growth regressions for 1960-2000, we estimate model 1 for the period 19602000; for 1970-2000, the equations are re-estimated for the period 1970-2000; and so on.

- 19 -

is the sum of 0.6 percent for the average colony minus 0.4 percent for the U.K. colony
dummy), 1 percent for a Spanish colony; 1.9 percent for a French colony and 3.3 percent for
a Portuguese colony. Thus, influence seems to matter a lot for donors, especially for Portugal
and France.

How much information about aid is contained in our instrument? In Chart 1, we depict the
first-stage relationship between actual and fitted aid calculated from the estimates of model 1
for the period 1960-00 after partialling out the effects of other covariates included in the first
stage. The relationship between actual and fitted aid is strong, with a t-statistic of about 5.
Our instrument appears to contain a lot of, hopefully exogenous, information about actual
aid.

II. AID AND GROWTH: REVISITING THE CROSS-SECTION EVIDENCE
In this section, we revisit the cross-country evidence with two aims. First, we examine
whether instrumenting for aid affects the results on aid effectiveness. Second, we explore
if the aid-growth relationship varies across time horizons and periods, sources of aid, types
of aid, episodes of growth, and specifications.

The basic IV results

- 20 -

We now present estimates for the cross-sections presented earlier in Table 2, with the
difference that we instrument for aid.

12

In Tables 4A, we present the second-stage of the

core instrumental variable (IV) specifications, which is representative of the results we obtain
more broadly. The equations are reasonably well specified as many of the standard covariates
are significant and have the expected sign. The coefficient on the aid term is not significantly
different from zero in three of four periods, while it is negative and significant in the period
1990-00. We should not put too much weight on this last result because, as we will see from
later tests, the instrumentation strategy is least reliable for this period.

The magnitudes of the estimated coefficient of aid are generally quite small, suggesting that
aid has a very small effect—positive or negative—on growth. Also, for the first three
columns, instrumenting seems to make the impact of aid less negative or more positive
(compare the aid coefficients columns in Table 2 columns 1-3 with those in Table 4A
columns 1-3). In other words, the IV strategy tempers the tendency of the OLS to magnify
the negative impact of aid. 13

12

The standard errors are affected by the fact that the instruments are estimated. The standard

error correction we used to estimate the correct standard errors is based on Frankel and
Romer (1999). The results were virtually unaffected by this correction.
13

As indicated in Table 4B, the coefficient estimate for the instrument is significant at the 1

percent significance level for all estimation periods. In the three long horizons, the F-test for
excluded instruments comfortably exceeds the weak instrumentation threshold of ten
(continued)

- 21 -

Robustness
Let us now turn to possible concerns about our instruments. First, do they satisfy the
exclusion restriction—that is, are they plausibly exogenous? As Durlauf et. al. (2004) point
out growth theory is so broad and all-encompassing that it is always possible to find a story
about why an instrument merits inclusion in the second-stage regression, invalidating
instrumentation. In our framework, the colonial and influence variables may be correlated
with growth other than through the endogenous variable. For example, proximity to donors
(say through a common language) might be bad because donors require bad policies or
support bad leaders or require greater defense-related spending. Alternatively, proximity to
donors might be good because they impose good conditionality. Also, certain colonial
relationships may imply a certain quality of current institutions with impacts on growth. In
each of these cases, the exclusion restriction might not be satisfied. One response to this
concern is that by including measures of policies and institutions we control for the different
ways in which historical variables can affect growth.

A crude way of testing whether our colonial variables pass the exclusion restriction is to
simply include the colonial variables for France, Spain and the United Kingdom directly in
the second stage. When we do this (Table 5A), the magnitudes of the coefficient estimates on
aid are not significantly altered across periods (compare Table 5A and Table 4A) and we do
suggested by Staiger and Stock (1997) for the case of one endogenous regressor. For the
1990_2000 horizon, the F-statistic is about 8.5.

- 22 -

not find a consistent pattern of the colonial variables being significant. This suggests that a
direct relationship between colonial variables and growth is not responsible for our results.

A second check is to see if our instrument passes over-identification tests. For this, of course,
we need a second instrument. As is well-known, it is very difficult to find such instruments,
especially one that is very different from the instrument that we have proposed in this paper.
But to the extent that over-identification tests have merit, a possible candidate is country size;
for example, even if donors did not care about influence, economies of scale (in dealing with
recipients, monitoring programs, etc.) might, a priori, suggest recipient size as a factor
determining aid decisions. Given our use of population as a scaling variable for measuring
influence in our preferred instrument for aid, we use the logarithm of recipient area as the
second instrument. So, we re-run the growth equation, this time using as instruments in the
first stage both our instrument derived from model (1) as well as the log of area. The results
are presented in Tables 5B (second-stage) and Table 5C (first-stage). 14

The first thing to note is that the coefficient on the aid variable is insignificant (Table 5B),
establishing the robustness of the core result. Second, the p-values for the Sargan test for
over-identifying restrictions are greater than 0.1 in three out of four cases, suggesting that our
preferred instrument at least passes these minimum requirements. The over-identification test

14

When the log of area is used as the sole instrument, it yields good first-stage results (results
available from the authors).

- 23 -

is, however, not met for the 1990-2000 horizon, which is why the IV strategy (and the
negative and significant coefficient) for this period should be viewed with caution.

Third, adding area as an additional instrument serves to shed light on our preferred
instrument. It is interesting to note in the first-stage results (Table 5C) that area is not
significant in the three long horizons while our preferred instrument is. This suggests that our
instrument contains a lot of information over and above that relating simply to recipient
size. 15 Finally, we present in Table 5D, an intuitive way of illustrating the exclusion
restriction (as suggested in Acemoglu et. al., 2001). We estimate the first stage,
instrumenting aid with log area and in the second stage also introduce our preferred
instrument directly. The instrument is insignificant in three out of four cases (and only
marginally significant in the 1990-00 horizon), again suggesting that it has no independent
effect on growth.

15

While a measure of country size could in itself be a plausible instrument, the reason not to

make it the preferred one is that there is uncertainty whether it can satisfy the exclusion
restriction; that is, a number of reasons can be advanced as to why a recipient’s size would
have an independent effect on growth. Our instrument, on the other hand, contains
information that is not just based on recipient size, and the finding in Table 5C is consistent
with that.

- 24 -

Of course, none of our attempts at addressing endogeneity through instrumentation is foolproof. Another, albeit rough way of doing this is simply to use initial or lagged values of aid
instead of instrumenting for contemporaneous values. We do this in Table 6, attempting to be
comprehensive by encompassing all possible timings of impact. Moving across the table are
columns representing the different growth horizons: 1960-00, 1960-90 etc, etc. In all, there
are nine such horizons. Moving down the table, we use different lags for the aid variable. So
the first row represents the impact of aid given in 1960-70 on growth in 1960-70 (column 1),
1970-80 (column 2), and 1960-80 (column 6) and so on. The table thus presents the OLS
estimate for lagged aid in the standard growth regression for different horizons, time periods,
and lags for aid. In no case is the estimated coefficient on lagged aid positive and significant.
Fully 32 of 37 coefficients are negative, of which 11 are statistically significant. Typically,
the estimated coefficient is small (below 0.1 in magnitude). 16

Non-linear and conditional effects
Let us turn to concerns about specification. In Panel A of Table 7, we ask whether there are
diminishing returns to aid. To test this, we include a squared aid term in the regression. All
the aid terms are insignificant as are the aid-squared terms. There is no consistent pattern in
their signs (a negative squared term would imply diminishing returns).

16

Since the covariates we used in the working paper version were a little different, we
repeated the exercise in Table 6 by including those covariates. Our results are very similar to
what we report here: in particular, in none of the 37 cases is aid significantly positive; in 10
cases, the aid coefficient was negative and significant at the 10 percent level (results
available from the authors upon request).

- 25 -

Burnside and Dollar (2000) and Collier and Dollar (2003) suggest that aid, even if it does not
unconditionally help growth, is helpful in those countries that have good policies and
institutions. In Panel B, we examine whether aid is more effective in better policy
environments. We interact aid with two measures, first, the Sachs-Warner measure updated
by Warcziarg and Welch (2003). We find that the coefficient on the aid-policy interaction
terms is never significant. This is consistent with the results in Easterly, Levine, and
Roodman (2004). We find similar results when we interact aid with the World Bank’s CPIA
ratings.

Recently, Dalgaard et. al. (2004) have argued that aid’s effectiveness depends on geographic
location. In fact, Roodman (2004) concludes after testing the robustness of a number of prior
results on aid effectiveness that “if there is one strong conclusion from this literature, it is
that on average aid works well outside the tropics but not in them.” Though there are
plausible stories for why growth may be higher outside the tropics, the rationale for the
effectiveness of aid outside the tropics (or its ineffectiveness within) is unclear. But in the
absence of a strong theoretical rationale, any such result might simply be an (ex post) way of
characterizing countries where aid has “worked” from countries where it has not, without

- 26 -

offering an explanation. 17 The underlying policy conclusion is also a little bleak because aid
and aid effectiveness are especially important inside the tropics, where most of the poorest
countries are situated.

But does aid conditional on geography show up in the cross-section? In Panel C of Table 6,
in addition to the standard covariates, we introduced a term, interacting aid with the measure
of geography due to Bosworth and Collins (2003). 18 While geography itself usually has a
positive correlation with growth, the aid-geography coefficient is never significant.

17

Put differently, there will always be a sample of countries where the aid growth correlation

is positive, even if the true average effect is zero or negative. Given that there are many
characteristics by which we can sort countries, it is not hard to find a characteristic that lines
up with the countries for which the correlation is positive. However, it is not clear what
conclusion one can draw from such a finding.
18

The Bosworth and Collins (2003) geography measure is a combination of the average

number of frost days per month in winter and the fraction of a country’s area in the tropics,
whereas the Dalgaard et. al. (2004) measure is just the latter but the two are highly correlated
(correlation of 0.92 in our sample).

- 27 -

Categories of aid: “Good” and “bad” aid
One of the increasingly popular strands in the aid-growth literature is to examine the impact
of different categories of aid. That is, researchers are moving from analyzing the impact of
aggregate aid to analyzing different components. Four different basis of distinguishing aid
are:
•

Motives for granting aid (why?)

•

Donor type (who is granting aid?)

•

The use to which aid is put (for what: health, social sector, technical assistance?)

•

The timing of impact (when?)

A general problem with making distinctions between aid categories is fungibility.
Earmarking of aid is not easy, especially for small donors, and even if it is, governments can
divert traditional sources of financing to other uses, undermining the earmarking objectives
of aid (that is for fungibility to be violated, two conditions need to be fulfilled: it should be
possible to earmark aid for particular uses and it should not be possible for the government to
then divert other expenditure that would otherwise have gone to those uses). Devarajan and
Swarup, (1998) present evidence that aid is indeed fungible.

If aid is fungible, then dividing aid into sub categories of “good” and “bad” aid as above is
hard to defend. If a donor wants to encourage a recipient to buy inappropriate irrigation
equipment from its manufacturers in return for the aid, the case must be made that the
recipient simply cannot free any budgetary room as a result of this expenditure (that is, the

- 28 -

expenditure would not have been made by a self interested recipient), and that the
expenditure is a negative net present value one for the recipient, taking into account any grant
elements in the aid. In other words, the recipient has to be complicit for aid to be “bad”.
Otherwise, while the magnitude of the coefficient on aid in explaining growth may be
attenuated, it should be positive.

Thus fungibility implies that how well aid gets translated into growth may not depend on the
specific purpose aid is given for, or the intent behind it, but how well the recipient translates
all expenditure to growth. The quality of the recipient--its policies and institutions—is thus a
good indicator, albeit not a full determinant, of the recipient’s ability and willingness to use
aid. This implies that some recent papers (see Bourgingnon and Sundberg (2007), for
example) that dismiss strategic aid as “bad” aid, and thus emphasize there should be no prior
expectation of beneficial effects from that kind of aid, are perhaps excessively harsh towards
strategic aid. To characterize strategic aid as “bad” aid is mixing motives and consequences.
Indeed, for strategic aid to be “bad” aid (as in badly used aid leading necessarily to bad
growth outcomes) two things would have to be shown; First, that strategic aid is
systematically given to countries with bad policies or institutions; Second, it would also have
to be shown that in some way researchers are not taking into account the effect of these bad
policies and institutions that mediate aid into outcomes.

The second factor is relatively easy to dispose because typically, most growth regression
control for a host of policies and institutions—macroeconomic, structural, openness and
property rights etc.—that potentially affect growth. In other words, our regressions suggest

- 29 -

that aid has no systematic effect even after controlling for any effect of strategic aid on
policies and institutions.19

On the first point, it should be noted just as an empirical matter, that while aid was given for
strategic reasons to Mobuto in Zaire and Marcos in the Philippines and to Egypt, it was also
given to Suharto in Indonesia, Pinochet in Chile, military regimes in Korea and Israel, all of
which seem to have flourished. Equally, a lot of well-intentioned aid was given by the Nordic
donors to Tanzania, Ghana, Kenya and a host of other African countries that do not seem to
have grown strongly. Thus strategic aid is not synonymous with badly used aid.

Another way of checking whether our instrument for aid proxies for “bad” aid is to see if the
variables that we used to explain total aid also help explain “good” aid. Appendix Table 1
reproduces the estimation in Table 3 but this time with bilateral social aid as the dependent
variable (and social aid is typically thought of as “good” aid). It is remarkable how similar
the two equations: all the variables have the same sign and significance (although the
magnitudes of the coefficients vary) and both equations explain a similar share of variation.
We now proceed to the other distinctions.

19

Policies and institutions may not be sufficient conditions for determining the aid-to-growth
transmission mechanism and hence the growth specifications could be missing a variable that
can capture the other determinants. But it is hard to see how the motives for giving aid
(strategic aid) or donor type can possibly proxy for this omitted variable.

- 30 -

A second basis for distinguishing “good” or development aid is by type of donor. Reddy and
Minoiu (2006) argue that aid given by a set of countries—mostly Scandinavian—is good aid,
or better than that given by others and they similarly argue that multilateral aid is better than
bilateral aid. 20 We test these propositions. One can indeed make the argument that
multilateral aid is less explicitly “political” than bilateral aid and should therefore have a
different, and presumably more favorable, impact. The argument for a possible differential
impact between multilateral and bilateral aid could also relate to the type of aid given or to
the nature and effectiveness of conditionality. But we find no difference between the effects
of multilateral and bilateral aid (Table 8A); both sets of coefficients are insignificant. We
also ran the specifications in Table 6, using another Reddy and Miniou definition of good
donors (both the top 5 and the top 10). As can be seen from Table 8B (aid is that from the top
5 donors), in only 13 of 37 cases is the aid coefficient positive, and in only one is it
significant at conventional levels. 24 of 37 coefficients are negative, and significant in 3
cases. If anything, even after a careful selection of donors, the weight of evidence is towards
a slight negative effect of aid. 21
20

One additional problem of distinguishing aid simply by donor type is that it is then difficult

to understand why one should expect similar consequences if it is given to two very different
types of policy regimes. Why should aid by Norway to Tanzania produce the same result as
aid by Norway to Zaire under Mobutu?
21

We estimate these using OLS because there is no variation for the top 5 donors in historic

and language links. The results are similar when we use the top 10 good donors.

- 31 -

The third basis for distinguishing aid is by purpose. This basis is particularly prone to the
fungibility/earmarking problem. If donors cannot individually or collectively alter the plans
and priorities of recipient governments, then it is hard to justify slicing aid. 22 In Table 8C, we
try to see if two different categories—aid for social uses and aid for economic uses have
significant positive effects. 23 This does not turn out to be the case.

Finally, Clemens et. al. (2004) claim that aid needs to be distinguished by the timing of its
impact—early versus late impact. Clemens et. al (2004) argues that the effect of early-impact
aid will be easier to detect in the data than late-impact aid. Subramanian and Kumar (2005)
contain a critique of their framework and findings. We re-run our specifications using their

22

One category of aid that might avoid the fungibility problem is technical assistance

because of the manner in which it is provided: essentially, donors pay foreign consultants to
provide some service to recipient governments. But technical assistance too does not seem to
have any impact on growth either.
23

The categories come from the OECD’s DEC database that provides data on ODA

commitments by purpose (CRS). Social sector aid includes education, health and population,
and water supply and sanitation; and economic aid includes energy and transport and
communications.

- 32 -

aid categories and find that there is no significant effect (Table 8D). 24 In fact, our result in
Tables 6 and 8B where we estimate the impact of aid over different lags (and hence is a more
general test) also bears on the point made by Clemens et. al. (2004) about the timing of aid’s
impact. We see in these tables that regardless of when aid’s impact can be thought to be felt,
there seems little evidence that aid affects growth.

In general, what we find, however, is that no sub-categories have any significant impact—
positive or negative—on growth. There is, however, a more general concern with slicing and
dicing up aid; it could become a fishing expedition where the researcher hunts for any sub
category that has a positive (or negative) correlation with growth, and then finds an (ex-post)
rationale to focus on that sub-category, depending on the researcher’s biases. This is why the

24

We need to instrument for early impact and late impact aid. In the Clemens et. al. (2004)

categorization, the former contains many of the economic aid categories and the latter the
social aid categories. So in our specifications that use the Clemens et. al. (2004) variables, we
instrument for early impact aid with our instrument for economic aid and for late impact aid
with the instrument for social aid. Recall that our instrument for economic aid is derived by
running an equation explaining bilateral economic aid flows between donors and recipients
(as we did for bilateral total aid in Table 3). We then constructed a series for fitted economic
aid by aggregating across donors for each recipient. Similarly, we develop the instrument for
social aid. The first-stage results (available from the authors upon request) show that these
instruments work well.

- 33 -

a priori theoretical rationale for focusing on a particular sub-category is important.
Unfortunately, fungibility renders most such rationales suspect.

III. AID AND GROWTH: REVISITING THE PANEL EVIDENCE
In this section, we revisit the aid-growth evidence based on panel estimations. Much of the
literature, with the exception of Hansen and Tarp (2002) and Dalgaard, Hansen and Tarp
(2004), employs either OLS or 2-stage least squares estimations procedures without fixed
effects.

An alternative approach that addresses the potential endogeneity of all the regressors and also
incorporates fixed effects is to use panel GMM regressions. 25 These come in two flavors.
There is the difference-GMM estimator due to Arellano and Bond (AB, 1991) and the
system-GMM estimator due to Blundell and Bond (BB, 1998). In both, identification relies
on first-differencing and using lagged values of the endogenous variables as instruments.

25

It is important to stress that fixed effects are not a panacea and come with their own

problems: first, they do not help inference if there are time-varying omitted factors affecting
the dependent variable and correlated with the right hand side variables. They may also
exacerbate measurement error by removing a significant portion of the variation in the right
hand side variables.

- 34 -

In the AB estimator, lagged levels are used to instrument for the differenced right hand side
variables, whereas in the BB estimator the estimated system comprises the difference
equation instrumented with lagged levels as in the AB estimator as well as the level equation,
which is estimated using lagged differences as instruments. Each estimator has its limitations.
The AB estimator often leads to a weak instruments problem because lagged levels are
typically not highly correlated with their differenced counterparts. On the other hand, the
BB estimator generates large upward biases in the right-hand side variables (see Hauk and
Wacziarg, 2004). The BB estimator has another deficiency: the instruments for the level
equation, namely the lagged differences of the RHS variables, are valid only if they are
orthogonal to the fixed effect. Given neither estimator is perfect, we report the results using
both procedures.

In Tables 9 and 10, we report the results of the GMM estimations corresponding to the core
specifications in Tables 4 and Tables 7A-7C (the specifications in Table 9 use the ArellanoBond procedure while those in Table 10 use the Blundell-Bond procedure). In all these
specifications, we report the results of using the unrestricted lags of all the endogenous
variables as instruments. The results do not change when we use fewer lags (available from
the authors).

The results are easy to summarize. In all the GMM specifications, which we would
emphasize are really fixed effects panel versions of the cross-section regressions reported in
tables 4 and 7, the results on aid remain broadly unchanged. In column 1 of Tables 9 and 10,
we report the core specification corresponding to Table 4. In column 2, we test whether there

- 35 -

are diminishing returns by adding the squared aid term (compare with Table 7, Panel A).
Column 3 is the counterpart of Table 7, Panel B, which tests whether aid works better in
better policy environments. Finally, in column 4 the aid-geography interaction is examined
(compare with Panel C of Table 7). In no case, does aid have a positive and significant effect
(the coefficient is negative and significant in Table 9, column 1 and in Table 10, column 4).
There is no evidence of aid working in better policy environments (see the coefficients of the
interaction between aid and policy in column 3 of Tables 9 and 10). There is some evidence
for aid working better in better geographic environments using the AB estimate (Table 9,
column 4) but the sign of the coefficient estimate for the aid-geography interaction is
reversed (and significant) in the system GMM BB estimate in Table 10. 26

In Appendix Tables 2 and 3, corresponding respectively to the AB and BB procedures, we
examine the impact of different categories of aid as in Table 8. Only early impact aid is
significant at the 10 percent level (and it has diminishing effectiveness as suggested by the
negative coefficient for the squared term). However, in the system GMM BB estimates in
Appendix Table 3, the signs of the coefficient estimates are reversed, and they are no longer
significant. It is hard to argue that even in the panel estimates, there is a robust effect of aid
on growth.

26

We ran all the regressions in Tables 9 and 10 using one-period lagged aid instead of using
contemporaneous values. In all cases, the aid-GDP coefficient was insignificant (results
available from the authors upon request).

- 36 -

IV. QUANTITATIVE IMPACT OF AID: THEORY AND EMPIRICS
What should one expect? Suppose the primary channel through which aid worked was by
increasing public investment. 27 What then would be the quantitative impact on growth? A
theoretical estimate of this impact can be obtained from a simple growth model. This model
yields the conclusion that, even under the most optimistic assumptions about the use of aid
(optimistic in the sense that all aid is invested and none of it is wasted or consumed), the
impact of aid should be positive but relatively small in magnitude.

Specifically, the relationship between aid inflows and growth is captured by the following
equation (see Appendix 2 for details):

δγ y
δ(

Aid
)
Y

= αβ

Y
K

where γy is the rate of growth of output per worker, Aid/Y is the ratio of aid to GDP, α is
capital share in income, β is the fraction of aid that is invested, and Y/K is the output capital
ratio (Y/K). Assuming that all aid is invested (β =1), and using a value of capital share in
income of 0.35 computed by Bosworth and Collins (2003), and a value of 0.45 for the

27

Of course, aid by financing schooling and increasing human capital accumulation could

also lead to total factor productivity growth. We discuss this channel below.

- 37 -

output-capital ratio for the average developing country in our regression sample, the
magnitude of the regression coefficient suggested by theory is 0.16; that is, a 1 percentage
point increase in the ratio of aid to GDP should at most raise the long-run growth rate by
0.16 percent, even on the most optimistic assumption that all aid is usefully invested. More
realistically, if half of all aid is wasted or consumed, the coefficient value should be close to
0.1. Of course, if the public investment financed by aid has some spillover effects and hence
an effect on productivity growth, the impact of aid could be slightly higher.

It is worth noting here that the coefficients on aid should be close to those on investment.
Barro and Martin (1995, Chapter 12), in summarizing the cross-section growth estimates,
suggest that a plausible coefficient on the investment to GDP ratio is about 0.03, that is a 1
percentage point increase in the ratio of investment to GDP should increase per capita growth
rate by 0.03 percent, even less than the (crude) theoretical estimate of 0.1 that we derive. In
sum, even in theory – unless one postulates significant non-linearities in the relationship
between investment and growth – it is unlikely that resources for investment by themselves,
no matter how well used, will lead to substantial increases in growth, unless accompanied by
policies that increase total factor productivity.

- 38 -

V. CONCLUDING REMARKS
This paper had a simple objective: to present in one place and using one framework results
on the different aspects of the aid-growth relationship and to do so both in cross-section and
panel contexts and by addressing the problem of the endogeneity of aid.

Our central conclusion is there is no robust positive relationship between aid and growth in
the cross-section, and this despite the fact that our instrumentation strategy corrects for the
bias in conventional (ordinary least squares) estimation procedures of finding a negative
impact of aid on growth. This conclusion holds across:

•

time horizons;

•

time periods;

•

cross-section and panel contexts

•

types of aid distinguished by:
o what it is used for (economic, social, food, etc.);
o who gives it (multilateral donors, bilateral donors, good donors and others);
o who it is given to (those with good policies and institutions and others);
o who it is given to (those in the tropics and outside); and
o how long it takes to have effect (contemporaneous versus lagged ).

In sum, we find that it is difficult to discern any systematic effect of aid on growth.

- 39 -

One implication may simply be that the entire enterprise of running cross-country growth
regressions may be plagued by noise in the data, which makes it hard to establish any
relationship even if they actually exist. This possibility is strengthened by a simple
theoretical exercise, which suggests that the effects of aid, even if well utilized, on growth
are likely to be positive but much smaller than suggested by previous studies. If noise in the
data plague all findings, then strong claims about aid effectiveness (or equally, on aid
ineffectiveness) based on cross-country evidence are unwarranted, and aid policies that rely
on such claims should be re-examined.

If noise is not the entire explanation (there are robust findings in the cross-country growth
literature, such as the importance of institutions and policies for growth), one has to ask what
aspects of aid offset what must be the indisputable growth enhancing effects of resource
transfers. We then have to move away from the traditional cross-sectional analysis, and focus
on more direct evidence of the channels through which aid might help or hinder growth. Such
further research is essential to improve aid effectiveness. We attempt some answers in Rajan
and Subramanian (2005).

- 40 -

Table 1: Summary Statistics
Variable

Mean
1960-00 (74 Obs.)
Real annual average per capita GDP growth (PPP)
1.559
Aid to GDP
6.105
Fitted aid to GDP
5.201
Initial level of per capita (PPP) GDP
7.399
Initial level of trade policy
0.257
Initial level of life expectancy at birth
48.391
Geography
-0.572
Institutional quality
0.528
Initial inflation
14.755
Initial M2/GDP
19.838
Initial budget balanc/GDP
-3.874
Average no. of revolutions
0.222
Ethnic fractionalization
0.479
Mult. aid/GDP
1.916
Bilat. aid/GDP
3.917
1980-00 (77 Obs.)
Real annual average per capita GDP growth (PPP)
0.931
Aid to GDP
5.430
Fitted aid to GDP
4.406
Initial level of per capita (PPP) GDP
7.886
Initial level of trade policy
0.434
Initial level of life expectancy at birth
57.426
Geography
-0.490
Institutional quality
0.534
Initial inflation
32.531
Initial M2/GDP
30.675
Initial budget balanc/GDP
-4.956
Average no. of revolutions
0.248
Ethnic fractionalization
0.460
Mult. aid/GDP
2.170
Bilat. aid/GDP
3.768
Panel (239 Obs.)
Real annual average per capita GDP growth (PPP)
1.032
Aid to GDP
4.689
Fitted aid to GDP
7.407
Initial level of per capita (PPP) GDP
8.062
Initial level of trade policy
0.364
Initial level of life expectancy at birth
61.425
Geography
-0.409
Institutional quality
0.485
Initial inflation
0.277
Initial M2/GDP
35.097
Initial budget balanc/GDP
-2.841
Average no. of revolutions
0.244
Ethnic fractionalization
0.422
Mult. aid/GDP
1.510
Bilat. aid/GDP
3.015

Std. Dev.

Min

Max

1.739
6.949
4.829
0.687
0.258
9.796
0.742
0.123
32.605
12.609
4.936
0.188
0.288
2.550
4.199

-3.373
0.087
-7.046
6.037
0.000
32.380
-1.040
0.225
-0.835
2.628
-23.145
0.000
0.004
0.006
0.072

6.794
28.378
19.707
8.967
1.000
71.680
1.528
0.859
173.199
72.980
5.837
0.829
0.902
9.797
19.388

2.177
7.098
4.177
0.833
0.349
9.817
0.807
0.128
57.411
15.647
6.363
0.264
0.300
3.226
4.673

-5.557
0.049
-6.450
6.094
0.000
35.400
-1.040
0.225
-0.835
8.133
-39.088
0.000
0.004
0.001
0.047

6.273
43.853
19.087
9.347
1.000
74.600
1.528
0.859
351.970
78.361
3.384
1.286
0.902
17.184
29.702

3.254
6.756
15.744
0.810
0.482
9.564
0.837
0.172
0.544
20.753
4.191
0.414
0.300
2.803
4.070

-11.518
0.011
0.099
6.094
0.000
35.200
-1.040
0.056
-0.005
3.932
-21.556
0.000
0.004
0.000
0.019

15.762
50.069
150.308
9.794
1.000
77.350
1.784
0.912
4.192
124.251
14.526
2.600
0.902
21.770
26.169

- 41 -

Table 2: Impact of Total Aid on Growth, OLS Estimations
(Dependent variable is average annual growth of per capita GDP)

Aid/GDP
Initial per cap. GDP
Initial level of policy (Sachs-Warner)
Initial level of life expectancy
Geography
Institutional quality
Initial Inflation
Initial M2/GDP
Initial Budget Balance/GDP
Revolutions
Ethnic Fractionalization
Observations
R-squared

(1)
1960_00

(2)
1970_00

(3)
1980_00

(4)
1990_00

-0.063
(0.028)**
-1.332
(0.284)***
1.788
(0.431)***
0.024
(0.020)
0.346
(0.132)**
3.944
(1.490)**
-0.003
(0.002)
0.017
(0.010)
-0.007
(0.024)
-1.261
(0.506)**
-0.102
(0.448)
74
0.77

-0.076
(0.043)*
-1.668
(0.317)***
2.278
(0.472)***
0.016
(0.030)
0.386
(0.179)**
4.023
(2.223)*
-0.004
(0.003)
0.016
(0.015)
-0.014
(0.033)
-1.310
(0.488)***
-0.391
(0.704)
78
0.70

-0.120
(0.069)*
-1.632
(0.376)***
2.303
(0.773)***
0.063
(0.041)
0.505
(0.224)**
1.361
(2.281)
-0.001
(0.002)
-0.010
(0.023)
-0.023
(0.035)
-0.669
(0.627)
0.045
(0.903)
75
0.64

-0.008
(0.048)
-1.147
(0.559)**
-0.159
(0.551)
0.151
(0.063)**
0.693
(0.408)*
2.951
(3.146)
-0.001
(0.000)***
-0.003
(0.014)
0.205
(0.059)***
-0.491
(0.652)
1.742
(1.084)
70
0.63

All standard errors are robust and reported below coefficient estimates. ***, **, and * denote significance at 1,
5, and 10 percent, respectively. All specifications include dummies for sub-Saharan African and East Asian
countries. For descriptions of the variables and their sources, see Appendix 1. The sample decreases for the
1980-00 and 1990-00 time periods because data on budget balance becomes sparser for the 1980s and 1990s, so
the initial value of budget balance cannot be computed for these periods. Outliers are excluded based on the
Hadi (1992) procedure on the core IV specification in Table 4, which results in two countries being dropped
from the 1980-00 horizon in all the results that are presented.

- 42 -

Table 3: Estimation of Exogenous Variation in the Allocation of Aid by Donors Across Recipients
(Dependent variable is aid / recipient GDP)

Dummy for pairs that ever had a colonial relationship
Dummy for pairs currently in a colonial relationship
Dummy for pairs that have common language (Language Dummy)
Dummy for country that ever had a colonial relationship with UK
Dummy for country that ever had a colonial relationship with France
Dummy for country that ever had a colonial relationship with Spain
Dummy for country that ever had a colonial relationship with Portugal
Ratio of logarithm of population of donor relative to recipient
Ratio of logarithm of population of donor relative to recipient*colony dummy
Ratio of logarithm of population of donor relative to recipient*UK colony dummy
Ratio of logarithm of population of donor relative to recipient*Spanish colony dummy
Ratio of logarithm of population of donor relative to recipient*French colony dummy
Ratio of logarithm of population of donor relative to recipient*Portugese colony dummy
Observations
R-squared

(1)
1960_00
0.017
(0.003)***
-0.017
(0.005)***
0.001
(0.000)*
-0.019
(0.003)***
-0.045
(0.005)***
-0.034
(0.005)***
0.002
(0.005)
0.001
(0.000)***
0.006
(0.001)***
-0.004
(0.001)***
0.004
(0.002)*
0.013
(0.002)***
0.027
(0.002)***
3288
0.41

(2)
1970_00
0.017
(0.002)***
-0.010
(0.006)*
0.001
(0.000)*
-0.020
(0.003)***
-0.035
(0.005)***
-0.029
(0.004)***
0.008
(0.004)*
0.001
(0.000)***
0.006
(0.001)***
-0.004
(0.001)***
0.002
(0.002)
0.010
(0.002)***
0.029
(0.002)***
3288
0.42

(3)
1980_00
0.014
(0.002)***
-0.015
(0.006)**
0.001
(0.000)
-0.015
(0.003)***
-0.026
(0.004)***
-0.023
(0.004)***
0.016
(0.004)***
0.001
(0.000)***
0.005
(0.001)***
-0.004
(0.001)***
0.001
(0.002)
0.010
(0.002)***
0.025
(0.002)***
3288
0.38

(4)
1990_00
0.014
(0.003)***
-0.011
(0.008)
0.000
(0.000)
-0.010
(0.003)***
-0.016
(0.005)***
-0.019
(0.004)***
0.025
(0.005)***
0.001
(0.000)***
0.006
(0.001)***
-0.006
(0.001)***
-0.002
(0.002)
0.007
(0.002)***
0.026
(0.002)***
3249
0.33

Estimation is by ordinary least squares. The estimated equation corresponds to equation 1 in Section II of the
paper. All standard errors are robust. Absolute value of t-statistics reported below coefficient estimates. ***, **,
and * denote significance at 1, 5, and 10 percent, respectively. For descriptions of the variables and their
sources, see Appendix 1.

- 43 Table 4A: Impact of Total Aid on Growth, IV Estimations
(Dependent variable is average annual growth of per capita GDP)

Aid/GDP
Initial per cap. GDP
Initial level of policy (Sachs-Warner)
Initial level of life expectancy
Geography
Institutional quality
Initial Inflation
Initial M2/GDP
Initial Budget Balance/GDP
Revolutions
Ethnic Fractionalization
Observations
R-squared

(1)
1960_00

(2)
1970_00

(3)
1980_00

(4)
1990_00

0.063
(0.061)
-1.175
(0.387)***
1.620
(0.666)**
0.059
(0.028)**
0.526
(0.187)***
4.558
(1.698)***
-0.003
(0.004)
0.017
(0.012)
0.016
(0.029)
-1.144
(0.618)*
0.712
(0.609)
74
0.66

0.096
(0.070)
-1.409
(0.435)***
2.139
(0.619)***
0.076
(0.039)*
0.606
(0.259)**
4.077
(2.328)*
-0.005
(0.005)
0.010
(0.020)
0.016
(0.036)
-1.406
(0.656)**
0.788
(0.851)
78
0.59

-0.004
(0.095)
-1.454
(0.446)***
2.332
(0.835)***
0.102
(0.050)**
0.605
(0.255)**
0.843
(2.484)
-0.002
(0.003)
-0.011
(0.025)
0.011
(0.042)
-0.719
(0.670)
0.818
(1.055)
75
0.61

-0.389
(0.194)**
-2.193
(0.692)***
-0.065
(0.726)
0.047
(0.089)
0.211
(0.421)
6.437
(3.588)*
-0.001
(0.001)*
-0.003
(0.014)
0.195
(0.093)**
-0.350
(0.778)
-0.092
(1.414)
70
0.37

Table 4B: Impact of Total Aid on Growth, First Stage Regressions
(Dependent variable is average of the ratio of total aid to GDP)

Fitted Aid/GDP
Observations
R-squared
F-value

(1)
1960_00

(2)
1970_00

(3)
1980_00

(4)
1990_00

0.695
(0.139)***
74
0.69
25.20

0.639
(0.114)***
78
0.75
31.58

0.603
(0.111)***
75
0.81
29.38

0.494
(0.169)***
70
0.68
8.53

All standard errors are robust and reported below coefficient estimates. ***, **, and * denote significance at 1,
5, and 10 percent, respectively. All specifications include dummies for sub-Saharan African and East Asian
countries. The instrument for aid corresponds to that in (1) and (2) in Section II of the paper. All specifications
include dummies for sub-Saharan African and East Asian countries. Other covariates in the first-stage
regression are omitted for presentational convenience. Throughout the paper, the values of the potentially
endogenous covariates are for the beginning of the relevant time period (or strictly speaking the first available
value closest to the initial year of the relevant time period). Outliers are excluded based on the Hadi (1992)
procedure. For descriptions of the variables and their sources, see Appendix 1.

- 44 -

Table 5A: Impact of Total Aid on Growth, IV Estimations
(Dependent variable is average annual growth of per capita GDP)

Aid/GDP
Colony UK
Colony France
Colony Spain
Observations
R-squared

(1)
1960_00

(2)
1970_00

(3)
1980_00

(4)
1990_00

0.051
(0.052)
0.019
(0.445)
0.418
(0.500)
0.407
(0.544)
74
0.69

0.080
(0.065)
0.557
(0.538)
0.931
(0.656)
0.225
(0.674)
78
0.63

-0.052
(0.090)
0.905
(0.548)
0.585
(0.559)
-0.941
(0.517)*
75
0.67

-0.308
(0.158)*
-0.604
(0.785)
-1.461
(0.741)*
-1.096
(1.142)
70
0.50

This specification is exactly as in Table 4A except for the addition of three colony dummies.

Table 5B: Impact of Total Aid on Growth, IV Estimations (Second-Stage)
(Dependent variable is average annual growth of per capita GDP)

Aid/GDP
Observations
R-squared
P-value for test of over-identifying restrictions

(1)
1960_00

(2)
1970_00

(3)
1980_00

(4)
1990_00

0.052
(0.052)
74
0.68
0.52

0.096
(0.068)
78
0.59
0.90

0.008
(0.094)
75
0.60
0.14

-0.251
(0.150)
70
0.52
0.05

Table 5C: Impact of Total Aid on Growth, IV Estimations (First Stage)
(Dependent variable is average of the ratio of total aid to GDP)

Fitted Aid/Initial GDP
Log Area
Observations
R-squared

(1)
1960_00

(2)
1970_00

(3)
1980_00

(4)
1990_00

0.560
(0.171)***
-0.582
(0.436)
74
0.70

0.596
(0.145)***
-0.160
(0.332)
78
0.75

0.569
(0.143)***
-0.097
(0.259)
75
0.81

0.279
(0.207)
-0.613
(0.354)*
70
0.70

In Tables 5B and 5C, there are two instruments for aid. The first is based on equation 1 in the text and the
second is the logarithm of a country’s area (in sq. kms.). Table 5B is the second stage while Table 5C is the first
stage.

- 45 -

Table 5D: Impact of Total Aid on Growth, IV Estimations (Second Stage)
(Dependent variable is average annual growth of per capita GDP)

Aid/GDP
Fitted Aid/GDP
Observations
R-squared

(1)
1960_00

(2)
1970_00

(3)
1980_00

(4)
1990_00

-0.091
(0.152)
0.107
(0.116)
74
0.81

-0.006
(0.761)
0.065
(0.494)
78
0.69

2.367
(7.554)
-1.428
(4.547)
75
n.a.

0.157
(0.286)
-0.270
(0.158)*
70
0.65

In Table 5D, aid is instrumented by the logarithm of a country’s area (in sq. kms.) while fitted aid is the
instrument based on equation 1 in the paper.

- 46 -

Table 6: The Effect of Aid Under Alternative Assumptions About Timing of Impact: OLS Estimations
(Dependent variable is average annual growth of per capita GDP)
(1)
1960-70
Aid Horizon=10 years
1960-70

-0.163
(0.127)

Growth Horizon=10 years
(2)
(3)
1970-80
1980-90

1980-90

n.a.

0.061
(0.154)
0.049
(0.080)
n.a.

1990-00

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

-0.117
(0.051)**
n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

1970-80

Aid Horizon=20 years
1960-80
1980-00
Aid Horizon=30 years
1960-90
1970-00
Aid Horizon=40 years
1960-00

(4)
1990-00

Growth Horizon=20 years
(5)
(6)
1960-80
1980-00

-0.281
(0.116)**
-0.153
(0.065)**
-0.182
(0.057)***
n.a.

-0.082
(0.087)
-0.035
(0.060)
-0.028
(0.067)
-0.003
(0.094)

0.027
(0.073)
0.012
(0.042)
n.a.

-0.025
(0.047)
-0.017
(0.099)
-0.014
(0.058)
-0.022
(0.093)
n.a.

Growth Horizon=30 years
(7)
(8)
1960-90
1970-00

Growth Horizon=40 years
(9)
1960-00

-0.171
(0.104)
-0.047
(0.051)
-0.062
(0.046)
n.a.

-0.078
(0.058)
-0.046
(0.034)
n.a.

-0.072
(0.072)
-0.013
(0.043)
n.a.

-0.088
(0.056)
-0.046
(0.032)
n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

0.019
(0.034)

-0.033
(0.040)
-0.120
(0.069)*

-0.049
(0.024)**
n.a.

-0.007
(0.036)
n.a.

-0.032
(0.027)
n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

-0.059
(0.024)**
n.a.

-0.043
(0.019)**
-0.085
(0.029)***

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

-0.094
(0.040)**
n.a.

-0.076
(0.027)***

All standard errors are robust, and are reported below coefficient estimates. ***, **, and * denote significance
at 1, 5, and 10 percent, respectively. All specifications include dummies for sub-Saharan African and East Asian
countries. Other covariates are omitted for presentational simplicity. Each entry corresponds to the coefficient
of aid in a regression whose time period is denoted by the column heading and where the aid variable is
averaged over the period denoted by the row heading. For descriptions of the variables and their sources, see
Appendix 1.

- 47 -

Table 7: Aid and Growth: Diminishing Returns and Conditional Impacts, IV Estimations
(Dependent variable is average annual growth of per capita GDP)
Panel 7A: Aid-square term
(1)
(2)
(3)
1960_00
1970_00
1980_00
Aid/GDP
-0.258
-0.169
8.573
(0.191)
(0.166)
(47.949)
Aid/GDP-squared
0.013
0.011
-0.576
(0.010)
(0.008)
(3.165)
Observations
74
78
75
R-squared
0.60
0.58
Robust standard errors in parentheses; *,**, and *** denote significance at 10 %, 5%, and 1%, respectively

(4)
1990_00
1.044
(2.797)
-0.081
(0.145)
70

Panel 7B: Aid interacted with Sachs-Warner Policy measure
(1)
(2)
(3)
1960_00
1970_00
1980_00
Aid/GDP
0.148
0.141
-0.037
(0.161)
(0.153)
(0.107)
Policy (Sachs-Warner)
2.943
2.687
-0.492
(1.539)*
(1.079)**
(2.205)
Aid/GDP*policy
-0.356
-0.144
1.747
(0.489)
(0.361)
(1.462)
Observations
74
78
75
R-squared
0.58
0.59
0.32
Robust standard errors in parentheses; *,**, and *** denote significance at 10 %, 5%, and 1%, respectively

(4)
1990_00
-0.460
(0.241)*
-2.340
(2.019)
0.610
(0.564)
70
0.24

Panel 7C: Aid interacted with Geography

Aid/GDP
Geography
Aid/GDP*Geography
Observations
R-squared

(1)
1960_00

(2)
1970_00

(3)
1980_00

(4)
1990_00

0.034
(0.058)
0.644
(0.223)***
-0.043
(0.054)
74
0.63

0.093
(0.081)
0.617
(0.249)**
-0.004
(0.068)
78
0.59

-0.120
(0.159)
0.972
(0.310)***
-0.187
(0.156)
75
0.53

-0.490
(0.180)***
0.582
(0.487)
-0.180
(0.147)
70
0.47

All standard errors are robust, and are reported below coefficient estimates. ***, **, and * denote significance
at 1, 5, and 10 percent, respectively. The instrument for aid corresponds to equation 3 in Section II of the paper.
Other covariates are omitted for presentational simplicity. For descriptions of the variables and their sources,
see Appendix 1.

- 48 -

Table 8: Impact of Different Categories of Aid
Panel 8A: Multilateral and Bilateral Aid
Multilateral Aid
(1)
1960_00
0.184
(0.189)

Mult. aid/GDP

(2)
1970_00
0.241
(0.206)

(3)
1980_00
-0.062
(0.207)

(4)
1990_00
-0.702
(0.374)*

Bilat. aid/GDP
Observations
R-squared

74
0.65

78
0.57

75
0.62

70
0.42

Bilateral Aid

(5)
1960_00

(6)
1970_00

(7)
1980_00

(8)
1990_00

0.091
(0.087)
74
0.67

0.139
(0.098)
78
0.60

0.003
(0.139)
75
0.60

-0.504
(0.249)**
70
0.39

Panel 8B: Impact of Aid Given by Top 5 "Good Donors," OLS Regression Results
(Dependent variable is average annual growth of per capita GDP)
(1)
1960-70
Aid Horizon=10 years
1960-70

Growth Horizon=10 years
(2)
(3)
1970-80
1980-90

1970-80

-1.122
(4.041)
n.a.

1980-90

n.a.

7.312
(4.227)*
0.623
(0.658)
n.a.

1990-00

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

-1.066
(0.433)**
n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

Aid Horizon=20 years
1960-80
1980-00
Aid Horizon=30 years
1960-90
1970-00
Aid Horizon=40 years
1960-00

(4)
1990-00

Growth Horizon=20 years
(5)
(6)
1960-80
1980-00

-2.304
(4.011)
-1.375
(0.590)**
-0.566
(0.326)*
n.a.

1.695
(3.525)
-0.593
(0.559)
0.735
(0.613)
0.721
(0.527)

2.587
(2.802)
-0.071
(0.342)
n.a.

-0.421
(0.401)
0.411
(0.528)
0.473
(0.779)
0.461
(0.705)
n.a.

Growth Horizon=30 years
(7)
(8)
1960-90
1970-00

Growth Horizon=40 years
(9)
1960-00

-0.381
(2.343)
-1.088
(0.701)
-0.291
(0.313)
n.a.

0.054
(2.417)
-0.378
(0.264)
n.a.

0.982
(1.939)
-0.203
(0.367)
n.a.

0.755
(1.676)
-0.428
(0.284)
n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

-0.012
(0.234)

-0.824
(0.514)
-0.231
(0.372)

-0.261
(0.191)
n.a.

-0.168
(0.277)
n.a.

0.055
(0.239)
n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

-0.458
(0.360)

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

-0.165
(0.165)
-0.206
(0.302)

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

-0.325
(0.323)
n.a.

n.a.

-0.169
(0.270)

Panel 8C: Social and Economic Aid

Social sector aid/GDP

(1)
1970_00
0.359
(0.280)

Social
(2)
1980_00
-0.048
(0.420)

(3)
1990_00
-1.148
(0.516)**

Economic aid/GDP
Observations
R-squared

78
0.64

75
0.61

70
0.45

(4)
1970_00

Economic
(5)
1980_00

(6)
1990_00

0.088
(0.067)
78
0.60

-0.020
(0.090)
75
0.61

-0.476
(0.354)
70
0.30

- 49 -

Panel 8D: Late-Impact and Early-Impact Aid

Late-impact aid/GDP

(1)
1970_00
0.170
(0.111)

Late-impact
(2)
1980_00
-0.007
(0.146)

(3)
1990_00
-0.478
(0.228)**

Early-impact aid/GDP
Observations
R-squared

71
0.64

71
0.60

70
0.40

(4)
1970_00

Early-impact
(5)
1980_00

(6)
1990_00

0.197
(0.141)
71
0.61

-0.026
(0.169)
71
0.61

-0.653
(0.397)
70
0.36

All standard errors are robust, and are reported below coefficient estimates. ***, **, and * denote significance
at 1, 5, and 10 percent, respectively. Other covariates are omitted for presentational simplicity. In Panel 8B, top
5 donors comprise Denmark, Finland, Norway, Sweden, and Iceland. In Table 8B, estimation uses OLS. For
descriptions of the variables and their sources, see Appendix 1.

- 50 -

Table 9: GMM Panel Regressions (Arellano-Bond Procedure)
(Dependent variable is average annual growth of per capita GDP)
Aid/GDP
Policy (Sachs-Warner)

(1)
-0.151
(0.077)**
-1.774
(0.933)*

(2)
-0.015
(0.207)
-1.326
(0.843)
-0.005
(0.005)

Aid/GDP-squared
Aid/GDP*policy

(3)
-0.168
(0.140)
-1.309
(0.993)

-0.022
(0.050)

Aid/GDP*Geography
Initial per cap. GDP
Initial level of life expectancy
Institutional quality
Log Inflation
M2/GDP
Budget Balance/GDP
Revolutions
Observations
Number of Groups
Chi-Square (Hansen over-id test)
AR(2) (test for serial correlation)
GMM estimation method
Endogenous variables
used as instruments

No. of lags of endogenous
varuiables used in instrumentation
Exogenous variable used
as instrument

(4)
0.163
(0.140)
-0.990
(1.129)

-8.347
(1.543)***
-0.393
(0.183)**
6.953
(2.767)**
-1.985
(0.671)***
-0.002
(0.032)
0.164
(0.082)**
-0.972
(0.625)
167
68
0.485
0.198
Difference
Initial income,
aid, policy,
inst. quality,
inflation, M2,
budget balance,
revolutions,
life expectancy
Eight

-7.998
(1.414)***
-0.209
(0.157)
5.665
(2.225)**
-1.838
(0.596)***
-0.015
(0.037)
0.117
(0.076)
-1.174
(0.624)*
167
68
0.423
0.269
Difference
Initial income,
aid, policy,
inst. quality,
inflation, M2,
budget balance,
revolutions,
life expectancy
Eight

-7.772
(1.552)***
-0.229
(0.156)
6.093
(2.350)***
-1.978
(0.882)**
-0.015
(0.036)
0.141
(0.070)**
-1.321
(0.831)
167
68
0.544
0.255
Difference
Initial income,
aid, policy,
inst. quality,
inflation, M2,
budget balance,
revolutions,
life expectancy
Eight

0.376
(0.113)***
-8.165
(1.260)***
-0.213
(0.153)
6.575
(2.392)***
-1.687
(0.829)**
-0.001
(0.031)
0.139
(0.082)*
-1.427
(0.675)**
167
68
0.536
0.199
Difference
Initial income,
aid, policy,
inst. quality,
inflation, M2,
budget balance,
revolutions,
life expectancy
Eight

Ethnic
Geography

Ethnic
Geography

Ethnic
Geography

Ethnic
Geography

All standard errors are robust and reported below coefficient estimates. ***, **, and * denote significance at 1,
5, and 10 percent, respectively. Regressions use the Arellano and Bond (1991) difference GMM estimator. For
descriptions of the variables and their sources, see Appendix 1.

- 51 -

Table 10: GMM Panel Regressions (Blundell-Bond procedure)
(Dependent variable is average annual growth of per capita GDP)
Aid/GDP
Policy (Sachs-Warner)
Geography

(1)
-0.054
(0.114)
1.370
(1.015)
0.496
(0.353)

Aid/GDP-squared

(2)
-0.187
(0.135)
0.722
(0.933)
0.490
(0.335)
0.005
(0.004)

Aid/GDP*policy

(3)
-0.046
(0.119)
1.026
(0.845)
0.596
(0.340)*

-0.046
(0.092)

Aid/GDP*Geography
Initial per cap. GDP
Initial level of life expectancy
Institutional quality
Log Inflation
M2/GDP
Budget Balance/GDP
Revolutions
Ethnic Fractionalization
Observations
Number of Groups
Chi-Square (Hansen over-id test)
AR(2) (test for serial correlation)
GMM estimation method
Endogenous variables
used as instruments

No. of lags of endogenous
varuiables used in instrumentation
Exogenous variable used
as instrument

(4)
-0.165
(0.087)*
0.855
(0.900)
0.717
(0.353)**

-2.456
(1.057)**
0.086
(0.098)
2.748
(2.579)
-1.498
(0.663)**
0.010
(0.021)
0.101
(0.075)
-0.073
(0.992)
0.129
(1.809)
239
72
0.391
0.298
System
Initial income,
aid, policy,
inst. quality,
inflation, M2,
budget balance,
revolutions,
life expectancy
Eight

-2.536
(0.603)***
0.076
(0.080)
3.173
(1.932)
-1.812
(0.627)***
0.008
(0.017)
0.111
(0.070)
-0.184
(0.437)
-0.178
(2.139)
239
72
0.598
0.224
System
Initial income,
aid, policy,
inst. quality,
inflation, M2,
budget balance,
revolutions,
life expectancy
Eight

-2.497
(0.819)***
0.105
(0.098)
3.644
(2.327)
-1.685
(0.692)**
-0.003
(0.017)
0.168
(0.068)**
-0.301
(0.582)
0.331
(1.870)
239
72
0.287
0.287
System
Initial income,
aid, policy,
inst. quality,
inflation, M2,
budget balance,
revolutions,
life expectancy
Eight

-0.122
(0.070)*
-1.994
(0.694)***
0.093
(0.087)
3.705
(2.211)*
-1.693
(0.580)***
0.010
(0.016)
0.138
(0.082)*
-0.508
(0.763)
1.246
(2.552)
239
72
0.371
0.285
System
Initial income,
aid, policy,
inst. quality,
inflation, M2,
budget balance,
revolutions,
life expectancy
Eight

Ethnic
Geography

Ethnic
Geography

Ethnic
Geography

Ethnic
Geography

All standard errors are robust and reported below coefficient estimates. ***, **, and * denote significance at 1,
5, and 10 percent, respectively. Regressions use the Blundell-Bond (1998) system GMM estimator. For
descriptions of the variables and their sources, see Appendix 1.

- 52 -

15

Chart 1: Conditional Relationship between Aid and its Instrument, 1960-00

-10

-5

Residuals of Aid/GDP
0
5
10

NIC

GMB
GNB
LSO

MWI
GUY
MRT

PNG
TCD
FJI
TTO
BOL
CYP
ROM

MLI ARG
LKA
BDI
ISR NER
RWA
URY
ZMB
SEN BFA
SGP
IRN PHL
PRY HND
CRI
NAM
VEN
ECU
MEX KEN
TUR
CHLMAR
SLV
KOR
BEN
MYSTHA
TGO
IND
JAM
ZAF
PAK PER
PAN GTM
DZA
SYR
UGA
BRA
BGD
COG
ETH COL MUS
CIV
CMR
DOM
MDG
IDN
ZWE
BWA
CHN
GHA
ZAR
EGY
GAB
NGA

-5

5
0
Residuals of Fitted Aid/GDP

10

coef = .69522287, se = .13858702, t = 5.02

The chart plots the first-stage relationship between actual and the instrument (fitted aid), conditional on all the
covariates that enter the second-stage growth regression. The slope of the line is the coefficient on fitted aid in
this first-stage regression (also shown in Table 4B).

- 53 -

Chart 2: Conditional Correlation between Growth and Total Aid, 1960-00

3

(OLS Estimation)

Residuals of Per Capita GDP Growth
-1
0
1
2

GAB

BWACOG

NGA

PAN NAM
DOM
ZWE
MUS GTM
SLV
SGP
UGA
SYR
BRA
PER
EGY
KOR
TTO
IDN
MRT
DZA BEN
MEX
IRN
COL
LKA
BOL
BGD INDTUR PHLBFA
GNB
CHN
SENRWA ARG GUY
CMR
ETH
MWI
MLI
PAK
ISR
TGO
ECUPRY
LSO
CHL
ROM FJI TCD
THA
CIV
MYS
HND
KEN
GHA
MAR
URY
VEN
PNG
ZAF
BDI
CYP
CRI
ZMB
JAM
MDG
NER

GMB

-2

NIC
ZAR

-10

-5

5
0
Residuals of Aid/GDP

10

15

coef = -.06308045, (robust) se = .02796237, t = -2.26

The chart plots the relationship between growth and actual aid, conditional on all the covariates. The slope of
the line is the coefficient on aid in the OLS regression in column 1 of Table 2.

- 54 Appendix 1. Data Description and Sources
Heston, Alan, Robert Summers and Bettina Aten, Penn World Table Version 6.1 (PWT), Center for International
Comparisons at the University of Pennsylvania (CICUP), October 2002.
OECD, DAC (Development Assistance Committee) database on Aid, 2002.
World Bank, 2004. World Development Indicators, Washington, D.C.: World Bank
IMF (International Monetary Fund), 2004, World Economic Outlook, Washington, D.C.: IMF.
Bosworth, B., and S. Collins, 2003, “The Empirics of Growth: An Update,” mimeo,
Brookings Institution, Washington D.C.
Barro and Lee, 1994: Data Set for a Panel of 138 Countries. The data set contains variables for the panel estimation.
Data are presented either quinquennially for the years 1960-1985, i.e., 1960, 1965,1970, 1975, 1980, and 1985, or for
averages of five years' sub-periods over 1960-1985. Barro, R., Lee, J-W., 1994, Data Set for a Panel of 138 Countries.
Revised January 1994.
Arthur S. Banks Banks, Arthur S. CROSS-NATIONAL TIME SERIES, 1815-2002 [Computer file]. Databanks
International ed. Binghamton, NY: Databanks International [Producer and Distributor], 2002.
Wacziarg, Romain and Karen Horn Welch (2003) “Trade Liberalization and Growth: New Evidence,” Mimeo, Stanford
University.
Correlates of War 2: This data set records all formal alliances among states between 1816 and 2000, including mutual
defense pacts, non-aggression treaties, and ententes.
Correlates of War Project, 2002, Correlates of War 2, University of Michigan
Rose, A.K., “Do we really know that the WTO increases trade?” 2004, American Economic Review.
Easterly website (Macro Time Series 2005)
Variable Name

Variable Description

Source

Annual average growth rate of real GDP (PPP) per capita where the
averages are taken over the relevant time period. Countries are
included in the sample for the 1960-00 horizon if there are data for at
least 35 years; for the 1970-00 horizon for at least 25 years of data;
Real economic

for the 1980-00 horizon for at least 15 years of data; for the 1990-00

growth

horizon for at least 5 years; and for the panel for at least 3 years.

PWT, version 6.1

- 55 -

The ratio of aggregate net development assistance that is disbursed
in current US dollars to GDP in current US dollars. It includes all
loan and grants undertaken by the official sector with the promotion
of economic development as the main objective and where loans
have a grant element of at least 25 percent. In all the regressions, the
aid-to-GDP is averaged over the relevant time period in the
regression. If the aid horizon is 1960-2000, then the aid-to-GDP
variable in the regression is average over this period of the annual
aid-to-GDP ratios. The variables are averaged similarly (i.e over 5
years) in the panel regressions. These averaging procedures are used
Aid to GDP

for all the aid variables.

Bilateral aid to

Bilateral aid includes aid from 22 donor countries defined in the

GDP

OECD’s DAC.

OECD, DAC

OECD, DAC

Multilateral aid is identified in the OECD’s DAC database and
Multilateral aid

includes assistance from the World Bank, and the regional

to GDP

development banks.
Social sector aid includes assistance for education, health and
population and water supply and sanitation. Data on this category of
aid is in terms of commitments. This was converted to disbursements
by taking the ratio of commitments in this sector to overall

Social sector aid

commitments and then multiplying this by aggregate aid

to GDP

disbursements.

OECD, DAC

Economic aid includes assistance for energy and transport and
communications. Data on this category of aid is in terms of
Economic aid to

commitments. This was converted to disbursements by taking the

GDP

ratio of commitments in this sector to overall commitments and then

OECD, DAC

- 56 multiplying this by aggregate aid disbursements.
Log of per capita (PPP) GDP at the beginning of the relevant time
period. For example, for the horizon, initial GDP is for the year
Initial GDP

1960.

PWT, 6.1

Life expectancy at birth in years at the beginning of the relevant time
period. For example, for the horizon, initial life expectancy is for the
year 1960 or for the closest year for which data are available. The
Life expectancy

same procedure is applied in the panel estimations.

WDI

Geography

Average of number of frost days and tropical land area

Bosworth & Collins, 2003

For the cross-section, the data are from Bosworth and Collins who
Institutional

use the ICRGE index averaged over the period 1986-1995.

quality

For the GMM regressions, data are averages for the relevant 5-year
period.

Bosworth & Collins, 2003

The average annual rate of growth of CPI-based inflation for the first
five years of the relevant time horizon. For example, for the period

Inflation

1960-00, this variable is measured for the period 1960-64. In the

Easterly’s website

panel, the inflation measures are averages of the relevant 5-year

(www.nyu.edu/fas/institute

period.

/dri/global

The ratio of M2/GDP for the first five years of the relevant time
Financial depth

horizon. In the panel, averages of the relevant 5-year period are used.

Easterly’s website

The ratio of general government budget balance to GDP for the first
five years of the relevant time horizon. In the panel, averages of the
Budget balance

relevant 5-year period are used.

WDI

The average number of revolutions per year in the relevant time
Revolutions

horizon. Revolutions are defined as any illegal or forced change in

Arthur S. Banks

- 57 the top governmental elite, any attempt at such a change, or any
successful or unsuccessful armed rebellion whose aim is
independence from the central government.

The Sachs-Warner trade policy index as updated by Wacziarg and
Initial policy

Welch and prevailing at the beginning of the relevant time horizon
or the year closest to it.

Wacziarg & Welch, 2003

Dummy that takes a value of 1 if donor and recipient country were
Colony

ever in colonial relationship

Rose, 2004

Dummy that takes a value of 1 if donor and recipient country enjoy
Current colony

a current colonial relationship

Rose, 2004

- 58 -

Appendix 2. Sample of Countries
Country

1960-00

1980-00

Panel

Algeria

yes

yes

yes

Argentina

yes

yes

Bangladesh

yes

Benin

Country

1960-00

1980-00

Panel

Korea, Rep.

yes

yes

yes

yes

Lesotho

yes

yes

no

yes

yes

Madagascar

yes

yes

yes

yes

no

no

Malawi

yes

yes

yes

Bolivia

yes

yes

yes

Malaysia

yes

yes

yes

Botswana

yes

yes

yes

Mali

yes

yes

yes

Brazil

yes

yes

yes

Mauritania

yes

no

no

Bulgaria

no

no

yes

Mauritius

yes

yes

no

Burkina Faso

yes

yes

yes

Mexico

yes

yes

yes

Burundi

yes

yes

no

Morocco

yes

yes

yes

Cameroon

yes

yes

yes

Namibia

yes

yes

yes

Chad

yes

yes

no

Nicaragua

yes

yes

yes

Chile

yes

yes

yes

Niger

yes

yes

no

China

yes

yes

yes

Nigeria

yes

yes

yes

Colombia

yes

yes

yes

Pakistan

yes

yes

yes

Congo, Dem. Rep.

yes

yes

yes

Panama

yes

yes

yes

Congo, Rep.

yes

yes

yes

Papua New Guinea

yes

yes

yes

Costa Rica

yes

yes

yes

Paraguay

yes

yes

yes

Cote d'Ivoire

yes

yes

yes

Peru

yes

yes

yes

Cyprus

yes

yes

yes

Philippines

yes

yes

yes

Dominican Republic

yes

yes

yes

Poland

no

yes

yes

Ecuador

yes

yes

yes

Romania

yes

yes

yes

Egypt, Arab Rep.

yes

yes

yes

Russian Federation

no

no

yes

- 59 -

El Salvador

yes

yes

yes

Rwanda

yes

yes

no

Ethiopia

yes

yes

yes

Senegal

yes

yes

yes

Fiji

yes

yes

no

Sierra Leone

no

yes

yes

Gabon

yes

yes

yes

Singapore

yes

yes

yes

Gambia, The

yes

yes

yes

South Africa

yes

yes

yes

Ghana

yes

yes

yes

Sri Lanka

yes

yes

yes

Guatemala

yes

yes

yes

Syrian Arab Republic

yes

yes

yes

Guinea-Bissau

yes

yes

yes

Thailand

yes

yes

yes

Guyana

yes

yes

no

Togo

yes

yes

yes

Haiti

no

yes

yes

Trinidad & Tobago

yes

yes

yes

Honduras

yes

no

no

Tunisia

no

yes

yes

Hungary

no

yes

yes

Turkey

yes

yes

yes

India

yes

yes

yes

Uganda

yes

yes

yes

Indonesia

yes

yes

yes

Uruguay

yes

yes

yes

Iran, Islamic Rep.

yes

yes

yes

Venezuela, RB

yes

yes

yes

Israel

yes

yes

yes

Yemen, Rep.

no

no

yes

Jamaica

yes

yes

yes

Zambia

yes

yes

yes

Jordan

no

yes

yes

Zimbabwe

yes

yes

yes

Kenya

yes

yes

yes

- 60 -

Appendix 3. Prediction of the Standard Growth Model of the Quantitative Impact of
Aid 28
In this appendix we derive a theoretical estimate of the impact of aid on growth based on the
standard Solow-Swan Growth model. The model assumes that a fraction of aid goes toward
financing public investment, which has an impact on long-run growth via capital
accumulation.
Y = AK α L1−α

(1)

Equation 1 is a simple Cobb-Douglas production function, with α representing the share of
capital in income, and A the technology parameter. In per worker terms, equation 1 can be
re-written as:
y = Ak α
Where y = Y/L and k = K/L

The equation for capital accumulation is:
.

K =I − δ ( K ) =Ig + Ip − δ ( Kp + Kg )

(2)

where the subscripts refer to the private and government sectors, and δ the depreciation rate.
Assuming that a fraction β of aid is invested by the government, with the rest representing
consumption or waste, equation (2) can be re-written as:
.

= β Aid + Ip − δ K and
K

28

We are grateful to Marta Ruiz-Arranz for this proof.

- 61 -

β Aid

.

=
k

+

L

IP
− (n + δ )(k )
L

(3)

where n represents the population growth rate.

The rate of growth of output per worker γy can be expressed in terms of the rate of growth of
capital stock per worker:
.

.

.

y
k A
γ=
= α( + )
y
y
k A

(4)

Substituting equation (3) in (4) yields
.

β Aid

I
A
γ y α(
=
+ P ) − α (n + δ ) + α
kL
kL
A

(5)

The coefficient in cross-country growth regressions measures the change in growth with
respect to the change in the ratio of aid to GDP. We need to convert equation (5) into one
that expresses aid in terms of GDP on the right hand-side. Thus (5) can be re-written as:

=
γy

αβ Aid Y
Y

.

α IP

A
+
− α (n + δ ) + α
K kL
A

(6)

Differentiating equation (6) with respect to aid-to-GDP yields:

δγ y
Aid
δ(
)
Y

= αβ

Y
K

(7)

Equation 7 implies that the coefficient of aid in a cross-country growth regression should be
related to the capital share in income (α), the fraction of aid that is invested (β), and the
output capital ratio (Y/K).

- 62 -

Assuming that all aid is invested (β =1), and using a value of capital share =0.35 computed
by Bosworth and Collins (2003), and the average value of the output-capital ratio for the
developing countries in our regressions sample which is about 0.45, the magnitude of the
regression coefficient amounts to 0.16; that is, a 1 percentage point increase in the ratio of aid
to GDP should raise the growth rate by 0.16 percent, even on the most optimistic assumption
that all aid is usefully invested. More realistically, if half of all aid is wasted or consumed,
the coefficient value should be 0.08 or close to 0.1.

It is possible that equation 7 underestimates the value of aid because it ignores the fact that
the public investment financed by aid has spillovers and hence economy-wide productivity
impacts. Incorporating this would yield the following variant of equation 7:

δγ y

.

Y δ ( A/ A)
= αβ +
Aid
K δ ( Aid )
δ(
)
Y
Y

(7)’

The last term on the right hand side captures the effect of aid on productivity growth. It is
difficult to know whether and to what extent public investment has had such productivity
impacts in aid-receiving countries. The IT revolution in the US since the mid-1990s added
about 0.5 percent per year to productivity growth. Extrapolating from this, it seems that an
upper limit for the impact of aid on growth would be about 0.2-0.25 percent per year for
every 1 percentage point increase in the received aid to GDP ratio.

- 63 -

Appendix Table 1. Estimation of Exogenous Variation in the Allocation of Social Aid by Donors Across Recipients
(Dependent Variable is share of donor's social aid to recipient)
(1)
1970_00
0.009
Dummy for pairs that ever had a colonial relationship
(0.001)***
0.001
Dummy for pairs currently in a colonial relationship
(0.004)
0.001
Dummy for pairs that have common language (Language Dummy)
(0.000)***
Dummy for country that ever had a colonial relationship with UK
-0.010
(0.002)***
Dummy for country that ever had a colonial relationship with France
-0.018
(0.002)***
Dummy for country that ever had a colonial relationship with Spain
-0.019
(0.002)***
Dummy for country that ever had a colonial relationship with Portugal
-0.001
(0.002)
0.000
Ratio of logarithm of population of donor relative to recipient
(0.000)***
0.003
Ratio of logarithm of population of donor relative to recipient*colony dummy
(0.001)***
Ratio of logarithm of population of donor relative to recipient*UK colony dummy
-0.002
(0.001)***
0.004
Ratio of logarithm of population of donor relative to recipient*Spanish colony dummy
(0.001)***
0.002
Ratio of logarithm of population of donor relative to recipient*French colony dummy
(0.001)***
0.013
Ratio of logarithm of population of donor relative to recipient*Portugese colony dummy
(0.001)***
2275
Observations
0.43
R-squared

(2)
1980_00
0.007
(0.001)***
-0.006
(0.005)
0.001
(0.000)***
-0.008
(0.002)***
-0.015
(0.002)***
-0.016
(0.002)***
0.002
(0.002)
0.000
(0.000)***
0.003
(0.001)***
-0.002
(0.001)***
0.003
(0.001)***
0.002
(0.001)**
0.012
(0.001)***
2263
0.37

(3)
1990_00
0.007
(0.001)***
-0.005
(0.007)
0.001
(0.000)***
-0.007
(0.002)***
-0.012
(0.002)***
-0.012
(0.002)***
0.006
(0.002)***
0.000
(0.000)***
0.003
(0.001)***
-0.003
(0.001)***
0.000
(0.001)
0.002
(0.001)***
0.012
(0.001)***
2205
0.37

Estimation is by ordinary least squares. The estimated equation corresponds to equation 1 in Section II of the
paper. The dependent variable is the share of social sector aid given by donor i to recipient j. All standard errors
are robust. T-statistics reported below coefficient estimates. ***, **, and * denote significance at 1, 5, and 10
percent, respectively. For descriptions of the variables and their sources, see Appendix 1.

- 64 -

Appendix Table 2: GMM Panel Regressions (Arellano-Bond Procedure)
(Dependent variable is average annual growth of per capita GDP)
Social sector aid/GDP
Social Sector aid/GDP Square

(1)
-0.892
(0.813)
0.014
(0.051)

Economic aid/GDP

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

-0.088
(0.183)
-0.001
(0.007)

Economic aid/GDP Square
Early-impact aid/GDP

0.687
(0.376)*
-0.058
(0.019)***

Early-impact aid/GDP Square
Late-impact aid/GDP

-0.160
(0.423)
-0.005
(0.014)

Late-impact aid/GDP Square
Mult. aid/GDP

-0.620
(0.331)*
0.007
(0.016)

Mult. aid/GDP Square
Bilat. aid/GDP
Bilat. aid/GDP Square
Observations
Number of Groups
Chi-Square (Hansen over-id test)
AR(2) (test for serial correlation)

(6)

165
68
0.379
0.056

162
67
0.337
0.067

163
66
0.643
0.220

163
66
0.299
0.167

167
68
0.296
0.186

-0.116
(0.215)
-0.004
(0.005)
167
68
0.688
0.221

All standard errors are robust and reported below coefficient estimates. ***, **, and * denote significance at 1,
5, and 10 percent, respectively. Regressions use the Arellano and Bond (1991) difference GMM estimator. For
descriptions of the variables and their sources, see Appendix 1.

- 65 -

Appendix Table 3: GMM Panel Regressions (Blundell-Bond Procedure)
(Dependent variable is average annual growth of per capita GDP)
Social sector aid/GDP
Social Sector aid/GDP Square

(1)
0.107
(0.728)
-0.038
(0.063)

Economic aid/GDP

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

-0.303
(0.169)*
0.011
(0.008)

Economic aid/GDP Square
Early-impact aid/GDP

-0.263
(0.303)
0.005
(0.016)

Early-impact aid/GDP Square
Late-impact aid/GDP

-0.254
(0.243)
0.011
(0.009)

Late-impact aid/GDP Square
Mult. aid/GDP

-0.441
(0.346)
0.026
(0.020)

Mult. aid/GDP Square
Bilat. aid/GDP
Bilat. aid/GDP Square
Observations
Number of Groups
Chi-Square (Hansen over-id test)
AR(2) (test for serial correlation)

(6)

237
72
0.579
0.287

235
72
0.427
0.123

235
72
0.545
0.320

235
72
0.428
0.157

239
72
0.546
0.248

-0.212
(0.191)
0.007
(0.010)
239
72
0.464
0.234

All standard errors are robust and reported below coefficient estimates. ***, **, and * denote significance at 1,
5, and 10 percent, respectively. Regressions use the Blundell and Bond (1998) system GMM estimator. For
descriptions of the variables and their sources, see Appendix 1.

- 66 -

References
Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James A. Robinson, 2001, “The Colonial Origins of
Comparative Development: An Empirical Investigation,” American Economic
Review, Vol. 91 (December), pp. 1369–1401.

Alesina, Alberto and David Dollar, 2000, “Who Gives Foreign Aid to Whom and Why?”
Journal of Economic Growth Vol. 5 No. 1, pp. 33-63.

Alesina, Alberto, and Beatrice Weder, 2002, “Do Corrupt Governments Receive Less
Foreign Aid?” American Economic Review No. 92 Vol. 4, pp. 1126-37.

Angrist, Joshua.D., and Alan.B. Krueger, 200), “Instrumental Variables and the Search for
Identification: From Supply and Demand to Natural Experiments,” Journal of
Economic Perspectives, Fall, Vol. 15, No. 4, pp. 69-86

Arellano, Manuel, and Stephen Bond, 1991, “Some Tests of Specification for Panel Data:
Monte Carlo Evidence and an Application to Employment Equations,” Review of
Economic Studies No. 58 Vol. 2, pp. 277-97.

Banerjee, Abhijit, Angus Deaton, Nora Lustig, Ken Rogoff, with Edward Hsu, 2006, “An
Evaluation of World Bank Research, 1998-2005” Washington D.C.

- 67 -

Banks, Arthur S., 2004, Cross-National Time Series, 1815-2002 [Computer file]. Databanks
International ed. Binghamton, NY: Databanks International [Producer and Distributor].

Barro, Robert J., and Jong-Wha Lee, 2004, “IMF Programs: Who is Chosen and What are the
Effects?” mimeo.

Barro, Robert J., and Xavier Sala-i-Martin, 1995, Economic Growth, McGraw-Hill, Inc.

Bauer, P.T., 1971, Dissent on Development: Studies and Debates in Development Economic,
(London: Weidenfeld & Nicholson).

Blundell, Richard and Stephen Bond, 1998, “Initial Conditions and Moment Restrictions in
Dynamic Panel Data Models,” Journal of Econometrics, No. 87, pp. 115-43.

Bosworth, Barry, and Susan Collins, 2003, “The Empirics of Growth: An Update,”
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Fall 4, pp. 136-47.

Bourgignon, F. and M. Sundberg, 2007, “Aid Effectiveness: Opening the Black Box,”
Forthcoming: American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, (May).

Burnside, Craig and David Dollar, 2000, “Aid, Policies, and Growth,” American Economic
Review No. 90 Vol. 4, pp. 847-68.

- 68 -

Clemens Michael A., Steven Radelet and Rikhil Bhavnani, 2004, “Counting Chickens When
They Hatch: The Short Term Effect of Aid on Growth,” Working Paper No. 44,
Center for Global Development.

Collier, Paul, and David Dollar, 2002, "Aid Allocation and Poverty Reduction," European
Economic Review, Elsevier, Vol. 46 No. 8, pp. 1475-1500.

Cordella, T., L. Ricci, and M. Ruiz-Arranz, 2005, “Deconstructing HIPCs’ Debt Overhang,”
mimeo, (Washington: International Monetary Fund).

Dalgaard, Carl-Johan, Henrik Hansen and Finn Tarp, 2004, “On the Empirics of Foreign Aid
and Growth,” The Economic Journal, Vol. 114 No. 496 pp. 191-216.

Devarajan, Shanta, and Vinay Swarup, 1998, “The Implications of Foreign Aid Fungibility
for Development Assistance,” mimeo, (Washington: World Bank).

Doppelhofer, Gernot, Xavier Sala-i-Martin and Ronald Miller, 2004, “Determinants of LongTerm Growth: A Bayesian Averaging of Classical Estimates (BACE) Approach,” The
American Economic Review, No. 94 Vol. 4, pp. 813-35.

Durlauf, Steven, Paul Johnson and Jonathan Temple, 2004, "Growth Econometrics,"
(forthcoming in Handbook of Economic Growth, P. Aghion and S. Durlauf, eds.,
North-Holland: Elsevier, Amsterdam).

- 69 -

Easterly, William, (2004)"National Economic Policies and Economic Growth: A
Reappraisal," (forthcoming in Handbook of Economic Growth, P. Aghion and S.
Durlauf, eds., North-Holland: Elsevier, Amsterdam).

———, Ross Levine, and David Roodman, 2004, “New Data, New Doubts: A Comment on
Burnside and Dollar’s ‘Aid, Policies, and Growth,” American Economic Review,
forthcoming.

———, 2003, “Can Foreign Aid Buy Growth?” Journal of Economic Perspectives No. 17
Vol. 3, pp. 23-48.

Frankel, Jeffery, and David Romer (1999) “Does Trade Cause Growth?” American Economic
Review, No. 89 Vol. 3, pp. 379-99.

Friedman, Milton (1958) “Foreign Economic Aid,” Yale Review, No. 47 Vol. 4, pp. 501-16.

Giavazzi, Francesco, and Guido Tabellini, 2004, “Economic and Political Liberalizations,”
IGER Working Paper No. 264, Available via the Internet: www.igier.unibocconi.it/en/who/tabellini.htm

Hadi, Ali, S., 1992, “Identifying Multiple Outliers in Multivariate data,” Journal of the Royal
Statistical Society, Series B, No. 54, pp. 761-71.

- 70 -

Hall, Robert E., and Charles I. Jones, 1999, “Why Do Some Countries Produce So Much
More Output per Worker Than Others?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 114,
pp. 83-116.

Hansen, Henrik, and Finn Tarp, 2001, “Aid and Growth Regressions,” Journal of
Development Economics, No. 64, pp. 547-70.

Hauk Jr. W.R., and R. Wacziarg, 2004, “A Monte Carlo Study of Growth Regressions,”
mimeo, Stanford University.

Kraay, Aart, 2004, "When is Growth Pro-Poor? Cross-Country Evidence," IMF Working
Papers 04/47, (Washington: International Monetary Fund).

Mishra, Prachi and David Newhouse, 2007, “Health Aid and Infant Mortality,” forthcoming
IMF Working Paper.

Rajan, Raghuram, and Arvind Subramanian, 2005, “What Undermines Aid’s Impact on
Growth?” NBER Working Paper No. 11657, (September).

Reddy, Sanjay and Carmela Minoiu, 2006, “Development Aid and Economic Growth: A
Positive Long-Run Relation,” mimeo, Barnard College.

- 71 -

Rodrik, Dani, 2005, “Why We Learn Nothing from Regressing Economic Growth on
Policies” Mimeo, Kennedy School of Government

Roodman, David, 2004, “The Anarchy of Numbers: Aid, Development, and Cross-country
Empirics” (Washington: Center for Global Development).

Rose, A.K., 2004, “Do We Really Know that the WTO Increases Trade?” American
Economic Review, Vol. 94, No. 1, pp. 98-114.

Sachs, Jeffery, and Andrew Warner, 1995, “Economic reform and the process of global
integration,” Brooking Papers on Economic Activity 1, pp 1-118.

Sala-i-Martin, Xavier, 1997, “I Just Ran Two Million Regressions.” American Economic
Review Papers and Proceedings, No. 87, pp. 178-83.

Staiger, Douglas, and James Stock, 1997, "Instrumental Variables Regression with Weak
Instruments," Econometrica, No. 65 Vol. 3, pp. 557-86.

Subramanian, Arvind, and Utsav Kumar, 2005, “Counting Chickens Before they Hatch: A
Comment,” mimeo, (Washington: International Monetary Fund).

Svensson, Jakob, 2003, “Why Conditional Aid Doesn’t Work and What Can Be Done About
It?" Journal of Development Economics, Vol. 70 No. 2, pp. 381-402.

- 72 -

Tavares, Jóse, 2003, “Does Foreign Aid Corrupt?” Economics Letters, Elsevier, Vol. 79
No. 1, pp. 99-106.

Wacziarg, Romain, and Karen Horn Welch, 2003, “Trade Liberalization and Growth: New
Evidence,” Mimeo, Stanford University.

World Bank, 1998, World Development Indicators

