NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

HOW THE INTERNET LOWERS PRICES:
EVIDENCE FROM MATCHED SURVEY AND
AUTO TRANSACTION DATA
Florian Zettelmeyer
Fiona Scott Morton
Jorge Silva-Risso
Working Paper 11515
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11515
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2005

We thank Eric Anderson, Severin Borenstein, Hai Che, Priya Raghubir, Jose Silva, K. Sudhir, and seminar
participants at the University of British Columbia, New York University, University of California at
Berkeley, the University of Southern California, and Stanford University for helpful comments. We are
particularly indebted to Meghan Busse for extensive comments and suggestions. The views expressed herein
are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
©2005 by Florian Zettelmeyer, Fiona Scott Morton and Jorge Silva-Risso. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

How the Internet Lowers Prices: Evidence from Matched Survey and Auto Transaction Data
Florian Zettelmeyer, Fiona Scott Morton and Jorge Silva-Risso
NBER Working Paper No. 11515
July 2005
JEL No. L11, L15, L62, D82, M31
ABSTRACT

There is convincing evidence that the Internet has lowered the prices paid by some consumers in
established industries, for example, term life insurance and car retailing. However, current research
does not reveal much about how using the Internet lowers prices. This paper answers this question
for the auto retailing industry. We use direct measures of search behavior and consumer
characteristics to investigate how the Internet affects negotiated prices. We show that the Internet
lowers prices for two distinct reasons. First, the Internet helps consumers learn the invoice price of
dealers. Second, the referral process of online buying services, a novel institution made possible by
the Internet, also helps consumers obtain lower prices. The combined information and referral price
effects are -1.5%, corresponding to 22% of dealers' average gross profit margin per vehicle. We also
find that buyers with a high disutility of bargaining benefit from information on the specific car they
eventually purchased while buyers who like the bargaining process do not. The results suggest that
the decisions consumers make to use the Internet to gather information and to use the negotiating
clout of an online buying service have a real effect on the prices paid by these consumers.

Florian Zettelmeyer
Haas School of Business
UC, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER
florian@haas.berkeley.edu

Fiona Scott Morton
Yale School of Management
135 Prospect Street
New Haven, CT 06520
and NBER
fiona.scottmorton@yale.edu

Jorge Silva-Risso
Anderson Hall 11
University of California
Riverside, CA 92521
jorge.silva-risso@ucr.edu

1

Introduction

There is convincing evidence that the Internet has lowered the prices paid by some consumers
in established industries. In car retailing, for example, Zettelmeyer, Scott Morton, and SilvaRisso (2004) show that new vehicle buyers who use the Internet pay 2.2% less for their car
than those who do not, a savings of $500 on the average car. In the insurance industry Brown
and Goolsbee (2002) show that the growth of the Internet has reduced the price of term life
insurance by 8-15%.
While these results are convincing that using the Internet lowers prices, they do not reveal
much about how using the Internet lowers prices. In particular, there are a number of things
a buyer can do with the Internet, including researching product characteristics, making price
comparisons, communicating with sellers, obtaining recommendations from peers, and so on.
Additionally, in some markets, the Internet has made new institutions possible, such as online
buying services, that change price negotiations. We would like to better understand what
aspects of Internet use matter most for the prices paid by consumers.
We will address this question in the context of price negotiations for new vehicles; we
use direct measures of search behavior and consumer characteristics to investigate how the
Internet affects negotiated prices in car retailing. We match transaction data on 1,500 car
purchases in California with the responses to a survey which asks buyers detailed questions
about their Internet usage, their attitudes towards information search and bargaining, and
their demographics.
We have two specific goals in this paper. The first goal is to investigate why the Internet
lowers the prices paid by consumers who use it. We consider two basic reasons. First, the
Internet could be lowering prices by decreasing search cost and thereby making more purchase
relevant information available to consumers who use the Internet. Information can be relevant in
various ways. For example, information about invoice prices allow consumers to better estimate

2

the dealer’s reservation price, an important piece of information in negotiations. Lower search
cost may also benefit consumers in their search for low-price dealerships. Because car prices are
negotiated and rarely posted, the Internet is unlikely to help consumer find price information
from competing dealerships without engaging in direct negotiation. However, the Internet may
help consumers find low-price dealerships because it facilitates an information exchange with
other consumers about the prices they paid at various dealerships. Also, consumers may make
price inferences from dealer websites. To some degree the Internet may be a substitute for
visiting multiple dealers.
The second reason we consider is that the Internet could be lowering prices for some consumers by consolidating their buyer power through online buying services; these institutions
have become widely accessible as a result of the Internet. There is evidence that groups of
buyers should expect to pay lower prices than individual buyers (Snyder 1998). We therefore
expect that consumers who use online buying services will pay lower prices.
The second goal of this paper is to determine whether there is an interaction between
customer characteristics (such as the disutility of bargaining) and the payoffs from using the
Internet. We are interested in this question because there is evidence that consumers who
are disadvantaged in the bargaining process are more likely to use the Internet (Zettelmeyer,
Scott Morton, and Silva-Risso 2004). The standard economic argument suggests that a consumer’s propensity to engage in a given behavior should be positively related to their benefit
from doing so. In the present context we therefore expect that consumers with characteristics
which disadvantage them in price negotiations will benefit more from using the Internet. For
example, consumers who dislike the face-to-face bargaining process might benefit more from
getting information from the Internet than consumers who don’t mind bargaining.
We show that the Internet lowers prices for two distinct reasons. First, the Internet informs
consumers. The information that seems to be most valuable to consumers is the invoice price of
the dealer; it enables them to negotiate a low price at a given dealership. Internet information
3

seems not to help consumers find low-price dealerships. In particular, the Internet does not
substitute for searching at multiple dealers. Second, the referral process of online buying
services, a novel institution made possible by the Internet, helps consumers obtain lower prices.
We believe that online buying services are effective because, unlike manufacturers, they can
exert pressure on dealers by directing incremental business to affiliated dealerships—and away
from unaffiliated dealerships.
Our results show combined information and referral price effects of -1.5%. This corresponds
to 22% of dealers’ average gross profit margin per vehicle. We want to highlight two important
points concerning these results. First, we account for potential selection effects in search and
purchasing behavior by directly controlling for individual buyer characteristics such disutility of
bargaining, willingness to search, and car knowledge. While these controls cannot fully rule out
selection bias, they increase our confidence that the price effects are not an artifact of differences
in unobserved characteristics between people who choose to use the Internet and those who do
not. Second, the estimates are close to the estimates of -2.2% in Zettelmeyer, Scott Morton,
and Silva-Risso (2004), using a different data source, a different estimation method, and a
different time period.
We also find that the benefits of gathering information differs by consumer type. While
buyers with a high disutility of bargaining pay 1.5% less when they have collected information
on the specific car they eventually purchase than they otherwise would have, buyers who like
the bargaining process do not benefit from such information. This stands in contrast to the
benefits of requesting a referral from an online buying service, which is equal for the two types
of buyers (-0.7%). We have argued above that a referral from an online buying service lowers
prices at a dealer because of the implicit threat an online buying service can make to redirect
customers to the dealer’s competitors if the referral service’s customers are not offered good
prices. Consistent with our findings, if this threat operates, it seems reasonable that it should
apply uniformly across consumers.

4

Our paper is related to prior work analyzing how consumers search for car information.
Ratchford and Srinivasan (1993) use survey data on search and choice behavior from a local
automobile market to estimate returns to search time. Moorthy, Ratchford, and Talukdar
(1997) present a model of total search effort with an emphasis on how prior brand perception
affects the search process. Ratchford, Talukdar, and Lee (2003) analyze how the Internet has
changed consumer search behavior for automobiles by comparing data from 1989 and 1999.
Furse, Punj, and Stewart (1984) use a survey to identify clusters of consumers with different
search patterns and find that a sizable segment of consumers search very little. Klein and
Ford (2001) replicate this approach for a sample of Internet users. These papers have been
very useful in informing our survey design. This paper represents a substantial extension of
these previous papers on Internet search for automobiles because it combines survey data with
detailed transaction data on purchase outcomes.
This paper is also related to Scott Morton, Zettelmeyer, and Silva-Risso (2001) and Zettelmeyer,
Scott Morton, and Silva-Risso (2004). These papers are based on a large dataset of transaction prices for new cars which is then combined with information on Internet usage from a
large online buying service (Autobytel.com). The first paper provides an overview of Internet
car retailing. The second paper controls for selection and shows that using Autobytel.com
reduces price by approximately 2.2%. Neither paper addresses the research questions in the
present paper. This is because the data used in these papers only contains a single searchor Internet-related explanatory variable, which is whether a consumer used the online buying
service Autobytel.com. This service both informs consumers and allows them to submit an
online referral. Without other explanatory variables measuring, for example, the extent to
which consumers were informed from other sources, these papers cannot determine the effects
of different search and purchasing activities. For the same reason these paper cannot disentangle whether consumers save from using the Internet because they become better informed, or
because online buying services change the way price negotiations are conducted.

5

Scott Morton, Zettelmeyer, and Silva-Risso (2004) use the same dataset here to test predictions from bargaining theory about how private information, patience, and bargaining disutility
affect the division of surplus between negotiating parties. That paper has no measures of Internet use and does not consider the role of the Internet for car negotiations.
We proceed as follows. Section 2 describes the survey and transaction data. Section 3
analyzes the different ways in which the Internet lowers prices. Section 4 concludes the paper.

2

Data

Our data come from two sources. The first source is a survey instrument which we mailed to
5250 consumers who purchased one of eight popular new car models in California during April
and May 2002. We match the individual survey data to transaction data from a data supplier
in the automotive industry (henceforth DSA).

2.1

Survey data

Survey instrument: The survey asked questions about (1) the number of dealers a buyer
visited, (2) the buyer’s negotiation strategy, (3) the offline and online sources of information the
buyer used, (4) the information the buyer learned at each of these information sources, (5) the
referrals the buyer requested, (6) demographics, and (7) personal attitudes towards bargaining
and information search. A copy of the survey can be found in the appendix.
Sample: We chose our sample by car type and then mailed the survey to every buyer of
the selected car types for whom we had transaction data in April and May 2002. The first
objective in selecting car types was to include a variety of car categories (e.g. midsize sedan,
luxury sedan, pickup, SUV, etc.). The second objective in selecting car types was to keep the
number of different cars small in order to be able to control for car fixed effects without losing
too many degrees of freedom. We defined a “car” as the interaction of make, model, body

6

type, transmission, displacement, doors, cylinders, and trim level (for example, one “car” is a
2002 Honda Accord sedan with automatic transmission, a 2.2 liter engine, 4 doors, 4 cylinders,
and the EX trim). We added the purchases of the most common “cars” for a variety of car
categories until we reached our desired sample size. This yielded the most popular variants of
Honda Accord, Chrysler PT Cruiser, Nissan Altima, Chevrolet Silverado, Toyota Corolla, Jeep
Grand Cherokee, Honda Odyssey, and Chevrolet Tahoe.
Procedure: Each potential respondent received three mailings. The first mailing contained
a letter announcing the arrival of the survey, introducing ourselves as the researchers and
explaining the purpose of the project. The second mailing was sent out 5 days later and
contained a cover letter, the survey, a pre-stamped return envelope, and a $1 bill. The third
mailing was sent out 5 days after the second mailing and consisted of a postcard thanking
buyers for their participation and reminding them to return the survey.
The survey design, including the cover letter, multiple mailings, and token thanks of the
enclosed dollar bill, appeared to be very effective at encouraging response. Of the 5250 we sent,
2470 were returned completed or partially completed, for a response rate of 47%.
Response issues: In cases in which the answer to a question was missing but could be easily
inferred from a followup question we filled in the answer. For example, if a buyer did not answer
whether she had used the Internet but proceeded to detail the types of sites she had visited
we filled in that she had used the Internet. We also corrected two inconsistencies in the way
surveys were filled out. The first correction concerns a question about the respondent having
collected information about the car he or she eventually purchased. We corrected answers for
which there were two ways to determine that the answer was erroneous. For example, if a
person indicated he had researched zero cars and also spent zero hours doing research online
and zero offline, then we did not allow him to be have “collected information about the car
he/she eventually purchased.” The second correction concerns the question of whether the
respondent had in any way used the Internet in conjunction with buying a car. For example,
7

some buyers checked off that they did not use the Internet to search for a car but then continued
to indicate which websites they had visited for research. In this case we changed the answer
on the internet use question to “yes.”1
In survey based research it is normally difficult to assess how respondents and non-respondents
differ along relevant dimensions. In our case this assessment is easier: since we have transaction
data for respondents and non-respondents alike, we can compare these two groups along any
variable we observe in the transaction data. First, we can compare the census-based demographic information associated with the census block groups in which buyers reside. Assuming
that these census based measures are representative of individual buyers’ demographics, nonrespondents are significantly (at the 5% level) less likely to be college graduates (27% vs.
31%), more likely to be high school drop-outs (18% vs. 13.5%), more likely to be Hispanic or
black (20% and 5% vs. 16% and 4%, respectively), have lower household incomes ($55,000 vs.
$59,000), and own less valuable houses ($214,000 vs. $228,000). There is no statistically significant difference between the two groups in the percentage of buyers who are identified as female
on the basis of their first name. Second, we can compare how respondents and non-respondents
differ with regards to behavioral measures contained in the transaction data. With regards
to price—the dependent variable used in this study—there is no significant difference between
respondents and non-respondents at the 5% level. Neither do we find a statistically significant
difference in the dealer profitability of purchases by respondents and by non-respondents.
We are not concerned about the demographic differences between respondents and nonrespondents. This is for two reasons. First, the differences do not seem large enough for
respondents and non-respondents to differ significantly with respect to our dependent variable
(or other transaction-based behavioral measures). Second, in our previous research we have
1

Our conclusions are unaffected by these corrections. To test for robustness, we repeated all specifications
in the paper with a dataset from which we dropped the inconsistent 71 survey responses. We also repeated
all specifications with a dataset which was left completely unaltered. While the magnitude of coefficients vary
slightly between datasets, our substantive findings are unchanged.

8

found that it is the poorest, least educated buyers who pay most for a car, ceteris paribus.
These are precisely the buyers who were least likely to respond to our survey (although the
difference in prices paid by these buyers compared to respondents is not large enough to be
statistically significant). Thus, since our results rely on between-consumer differences in prices
paid due to differences in search and purchase behavior, price differences are likely to be smaller
within respondents than within the general population. Consequently, our results are likely to
be a conservative lower bound of the true benefits of searching and using the Internet.
Basic survey findings: Seventy-two percent of respondents reported that they used the Internet in some way to help them shop for a new vehicle. The most frequently visited site by
buyers who reported using the Internet were manufacturer websites (70%). Internet consumers
also frequently visited informational websites such as consumerreports.com or kbb.com (63%),
followed by online buying services such as Autobytel.com or Carsdirect.com (56%) and individual dealer websites (31%). Only 6% of buyers who used the Internet collected information
via chat rooms or bulletin boards. 78% of buyers who had used the Internet responded that
they had explicitly mentioned that fact to the dealer.
Internet users report having collected information on more car types than buyers who did
not use the Internet. The median buyer who used the Internet collected information for 2-3
cars whereas the median offline buyer only collected information for 1 car. Most strikingly, only
52% of buyers who did not use the Internet said that they had collected information (from any
source) specifically on the vehicle they ended up buying. This contrasts with 95% for buyers
who used the Internet. Across both groups the average is 82%.

2.2

Transaction data

DSA collects transaction data from a sample of dealers in the major metropolitan areas in the
US. These data include some customer information, the make, model and trim level of the car,
financing information, trade-in information, dealer-added extras, and the profitability of the
9

transaction to the dealership.
The price observed in the dataset is the price that the customer pays for the vehicle including
factory installed accessories and options and the dealer-installed accessories contracted for at
the time of sale that contribute to the resale value of the car.2 The Price variable we use as
the dependent variable is this price, minus the ManufacturerRebate, if any, given directly to the
consumer, and minus what is known as the TradeInOverAllowance. TradeInOverAllowance is
the difference between the trade-in price paid by the dealer to the consumer and the wholesale
value of the specific trade-in vehicle (as estimated by the dealer). We adjust for this amount
to account for the possibility, for example, that a dealer may offer a consumer a low price for
the new car because the dealer is profiting from the trade-in.
We control for car fixed effects according to the definition of a “car” above. While our car
fixed effects will control for many of the factors that contribute to the price of a car, it will not
control for the factory- and dealer-installed options which vary within trim level. The price we
observe covers such options but we do not observe what options the car actually has. In order
to control for price differences attributable to options, we include as an explanatory variable
the percent deviation of the dealer’s cost of purchasing the vehicle from the average vehicle cost
of that car in the dataset. This percent deviation, called VehicleCost will be positive when the
car has an unobserved option (for example a CD player) and is therefore relatively expensive
compared to other examples of the same car. Our measure of price also takes into account any
variation in holdback and transportation charges.
To control for time variation in prices, we define a dummy EndOfMonth that equals 1 if the
car was sold within the last 5 days of the month. This dummy accounts for the fact that sales
people get bonuses when they fulfill monthly sales quotas, changing their incentive to hold out
for a high price. A dummy variable WeekEnd specifies whether the car was purchased on a
2

Dealer-installed accessories that contribute to the resale value include items such as upgraded tires or a
sound system, but would exclude options such as undercoating or waxing.

10

Saturday or Sunday to control for whether consumers who buy cars on weekends are different
from other consumers in ways that are otherwise unobserved. In addition, we include a dummy
for the second month in our 2-month sample period to control for other seasonal effects.
We control for the competitiveness of each dealer’s market. For each dealership we count
the number of dealerships with the same nameplate that fall in a zip code that is within a
10 mile radius of the zip code of the focal dealership. We take into account cases where one
owner owns several franchises in close proximity so that our measure counts only the number
of separately-controlled entities.
We also supplement the demographic information from the survey with census data that
DSA matches with the buyer’s address from the transaction record. The data is on the level of
a “block group,” which makes up about one fourth of the area and population of a census tract.
On average, block groups have about 1100 people in them. Finally, we control for whether the
car was sold in Northern or Southern California.
Combining the two datasets results in 1,436 observations. This is smaller than the number
of returned surveys because of missing information in the transaction dataset and some only
partially completed surveys.

3

Results

We now proceed to using the direct measures of search behavior and consumer characteristics
to investigate how the Internet lowers negotiated prices in car retailing. Our dependent variable
is Price as defined in the data section. In order to provide the appropriate baseline for the
price of the car, we use a standard hedonic regression of log price. We work in logs because
the price effect of many of the attributes of the car, such as being sold in Northern California
or in May, are likely to be better modeled as a percentage of the car’s value than a fixed dollar
increment. We estimate the following specification:

11

ln (Pricei ) = Xi α + Di β + Si γ + i
The X matrix is composed of transaction and car variables: car, month, and region fixed
effects, car costs, and controls for whether the car was purchased at the end of month or
the weekend, and whether the buyer traded in a vehicle. The D matrix contains demographic
characteristics of the buyer and her census block group (see Table 1 in the appendix for summary
statistics). We use demographic information on gender, age, education, income, and race from
the survey. We use information on house ownership, median house value, and type of occupation
in the census block group in which the buyer resides. We control for these demographic variables
because we know from Scott Morton, Zettelmeyer, and Silva-Risso (2003) that they are related
to negotiated car prices. In addition, these variables are also correlated with the search and
purchasing behavior we intend to analyze in this paper; their inclusion is thus critical to avoid
bias in the coefficients of interest.3 To this basic specification we add a matrix S which contains
survey responses that indicate the search behavior and Internet use of a buyer.
We begin our investigation of the role of the Internet by including an indicator to the
specification which is one if a buyer answered “yes” to the question “Did you use the Internet
in any way to help you shop for a new vehicle? (e.g. to research vehicles, find a dealer, etc.).”
We refer to this indicator as InternetUse (see column 1 in Table 2). We find that buyers who
reported having used the Internet in any way to help them shop for a new vehicle pay on
average 1.16% less than other buyers (p-value < 0.001).
While this describes the average difference in the prices paid by Internet users and nonusers, respectively, this average likely does not measure the expected return to a customer of
3

For example, education is good predictor of Internet usage. Only 37% of buyers who reported not to have
a high school degree used the Internet. This is in contrast to 81% of buyers with a college degree or higher.
Also, 87% percent of buyers with income above $150,000 but only 47% of buyers with income between $20,000
and $29,999 reported using the Internet for car buying. We will not discuss the estimated coefficients on the
demographics in this paper because they are not the focus of the study. The interested reader is referred to
Scott Morton, Zettelmeyer, and Silva-Risso (2003) for a detailed analysis of the effects of demographics on the
price of a new car. For another approach on the effect of demographics on bargaining outcomes see Chen, Yang,
and Zhao (2003).

12

deciding to use the Internet. The reason is that the average effect on price likely includes effects
caused by unobserved customer traits (such as being a “smart shopper”) which happen to be
correlated with using the Internet.
Is the Internet effect driven by unobserved differences between online and offline
consumers?
In order to estimate the “treatment effect” of using the Internet, in this section we run the same
specification as above, but this time we control for consumer types. We are able to (imperfectly)
measure normally “unobserved” consumer types by asking our consumers particular questions
on the survey. While controlling for these measures cannot rule out that some of the Internet
effect remains driven by unobserved differences between consumers, we measure consumers
characteristics which we ex-ante believe best predict consumers’ underlying propensity to search
for purchase-relevant information and to use the Internet.4
We ask consumers to rate their agreement or disagreement with a list of statements to
get a measure of three consumer traits.5 These traits are (1) whether a consumer has a
high willingness to search, (2) whether a consumer is a car enthusiast, and (3) whether a
consumer has a high disutility of bargaining. To get answers that are reliable and as comparable
as possible across respondents we ask survey participants questions about their behavior or
attitudes, not about the traits directly. For example, we are interested in the “car enthusiast”
trait to control for whether a consumer knows a lot about cars, even if they did little or no
search for their car purchase. We could have asked a survey participant to agree or disagree
with the statement “I am a car enthusiast,” thereby leaving it up the respondent to decide
what a car enthusiast is. Instead, we get more consistent answers by asking “I read car- and/or
4
At then end of section 4 we show that these consumer characteristics are indeed correlated with Internet use.
This is also true for some other independent variables of interest (not reported). Since our measures of consumer
characteristics are also related to the prices paid by consumers, this shows the importance of controlling for
these characteristics in subsequent specifications in order to avoid biased estimates.
5
These measures were chosen based on our prior research findings, and discussions with car and internet
industry experts.

13

truck-enthusiast magazines regularly” and “I tend to visit dealers whenever a new model is
introduced.”6 Similarly, we get at consumers’ willingness to search with statements such as
“I do a lot of price comparison when making large purchases,” “I am the kind of person who
gathers as much information as possible before visiting car dealers,” and “I frequently use the
Internet to obtain information about products I am interested in.” Finally, to assess whether
a consumer derives a high disutility from the bargaining process we present consumers with
the statements “I am afraid that I will be taken advantage of by a dealer when negotiating the
price of a new car,” and “It is hard for me to find time to shop for a new vehicle.” We assume
that consumers who feel very vulnerable will dislike bargaining more than consumers who do
not feel vulnerable. The response to the second statement measures the consumer’s assessment
of her opportunity cost of being engaged in a bargaining interaction.7
To investigate how our survey questions map into the three consumer traits they are intended to measure we employ a factor analysis. Three factors have eigenvalues above 1 and
their interpretation corresponds exactly to our three consumer traits. The first factor—with
high factor loadings on the three “willingness to search” questions8 —has an eigenvalue of 1.99
and explains 28% of the variation in the seven items. The second factor—with high factor
loadings on the two “car enthusiast” questions—has an eigenvalue of 1.51 and explains 22% of
the variation in the seven items. The third factor—with high factor loadings on the two “bar6
Note that these questions may not entirely overcome our concerns associated with asking consumers questions
with vague terms. In particular, some of our questions involve an implicit norm that may differ between, for
example, Internet-based and other buyers. This is a limitation of our survey which we cannot overcome at this
time.
7
The consumer traits we construct are based in part on a consumer’s own assessment of his or her bargaining
ability. These assessments are made 6-12 weeks after the consumers purchased a car. If consumers infer their
bargaining ability from the price they obtained for this particular vehicle, there could be an endogeneity between
prices and consumer traits. If this is the case, too much of the price effect will be attributed to consumer traits
and too little to other factors, such as information search. While this endogeneity is of concern, since the primary
purpose of the consumer traits is to function as control variables, we believe such endogeneity biases the results
against our main findings.
8
The rotated factor loadings (varimax rotation) for the first factor are 0.82 for DoPriceComparisons, 0.72 for
InternetForInfo, and 0.85 for GatherMuchInfo. For the second factor, corresponding to“car enthusiast,” the factor loadings are 0.85 for ReadCarMagazine, and 0.84 for VisitDealerForFun. For the third factor, corresponding
to “bargaining disutility,” the factor loadings are 0.73 for AfraidTakenAdvantage, and 0.78 for NoTimeToShop.

14

gaining disutility” questions—has an eigenvalue of 1.09 and explains 16% of the variation in the
seven items. The reliability of the measures is as follows: Cronbach’s alpha for the three “willingness to search” questions is 0.7; the correlation coefficient for the two two-question scales is
0.45 (p-value < 0.001) for “willingness to search” and 0.18 (p-value < 0.001) for “bargaining
disutility.”
We begin with specifications which include the answers to the individual consumer trait
questions directly in the regression (later, in section 3.2 we will use the factors). We repeat the
specification in column 1 of Table 2, adding these measures of “unobserved” consumer traits.
The coefficient on InternetUse decreases from −1.16 to −0.98 (p-value 0.01, see column 2 in
Table 2). Consumer traits are related to price as follows: buyers who were more afraid of
being taken advantage of by the dealer pay more, suggesting that they had reason to be afraid.
Consumers who agree more with the statement “I do a lot of price comparison when making
large purchases” pay less (p-value 0.10). Other consumer trait variables are not significantly
different from zero. This reflects one consequence of our approach to include all consumer trait
variables in the regression. Since several of the questions are, by design, quite similar they may
be only jointly significant. Hence we test the hypothesis that the subset of variables which
measure each consumer trait are jointly zero. We reject the hypothesis that the variables measuring consumers’ disutility of bargaining (AfraidTakenAdvantage, NoTimeToShop) are jointly
zero (p-value 0.001). We also reject the hypothesis that the variables measuring consumers’
willingness to search (DoPriceComparisons, InternetForInfo, GatherMuchInfo) are jointly zero
(p-value 0.05). We cannot reject the hypothesis that the variables measuring whether a consumer is a car enthusiast (ReadCarMagazine, VisitDealerForFun) are zero (p-value 0.43).
We conclude that the Internet effect is unlikely to result from differences between online
and offline consumers in their demographics, their bargaining disutility, their willingness to
search, or their knowledge about cars; buyers who have used the Internet pay approximately

15

1% less, even after controlling for demographics and (normally unobserved) consumer traits.9
This corresponds to 15% of dealers’ average gross profit margin per vehicle.
Does Internet use serve as a signal to dealers?
While we have shown above that the Internet effect seems not to be the result of measurable
differences between online and offline consumers, it could still be that the Internet discount
results from the perception of dealers that Internet consumers are different. We can analyze
this question because we asked consumers whether they had mentioned to the dealer that they
used the Internet to do research. If the Internet saves consumers money because dealers assume
that consumers who used the Internet are different from “regular” consumers, we should find
that the Internet effect should differ between consumers who told the dealer they had used the
Internet and consumers who did not.10 No consumer in our sample reported telling the dealer
that they had used the Internet when, in fact, they had not. We repeat the specification in
column 2 of Table 2 an indicator variable ToldDealer which is one if a buyer who used the
Internet told that dealer that she used the Internet to do research (unreported). We cannot
reject the hypothesis that consumers who used the Internet and told the dealer that they had
done so paid on average the same price for a new car as consumers who did not tell the dealer
about their Internet use (the coefficient on ToldDealer is 0.14, p-value 0.70).
Based on the results of this and the previous discussion we conclude that, based on the
survey measures at our disposal, the Internet effect is unlikely to result from actual or dealerperceived differences between online and offline consumers. We are now interested in determining the mechanism by which the Internet lowers the prices paid by consumers.
9

Another way to control for selection would be to instrument for Internet use. Regrettably, it is very difficult
to find instruments that are correlated with Internet use and uncorrelated with the prices consumers pay for
cars. This is because prices are individually negotiated and thus a function of consumer characteristics which are
also likely to predict Internet use. Hence, it is very difficult to argue that there are measures that could be used
to predict Internet use in the first-step selection equation, but should be excluded from the price equation. This
is why we have chosen the alternative “selection on observables” approach by eliciting normally unobservable
consumer characteristics through a survey instrument.
10
This argument is not valid if dealers can tell whether a consumers used the Internet, irrespective of whether
consumers inform the dealer.

16

3.1

The role of the Internet

In the results so far, we have shown that Internet usage leads to prices that are lower by about
1% and that this is not, insofar as we can tell, because Internet users and non-users differ on
observable demographic characteristics or on individual traits which our survey allows us to
observe. The aim of this paper, however, goes beyond showing that Internet usage does indeed
have a “treatment effect.” Our aim is to “unpack” this treatment effect – to understand what
it is about what consumers are doing online that leads to lower prices. We first consider the
effect the Internet has on prices by aiding consumers in obtaining information.
Does the Internet lower prices by facilitate purchase-relevant information search?
Our aim in this subsection is to estimate how much of the effect of InternetUse on prices is
attributable to a consumer being better informed. To do so we make use of the fact that
in the survey we ask whether a consumer obtained information about the specific vehicle she
eventually purchased. This enables us to observe whether a consumer is informed independently
of whether she used the Internet. This is because Informed includes both consumers who
gathered information entirely offline, and consumers who used the Internet, but not to obtain
information about the specific car they purchased. By comparing the effect of Informed with
the effect of InternetUse we can get some sense of how much of the Internet usage effect on
price is due to being better informed.
We begin with a specification in which – instead of InternetUse – we include the indicator
Informed for whether the buyer collected information specific to the vehicle that she ended
up purchasing (see column 3 of Table 2). We find that buyers who reported having collected
information for the type of car they eventually purchased pay on average 0.74% less than other
buyers (p-value 0.06). This is somewhat smaller than the coefficient of 0.98% for InternetUse.
In an unreported specification with both variables, Informed becomes insignificant (p-value
0.26) while the InternetUse coefficient changes to -0.81 (p-value 0.045). The similar effect of

17

the two variables and a high and significant correlation coefficient of 0.5 suggests that becoming
better informed is an important part of the advantage of using the Internet.
How is Internet information helping buyers?
Having found that information is an important part of how the Internet helps consumers in
negotiating lower prices, we would like to know how the information is helping. In particular,
we consider two possible hypotheses. First, consumers could be benefitting from using the
Internet because doing so provides them with information that helps them better negotiate
with a dealer. Second, consumers could be benefitting from using the Internet because doing
so helps them find low-price dealers.
We begin by investigating what kind of information matters most in price negotiations. We
asked respondents what information they researched on the Internet, including “which car to
purchase,” “which dealers to visit or buy from,” “dealer cost (invoice/hold-back),” or the “fair
price or market value.” We find that the only piece of information that affects transaction price
is the invoice price of the car. Consumers who have collected information about the invoice
price of the car they wish to buy pay on average 0.61% less than other buyers (p-value 0.04,
see column 4 in Table 2).11 Since the invoice price of a dealer is closely related to the dealer’s
reservation price for a specific vehicle, our result implies that, on average, consumers who have
better information about a dealer’s reservation price will do better in price negotiations than
consumers who are uninformed. This finding is consistent with predictions from the gametheoretic literature on bargaining with incomplete information (see Chatterjee and Samuelson
(1983) for a static model, Fudenberg, Levine, and Tirole (1985) and Gul, Sonnenschein, and
Wilson (1986) for dynamic buyer-offer models, and Ausubel and Deneckere (1998) for a dynamic alternating-offer model which generate this prediction).12 Overall, consumers seem to
11
This result is not due to collinearity between the four information variables. We obtain the same result if we
run four separate specifications, each of which contains all controls but only one of the four information variables
at a time (not reported).
12
See Scott Morton, Zettelmeyer, and Silva-Risso (2004) for a more detailed literature review.

18

be benefitting from using the Internet because it provides them with information that helps
them better negotiate with a dealer.
In contrast, we can find no evidence that consumers are benefitting from using the Internet
because doing so helps them find low-price dealers. For many non-car products, the Internet
makes it possible to compare prices offered by competing retailers either by checking multiple
sites or with a price comparison site such as MySimon.com. Since dealer franchise laws require
cars to be sold through dealerships and since almost all dealerships engage in price negotiation,
this kind of direct price comparison is not possible for cars. However, we can observe in our
data that some dealers do offer consistently lower prices than others. While it is possible that
consumers may be able to learn this information, for example, in an online discussion forum or
by inference from a dealer’s own website, we find no evidence in our data that this is occurring
to any significant degree.
We can see this in several specifications. First, in column 4 in Table 2, a response indicating
that a consumers has collected information on “which dealers to visit or buy from” has no
statistically significant effect on the price. Another way of testing whether the Internet effect
is due to consumers finding low-price dealerships is to add dealer fixed effects to the core
specification in column 2 in Table 2. In this unreported regression, the estimated coefficient
on the InternetUse variable is identified by within-dealer variation in whether consumers are
informed or not. Since identification in this specification does not rely on differences in average
price levels between dealers, the results cannot be due to consumers searching for low-price
dealerships. The coefficient on InternetUse remains significant and negative at -0.81% (p-value
0.04).
A third way of investigating whether the Internet is used to gather information that helps
consumers find low-price dealers is to test whether InternetUse substitutes for search among
dealers. We asked buyers how many other dealerships they visited. If we add the number of
visited dealers to the core specification in column 2 in Table 2, each increase in response scale

19

category for the number of visited dealers decreases price by 0.34% (p-value 0.02, regression
unreported). Most importantly, the coefficient on InternetUse remains significant and changes
little (-0.85%, p-value 0.03). The fact that each variable appears to influence negotiated prices
when both are included in the regression suggests that dealer search and InternetUse are not
performing exactly the same role.
The results in this subsection suggests that Internet information helps consumers by enabling them to negotiate a low price at a given dealership. However, Internet information seems
not to help car buyers find low-price dealerships.
We now want to know whether the Internet serves any additional role in lowering prices
for consumers. We explore this question by distinguishing among the different ways in which
consumers can use the Internet. In particular, we distinguish between manufacturer websites,
individual dealer websites, online buying services, informational websites, and chat rooms. For
each type of online source we construct an indicator that is one if a buyer used that source of
information. Column 5 in Table 2 reports a specification that contains #DealersVisited, and
the indicators for how the Internet was used. We find that online buying services are the only
type of online site which is associated with lower price.13 The coefficient is -0.90 and highly
significant (p-value 0.001). This leads us to investigate the role of online buying services next.
How are online buying services helping buyers?
Online buying services and manufacturer websites differ from other online sources in that
they go beyond providing information to consumers. All online buying services and many
manufacturer websites allow consumers to request a quote from a dealer. The dealer typically
calls or e-mails the referred consumer within 24-48 hours with a price quote. A consumer can
ask for a price quote in a few seconds on a website, and receive it in his or her home the
next day. This raises the question of whether some of the savings from using the Internet
13
This result is not due to collinearity between the five variables describing how consumers use the Internet.
We obtain the same result if we run five separate specifications, each of which contains all controls but only one
of the five information variables at a time (not reported).

20

could be driven by a mechanism that is distinct from informing customers, namely the referral
process. To investigate the effect of utilizing the referral process, we add to the basic Internet
specification with #DealersVisited an indicator that is one if a consumers answered “yes” to the
question “Did you submit a formal request to any online buying service (e.g. Autobytel.com,
Carpoint.com, Autoweb.com) to be referred to one of the site’s affiliated dealers?” We also add
an indicator that is one if a consumers answered “yes” to the equivalent question for referrals
from manufacturer websites.
We find that submitting a referral to an independent online buying service is associated
with 0.72% lower prices, in addition to the savings of 0.76% (p-value 0.05) associated with
using the Internet (see column 6 in Table 2). Manufacturer referrals, in contrast, have no effect
on price.
This result is very important because it indicates that there is some important aspect of the
business model of independent referral sites that drives the difference. The major difference
between a referral from an online buying service and from a manufacturer is that the manufacturer refers consumers to the closest dealer selected from the entirety of its dealerships while
online buying services sign contracts with only a subset of dealers. For example, out of the
approximately 22,000 dealers in the US, Autobytel.com in the first quarter of 2001 contracted
with 5,000 dealerships. Online buying services assign dealers exclusive territories, and refer all
customers within that territory who submit a purchase referral for the dealer’s nameplate to
that dealer. Since only a subset of dealers are affiliated with a given online buying service, this
dealer’s exclusive territory will be larger than the territory in which it is the closest dealer of
that nameplate. This implies that referrals from an online buying service will more often be
incremental to the dealership’s regular customers than referrals from manufacturers. Manufacturers will refer to dealers only customers for whom the dealer is already the closest dealer of
that nameplate. Provided the incremental stream of customers generated by the online buying
service is valuable to the dealership, the dealership has an incentive to quote prices low enough

21

to convert a substantial number of referrals into sales. This is because online buying services
monitor the percentage of referrals that result in a sale, and if the percentage is too low, the
dealer may be terminated and replaced by another dealer in that area. The implied threat is
not only that incremental sales get lost, but also that the replacement dealer will then “steal”
some of the dealership’s own consumers. Such a threat is not available to manufacturers.
This argument bears resemblance to that of Klein and Murphy (1988) and Klein (1995) on
contractual provisions in franchising. Klein (1995) argues that three elements are necessary
for the loss of future rents to be a credible threat for a franchisee: (1) the contract between
the franchisor and franchisee must leave downstream rents for the franchisee, (2) the franchisor
must be allowed to monitor the performance of the franchisee, and (3) the franchisor must
be able to easily drop the franchisee. These condition are similar to what we observe for
the contracts between online buying services and their affiliated dealers: (1) Dealers are given
exclusive “online territories” which are substantially larger than their offline territories, thereby
creating incremental profits for dealers, (2) online buying services monitor the performance
of dealers with customer satisfaction surveys, and (3) online buying services can easily drop
dealerships from their roster. This interpretation of the role of exclusive territories is different
from the one hypothesized by Chen, Iyer, and Padmanabhan (2002). In their paper online
buying services grant exclusivity to dealers to avoid Bertrand-type competition among dealers.
In contrast, our argument and that of Klein (1995) suggests that exclusivity is granted in order
to ensure dealer performance, which in this context means offering lower prices to consumers.
In a sense, independent online buying services bargain with dealers on behalf of a large group
of consumers, although that group is not yet formed. With this interpretation our result is also
consistent with the theoretical predictions of Snyder (1998) who shows why groups of buyers
should expect to pay lower prices to a seller than individual buyers.
In summary, buyers who use the Internet to shop for a car seem to be paying lower prices
for two distinct reasons. First, they become on average better informed than other buyers.

22

This information gives consumers better knowledge of of a dealer’s opportunity cost, which
tends to lower the transaction price the consumer pays. Second, buyers seem to be able to take
advantage of any pressure that online buying services exert on dealers through their ability to
direct customers among dealers. The total Internet effect is 1.5% of the purchase price, or 22%
of dealers’s average gross profit margin.14

3.2

Does the Internet benefit all consumers equally?

Next, we investigate whether the information and referral effects accrue to all buyers equally.
In particular we are interested in whether the Internet “levels the playing field” by improving
outcomes by more for individuals who would do worse without the Internet. In this paper,
we can examine this question because in our survey we ask explicitly about indicators that
an individual is at a bargaining disadvantage and we observe a range of car-purchase related
Internet activities.
In the survey, we ask respondents to rate their agreement with the statements “I am afraid
that I will be taken advantage of by a dealer when negotiating the price of a new car” and
“It is hard for me to find time to shop for a car.” We believe there are a number of characteristics that might lead an individual to strongly agree with the first statement, including
aversion to conflict, dislike of stressful situations, or anxiety in high-pressure environments.
Instead of trying to assess these elements independently, we ask for a summary assessment that
describes the consumer’s level of apprehension about the bargaining process. In addition, we
also ask whether individuals have a time constraint that would make participation in extended
negotiations costly for them. We expect that both aspects will make the bargaining process
unattractive and lead to less desirable outcomes for consumers.
14

We provide one additional piece of evidence to show that the “Internet effect” can be broken into a referral
and an informational component. In a regression that controls for the referral effect, the variable InternetUse and
the variable Informed are almost interchangeable (see column 6 and 7 in Table 2). The InternetUse coefficient
is estimated at -0.76 in the first column (p-value 0.05). The second specification no longer includes InternetUse
but yields a coefficient estimate of -0.67 for Informed (p-value 0.09). The effect of a referral is similar in the two
specifications.

23

We use the responses to these statements to create an indicator variable, DislikeBargaining, which is one if a buyer derives a higher disutility from the bargaining process than the
median buyer. We derive this indicator using two different approaches. In our first approach
we construct a variable which is the sum of the normalized values of the responses to the two
statements.15 We then create an indicator which is one for a buyer with a higher value on
this variable than the median buyer. We run a specification in which we include DislikeBargaining on its own and also interacted with both InternetUse and OBSReferral (see column 1
in Table 3). We find that consumers who DislikeBargaining pay 2.1% more than consumers
who do not (p-value < 0.001). We also find that consumers who obtained a referral from an
online buying service pay 0.83% less than those who do not (p-value 0.07); these savings accrue
equally to buyers who do and do not DislikeBargaining. (The DislikeBargaining-OBSReferral
interaction term is statistically zero.) Using the Internet, however, only benefits consumers who
dislike bargaining (by 1.7%, p-value 0.01); consumers who like to bargain (presumably because
they are good bargainers) do not benefit from using the Internet other than by obtaining a
referral.
To ensure the robustness of these findings we use the factor BargainingDisutility from the
factor analysis on page 15 to derive our indicator variable. We redefine our indicator to be one
if a buyer derives a higher BargainingDisutility than the median buyer.
We repeat the previous specification, however, instead of including the consumer trait measures directly, we make use of the factors WillingnessToSearch and CarEnthusiast to control
for consumer types. The results are similar to the previous specification (see column 2 in Table 3). We find that consumers who DislikeBargaining pay 2.0% more than consumers who do
not. We also find that consumers who obtained a request from an online buying service pay
0.74% less than those who do not (p-value 0.10); again these savings accrue equally to buyers
15

For each variable we calculate the mean and standard deviation over all respondents. Then we normalize
the answer for each individual by subtracting the mean and dividing by the standard deviation.

24

who do and do not DislikeBargaining. As before we find that using the Internet only benefits
consumers who dislike bargaining (by 1.5%); consumers who like to bargain or have the time
to do so do not benefit from using the Internet other than by obtaining a referral. The sum of
the marginal Internet effects is shown in the following table.

Used Internet for information
(but did not request referral)
In addition, requested referral
Total Internet effect

Likes bargaining
0%

Dislikes bargaining
-1.5%

-0.7%
-0.7%

-0.7%
-2.2%

Our first result of this section is that buyers who dislike the bargaining process benefit much
more from being informed. This suggests that the effect of the Internet’s information provision
role is, at least in car buying, to move consumers towards a more level playing field in terms of
bargaining ability. Indeed, individuals who do not dislike bargaining do not appear to benefit
at all from being better informed by the Internet. One can argue that, colloquially, this is the
very definition of being a good bargainer: to be able to do well without knowing much about
one’s own and the other party’s outside options.16
The second key result is that the benefits of requesting a referral accrue equally to all
buyers. We have argued in section 3.1 that a referral from an online buying service lowers
prices at a dealer because of the implicit threat to direct customers to the dealer’s competitors.
Consistent with our findings, if this threat operates, it seems reasonable that it should apply
uniformly across consumers.
It is important to note that our result that buyers who like the bargaining process do not
benefit from being informed is not specific to the Internet specification: we repeat the basic
Informed specification from column 7 of Table 2 with the DislikeBargaining dummy and the
interaction of the dummy with Informed.17 We find that consumers who DislikeBargaining pay
2.6% more than consumers who do not (see column 3 in Table 3). We find the same qualitative
16
For example, being able to negotiate a salary raise after having received a competing job offer is not a sign
of good bargaining skills. However, negotiating a raise without such an offer may very well be.
17
We construct the dummy according to the first approach in this subsection.

25

result as in our two Internet specifications, namely that the benefits of being Informed accrues
only to consumers who dislike bargaining (by 2.0%).
Finally, if a subset of consumers gain disproportionately from using the Internet to buy a
car, economic theory suggests that this group should be disproportionately likely to use the
Internet. Our final specification in Table 3 is a probit that relates a buyer’s decision to use the
Internet the consumer trait measures constructed in the factor analysis. We find that buyers
with a higher disutility from the bargaining process are more likely to use the Internet.

4

Conclusion

In this paper we use direct measures of search behavior and consumer characteristics in the car
industry to investigate how the Internet affects negotiated prices in car retailing. We match
transaction data on 1,500 car purchases in California with the responses to a survey which
asks buyers detailed questions about their Internet usage, their attitudes towards information
search and bargaining, and their demographics.
Our survey data enable us to control directly, at an individual level, for heterogeneity in
attitudes towards search and bargaining disutility. While these controls cannot fully rule out
selection bias, they increase our confidence that the price effects are not an artifact of differences
in unobserved characteristics between people who use the Internet and those who do not.
We show that the Internet lowers prices for two distinct reasons. First, the Internet informs
consumers. The information that seems to be most valuable to consumers is the invoice price of
the dealer; it enables them to negotiate a low price at a given dealership. Internet information
seems not to help consumers find low-price dealerships. In particular, the Internet does not
substitute for searching at multiple dealers. Nor does searching at multiple dealers substitute
for being better informed.
Second, the incentives provided by online buying services’ contracts with dealerships help

26

consumers obtain lower prices through a referral process. Referrals from manufacturer websites do not lower prices. We believe that online buying services are more effective because,
unlike manufacturers, they can exert pressure on dealers by directing incremental business to
affiliated—and away from unaffiliated—dealerships. The magnitude of the combined information and referral effect of the Internet is 1.5% of the purchase price, or 22% of dealers’s average
gross profit margin.
We find that the benefit of gathering information differs by consumer type. While buyers
with a high disutility of bargaining pay 1.5% less when they have collected information on the
specific car they eventually purchase, buyers who like the bargaining process do not benefit
from such information.
The point estimate of the combined information and referral price effects is close to the estimate of Zettelmeyer, Scott Morton, and Silva-Risso (2004). They found that, after controlling
for selection, Autobytel.com lowered prices by 2.2%. Since Autobytel.com is a major online
buying service, we can compare this estimate with the sum of our InternetUse and OBSReferral
coefficients in the last subsection, 1.5%, or with the estimate of 2.2 to 2.5% for consumers with
a high disutility from bargaining. The similarity of the coefficient estimates is remarkable given
that Zettelmeyer, Scott Morton, and Silva-Risso (2004) use data from 1999, the height of the
Internet boom and a time of experimentation by both consumers and retailers. In contrast,
the data in this paper are from April and May of 2002, when the Internet had become more
mainstream.
More generally, the results in this paper suggest that the decisions consumers make to
use the Internet to gather information and to use the negotiating clout of an online buying
service have a real effect on the prices paid by these consumers. The results speak both to
the significance of the Internet in making information more easily available, and also to the
potential of Internet institutions to affect the distribution of surplus even in established offline
industries like auto retailing.

27

References
Ausubel, L. M., and R. J. Deneckere (1998): “Bargaining and Forward Induction,” mimeo,
University of Maryland University of Wisconsin-Madison.
Brown, J. R., and A. Goolsbee (2002): “Does the Internet Make Markets More Competitive? Evidence from the Life Insurance Industry,” Journal of Political Economy, 110(5),
481–507.
Chatterjee, K., and L. Samuelson (1983): “Bargaining under Incomplete Information,”
Operations Research, 31(5), 835–851.
Chen, Y., G. Iyer, and V. Padmanabhan (2002): “Referral Infomediaries,” Marketing
Science, 21(4), 23–45.
Chen, Y., S. Yang, and Y. Zhao (2003): “A Structural Approach to Modeling Negotiated
Prices of Automobiles,” New York University, New York, NY.
Fudenberg, D., D. K. Levine, and J. Tirole (1985): “Infinite-Horizon Models of Bargaining with One-Sided Incomplete Information,” in Game Theoretic Models of Bargaining, ed.
by A. Roth. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, England.
Furse, D. H., G. N. Punj, and D. W. Stewart (1984): “Typologies of Individual Search
Strategies Among Purchasers of New Automobiles,” Journal of Consumer Research, 10,
417–431.
Gul, F., H. Sonnenschein, and R. Wilson (1986): “Foundations of Dynamic Monopoly
and the Coase Conjecture,” Journal of Economic Theory, 39, 155–190.
Klein, B. (1995): “The Economics of Franchise Contracts,” Journal of Corporate Finance:
Contracting, Governance and Organization, 2, 9–37.

28

Klein, B., and K. Murphy (1988): “Vertical Restraints as Contractual Enforcement Mechanisms,” Journal of Law and Economics, 31, 265–297.
Klein, L. R., and G. T. Ford (2001): “Consumer Search for Information in the Digital
Age: An Empirical Study of Pre-Purchase Search for Automobiles,” mimeo, Rice Univeristy,
Houston, TX.
Moorthy, S., B. T. Ratchford, and D. Talukdar (1997): “Consumer Information Search
Revisited: Theory and Empirical Evidence,” Journal of Consumer Research, 23(4), 263–277.
Ratchford, B., and N. Srinivasan (1993): “An Empirical Investigation of Returns to
Search,” Marketing Science, 12(1), 73–87.
Ratchford, B. T., D. Talukdar, and M.-S. Lee (2003): “The Impact of the Internet on
Information Search for Automobiles,” Journal of Marketing Research, 40(2), 193–209.
Scott Morton, F., F. Zettelmeyer, and J. Silva-Risso (2001): “Internet Car Retailing,”
Journal of Industrial Economics, 49(4), 501–520.
(2003): “Consumer Information and Discrimination: Does the Internet Affect the
Pricing of New Cars to Women and Minorities?,” Quantitative Marketing and Economics,
1(1), 65–92.
(2004): “A Test of Bargaining Theory in the Auto Retailing Industry,” Discussion
paper, UC Berkeley.
Snyder, C. M. (1998): “Why do larger buyers pay lower prices? Intense supplier competition,”
Economic Letters, 58, 205–209.
Zettelmeyer, F., F. Scott Morton, and J. Silva-Risso (2004): “Cowboys or Cowards:
Why are Internet car prices lower?,” Discussion paper, Berkeley, CA.

29

Table 1: Summary Statistics†
Obs

Mean

Std. Dev.

Demographic Variables From Survey
Age
1436
3.03
0.91
Education
1436
4.82
1.44
Income
1436
5.18
2.19
Black
1436
0.03
0.18
Hispanic
1436
0.20
0.40
Female
1436
0.40
0.49
Demographic Variables From Census
%HouseOwnership
1436
0.67
0.24
MedianHouseValue
1436
2.28
1.06
%Professional
1436
0.16
0.08
%Executives
1436
0.17
0.08
%BlueCollar
1436
0.27
0.16
%Technicians
1436
0.03
0.02
Summary Statistics from Transaction Data
Price
1436 23284.92
5499.61
TradeIn
1436
0.30
0.46
EndOfMonth
1436
0.20
0.40
Weekend
1436
0.30
0.46
Competition
1436
4.50
3.06
MonthMay
1436
0.52
0.50
SouthernCal
1436
0.62
0.48
†

Min

Max

1.00
1.00
1.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

5.00
7.00
10.00
1.00
1.00
1.00

0.01
0.19
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

1.00
5.00
0.62
1.00
0.91
0.16

9800
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

38750
1.00
1.00
1.00
16.00
1.00
1.00

Age, education, income represent response categories.
MedianHouseValue in $100,000.
Competition: number of dealers of same nameplate in a 10 mile
radius of dealership.

30

Table 2: Price effects of search and purchasing behavior†
Dep. Var. ln(price)
InternetUse
Informed

(1)
−1.16
(0.32)∗∗

(2)
−0.98
(0.39)∗

(3)

KnowInvoice
KnowMarketPrice

ManufacturerSite
DealerSite
InformationSite
ChatRoom
OBSSite

NoTimeToShop
DoPriceComparis.
InternetForInfo
GatherMuchInfo
ReadCarMagazine
VisitDealerForFun
CustomerAge
Education
Income
Income2
Black
Hispanic
OtherRace
Female
Constant
Car Fixed Effects
Observations
R-squared
∗
†

(7)

−0.67
(0.39)+

−0.35
(0.14)∗
0.13
(0.28)
−0.19
(0.30)
−0.12
(0.29)
0.73
(0.45)
−0.90
(0.27)∗∗

#DealersVisited

AfraidTakenAdv.

(6)
−0.76
(0.39)+

0.02
(0.31)
−0.14
(0.28)
−0.61
(0.30)∗
−0.04
(0.31)

KnowDealers

ManufReferral

(5)

−0.74
(0.39)+

KnowCars

OBSReferral

(4)

−0.31
(0.14)∗

−0.33
(0.14)∗

−0.72
−0.80
(0.28)∗
(0.28)∗∗
0.10
0.09
(0.34)
(0.34)
0.42
0.42
0.44
0.45
0.43
0.44
(0.13)∗∗
(0.13)∗∗
(0.13)∗∗
(0.13)∗∗
(0.13)∗∗
(0.13)∗∗
0.23
0.22
0.25
0.21
0.19
0.18
(0.15)
(0.15)
(0.15)
(0.15)
(0.15)
(0.15)
−0.39
−0.31
−0.36
−0.31
−0.32
−0.26
(0.23)+
(0.23)
(0.23)
(0.23)
(0.23)
(0.23)
0.01
−0.17
−0.14
−0.09
0.04
−0.09
(0.18)
(0.16)
(0.17)
(0.17)
(0.19)
(0.16)
−0.25
−0.28
−0.26
−0.24
−0.23
−0.24
(0.20)
(0.21)
(0.21)
(0.21)
(0.20)
(0.21)
0.21
0.23
0.22
0.28
0.24
0.25
(0.17)
(0.17)
(0.17)
(0.17)+
(0.17)
(0.17)
−0.10
−0.10
−0.11
−0.11
−0.13
−0.13
(0.20)
(0.20)
(0.20)
(0.20)
(0.20)
(0.20)
−0.13
−0.12
−0.09
−0.13
−0.11
−0.12
−0.10
(0.14)
(0.15)
(0.15)
(0.15)
(0.14)
(0.14)
(0.15)
−0.41
−0.39
−0.39
−0.41
−0.38
−0.39
−0.39
(0.10)∗∗
(0.10)∗∗
(0.10)∗∗
(0.10)∗∗
(0.10)∗∗
(0.10)∗∗
(0.10)∗∗
−0.23
−0.20
−0.20
−0.25
−0.20
−0.20
−0.20
(0.25)
(0.25)
(0.25)
(0.25)
(0.25)
(0.25)
(0.25)
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.05
0.04
0.04
0.04
(0.02)+
(0.02)+
(0.02)+
(0.02)∗
(0.02)∗
(0.02)+
(0.02)+
0.52
0.69
0.67
0.68
0.68
0.68
0.66
(0.88)
(0.87)
(0.87)
(0.87)
(0.87)
(0.87)
(0.87)
0.37
0.40
0.41
0.40
0.50
0.41
0.41
(0.38)
(0.38)
(0.38)
(0.39)
(0.38)
(0.38)
(0.38)
0.24
0.28
0.31
0.20
0.34
0.27
0.30
(0.44)
(0.42)
(0.42)
(0.44)
(0.43)
(0.42)
(0.43)
0.48
0.32
0.31
0.25
0.32
0.32
0.31
(0.26)+
(0.27)
(0.27)
(0.27)
(0.27)
(0.27)
(0.27)
1, 007.30
1, 007.09
1, 007.18
1, 007.14
1, 007.62
1, 007.62
1, 007.71
(1.43)∗∗
(1.75)∗∗
(1.76)∗∗
(1.77)∗∗
(1.76)∗∗
(1.77)∗∗
(1.77)∗∗
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
1436
1436
1436
1419
1435
1435
1435
0.96
0.96
0.96
0.96
0.97
0.97
0.97

significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%; + significant at 10% level. Robust standard errors in parentheses.
Unreported are car, month, and region fixed effects, EndOfMonth, Weekend, TradeIn, Competition, VehicleCost, and
census demographics.
Response scale on trait variables is 1=”Disagree Strongly”, 4=”Agree Strongly.”
All coefficients are multiplied by 100.

31

Table 3: Price effects by bargaining disutility and Probit on Internet use†
Dep. Var.
InternetUse
DislikeBargaining
InternetUse*DislikeBarg
OBSReferral
OBSReferral*DislikeBarg

(1)
ln(price)
0.17
(0.48)
2.09
(0.52)**
-1.70
(0.62)**
-0.83
(0.46)+
0.26
(0.57)

(2)
ln(price)
0.06
(0.42)
1.97
(0.54)**
-1.49
(0.63)*
-0.74
(0.40)+
0.17
(0.54)

Informed
Informed*DislikeBarg
#DealersVisited
DoPriceComparisons
InternetForInfo
GatherMuchInfo
ReadCarMagazine
VisitDealerForFun

-0.29
(0.14)*
-0.25
(0.23)
0.02
(0.18)
-0.23
(0.20)
0.21
(0.16)
-0.12
(0.20)

-0.31
(0.14)*

WillingnessToSearch

(3)
ln(price)

2.57
(0.67)**

0.49
(0.51)
-2.00
(0.72)**
-0.35
(0.14)*
-0.20
(0.24)
-0.17
(0.15)
-0.29
(0.20)
0.25
(0.16)
-0.10
(0.20)

-0.29
(0.16)+
0.05
(0.13)

CarEnthusiast
BargainingDisutility
CustomerAge
Education
Income
Income2
Black
Hispanic
OtherRace
Female
Constant
Car Fixed Effects
Observations
R-squared
∗
†

-0.07
(0.14)
-0.39
(0.10)**
-0.21
(0.25)
0.04
(0.02)+
0.75
(0.87)
0.42
(0.38)
0.36
(0.43)
0.39
(0.27)
1,007.80
(1.75)**
yes
1435
0.97

-0.10
(0.14)
-0.38
(0.10)**
-0.18
(0.25)
0.04
(0.02)+
0.69
(0.87)
0.38
(0.38)
0.36
(0.43)
0.34
(0.27)
1,006.60
(1.52)**
yes
1435
0.97

(4)
InternetUse

-0.04
(0.14)
-0.39
(0.10)**
-0.20
(0.25)
0.04
(0.02)+
0.67
(0.86)
0.39
(0.38)
0.42
(0.42)
0.38
(0.27)
1,007.93
(1.77)**
yes
1435
0.97

0.76
(0.05)**
-0.18
(0.04)**
0.16
(0.04)**
-0.22
(0.05)**
0.06
(0.03)*
0.02
(0.09)
0.01
(0.01)
0.03
(0.23)
-0.36
(0.11)**
-0.02
(0.20)
-0.02
(0.09)
0.94
(0.48)*
no
1436

significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%; + significant at 10% level. Robust standard errors in
parentheses. All coefficients are multiplied by 100.
Unreported are (columns 1-3) car, month, and region fixed effects, EndOfMonth, Weekend, TradeIn,
Competition, VehicleCost, and (columns 1-4) census demographics.
Response scale on trait variables 1=”Disagree Strongly”, 4=”Agree Strongly.”

32

