                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             REAL DETERMINANTS OF CORPORATE LEVERAGE




                          Alan J.   Auerbach




                     Working   Paper No. 1151




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                   1050   Massachusetts Avenue
                       Caithridge MA 02138

                             June 1983




This paper was prepared as part of the National Bureau of Economic
Research program in Financial Markets and Monetary Economics and
project in the Changing Roles of Debt and Equity in Financing U.S.
Capital Fornation, which was financed by a grant from the American
Council of Life Insurance. It was presented at the NBER
Conference on Corporate Capital Structures in the United States,
Palm Beach, Florida, January 6 and 7, 1983. I am grateful to Roger
Gordon for helpful discussion, Benjamin Friednan and other con-
ference participants for useful comments, Gregory Clark for
assistance with the research, and the NBER for financial support.
Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                            tIBER Working Paper #1151
                                                 June 1983




                        Real Determinants of Corporate LeveraL-:
                                         Abstract

            The U.S. corporate tax distorts the behavior of both real and
financial   decisions. With respect to the former, the variation in

depreciation allowances and investment tax credit provisions across types

of investments leads to widely vazying effective tax rates, especially

since 1981. Financial policy is distorted by the differential treatment          of
debt   and equity. The wrpose of this paper       is   to examine, using firm-level

panel data, the relationship between real and financial decisions by

corporations, in part to determine the extent to which these biases offset

or   reinforce each other.
            Our results are tentative and suggest that patterns of real and
financial behavior are only partially consistent with predictions of
various capital structure models (e.g. bankruptcy/agency cost, limited tax
shield)   and that   there   is no obvious offset on the financial side to the

tax bias against investment in structures.


                                            Alan J. Auerbach
                                            National Bureau of Economic Research
                                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                            Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138
                                            (617) 868—3900 ext. 344
I. Introductior

             This study presents empirical estimates of the importance of dif-

ferent characteristics of corporations in influencing the propensity of such

corporations to finance their investments by borrowing. It also considers

the determinants of the type of borrowing finns do, by estimating jointly

the   determinants of short—term and long—term borrowing. Such analysis is
important because there are several competing hypotheses about the deter-
minants of corporate borrowing that are difficult to choose among on the
basis of economic theory alone.
             Our task   is facilitated by a rich data panel based on information
on nearly 200 corporations gathered from several sources, including infor-
mation on the composition of the capital stocks of individual firms. The
large number of variables representing firm characteristics facilitates the
evaluation of different models of leverage, while the availability of at
least 9     years   of data on each firm allows us to distinguish between short
run   and   long run   determinants   of borrowing.
             The tax law plays a central role in most models of corporate

leverage,     and it is   recent changes in the tax law that   motivate some of the

current interest in the cjuestion of what determines corporate borrowing.

One important issue to which ouch recent attention has been devoted is the

apparently     large bias built   into   the Accelerated Cost Recovery System
(ACES) for depreciable assets introduced by the Economic Recovery 'lhx Act
of    1981. According to most     calculations, the combination of the investment

tax credit and either three—year or five—year write—off gave investments in
business equipment deductions and credits that exceeded in present value
the benefits conveyed by immediate expensing. As is well—known, a cor-
porate tax with expensing (and without interest deductibility) is "neutral"
                                        —2—



 in the sense that it does not distort corporate investment decisions. Put
 another   way, the effective corporate marginal tax rate on investment is

 zero. The presence of tax benefits in excess of expensing therefore

 implies the existence of a marginal subsidy, i.e. a negative tax rate.

Indeed, the ACRS benefits are so generous that     the   aggregate effective tax
rate on equipment investment is now essentially zero, after the

introduction in the 1982 tax act of a 50 percent basis adjustment for

investment credits received.1

             Under the current law, structures do not receive this effective

tax exemption offered to equipnent. Though the tax lifetime for most

business    structures (15 years) is now imich shorter than before, structures
typically receive no investment tax credits. As a result, estimates
suggest that the effective tax rates on structures now lie below the
statutory rate of I6 percent (i.e., depreciation allowances are more
generous    than economic depreciation) but ziuch closer to this rate than

zero.2 Frther, nondepreciafle assets, such as land, do not qualify for

any   investment   incentives comparable to accelerated depreciation or the

investment    tax credit.
             This suggests that there exists a potentially serious distortion
facing    the choice of investment mix by- corporations.3 However, such a
conclusion is necessarily valid only if a separation prevails between real
and financial corporate decisions. Under some models of debt—equity
choice,   there nay be a tax advantage to the use of debt finance which is

dissipated by other costs to the firm as leverage increases. If these

costs relate systematically    to the firm's investment mix, one wou1d expect
                                         —3—



debt—equity ratios to differ for this reason. For example, one could
inagine a case in which leverage costs are lower for structures, wi.th the
additional   leverage this would make possible acting to offset the tax

disadvantage    structures face on the   "real" side.

            This   is an example of the type of issue we seek to resolve in the

analysis that   follows.   We begin, in Section II, with a brief review of the

literature on optimal financial structure in the presence of taxation, with

particular emphasis on the choice of debt—equity ratio. Section III devel-

ops the different variants of the model of corporate borrowing that will

be estimated. The     model shares with its predecessors the weakness of being
an ad hoc   model, rather than one derived rigorously from a firm's dynamic

optimization   problem. However, this seems unavoidable in the current

context, and the model contains enough flexibility to be compatible with

different underlying behavioral hypotheses. Section IV presents a

description of the construction of the data set and the definitions of the

variables used in the regressions, and Section V presents the regression

results.


II. Theories of Corporate Leverage

            Most theories of corporate leverage begin with the twin observa-

tions that corporate taxation appears to bias the choice of financial

policy completely toward debt, and that corporations typically finance

perhaps only one quarter of their accumulations of capital by actually

issuing debt.b The challenge is to explain why          the   simple Modigliani—

Miller   (1963) "all debt" result does not hold.
                                        —




             One suggested answer was   provided   by Miller (1971), who argued

that   the   presence of a progressive personal income tax with favorable

treatment of equity income (because of the partial exclusion and deferral

advantage associated with capital gains taxation) would lead to an equili-

brium   with firms facing the same cost of capital for debt and equity. In
this equilibrium, the tax advantage to debt would just be offset by a lower
before—tax return to equity holders. This model implies that in
equilibrium, taxation does not alter the     original finding of ?4odigliani and

Miller   (1958) that financial policy is irrelevant. Moreover, it      offers   no

reason why    financial policy would relate to real investment decisions or

other   characteristics of firms.
             Certain fundamental problems with the Miller result have been
pointed out by a number of authors. For example, the implicit tax rate on
municipal debt does not appear to be anywhere near the corporate rate sug-
gested by the model.S Moreover, the portfolios of individual investors
contain both equity and taxable debt, rather than exhibiting the segmenta-
tion   that Miller's hypothesis would predict. Thus, it seems that certain

additions nnst be nade to Miller's model to explain observed behavior.

             Several of the models we consider have in common the property of

there being certain costs faced by firms that increase with leverage,

making   interior   debt—equity ratios optimal in spite of the presence of a

partial tax advantage to debt finance. We consider these models next, dis-

cussing their empirically testable implications.
                                       —5—



A.   Bankruptcy/Agency Cost Models
            The most basic explanation for interior debt—equity ratios is
costly bankruptcy.6 It is important to emphasize that the bankruptcy event
must not simply be costly to some security holders in the sense of causing
a redistribution of resources among different classes. The possibility of
such redistributions could be allowed for adequately by an adjustment of
the normal coupon rate on debt. For potential bankruptcy to discourage the
issuance of debt, there mist be costs to the firm as a whole, such as legal
fees,   court costs, or the loss on disposition of fixed assets (under

liquidation). tbreover, these costs must be sufficiently large to be

important relative to debt' a tax    advantage when bankruptcy is   a likely

outcome.    Thipirical evidence tends to refute this,? if we take    the observed

frequency   of bankruptcy as a rough probability measure.
            In models of imperfect infornation, or dynamic models in which
financial   and investment decisions occur at different times, additional

costs associated with bankruptcy can arise because of the inability of

bondholders to constrain the behavior of corporate managers. In a static

model, it nay be difficult for creditors to monitor the behavior of firms

(Ross, 1977). In    dynamic models,   managers may have the incentive to choose

socially inefficient investment plans, because they do not internalize the

effects of such plans on the value of outstanding long term debt (Jensen

and Meckling, 1976). For example, firms with high levels of outstanding

long—term debt can choose to undertake very risky projects that increase

the probability of   bankruptcy. Under limited corporate liability, this
transfers   resources from debt—holders to equity holders, and nay do so to a
                                            —6—




 sufficient extent that risky projects with low total payoffs will dominate
(from the equity—holders' viewpoint) safer projects with higher total pre-
sent value. The inefficency induced by this moral hazard is a social cost
that, presumably, imast     be borne by   the firm   and its owners exante in the
form   of higher coupon payments to holders of long—term debt.         It would

clearly be in the stockholders' interest to constrain the firm's behavior

in order to avoid such costs. While niechanisins to achieve this do exist

(e.g., bond covenants restricting future borrowing), it would be costly if

not   impossible to use them to replicate the desired outcome.
             If   such costs to leverage remain, it msy be possible to identify

differences   across firms    in the level of such costs. For example, Myers

(1977)   suggests   that the moral hazard problem is more acute for firms whose
value derives from the anticipated rents from future investment opportun-
ities rather than from existing assets or assets which the firm is com-

mitted to purchase. Presumably, there would also be less of a problem for
firms with a narrow range of investment opportunities from ihich to choose.
A second determinant of the level of agency costs should be the firm's
bankruptcy   risk, holding debt level constant. One can idel this using an
option—pricing              assuming that bankruptcy will occur if the
                   framework by

value of the firm as a whole drops below the level of claims against the
firm. The cost of such a "bankruptcy option" depends, following the
standard option—pricing results (Black and Scholes, 1973; Merton, 1973) on
the firm's value as wefl as the variance of its value over time.
           Myers    also suggests that    the   agency problem may give rise to
maturity—matching of financial claims and real assets • although he also
                                          —7—


points out that the problem could be alleviated if firms engaged only in

short—term borrowing, since debt would always be fully redeemed before the

making of decisions about future projects. One could imagine the occur-

rence of either of these practices, but it is more difficult to derive a

model that produces them. One purpose of our empirical analysis is to

determine whether such behavior can actually be detected in practice.


B. Limited Tax Shield Models

            The U.S. corporate income tax treats gains and losses asym-

metrically. Thsses ny be carried back up to three years to obtain a

refund of past taxes, but the excess of' any remaining losses mast be
carried forward, without interest, and subject to expiration after fifteen
years (seven years during this paper's sample period). Firms without tax-
able income need not be in financial distress or on the verge of bank-
ruptcy. However, the prospect of not being able to use the future tax
deductions provided by interest payments nakes debt less attractive, and
may cause   firms to limit their leverage. This is the essence of the
explanation offered by De Angelo and I4asulis (1960). It is attractive as
an explanation of debt policy because, unlike bankruptcy or agency costs,
tax costs are easily measured.
            The hypothesis also has   a   number of testable implications. First,
firms with substantial loss carryforwards should, ceteris paribas, choose
to issue less debt. Second, firms investing in assets with a greater
fraction of their total after—tax returns generated by investment tax
credits and depreciation deductions should also use less debt finance.
This is seen most simply if we imagine a project which costs one dollar and
                                              —5—


lasts for one period, yielding a gross return f subject to taxation at rate

 r, after a depreciation deduction equal to a fraction d of gross rents. If

r is the required after—tax rate of return required by the firm (in

addition to the return of the initial one dollar investment), then the

after—tax return satisfies:


(i)            (l—r)f +   tdf   =   (l+r)

This implies that       the   firm's taxable income is:



(2)            f(1—d) =   _________


which   decreases with d. This result carries over directly to a multiperiod
model if capital decays geometrically and depreciation deductions exceed

actual depreciation by a given fraction of income, say a. In this case,

taxable      income as a fraction of capital is a function only of a and not the
asset's depreciation characteristics.5 t.bre realistically, effective tax
rates on assets differ not through variations in a but through differences
in the timing of depreciation deductions and          qualification   for investment

tax credits. Thus,        the magnitude of    a firm's taxable income will depend
not   only   on the effective tax rate on the assets it owns but       also   on their

age   structure. For example, a unit of equipment under the original 1981
version of ACES would receive tax benefits in the first year of service
sufficient to shelter income equal to 37 percent of the asset's purchase
price.9      On   the other band, this same asset iould receive no deductions at
all   after five years. Because acceleration of this sort (though not as

extreme) has been present for many          years, the fraction of a fin's income
                                      —9—



sheltered by deductions and credits will generally increase with the rate
at which the firm   accumulates capital,    given the firm's capital stock
composition.
            A final implication of this model    of   leverage determination is
that   the firm's riskiness, this time as measured by the fluctuations     of
earnings   before interest but after taxes1° should also discourage borrowing

because the asymmetric tax treatment of gains and losses will lower the

expected tax savings from any given level of debt.


C. ¶1x Clientele !'bdels

            If the Miller equilibrium holds, each firm will be completely

indifferent in its choice of debt—equity ratio. The foregoing models

suggest that asymmetries in the legal treatment of gains and losses, either

through    limited corporate liability under bankruptcy or the lack of a loss
offset in the tax law, may cause the Miller result to break down. An
additional    reason why this may happen concerns the issue of whether

investors can obtain the same patterns of returns holding either only debt

or only equity. If they cannot, then a firm's financial policy will

generally matter, and will affect the welfare of different individuals

differently (Anerbach and King, 1983). In this case, the choice of

financial policy by a firm acting "in the interests of its shareholders"

depends on who these shareholders are. !tx       clienteles may develop for
different    firms, with investors in hier personal tax brackets having a

greater relative preference for the firms they own to finance through

retentions rather than borrowing (Auerbach, 19814). Put another way, such

investors would prefer to borrow on their own account, rather than have
                                     — lU —



firms   do it for them, if their personal tax rate is sufficiently high.

Since rst equity finance cones through retained earnings, this suggests

that a corporation facing increasing costs to leverage will use less debt

finance, the higher is the tax rate of its clientele.


D. Summary

            There are several empirical inlications of the foregoing models

about overall debt—equity ratios. Risky firms should borrow less, whether

risk is measured by fluctuations in valuation or in earnings. Fst growing

firms should borrow less, because of their higher ratio of growth

opportunities to existing capital, and because of their greater tax shield

front depreciation deductions and investment tax credits. Firms investing

in assets receiving generous tax treatment, such as equipment, generally,

relative to structures and land, should use less debt for the same reason.

Firms with high—tax clienteles should use less debt than others.

           We have more limited predictions about the maturity structure of

debt   that firms will choose. If firms engage in maturity matching, we
would expect to see a smaller fraction of long—term debt used to finance
equipment, which typically depreciates more rapidly. We might also expect
that firms eschewing long—term debt for agency reasons would shift to
short—term debt rather than equity finance. Particularly with respect to
the question of maturity structure, it is Important that the model we
estimate has the capacity of separating long—term determinants of leverage
from those that msy dominate borrowing decisions in the short run.
                                              —11-


111. A Model       of   Corporate Borrowinc

            Our approach       differs from that     taken in   taich of' the literature on
financial    decisions in two major        respects. We model the borrowing by
individual    firms as a continuous process. That is, our model attempts to

explain changes in levels of debt rather than discrete new issues. This

seems appropriate for firms as           large   as those in our sample. We also

express all variables in real terms, corrected for inflation. The process
by which such variables were obtained from book value data is described in
the next section. .ir model is similar in some respects to that estimated
by Taggart (1977) using quarterly aggregate time series data. However,
there are several important differences and allowances for the ability to
distinguish effects across firms as well as over time. We estimate both a
single equation model for all debt and a two—equation model to explain
short—term and long—term debt.
            The basic model is intended to capture three characterizations of
firm borrowing behavior.
             (i) a long run target debt—equity            ratio based on the factors

                   outlined in Section II;

             (2) a lag in adjustment to changes in this desired ratio; and
             (3) the short—run importance of cash flow constraints.
To illustrate the interaction of these points, consider a firm tth a najor
tax loss carryforward that wishes to undertake an investment project. This
firm nay wish      to use   only retained earnings, but sufficient earnings may
not be available, particularly as the loss carryforward probably indicates
low cash    flow   as   well   as   low taxable income.   Hence, we might observe this
                                       —it—


firm borrowing more in the short run than would be predicted by the

underlying attractiveness of debt finance. It is important that our model

allow such borrowing to be distinguished from borrowing based on

longer—term considerations. A simple cross—section regression would not be

capable of separating such factors.

            We outline first the model of aggregate firm borrowing. The

long—run desired debt—assets ratio b* is taken to be a linear function of

several variables. These variables vary over time,        over   firms, or over

both   time and firms. We assume that firms borrow to close part of the gap
between the current ratio of debt to assets and the desired one,l1 but also
are influenced by current cash flow needs. We define this cash flow
deficit   as the change in the firm's debt—assets ratio that Mould be
required for the firm     to finance its new investment   out of internal funds

and borrowing, while at the same time maintaining dividends at their trend

level and avoiding the issuance of new shares. The motivation for this

variable is that   both   new share issues and dividend cuts are activities

generallytaken to be costly to the firm: the former because of tax
considerations, the latter because of the undesirable signal it my
convey.12
            The cashflow deficit variable is constructed by subtracting from
the sum of gross investment and trend    dividendsl3 (uses) the sum of'

after—tax cash flow (after—tax earnings plus depreciation) and the product
of the current debt—assets ratio and gross investment (sources), and
dividing the difference by assets. This variable equals zero when
investment and trend dividends can be exactly covered by internal funds
                                               —13—


plus borrowing at the current debt—assets ratio. If it is positive, an

increase in the debt—assets ratio will be needed if dividend cuts and new

share   issues are to be avoided.
           This variable differs from the standard "external deficit"
variable in its inclusion of trend rather than actual dividends. Moreover,
it includes borrowing at the current debt—asset        ratio on the sources side

because   the partial adjustment nodel is expressed in debt—asset ratios
rather than in levels of debt. Fbrimalating the model in this way allows us
to distinguish between increases in the level of debt as the firm grows and
fluctuations araind this trend that result in changes in the incentives to
use debt finance.14
            The basic model, then1 is of the form:


(s)         Abit     xo(b
                               —
                                   bit1)   +
                                               Yofit

Where fft is the firm's deficit as just defined, bit is the firm's ratio of
debt to assets, (the latter equal to its fixed capital stock plus working
capita) and

(4)         b7 =
is the firm's long run target        debt—assets ratio based on the determinants


fit.
            The model that distinguishes between the ratio of long—term debt
to assets (L)      and   that of short—term debt to assets (s) has two equations
of a forni similar to (3):
                                                   l4—


(5a)         it = x1(t; — L_)                 +          —          +



(5b)         As1       = A2t       —          +          —          +



where each equation includes not only its own gap between desired and

actual levels but        that     from the other equation. Similarly, we define £*

and 8* by:



(6a)               =



(6b)     sat a_2 •         ..it


             Because     we mice no prior distinction between the variables
determining    £* and those determining s", the vectors                  and a2 can not be

identified using equations (5a) or (5b) alone (unless the cross effects

and A2 are zero). However, they are exactly identified by the equations

together. Further, since the two              equations      have the same set of explana-

tory variables, naximum           likelihood      estimation of the system is accomplished

by performing ordinary least squares on the equations separately.

             The vector                includes dumnr variables for each firm and for

each year (save the last). The former are included to account for

interfirm differences in the desired ratio of debt to assets, while the

latter are intended to pick up year to year differences in the incentive to

borrow that    are     common across firms,        as might be caused by macroeconomic
fluctuations (e.g., changes in the inflation rate or the term structure).
Indeed, an interesting side result of the estimation procedure is the
                                        —15—


pattern   of these dumn' variables over time.
            Also available are many other measures of firm attributes, but
most of these are either constant or change slowly over the sample period,
making it impossible to include them in regressions along with the
individual   firm effects. Only the firm's tax loss carryforward has
sufficient year—to—year variance to be included in the initial estimation
procedure. The remainder, however, may be used in a second estimation
stage to explain the variation in the individual firm constants, in a
cross—section regression. The need for this two stage procedure would be
obviated if the firm dummies were omitted from the first estimation stage,
and the various firm characteristics included in the vector x directly.
However, such a procedure would introduce a large, firm specific error

(equal    to the unexplained part of the firm's own   fixed   effect) that   would

likely    be correlated with other explanatory variables, leading to
inconsistent    estimation.15


IV. Data

            The data   used in this paper come from three sources. The basic
data on firms come     from a copy of the Compustat tape covering the    years
1958 to 1977.     Worn   this tape, we selected those firms for which all obser-
vations of a subset of key variables were available. Long—term debt
corresponds to the Couçustat category of all debt maturing in nre than one
year. &iort—term debt also includes long—term debt maturing within one
year.     Thtal assets equals fixed capital, plus inventories, plus other

current assets net of non—debt current liabilities. (An alternative

approach    to the measuremant of total assets is to use the total market
                                          —16—


value of equity plus debt. This is discussed below in Section V.) Balance

sheet and income statement data on long—term debt, capital, inventories and

earnings were corrected from book value through a series of steps described

in detail in Auerbach (1984). We review these steps briefly below.

            Long—term debt was converted, to market value using assumptions

about the initial age structure of such debt in 1958, the maturity of new

issues, and the coupon rate on such issues. From this corrected data

series, we calculated the change in the market value of outstanding long

term debt due to interest fluctuations, adding this plus the inflation gain

on   net financial liabilities (long—term debt plus short—term debt less
financial assets) to book earnings.
            Inventories were corrected according to information on the pri-
mary method of inventory accounting used by each firm.        The   inventory
valuation adjustment so obtained was subtracted from book earnings to
correct for their inclusion of excess inventory profits.
            Depreciation   was estimated by- assuming that book   depreciation is
correct   except for the fact that it is based on initial asset prices. The

method used calculates that     rate   of declining balance (exponential) depre-

ciation, 6,that, when applied to a perpetual inventory calculation for
updating capital stocks beginning with the 1958 book value for net fixed
capital, yields the stated 1971 book value.        (If all assets actually were

written   off, and did depreciate, at a single rate, this calculation would
yield   the correct rate.) Using this estimate of 6, we generated a cor-
rected series for capital stocks and depreciation using the perpetual
inventory   method, starting in 1958. As with debt and inventories, the dif—
                                       —17—



ference   between corrected and book depreciation was subtracted from book

earnings. The measure of corrected cash flow entering into the computation

of the cash flow deficit f is simply the sum of corrected after—tax profits

plus corrected depreciation.

           After such corrections, all variables were deflated to be

expressed in constant dollars rather than current dollars. hch firm's

earnings   growth rate was estimated   by   fitting   a quadratic trend over the

period 1963—1971   for the firm's corrected earnings, before interest but
after taxes, and taking the growth rate along this trend at the sample
midpoint, 1970. The variance of firm earnings was approximated by the
sample variance around this trend, normalized by the squared trend value in
1970.
             A second source of data is the actual 1GC reports filed by the
individual   firms. These reports contain more detailed information than is

provided   by Compustat. In particular, many firms list        separate capital

stocks, depreciation and investment for several classes of capital. The

most detailed common breakdown is transportation equipment, other equip-

ment, structures and land, with sane firms aggregating the first two and

last two of these categories. Firms that did not provide uninterrupted

data between 1969 and 1971, or that did not follow this general asset class-

ification, were omitted from the sample. For the remainder, disaggregated,

corrected capital stocks were created following the perpetual inventory

method described above, using 1968 and 1971 net capital stocks and investment

and depreciation reported for the intervening years. 9ich capital stocks

were not used directly, but were divided by their annual sum to generate
                                             — lb—



capital stock fractions. These fractions were averaged over time for each
firm and used in the second estimation stage as explanatory variables.
             Of the 189 firms for which capital stocks by asset category were
conuted, 1149 have separate categories for land and structures, while 140
combine the two into a single category. Forty firms report separate sta-
tistics for transportation equipment, while the remaining firms lump all
equipment together. The average capital stock depreciation rates derived
for each category appear realistic, though there is substantial variance in

these rates across firms. The sumnary statistics for these depreciation

rates are reported in Table 1.            (It should be remembered       that   the equipment

category    includes all equipment for 1149 firms, and that             the structures

category    incliHes land as well for iO firms.)              The   category nans are quite
consistent    'with estinates of economic depreciation found in the litera-

ture. i6




                                       Table 1
                                  Depreciation       Rates
                           Number
Category                       Observed                      Mean                 Variance


Structures                      189                          .072                    .006

Land                            1149                         .025                   .010
Equipuent                       189                          .138                   .010

Transportation                   140                         .225                   .010
Equipment                  .




            In the regressions reported in this paper, we omit the                firms    for

which no structures/land breakdown is available, and add together the
                                               —19—



equipment   categories for those linus          reporting transportation       equipment

separatei.y. This leaves us with 1b3 firms in the final sample.1?

            The final source of data is the CRSP tape, which provided daily

return and dividend data. In an earlier paper (Auerbach, 1983), we per-

formed a    series of regressions on daily data            for each of the rinG in our

sample,   using observations for every tenth trading              day   between 1963 and

19T7 plus   all days on which the firm's common stock went ex dividend. The
regressions   were of   the form:


                    00 + Oidt   +         +
                                    e2m       O3r
where      and   d. are the stock's capital gains per dollar of stock and divi-

dend per dollar, respectively, and m and r are the rate of change in the

Standard    and Pbor's Index and the Treasury bill rate. This equation
derives from a      version of the Capital Asset Pricing ?tdel with progressive

personaltaxes, with 02 a measure of the firm's "beta". The term 61 ought
to be —1 in the absence of taxes. Over the sample of firms for which (7)
was estimated, 01 has an average of —.787. Under certain assumptions, this
divergence    may   be attributed to      the differential taxation of dividends and

capital gains, and the variation in 01 across firms may be traced to dif-

ferences in tax clienteles.lB The estimated values (Oi+l) are used in the

present paper as estimates of the clientele tax rate and beta of each firm.

To estimate the variance in value             for   each firm, we take the variance over

this    same sample   (excluding ex dividend days)          of   each firm's proportional

capital gains,          which yields a        normalized   measure of the variance of the

firm's equity value, and xmaltiply it by the sample                ratio   of equity to debt
                                            —20—



plus   equity for the firm, yielding an overall volatility measure analogous

to   the "unlevered" beta.

V. Estimation Results
            For convenience, we rewrite the one—equation and two—equation
models   here:



(kie equation

            Abit =x(b*
                   0 it
                        —b
                         it—i
                              )+yf
                                 Qit

             it a_O• _]t
            b!       x.


Two equations
            AL
                 it         1 it
                       A(L* —L it—i          I it —s it—i     lit
            As
                 it    A(L*
                        2 it
                             —L it—i        2 it     —sit—l)+vf
                                                              2it

            Lit a •xit ' It
                      ..l
                                   =
                                       _2     .,it



            The measure of total assets by which we divide measures of debt

to form ratios includes corrected book values of both fixed capital and

working capital, as described in Section IV. However, one could argue that

an   alternative, market value—based measure is preferable, one that simply
adds up the value of all claims against the firm, including common and
preferred stock, long—term debt and short—term debt. The benefit of
using the second method is that it nay more accurately reflect the value of
a firm's than any measure based on book values, even "corrected" ones. For
example, a firm with ener'—intensive plant and equipment would suffer a
loss in value if enerr prices rose unexpectedly, because the discounted
value of the quasi—rents anticipated to flow from its assets would fall.
If measured properly, this would appear as capital stock depreciation, but
such a measure is difficult to obtain except indirectly through narket
valuation. Similarly, a firm with large amounts of income from intangibles
(goodwill,    patents, nnopoly rents, etc.) may have a    comprehensive stock of
income—generating    assets nuch larger than the measured capital stock.

Arguing against the use of the value—based method is the uncertainty about

the equilibriun ratio of market value to the correctly measured value of

assets. This aunts to a question about the long—run         value   of Tobin's q.

For example, under a Miller—type equilibrium with retained earnings serving

as the marginal source of finance, firms      would be indifferent in their
choice   of debt—equity ratio but the value of debt plus equity would

increase   with leverage (Auerbach, 1979) .19 In   addition, it is unclear how

nich firms react to volatile year—to—year fluctuations in value in          -




determining    desired levels of debt.

             Since each of these methods of   defining assets has arguments in
Its   favor, we estimated regressions for both the book—based (Method i) and

market—based (Method ii) asset measures. The results for the first

estimation stage were relatively similar, so only those for Method I are

discussed in the text. These are shown in Table 2. (An analogue to 'lble

2 for t&thod II is presented and discussed     in the Appendix.)
             The attribute vector, x, includes firm dummies, time dummies, and

the previous year's tax loss carryforward.20 The estimates are for the

period 1969—1977, for which data on all variables described above were

available.
                                       —22—
                                    Tah1
                              Models of' Borro.zThj

                                   (2.1)                 (2.2)           (2.3)
                                    All                Long—Term
Dependent Variable              Borrowing (a)         Borrowing (u)   Borrowing   (as)


Independent Variable

  Lagged    Debt   (b)             —.274
                                   (.021)

  Lagged Long—Term Debt (t)                             —.3o             .040
                                                        (.021)          (.005)

  Lagged Short—Term Debt (s)                             .201           —- 738
                                                        (.108)          (.026)

  Cash Flaw Deficit (r)            —.015                 .005           —.012
                                   (.029).              (.028)          (.067)

  Tax    less Carryforward (x103) —.356                 —.296           —.031
                                   (.139)               (.136)          (.032)
  Firm Dummies (mean)               .070                 .010            .002

Year Dummies

  1969                             —.010                —.011
                                   (.005)               (.003)          (.ooi)

  1970                             —.027                —.031            .004
                                   (.005)               (.005)          (.ooi)
  1971                             —.015                —.017            .004
                                   (.005)               (.005)          (.ooi)

  1972                             —.008                —.007            .001
                                   (.005)               (.005)          (.001)

  1973                            —.009                 —.009            .001
                                   (.oos)               (.005)          (.001)

  1974                            —.018                 —.018           —.001
                                   (.oo)                (.005)          (.ooi)

  1975                            —.0148                —.049            .001
                                  (.005)                (.005)          (.001)

  1976                            —.020                 —.020            .001
                                  (.005)                (.005)          (.001)

 SSR                              2.53                  2.31             .136

                                    .208                 .239            .467


Standard errors in parentheses.
                                       —23—



            The first column of Th.ble 2 shows the estimates for the single
ecjuation model, while the second and third present the reduced form

estimates for the two equation model. An interesting feature of all three

regressions is the relatively large size of the coefficient on the own

lagged variable ——   the annual adjustment speed. These speeds, 27.4 percent
per year for all debt, 30.4 percent for long—term debt, and 73.8 percent

for   short—term debt are particularly large given that they relate not to
levels of debt but ratios of debt to assets. A second point is that the
cross effects between long—term and short—term debt are both positive and
significant, indicating a substitutability of the two forms of finance.
The cash flow deficit is insignificant in all three equations, a somewhat
surprising    result. It suggests, for example, that a drop in cash flow,

holding investment constant, will not affect borrowing independently of

other factors. This is rather implausible, and suggests that a more

elaborate specification would be useful. The tax loss carryforward is

negative in all three regressions, as predicted, and significant in the

first two.

             From the estimates in ¶Ikble 2, we can solve for the annual

desired debt—asset ratios for any    firm. As a representative example, we
consider a firm with no cash flow deficit     and   no tax loss carryforward, and
with   a firm effect equal to the mean of such effects over firms (shown in

Table 2).

            The estimated targets b*, £*   and s' for debt in each sample year

are    shown in Thble 3.21 The numbers are reasonable in magnitude, compared
to    observed aggregate debt—asset ratios. None of the three series shows
                                       Tb1e 3
                        Estimated Desired Debt—Asseti, F-ttioct

                (3.1)                 (3.2)             (3.3)          (3.4)
                All                Long—Term         Short—Term
Year         Borrowing (b*)       Borrowing   (t')   Borrowing (s*)   (t*+s*)

                  t
1969            .281.                 .185              .017           .202

1910            .157                  .136              .016           .152

1971            .202                  .1814             .017          .201
1972            .227                 .214              .0114          .228
1973            .225                 .208              .015           .223
19714           .189                 .1T8              .011           .189

1975            .080                 .073              .007           .080
1976            .184                 .171              .013           .184
1977            .256                 .239              .015           .254

 Calculated for a firm with mean fixed effect and no cash flow deficit or tax
 loss carryforward.
any noticeable   trend over the period, and the estimates tend to nov'
together. An indication that the aggregate equation fits reasonably well
relative to the two equation system comes from the fact that the sum of the

estimated values of s and j* is generally very close to b*. The year to
year   movements reflect those actually observed in the aggregate (see, for

example, the statistics in Robert Taggert's paper in this volume), such as

the decline in leverage from 1973 to 1915 and increase thereafter to 1911.

However, the movements from year to year in Table 3   are   larger in

magnitude, since they reflect changes in long—run targets rather than

actually attained values.

            We turn next to the second stage of our estimation, that of

explaining differences in the desired debt—assets ratios of different finns

using finn characteristics. We perform cross section regressions for

long—term debt, short—term debt, and all debt, with the dependent variables

in the regression being the estimated structural coefficient of the finn's

dumury variable in the expressions for L, s and bTM, respectively. Because

the two methods of defining total assets (corrected book versus value)

provide somewhat different results, we present both sets, in Tables 4 and     5,


respectively.    The explanatory variables in each table, all described

above, are "unlevered" variances of finn value and earnings, the firm's

"clientele tax rate" estimated from ex dividend day regressions, the

estirated rate of depreciation of the firm's capital stock, and variables

reflecting the composition of the firm's assets. For the first definition

of assets (corrected book value) we include the fraction of fixed capital

accounted for by structures, equipment, and land (which sum to one),
                                     —26-


multiplied by the ratio of fixed capital to total assets. This yields the

fraction that each component of fixed capital accounts for of the firm's

total assets, fixed and current. The coefficients of these fractions may

be interpreted as the optimal debt—assets ratio for the particular type of

asset, relative to that for current assets. When the market value—based

measure of assets is used, we mist adopt some convention for allocating the

difference between market value and the value of assets carried over from

the   first measure. We choose to aflocate the entire difference to
intangible assets previously unaccounted for, and include in the regression
the fraction of the new capital stock measure represented by goodwill (the
remaining three fractions, for structures, land and equipment, are scaled up
or down accordingly). This fraction has a highly significant and negative
coefficient in all three regressions reported in ble 5. The absolute
value of the coefficient on goodwill is nearly as large as that of the
constant in the aggregate regression, indicating that very little debt is
used to finance goodwill, as we have measured it. This nay be interpreted
in at least two ways. One ny take it as an indication that firms finance
intangible assets with less debt, in accordance with the theory of agency
(at least to the extent that the intangibles indicate more discretion on
the part of the finn's managers). On the other hand, this finding nay also

reflect the possibility that managers base their borrowing decisions on

book asset measures (perhaps corrected for inflation) but not on stock

market values.

           Except for the asset composition variables, the explanatory

variables have very similar coefficients in the two tables, although they
are not necessarily consistent with the predictions of the various theories
discussed in Section II. The clientele tax rate variable is always
insignificant, perhaps reflecting on its quality as a tax rate prov. The
growth rate and variance of earnings always have positive coefficients,
usually significant. Neither of these results has an obvious explanation.
The rate of capital   depreciation always exerts a positive effect, which also

was not predicted. However, this effect is only significant for short—term

borrowing,   consistent with the notion of nturity—matching. The variance
of   value does perform as predicted, but   never   significantly so. All   in
all,   these results provide rather negative evidence with respect to all of

the theories of leverage presented above.
         The coefficients of the capital stock fractions differ
considerably between bles 1 and 5, presumably because of the inclusion
in the   latter table of the goodwill fraction. When     the first,
corrected—book neasure of assets is used, only equipment has a significant
coefficient, which is positive. When goodwill is added both to the ntasure

of assets and to the regression as a fraction of the new asset ntasure, the

coefficient of structures beconts significantly negative, and that     of    land

significantly positive.    While there is no indication that    structures are

financed with greater leverage than equipment, the instability of these

results is quite disturbing. Given that the allocation of the entire

difference between market and corrected book values to goodwill is

arbitrary and not necessarily appropriate, it is quite difficult to draw

conclusions here.
                                              —2$-
                                         Thbie L
                          Firm   Characteristics and Borrowing


                                     (5.1)               (4.2)              (14.3)
Dependent Variable                   All               Long—Term          Short—Te rm
(Finn Effect)                    Borrowing     (b*)   Borrowing    (&*)   Borrowing (*)


Constant (xA)                         .177                .i86              —.007
                                     (.053)              (.o48)              (.007)
Variance of Value (x103)             —.117              —.119                 .009
                                     (.096)              (.067)              (.012)

Clientele Tax Rate                   —.017              —.020                .022
                                     (.025)              (.022)             (.003)

Variance of Earnings                  .290                .239               .044
                                     (.131)              (.119)             (.017)

Growth Rate   of   Earnings           .409                .416               .012
                   .                 (.175)              (.159)             (.022)

Rate of Capital                       .2143               .1614              .057
Depreciation                         (.229)              (.207)              (.029)

Fraction Structures                   .271                .278               .012
                                     (.303)              (.274)             (.039)

Fraction land                        —.205               —.260               .027
                                     (.325)              (.295)             (.041)

Fraction Equipment                    .166                .136               .024
                                     (.061)              (.055)              (.007)

SSR                                  1.35                1.10                 .022

2                                     .157                .145                .157


Standard errors in parentheses.
                                            —29—

                                       Table 5
                        Firm   Characteristics and Borrowing
                           (Alternative Assets Definition)

                                   (5.')              (5.2)            (5.3)
Dependent Variable                 All              Long—Term        Short—Term
(Finn Effect)                  Borrowing (b*)      Borrowing (L*)   Borrowing    (*)
Independent Variable

 Constant (xA)                      .187               .191             .002
                                   (.oIo)             (.038)           (.006)

Variance of Value (x103)          —.080               —.086             .006
                                   (.ois)             (.070)           (.oi')

Clientele Tax Rate                 —.007              —.010             .003
                                   (.019)             (.017)           (.003)

Variance of Earnings                .189               .148             .031
                                   (.116)             (.110)           (.017)

Growth Rate                         .640               .591             .044
                                   (.166)             (.156)           (.024)

Rate of Capital                     .2214              .175             .0142
Depreciation                       (.180)             (.170)           (.026)
Fraction   Structures              —.548              —.480            —.   o6
                                   (.227)             (.2114)          (.033)

Fraction Land                       .652               .563             .079
                                   (.206)             (.195)           (.030)
Fraction Eiuipnent                  .012              —.006            —.004
                                   (.042)             (.040)           (.oo6)
Fraction   Goodwill                —.159              —.142            —.015
                                   (.033)             (.032)           (.oo5)
SSR                                 .786               .697             .017

                                    .511               .484             .371

Standard errors in parentheses.
                                             —30—


VI. Conclusion

            Our   partial adjustment models of borrowing suggest rapid speeds of
adjustment, particularly          for short—term debt, and desired ratios of debt,

and   its long—term and short—term components, to assets during the period
1969—19T7 that, while not constant, exhibit no obvious trend. Some firm

characteristics      are insignificant in explaining cross—sectional differences
in leverage, while others appear to contradict           the prediction of various

theories in their impacts. The effects of firm growth rates on the level

of borrowing is inconsistent with the predictions of "agency" models of

leverage.    The positive effects of earnings variance on borrowing appears

to contradict the "tax shield" borrowing model, but            the   tax loss

carryforward      has   the   negative effect that   this model would predict.
            The   results do not indicate that firms      borrow more to invest in

structures   than in equiçxnent but the results here vary substantially
according to the measure of assets used. Richer models of firm behavior
appear to be required before more definitive conclusions can be reached.
                                       —31—



                                      Appendix


         This    appendix presents in Th.ble 2.A the first—stage estimation
results for the alternative definition of firm assets, based on unrket
value rather than corrected book value. The only important difference is
in the significant coefficients in all three equations of the cash flow
deficit, which had insignificant coefficients in all three equations in
Table 2. One suspects that this result is attributable to large short—run
fluctuations in value being ignored by firms. For example, a large decline
in the value of the firm would increase the cash flow gap, since "normal"
debt increases (the current debt to assets ratio multiplied by the change
in assets) would be negative. At the saa time, the observed change in the
debt—assets   ratio would be positive, even if there were no change   in   the

level of debt,   because   of the decline in the value of assets. It is

difficult in this undel to distinguish between the hypothesis that firms

simply ignore changes in value, and the hypothesis that the reduction in
desired debt is just offset by the increase in the cash flow deficit. To
sort out this problem, one would need a model that disaggregates different
sources of the cash flow deficit.
                                           Thbie 2k
                  Models of Borrowing: Alternative Assets Definitiou
                                       (2.Al)            (2.A2)           (2.3A)
                                       All             Long—Term        Short—Term
Dependent Variable                  Borrowing (Ab)    Borrowing (AL)   Borrowing (As)


Independent Variable

 Lagged Debt (b)                       -.44i
                                       (.021)

 Lagged Long—Term Debt U)                                —.437             .032
                                                         (.022)           (.005)

 Lagged Short—Term Debt       (s)                        —.171
                                                         (.112)           (.026)
 Cash    flow Deficit (r)               .346              .318             .025
                                       (.019)            (.019)           (.oo4)

 Tax   Loss carryforward (x103)         .051              .063             .042
                                       (.157)            (.153)           (.036)
 Firm    tkznimies   (Mean)             .101              .099             .003
Year   Dummies:

  1969                                 —.032             —.039             .003
                                       (.006)            (.oo6)           (.001)

  1970                                 —.038             —.043             .005
                                       (.006)            (.oo6)           (.ooi)

  1971                                 —.043             —.044             .003
                                       (.oo6)            (.oo6)           (.001)

  1972                                 —.035             —.034             .0004
                                       (.oo6)            (.oo6)           (.ooi)

  1973                                  .009              .005             .004
                                       (.oo6)            (.oo6)           (.ooi)

  1974                                  .025              .022             .003
                                       (.oo6)            (.006)           (.001)

  1975                                 —.046             —.050             .002
                                       (.oo6)            (.oo6)           (.ooi)

  1916                                 —.024             —.025             .002
                                       (.006)            (.006)           (.ooi)

SSR                                    3.17              2.97              .i6i


                                        .542              .532             .1i70




Standard   errors in parentheses.
                                               —33--



                                     Footnotes


1. See Hulten and Robertson             (1982).

2. For example, see the Economic Report                of   the President (1962), or
      Hulten and Robertson (1982).
3.    A   justification for the use of effective tax rates in welfare analy-
      sis is given by Auerbach (1982).
4.    Such     a fraction is    typical   of the time    series   debt—capital ratios
      calculated      by Gordon and Malkiel (1961).

5. Gordon and Maikiel (1981) present results suggesting a value between

      .2 and .3, versus a corporate tax rate (historically) of at least .46.

6.    See, for example, Scott (1976).

7. See, for example, Miller (1971).

8. This foflows from the fact that the user cost of capital to which

      the mrginal product of capital              will be set equals
      c = q(r+6)(l_t6+1')
                     r+6
                          )/(l—r), where q is the relative capital

      goods price. Therefore, taxable income as a fraction of assets,
       cIC—óqK
                 ),   equals   (—)r(l—a).
          qK                   l-t


 9.   This results from a 15 percent deduction and a 10 percent investment
      tax credit, which shields income of 22 percent.
10. One      would    subtract not    taxes   actually paid but    those   that   would   be

     paid by the firm were it entirely financed by equity.
11. This partial adjustment specification imposes a common, geometric lag
      structure on the different determinants of the desired ratio of debt
      to assets. Fxrther research on this topic might consider more
                                        — 34—




       general    lag specifications to determine whether these restrictions an
       justified.
12. These points are quite common in literature. See, for example,
       Auerbach    (i98i).

13. Trend dividends are calculated by regressing the firm's annual

       dividends on a constant, time   and time squared over the period
       1963—1977.

1IJ.   An alternative approach, used in an earlier version of'     this paper,
       would be to detrend levels of debt.

15. Additional problems of inconsistency could arise if the remaining

       errors for each firm were correlated over time, even after being

       purged of fixed effects. An attempt to control for this using two

       stage least squares, with the lagged debt—assets ratios and cash flow

       deficit variables regressed in the    first   stage on several lagged

       vaines of the firm's sales proved unsuccessful, in that     the   sales

       variables proved to be very poor instruments. No other obvious

       candidates came to mind. Given the rapid adjustment speeds found in

       the basic ntdel (Table 2 below) and the usual tendency of positive

       autocorrelation to bias such speeds downward, one iy hope that the

       potential problem is not a serious one here.

16. See Hulten and Wykoff (1981) for example.

17.    There are l19 firms with complete capital stock data (see Table i)
       but six had missing values for one of the other explanatory variables,
       the tax loss carryforward.
                                          —3)—


18. These interpretations are not universally accepted. See            the criti-
      cisms of      Miller and Scholes (1982), for example.

19.   This occurs     because   a firm's equity is valued at (A—B). where A

      is the value of a firm's assets, B the value of its debt, and            is

      a constant less than one, based on the relative tax rates on dividends

      and capital gains.

20. In a few cases in which this value was        missing,    we used the one from

      two   years   before.

21. Note that to obtain j* and s*, one mist solve for the structural

      parameters   in a1 and a2 in (6) from the reduced form       estinates of the

      two   equation system for £ and s.
                                        —36—


                                    References

Auerbach, Alan J.     "Wealth Maximization and the Cost of Capital." Quart.
     J. Econ. 93    (August 1979): 1433—41e6.

__________• "Tax Neutrality and the Social Discount Rate." J. Pub. Econ.
     17 (April 1982), 355—372.
__________• "Stockholder Tax Hates and Firm Attributes." .1. Pub. Econ.
     (1983 forthcomIng).
__________      "Taxes,   Firm Financial Policy and the Cost of Capital: An
     Empirical Analysis." J. Pub. Econ., (19814 forthcoming).
___________ and   Mervyn A. King. "Taxation, Portfolio Choice and Debt
     Equity Ratios: A General Euilibriuin Model." Quart. J. Econ.
     (1983 forthcoming).
Black, fisher and Myron Scholes. "The Pricing of Options and Corporate
     Liabilities." .7. Polit. Econ. 81      (May—June   1973), 637—54.
DeAngelo,    Harry and Ronald Masulis. "Optinl Capital Structure Under
     Corporate and Personal Taxation." J. Finan. Econ. 8 (March 1980),
     3—81.

Economic Report of the President, 1982.
Gordon, Roger and Burton G. MaflUel. "Corporation Finance." In How Taxes
     Affect Economic Behavior, eds. H.J. Aaron and J.A. Pechman. Washing-
     ton: Brookings, 1981.
Hulten, Charles B. and James t. Robertson. "Corporate Tax Policy and
     Economic Growth: An Analysis of the 1981 and 1982 Tax Acts."
     Urban    Institute Discussion Paper (December 1982).
                                            —37—


__________ and Frank      L. Wykoff. "The Measurement of &onomic DepreciH..
        tion." In Depreciation. Inflation and the       %xation of' Income from

        Capital,   ed. C.R. Hulten. Washington: Urban Inst., 1981.
Jensen, Michael and William Meckling. "Theory of the Finn: Managerial
        Behavior, Agency Costs and Ownership Structure." 3. Finan. Econ.
        3 (October 1916),   305—360.

Merton, Robert. "Theory of Rational Option Pricing." Bell 3. Econ. Ii
        (Spring 1973),   141—163.

Miller, Merton H. "Debt and xes." J. Finance 32 (May 1917),                    261—275.

__________ and Myron S. Scholes. "Dividends and xes: Sonr Empirical
        Evidence." J.    Polit.   Econ. 90 (December 1982) •    1118—1141.

Modigliani, Pranco and Merton H, Miller, "The Cost of             Capital,     Corpora-
        tion Finance, and the Theory of Investment." Amer. Econ. Rev. 46
        (June 1958), 261—297.
___________ and __________.         "Corporate   Income xes   and   the Cost of
        Capital: A Correction." Amer. Econ. Rev. 53           (June   1963),   433_41i3,

Myers,    Stewart. "Determipants of Corporate Borrowing." 3. Finan. Econ.
        5 (November   1971), 141—175.
Ross,    Stephen A. "The Determination of' Financial      Structure: The

        Incentive—Signalling Approach." Bell J. Econ.         8 (Spring 1977),
        23—40.

Scott,    James H. "A Theory of' Optiunl Capital Structure." Bell 3. Econ.                 7

        (Spring 1976), 33—54.

Taggart,    Robert A. "A Model of Corporate Financing Decisions." 3. Finance
        32 (December 1977), 1467—1484.
