NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INEQUALITY
Edward L. Glaeser
Working Paper 11511
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11511
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2005

This essay was written as a chapter for the Oxford Handbook of Political Economy. I am grateful to the
editors, Barry Weingast and Donald Wittman, for extensive comments and editing. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
©2005 by Edward L. Glaeser. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Inequality
Edward L. Glaeser
NBER Working Paper No. 11511
July 2005
JEL No. J0
ABSTRACT

This paper reviews five striking facts about inequality across countries. As Kuznets (1955) famously
first documented, inequality first rises and then falls with income. More unequal societies are much
less likely to have democracies or governments that respect property rights. Unequal societies have
less redistribution, and we have little idea whether this relationship is caused by redistribution
reducing inequality or inequality reducing redistribution. Inequality and ethnic heterogeneity are
highly correlated, either because of differences in educational heritages across ethnicities or because
ethnic heterogeneity reduces redistribution. Finally, there is much more inequality and less
redistribution in the U.S. than in most other developed nations.

Edward L. Glaeser
Department of Economics
315A Littauer Center
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
eglaeser@harvard.edu

1. Introduction

The insight that economics impacts politics as much as politics impacts economics lies at
the heart of political economy. This circle of causation is at the center of research on the
political economy of inequality. Democracy, political stability and executive constraints
all appear to be more feasible in more equal societies. Public policies towards
redistribution and human capital can make societies more equal.
In Section II of this paper, I review the causes of inequality. Recent increases in
inequality in the developed world are in part the result of skill-biased technological
change (Katz and Murphy, 1992), but government policies influence how these
technological changes impact different developed countries (Hanratty and Blank, 1992).
Long-standing differences in inequality across countries may reflect colonialism and
patterns of agriculture, but initial differences in inequality also influenced political
institutions, policies, and structures, which may have exacerbated economic inequality
(as in Moore, 1966, Engerman and Sokoloff, 2002).
In Section III of this paper, I review the second half of the causal chain between
inequality and politics— the impact of inequality on government. In medial voter
models, inequality predicts more redistribution. However, greater inequality can mean
that the wealthy have more resources which can be used to reduce influence. Great gaps
between rich and poor may also hurt democracy and rule of law if elites prefer dictators
who will protect their interests or if the disadvantaged turn to a dictator who promises to
ignore property rights.
In the last section of this review essay, I turn to the special question of “American
Exceptionalism,” which in this context refers to the question of why there is so much less
redistribution and more inequality in the U.S. than in Europe. The differences between
the U.S. and Europe in inequality and redistribution have troubled authors like Friedrich

2

Engels, Werner Sombart and Martin Lipset for more than a century. American
exceptionalism appears to be the result of ethnic heterogeneity and European political
institutions, which have been influenced by numerous revolutions and two World Wars.
A large body of evidence supports the hypothesis that ethnic heterogeneity reduces
support for welfare, and the U.S. is far more ethnically heterogeneous than Europe. The
U.S. also has political institutions including a majoritarian government, federalism, and
checks and balances which have limited the expansion of the American welfare state,
while European countries lack comparable institutions. These institutional differences
are not exogenous, but rather reflect the fact that many European constitutions were
rewritten by left wing politicians when earlier monarchies were defeated militarily.
2. The Political and Economic Causes of Inequality
Most studies of inequality focus of income, but inequality can also be calculated based on
wealth, consumption or any other reasonable proxy for well-being.

Wealth or

consumption have the advantage that they are less subject to short term income shocks,
and the inequality of lifetime earnings is probably more important than the inequality of
transitory earnings. However, because wealth and consumption data are not available in
enough circumstances, most of the empirical work focuses on inequality of annual
income. Consequently, I focus my empirical discussion on that variable. Nevertheless,
improving inequality measures by improving the measurement of permanent well-being
is certainly one research frontier.
Measuring income inequality also requires transforming the distribution of income or
wealth or consumption into a single measure that can be used in standard empirical work.
The literature on this issue parallels the industrial organization literature on market
concentration. The most popular measure of income inequality is the Gini coefficient
which is the difference between the 45 degree line and the Lorenz curve that shows the
cumulative distribution of income. A second measure is the share of total national
income possessed by various subgroups of the population, i.e. the share of total wealth
owned by the richest 5 percent of the population. In some cases, these variables will

3

actually reveal much more than a Gini coefficient, especially if we are interested in
knowing whether inequality matters because the rich are particularly rich or because the
poor are particularly poor. As different measures are usually highly correlated, different
empirical studies that use these different measures often produce quite similar results
(e.g. compare Persson and Tabellini, 1994, with Alesina and Rodrik, 1994).
Inequality over Time
These empirical measures are then used by empirical researchers, who have provided a
series of facts about the correlates of inequality. Perhaps the most famous relationship is
the Kuznets (1955) curve shown in Figure 1. Income inequality first rises and then falls
as countries get richer. This curve points to the initial period of industrialization as the
point of development where inequality is maximized. Indeed, U.S. history shows a
“great compression” during the middle decades of the 20th century (Goldin and Margo,
1992) as the relatively equal period between 1950-1975 followed the far greater
inequality of the Gilded age and pre-depression America. Figure 1 also illustrates
American exceptionalism as the U.S. is much more unequal than other countries of
comparable income.
The Kuznets curve is not just an economic phenomenon; it also reflects political factors.
The general pattern in industrializing nations is that there are few public efforts to
redistribute during early industrialization. During this period, traditional private
providers of charity (churches, charities, families) are expected to look after the bottom
end of the income distribution. As industrialization proceeds, governments almost
universally started taking a more active role in redistribution, which is one reason why
inequality declines with development. Development increases redistribution for at least
three reasons: development is generally associated with greater government size,
probably due to increasing governmental competence; development is associated with
greater education and political skill on the part of poorer citizens, and development
transforms a dispersed agrarian workforce into clustered industrial workers who can
readily be organized.

4

Somewhat surprisingly, given the Kuznets curve, the great compression was followed
within the United States, and elsewhere, by a significant increase in inequality since
1975. Katz and Murphy (1992) conclude that the period of rising inequality in the U.S.
appears to be have been driven by rising demand for more skilled workers. The rise in
demand for the skilled might be the result of a number of different changes including
skill-biased technological change, increasing trade and globalization, the decline of
manufacturing, and unions. Pride of place appears now to be given to changing
technology (Autor, Katz and Krueger, 1998) as the cause of greater inequality, but other
factors also matter.
While most authors seem to believe that rising inequality within the U.S. is the result of
economic as opposed to political changes, the impact of these economic changes is
determined in part by a political filter. Technological changes and increases in world
trade should impact most developed countries in similar ways. Yet the U.S. has
experienced a much more striking increase in inequality than most other comparable
countries (Picketty and Saez, 2003, Blau and Kahn, 1996, Hanratty and Blank, 1992), and
economic forces alone do not appear to explain why inequality rose so much more within
the U.S.
Political factors surely played some role in the greater increase in inequality with the U.S.
At the top of the income distribution, less progressive taxation in the U.S. made it easier
for Americans to become rich and increased the incentives for Americans to acquire large
fortunes (Picketty and Saez, 2003). Stronger unions and centralized bargaining in Europe
increased equality there among industrial and other middle income workers (Blau and
Kahn, 1996). Unions have generally fought inequality among their members, perhaps
because heterogeneity breaks down union cohesion or because of the quasi-democratic
nature of most unions. At the bottom of the income distribution, general unemployment
benefits and restrictive labor market regulations ensure that more of the less productive
European workers leave the workforce and are therefore excluded from measures of wage
inequality.

5

Inequality across Countries
If changes in inequality within the U.S. and other countries are primarily the result of
changing returns to skills and government responses to those changing returns to skill,
differences in inequality across countries are more often caused by differences in the
distribution of skills. In particularly egalitarian countries, like in Scandinavia, the
population is generally well educated and the distribution of skills is quite compact.
Conversely, particularly unequal developing countries like Brazil have enormously
heterogeneous skill levels between educated urban elites and less educated agricultural
workers.
But if the inequality of skills underlies the inequality of income, then the primary puzzle
becomes understanding why skill inequalities are so different across country. Skill levels
today are themselves result both of government policies, and long-standing cultural
forces, like religion or ethnicity, but patterns of national inequality appear to predate the
era of large-scale government schooling (the 19th century). As high levels of inequality
often predate significant government redistribution or schooling, cultural, and religious
causes are probably the first causes of inequality across countries.
Protestant churches sought legitimacy in the Bible (as opposed to the traditions of the
Catholic church) and these churches encouraged literacy to increase familiarity with the
Bible (Weber, 2001). Protestant communities worked to create widespread education
that would ensure that everyone could read, which increased both the level of education
and decreased its variance by raising the lower tail of the distribution.
More importantly, skill inequality seems to come mostly from the juxtaposition of
ethnicities with different educational traditions, and in particular the extent to which new
world countries are made up primarily of Europeans or of mixtures of Europeans and
non-Europeans. As Figure 2 shows, the correlation between ethnic fractionalization and
income inequality is quite strong. Europeans who came to the New World had a

6

significant educational advantage over the natives they conquered, at least in terms of
skills that became valuable in developed economies. Even the great empires of the preColumbian Americas lacked basic modern skills; the Incas had no alphabet.
Inequality then depends significantly on the extent to which nations are populated by
Europeans or mixtures of Europeans and natives. Engerman and Sokoloff (2003) argue
that countries with a comparative advantage in cash crops, such as sugar or tobacco,
attracted small numbers of Europeans who then relied on local and slave labor to farm
these crops. Those countries are less equal to this day. Acemoglu, Johnson and
Robinson (2001) argue that settler mortality determined whether countries attracted large
European migrations (which then largely eradicated the existing native populations) or
smaller scale migrations that then interacted with native and slave labor. Galor, Moav
and Vollarth (2004) present a more general theory of land distribution and long run
inequality.
If populations with heterogenous educational backgrounds are the initial condition
determining modern inequality, the actual distribution of income today also depends on a
large number of government policies towards schooling and redistribution since that
point. Many Asian countries, which once had small European elites and large masses of
uneducated natives, are now both well educated and egalitarian. These transformations
reflect the results of government policies towards education in countries like Singapore,
Taiwan, and South Korea. By contrast, initial skill differences in countries in ethnically
heterogeneous countries were often widened, not eliminated, by subsequent educational
policies which favored the European elites.
Figure 3 shows the strong negative correlation between inequality and social welfare
spending across countries. This correlation reflects both that social welfare reduces
inequality and more initial inequality leads to less redistribution. While some of this
relationship reflects reverse causality, and omitted variables (like income and
fractionalization) that drive both variables, there is little doubt that governments do have

7

the power through tax policy and through spending to alter the income distribution of
their country.
Understanding income inequality across countries also requires understanding the reasons
that a government decides to invest in its children, or to invest in redistribution more
generally. Two factors, apart from inequality itself, appear to be important: ethnic
heterogeneity, and political institutions. Ethnic and racial fractionalization limits the
tendency to redistribute income either because people are less willing to support transfers
to those who are ethnically different, or because ethnic differences provide a means of
demonizing policies that help the poor (Alesina and Glaeser, 2004). Individual data on
opinion polls and voting behavior, cross-state outcomes within the U.S., cross-national
data, and history all support the view that ethnic heterogeneity reduces redistribution.
Luttmer (2001) shows that people are more likely to support redistribution when they live
around poor people of the same race and less likely to support redistribution when they
live around poor people of a different race. Holding income constant, there is also a huge
impact of race on the willingness to support redistribution and vote democratic,
suggesting the significance of race in politics.
Across states within the U.S., the percentage of the population that is black strongly
predicts less generous welfare systems and across countries, ethnic fractionalization
strongly predicts less redistribution; across countries, redistribution also declines with
ethnic heterogeneity (Alesina and Glaeser, 2004). The history of redistribution within the
U.S. points to the importance that race has played at several critical junctures, such as the
fight against the Populists in the 1890s (see Woodward, 1955).
Political institutions, like proportional representation and majoritarianism, also impact the
level of redistribution (Persson and Tabellini, 2003, Miles-Feretti, Perotti and Rostagno,
2002). This literature suggests that majoritarianism induces governments to cater to the
needs of the median voter, while proportional representation ensures the election of
representative who may be particularly focused on the desires of the poor for more
transfers. Likewise, federalism limits redistribution because out-migration of capital and

8

the wealthy serves as a break on the tendency to redistribute income (Qian and Weingast,
1997), except if the government actually wants the rich to flee because the rich represent
its electoral opponents (Glaeser and Shleifer, 2004). Checks and balances are another
force that has tended to restrict the growth of welfare states.
While there is little doubt that political institutions do matter for the level of
redistribution in society, the greater question is whether these institutions should be taken
as first causes or as endogenous factors that reflect deeper social forces (Glaeser,
LaPorta, Lopes-De-Silanes and Shleifer, 2004). Political institutions are hardly all that
permanent. France acquired proportional representation in 1946, with the Fourth
Republic, lost it after the failed right wing coup that ended that government and put
DeGaulle in power, re-acquired it under Mitterand and then lost it when the socialists
realized that proportional representation was helping right-wing extremists. The relative
stability of Anglo-American traditions has often led scholars to vastly overstate the
degree to which political institutions are durable. I will turn to the causes of institutional
change in Section IV when I compare the U.S. and Europe.
3. The Impact of Inequality on Politics
There are three different ways in which inequality might impact political outcomes.
First, rising inequality should impact inequality even within a median voter framework,
where rising inequality leads to a greater desire for redistribution. Second, higher
inequality might reduce redistribution and public good provision because economic
resources determine not only preferences, but the ability to influence political outcomes
as well. Third, economic inequality might influence the whole structure of political
institutions (like democracy) themselves.
The most straightforward prediction of the median voter literature (summarized by
Londregan in this volume) is that redistribution will be popular when the mean income is
higher than the median income (Meltzer and Richard, 1981). If income follows a Pareto
distribution, then an increase in variance will be associated with an increase in the gap

9

between mean and median income. Two of the more influential papers that examine
inequality within a median voter context are Persson and Tabellini (1994) and Alesina
and Rodrik (1994), which both argue that greater inequality will lead to greater
preferences for redistribution, and show a negative empirical connection between
inequality and growth.
The open question with these papers is whether inequality actually increases
redistribution. As shown in Figure 3, empirically there is a strong negative relationship
between inequality and social welfare spending, which seems to contradict this claim.
While this negative correlation might reflect that more redistribution reduces inequality,
it is also possible that more inequality leads to less redistribution rather than more
because in unequal societies the poor lack the resources to push their political agenda.
The median voter model also can explain a connection between inequality and public
good provision. Greater inequality should work like any form of heterogeneity and
decrease the demand for common public goods (Alesina, Baqir and Easterly, 1999). For
example, the rich might want a legal system focused on protecting property while the
poor might be more concerned with preventing interpersonal violence in disadvantaged
areas. Because these groups disagree, there is less willingness to invest in a common
legal system than there would be if the population shared a common set of legal needs.
This is certainly one interpretation of the finding that crime is higher in more unequal
societies (Fajnzylber, Lederman and Loayza, 2002). One natural interpretation of this
connection might be that as inequality rises, the returns to crime increase for the poor
(because rich victims because richer) and the opportunity costs of crime are lower
(because the poor are poorer). Another interpretation is that more unequal societies have
less policing, which does appear to be the case. For example, there are 12,000 police
officers in Bogota, Columbia, and 28,000 police officers in New York City. These two
cities have similar populations, but Columbia is a particularly unequal nation.

10

While the most cited papers on inequality and policy outcomes have focused on results
within a median voter context, inequality of resources will also change the political clout
of different groups. Indeed, the most important impact of inequality may be changing the
power with which the rich and poor can impact outcomes. For example, if the rich can
influence political outcomes through lobbying activities or membership in special interest
groups (Prat in this volume discusses the influence of pressure groups), then more
inequality could lead to less redistribution rather than more. This negative correlation can
be seen in Figure 3. According to this view, as the rich become richer, they acquire a
greater ability to influence policy and achieve the policy goals that they want.
Glaeser, Scheinkman and Shleifer (2003) provide one connecting inequality of resources
with the ability to manipulate political institutions. This model focuses on bribing
judges. It suggests that when the judicial system is sufficiently weak, so that the
expected penalty facing a judge who accepts a bribe is small, then the ability to bribe will
determine the outcome in court. This work emphasizes the subversion of legal and
political processes and argues that this subversion will be more likely in societies where
different actors have unequal access to the resources needed for subversion. Inequality
may lead courts to break down or, as in the Engerman and Sokoloff examples, rich
magnates may use their economic power to make a mockery of popular democracy.
These arguments are related to a third literature on the connection between inequality and
political outcomes which emphasizes that inequality will lead to different political
institutions, and in some cases less democracy (the Przeworski chapter in this volume
discusses the determinants of democracy). Indeed, stable democracy is much more
common in highly equal societies. Dividing the world into more and less equal countries
based on World Bank Gini coefficients shows that 95 percent of the more equal countries
are classified as democracies by Jaggers and Marshall (2000) and only 75 percent of the
less equal societies are classified as democracies.
While the correlation between inequality and democracy might be the result of reverse
causality where democracy reduces inequality, Engerman and Sokoloff (2002) provide

11

compelling historical evidence showing that initial inequality seems to deter the
development of democracy in the new world. Inequality, which was itself the result of
long-run economic factors, led many seemingly progressive groups to oppose extending
the franchise. Educated urban workers feared extending the franchise in many cases
because this would empower rural magnates who would totally control the votes of their
poor employees.
There are many models that predict a causal link between equality and democracy. It
may be that in less equal countries, elites are less willing to share power with the poor
because of fear of expropriation. Alternatively, potential enemies of democracy may find
it easy to build support among the poor. While there is a great deal of history providing
support for both phenomena (Finer, 1962), little empirical work exists to assess the
relative importance of the different stories.
Inequality is not only correlated with dictatorship, but also with other measures of
political problems. For example, Figure 4 shows that inequality is positively correlated
with subjective assessments of the risk of governments expropriating private wealth.
Most similar measures of property rights protection show a negative correlation with
inequality. You and Khagram (2004) indeed find a connection between inequality and
corruption. Again, causal inference is impossible but these correlations are strong and
suggestive and they at least raise the possibility that inequality may be causing bad
government.
4. American Exceptionalism
Few topics in the political economy of inequality have as rich a heritage as the study of
American exceptionalism— why the U.S. is less equal than Europe and why the U.S.
never developed a full fledged European welfare state. Although DeToqueville (1835) is
rightly seen as the first scholar of American exceptionalism, the modern literature really
begins with Friedrich Engels (1959) and Werner Sombart (1976) who asked “why is
there no socialism in the United States.” Seymour Martin Lipset (1966) continued this

12

tradition and became the expert in understanding why socialism never flourished within
the U.S.
Economic, political, and sociological factors could all potentially explain American
exceptionalism. The economic explanations focus on the allegedly higher levels of
economic opportunity within the U.S. Americans do believe that they live in an open
society, and Europeans believe that they live in a closed society. After all, only 29
percent of Americans surveyed believe that the poor are trapped in poverty while 60
percent of Europeans believe that the poor are trapped. 60 percent of Americans believe
that the poor are lazy, while only 26 percent of Europeans share that belief (Alesina and
Glaeser, 2004).
But there is little reality behind those views. Gottschalk and Spolaore (2002) look at
income mobility in the U.S. and Germany and find that 60 percent of the members of the
bottom quintile of the income distribution in the U.S. in 1984 remained in that quintile in
1993, while only 46 percent of Germans in the bottom quintile of their income
distribution remained in that bottom quintile 9 years later. Checchi, Ichino and
Rustichini (1999) find similar results when comparing intergenerational mobility in the
U.S. and Europe. Alesina and Glaeser (2004) survey a wide range of evidence and find
little evidence supporting economic explanations for American exceptionalism. In the
next section, I will discuss why views about economic mobility differ so much between
the U.S. and Europe when reality doesn’t look all that different.
Standard median voter theory provides little ability to explain the differences between the
U.S. and Europe. The U.S. income distribution is more variable and skewed to the right
than the European income distribution. In a standard median voter model, both of these
factors predict that there should be more redistribution in the U.S., not less. There is no
evidence that the U.S. tax system is more inefficient than European tax systems.
Privately, Americans are much more generous than their European counterparts, so it is
hard to believe that the lack of an American welfare system just reflects some lack of
American generosity.

13

Two factors appear to explain America’s low level of redistribution and greater level of
inequality: ethnic heterogeneity and political institutions. As I discussed above, ethnic
fractionalization appears to be strongly correlated with low levels of redistribution across
countries, and America is far more ethnically heterogeneous than Europe. European
countries are remarkably homogenous, either because nations engaged in strong
homogenizing policies or because current nations reflect ethnically homogenous areas
that broke away from former empires. America is a nation of immigrants and kidnapped
slaves, and there has never been a policy of homogenization comparable to that followed
in France, for example, in the late 19th century.
The importance of ethnic fractionalization is not only seen in cross-national regressions.
As mentioned above, there is a significant correlation between the percentage of the
population that is black in a state and less generous welfare payments. Opinion polls
within the U.S. also confirm the role of race in attitudes towards redistribution. Perhaps
most convincingly, there is abundant historical evidence showing the role that racial
divisions have played in stemming the rise of the American left. The New York City
Draft riot, which was America’s bloodiest riot and labor uprising, petered out in part
because the German rioters turned on the Irish. In the 1870s and 1880s, conflicts
between natives and immigrants bedeviled the labor movement. In the 1890s, Southern
conservatives used racism to discredit their populist opponents whose policies would
have enriched poor blacks. In 1928, anti-Catholicism was used against Democrat Al
Smith in the 1928 election. In the 1960s, the powerful Democratic political coalition fell
apart over issues of race and civil rights in the South. Racial divisions do not
automatically breed dislike, but they do make it possible for political entrepreneurs to
build distrust and even hatred.
Using the coefficient from an international regression where redistribution is regressed on
ethnic heterogeneity and other controls, the differences in ethnic heterogeneity between
the U.S. and Europe can explain one-half of the difference in redistribution between these
two regions. Of course, the view that America’s ethnic fractionalization explains the lack

14

of redistribution is not new. Friedrich Engels himself emphasized the divisions between
natives, immigrants and blacks as a reason why America didn’t have a socialist party.
But racial heterogeneity is not the only reason for American exceptionalism. There are a
number of differences in political institutions between the U.S. and Europe that also help
explain the smaller U.S. welfare state. As discussed earlier, there is a strong link across
developed countries between proportional representation and the level of redistribution.
This link shouldn’t surprise any student of European history—in the early 20th century,
workers’ parties regularly lobbied for the introduction of proportional representation
because they thought that this would strengthen their electoral chances. Using the
coefficient on proportional representation from cross-country regressions, the difference
in this one institution between the U.S. and Europe can explain the smaller U.S. social
welfare state (Alesina and Glaeser, 2004).
The strong relationship between proportional representation and redistribution across
countries reflects more than just a causal effect of this one institution. Proportional
representation tends to accompany a wide range of institutions which together supported
the rise of the welfare state in Europe, and American majoritarianism is accompanied by
many other political institutions which have helped stem the growth American
redistribution. For example, U.S. traditions of federalism which gave power of welfare to
the States seem to have checked the rise of welfare spending as states limit redistribution
to keep rich people in and poor people out. Checks and balances within the U.S., which
are often weaker in many European countries, also appear to check the growth of
redistribution. In the 1930s, the conservative bloc in the Senate (combining Southern
Democrats and Northern Republicans) blocked the continuing expansion of the New
Deal. In the 1990s, the interactions between Gingrich’s house and Clinton’s presidency
ended “welfare as we know it.”
America also has institutions that are not particularly democratic and that represent past
political views more than current popular enthusiasms. Both the Senate and the Supreme
Court have at various times presented serious roadblocks to the growth of the American

15

welfare state, particularly in the 1930s, but also in the 19th century when the Supreme
Court repeatedly declared that the income tax was unconstitutional. In the late 20th
century, conservative railed against a liberal activist court, but prior to 1950, the Supreme
Court was a steady break on the growth of government regulation, taxation and
redistribution.
While there seems little doubt that American political institutions help us to understand
why the U.S. has much less redistribution and more inequality, these institutions are
themselves hardly the root causes of the differences across the Atlantic. Institutions are
rarely the first causes of anything, but rather just reflect more exogenous differences
between countries. A comparison of European and American political institutions in
1870 would surely tell us that the U.S. has the most liberal, not the most conservative,
institutions among wealthier countries. The United States had widespread suffrage and
gave more power to popular democracies than most European nations. France had an
Emperor, Prussia its King and even England had a powerful entrenched House of Lords.
In the 19th century, the U.S. had institutions that were particularly progressive, not
particularly conservative.
The big difference in political institutions between the U.S. and Europe is the result of
radical change of political institutions in 19th century Europe and the relative stability of
the U.S. Almost every major country in continental Europe had either a full-fledged
revolution (as in Germany, Austria, Portugal, Russia), a general strike whose impact was
quasi-revolutionary (as in Belgium, Sweden, Finland, Switzerland), a civil war (Spain),
or a post-war constitutional revision that completely revamped pre-existing institutions
(France, Italy). Some European countries had more than one of these events.
In small, dense countries, these violent uprisings succeeded in forcing institutional chane
even without externally produced chaos. Belgium, Finland and Portugal all revamped
their institutions (and established proportional representation) before the First World
War. In larger countries, big armies made up of soldiers who were socially isolated from
strikers or revolutionaries served to repress domestic uprisings before 1914. The real

16

watershed was the First World War, when ancient dynasties were first defeated in battle
and then upended by domestic uprisings. Demoralized armies that were made up of
civilian draftees rather than professional soldiers were unwilling or unable to suppress
revolution or strikers in Russia, Germany, Austria-Hungary, Turkey, and Italy. As left
wing groups gained control at the expense of defeated dynasties, they crafted political
institutions that would entrench left-wing power for decades to come. The European
welfare state is, in many cases, built on political institutions which are the legacy of the
chaos and defeats of 1918.
The U.S. then is exceptional, not because it lacked violent strikers or because it lacked a
labor movement, but rather because these groups were unable to force change in the
American constitution through strikes or revolutions. In the late 19th century, in the New
York City Draft riots, in the Homestead strike, and in the Haymarket riots, police and
Pinkertons successfully stopped uprisings. Moreover, because of America’s vast size,
these uprisings happened far from the corridors of power, so they did not really threaten
America’s political leadership. In the 20th century, when the Bonus marchers moved on
Washington, the undefeated, professional America easily dispersed these straggling
veterans with force. America kept its 18th century constitution, with its strong respect for
property rights, because the country did not lose a war on its home soil and the forces of
the government were always easily up to the task of repressing left-wing uprisings. In
Europe, political institutions reflect the chaos of 20th century Europe and the power of
socialist forces during that chaos.
Beliefs about Inequality
This discussion still leaves one final puzzle: why do Americans and European have such
different beliefs about the nature of inequality in their countries. Why do sixty percent of
Americans believe that their poor are lazy and have tremendous opportunities, while sixty
percent of Europeans believe that the poor are trapped? There is no evidence suggesting
that the American poor work less hard than their European counterparts. Indeed, far from

17

being lazy the bottom quintile of the American income distribution works far more hours
than their counterparts in many European countries.
Differences in mobility rates or hours worked do not explain the differences in beliefs. A
far better explanation is that beliefs about inequality and its sources reflect the steady
indoctrination of schools and political leaders. Left-wing leaders find it in their interest
to convince people that the poorer beneficiaries from left-wing policies are good people
sadly beset by forces outside of their control. Right-wing leaders find it equally in their
interest to convince people that the poor are cheats and wastrels and that money spent on
welfare is useless spending on morally deficient individuals.
There is abundant evidence that in schools, speeches, and writing, Americans have
regularly heard the message that they live in a land of opportunity. Interestingly,
Europeans who lived in the right wing regimes of the 19th century heard the same thing.
The textbooks of the French Third Republic featured a shoemaker named Gregoire who
was working his way up the social ladder. The Kaiser was just as adamant that his
schools teach people that working hard will lead to success. The difference between
American and European indoctrination appeared with the triumph of the European left.
Already in the 1890s, German teachers’ unions fought with the Kaiser to teach a different
ideological message. In the aftermath of the First World War, schools in Europe came to
steadily spread Marxist messages of class immobility and consciousness.
As such, beliefs about income mobility and inequality reflect indoctrination and the
political success of the right in the U.S. and the left in Europe, more than they do
anything about reality. This final point provides a fitting caution with which to end this
essay. Much of the academic discussion of inequality is based more on ideology and
indoctrination than on reality. Much of the hostility towards inequality (especially the
wealth of the very rich) reflects political objectives more than hard academic research
about actual costs of that inequality. Likewise, those who argue that using redistribution
to fight inequality will seriously destroy economic growth, often reflect their political
preconceptions more than empirical evidence. Hopefully, future research on inequality

18

will focus more on objective truth and depend less on the ideological orientation of
different researchers.
5. Conclusion
Inequality remains a fascinating topic of research. Across countries, inequality levels
differ wildly and inequality is correlated with a number of important variables.
Inequality appears to be determined by the level of development in a non-monotonic
manner. Inequality also seems to be the result of ethnic heterogeneity, which impacts
inequality both directly, since different ethnicities have different skill levels, and
indirectly through political channels, as people seem less eager to transfer money to
people from a different ethnic group. Inequality is correlated with dictatorship and with
governments that fail to respect property rights. These correlations at least raise the
possibility that inequality is actually a causal variable that leads to worse political
outcomes, but we are far from confident that causality runs from inequality to politics.
The implications of inequality research for public policy are far from clear. Alesina and
Rodrik (1994) suggest that inequality deters growth because inequality leads to costly
redistributionary policies. Even if this were the right interpretation of the small
inequality-growth correlation, then it would hardly make sense to try to fight inequality
with redistribution since, according to this model, redistribution is the problem that
inequality creates. The literature on the political economy of inequality does not give
clear answers on policies, but it does suggest that shifts in inequality may influence
polities in far-ranging, substantial, and often unpredictable ways.

19

References
Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson and James Robinson (2001) “The Colonial Origins of
Economic Development: An Empirical Investigation,” American Economic Review
91(5): 1369-1401.
Alesina, Alberto and Edward Glaeser (2004) Fighting Poverty in the U.S. and Europe: A
World of Difference. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Alesina, Alberto, Reza Baqir and William Easterly (1999) “Public Goods and Ethnic
Divisions,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 114: 1243-1284.
Alesina, Alberto and Dani Rodrik (1994) “Distributive Politics and Economic Growth,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 109(2): 465-490.
Autor, David, Lawrence Katz and Alan Krueger (1998) “Computing Inequality: Have
Computers Changed the Labor Market?” Quarterly Journal of Economics 113(3):
1169-1213.
Blau, Francine and Lawrence Kahn (1996) “International Differences in Male Wage
Inequality: Institutions versus Market Forces,” Journal of Political Economy 104(4):
791-837.
Checchi, Daniele, Andrea Ichino and Aldo Rustichini (1999) “More Equal and Less
Mobile? Education Financing and Intergeneration Mobility in the Italy and in the
U.S.” Journal of Public Economics 74: 351-393.
DeToqueville, Alexis (1835) Democracy in America. London: Saunders and Otley.
Engels, Friedrich (1959) “Why There is No Large Socialist Party in America” in Marx
and Engels: Basic Writings on Politics and Philosophy, Lewis S. Feuer Ed. Garden
City: Anchor Books.
Engerman, Stanley L. and Kenneth L. Sokoloff (2002) "Factor Endowments, Inequality,
and Paths of Development Among New World Economies," Economia 3: 41-102.
Fajnzylber, Pablo, Daniel Lederman and Norman Loayza (2002) “Inequality and Crime,”
Journal of Law and Economics 45(1).
Finer, Samuel (1962) The Man on Horseback: The Role of the Military in Politics.
London: Pall Mall.
Galor, Oded, Omer Moav and Dietrich Vollrath (2004) "Land Inequality and the Origin
of Divergence and Overtaking in the Growth Process: Theory and Evidence" Brown
Economics Working Paper 2003-04.

20

Glaeser, Edward, Rafael LaPorta, Florencio Lopes-De-Silanes and Andrei Shleifer (2004)
“Do Institutions Cause Growth?” Journal of Economic Growth, forthcoming.
Glaeser, Edward and Andrei Shleifer (2004) “The Curley Effect,” Journal of Law,
Economics and Organizations, forthcoming.
Glaeser, Edward, Jose Scheinkman and Andrei Shleifer (2003) “The Injustice of
Inequality” Journal of Monetary Economics.
Goldin, Claudia and Robert A. Margo (1992) "The Great Compression: The U.S.Wage
Structure at Mid-Century." Quarterly Journal of Economics 108: 1-34.
Gottschalk, Peter and Enrico Spolaore (2002) “On the Evaluation of Income Mobility”
Review of Economic Studies 69: 191-208.
Hanratty, Maria and Rebecca Blank (1992) “Down and Out in North America: Recent
Trends in Poverty Rates in the United States and Canada. Quarterly Journal of
Economics 108.
Jaggers, Keith and Monty Marshall (2000) “Polity IV Project” Center for International
Development and Conflict Management, University of Maryland.
Katz, Lawrence and Kevin Murphy (1992) “Changes in Relative Wages, 1963-1987:
Supply and Demand Factors” Quarterly Journal of Economics 107(1): 35-78.
Kuznets, Simon (1955) "Economic Growth and Income Inequality," American Economic
Review 65:1-28.
Lipset, Seymour Martin (1966) American Exceptionalism. New York: W. W. Norton.
Luttmer, Erzo (2001) “Group Loyalty and the Taste for Reditribution” Journal of Political
Economy 109(3): 500-528.
Meltzer, Allan and Scott Richard (1981) “A Rational Theory of the Size of Government,”
Journal of Political Economy 89(5): 914-927.
Miles-Ferretti, Gian Maria, Roberto Perotti and Massimo Rostagno (2002) “Electoral Rules
and Public Spending,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 117: 609-658.
Picketty, Thomas and Emmanuel Saez (2003) “Income Inequality in the United States:
1913-1998” Quarterly Journal of Economics 118(1): 1-39.
Persson, Torsten and Guido Tabellini (2003) The Economic Effects of Constitutions.
Cambridge: M.I.T. Press.

21

Persson, Torsten and Guido Tabellini (1994) “Is Inequality Harmful for Growth?”
American Economic Review 84(3): 600-621.
Qian, Yingyi and Barry R. Weingast (1997) “Federalism as a Commitment to Preserving
Market Incentives” The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 11(4): 83-92.
Sombart, Werner (1976) Why is there no socialism in the United States? London:
Macmillan.
Task Force on Inequality and American Democracy (2004) “American Democracy in an
Age of Rising Inequality” American Political Science Association.
You, Jong-sung and Sanjeev Khagram (2004) "Inequality and Corruption" Hauser Center
for Nonprofit Organizations Working Paper 22; KSG Working Paper Series RWP04001.
Weber, Max (2001) The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism. London:
Routledge.
Woodward, C. Vann (1955) The Strange Career of Jim Crow. New York: Oxford
University Press.

22

Gini Index from World Bank

.
Brazil
South Af

60

Colombia

Zimbabwe
Honduras
Nicaragu Nigeria
Zambia

Venezuel
Panama
Malaysia

Philippi

Peru

Kenya

Ethiopia
Mozambiq

New Zeal

Ecuador
Thailand Turkey

China

Uganda
India
Indonesi

Nepal

Chile
Mexico

US

Jordan
Algeria

UK
Ireland
Portugal Israel
Australi

Banglade
Ghana
Pakistan

South Ko
Egypt

Greece
France Switzerl
Netherla
Spain
Canada
Germany
Italy
Norway
Finland
Belgium
Sweden
Japan
Denmark
Austria

23.1
4.52179

10.4888

Log GDP per capita for 1998

Figure 1: Inequality and Income
Gini Index from World Bank
60

.
Brazil

Paraguay

Guatemal
Colombia

Chile
Mexico

Honduras
Nicaragu

Venezuel
Rep. Dom
Malaysia
Costa Ri

Peru

Philippi
New Zeal
Uruguay

Ecuador
Bolivia
US

Thailand Turkey

Trinidad
India

UK
Australi

Ireland
Portugal

Switzerl Netherla
France
Greece
Spain

Israel

SriLanka

Canada

Germany

23.1

ItalyLuxembur
Norway
Finland
Belgium
Sweden
Japan
Denmark
Austria

0

Ethnic Fractionalization

Figure 2: Fractionalization and Inequality

23

.67821

60

Brazil

Guatemal Paraguay
Colombia
Honduras

Mexico

Papua Nu

Gini Index from World Bank

Chile

Nicaragu

Venezuel
Rep.
Dom
Malaysia
Costa Ri

Philippi
Peru

New Zeal

Ecuador

Uruguay

Bolivia
Turkey
Thailand
Trinidad

US

Nepal
SriLanka

UK
Israel Ireland

AustraliPortugal
Greece

Switzerl
Canada

FranceNetherla

Spain
Germany
Italy

Finland Norway

Japan

Luxembur
SwedenBelgium

Denmark
Austria

23.1
0

20.4706

Social Welfare Spending

Figure 3: Inequality and Redistribution
Risk of Expropriation [0
9.98

Netherla
Switzerl
Germany

Norway
Austria
Denmark
Japan
Finland
Belgium

Canada
France
Spain

Sweden Italy

.
US

UK
Ireland

New Zeal

Australi
Portugal

South Ko

Israel
Malaysia
India
Chile

Thailand
Greece

Brazil

Mexico

Indonesi
Turkey

Venezuel

Colombia
South Af

Uruguay
Ecuador
Egypt
Jordan
SriLanka
Pakistan

Kenya

5.22
23.1

Zimbabwe

Peru
Philippi

Nigeria

Gini Index from World Bank

Figure 4: Inequality and Expropriation

24

62.9

