                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    DO STRONGER INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS
                  INCREASE INTERNATIONAL TECHNOLOGY TRANSFER?
                   EMPIRICAL EVIDENCE FROM U.S. FIRM-LEVEL DATA

                                              Lee Branstetter
                                             Raymond Fisman
                                              C. Fritz Foley

                                          Working Paper 11516
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w11516


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       July 2005

The statistical analysis of firm-level data on U.S. multinational companies was conducted at the International
Investment Division, Bureau of Economic Analysis, U.S. Department of Commerce under arrangements that
maintain legal confidentiality requirements. The views expressed are those of the authors and do not reflect
official positions of the U.S. Department of Commerce. The authors thank Vincent Leung, Changxiu Li,
Grace Lin, and Yoshiaki Ogura for excellent research assistance, and we are grateful to the Columbia
Business School Finance and Economics Division, the Chazen Institute, the Division of Research at the
Harvard Business School, the NBER, the National Science Foundation, and the World Bank Research Group
for financial support. We also thank (without implicating) Ed Glaeser, Jim Hines, Adam Jaffe, Daniel
Johnson, Tarun Khanna, Joshua Lerner, Jim Levinsohn, Jim Markusen, Keith Maskus, Joanna Oxley,
Krishna Palepu, Yi Qian, Michael Riordan, Kamal Saggi, Manuel Trajtenberg, and workshop participants
at the City University of Hong Kong, Columbia University, Harvard Business School, Hitotsubashi
University, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, the University of Michigan, Syracuse
University, the University of Tokyo, Yale, Yokohama National University, and the NBER for helpful
comments. We also wish to express our gratitude to a number of multinational managers, patent lawyers,
accountants, and intellectual property consultants who taught us a great deal about the details of IPR reform
and how firms respond to it. By prior arrangement, these individuals will remain anonymous. All errors are
our responsibility. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by Lee Branstetter, Raymond Fisman and C. Fritz Foley. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Do Stronger Intellectual Property Rights Increase International Technology Transfer? Empirical
Evidence from U.S. Firm-Level Data
Lee Branstetter, Raymond Fisman and C. Fritz Foley
NBER Working Paper No. 11516
July 2005
JEL No. O34, O33, F23

                                            ABSTRACT



This paper examines how technology transfer within U.S. multinational firms changes in response

to a series of IPR reforms undertaken by 16 countries over the 1982-1999 period. Analysis of

detailed firm-level data reveals that royalty payments for technology transferred to affiliates increase

at the time of reforms, as do affiliate R&D expenditures and total levels of foreign patent

applications. Increases in royalty payments and R&D expenditures are concentrated among affiliates

of parent companies that use U.S. patents extensively prior to reform and are therefore expected to

value IPR reform most. For this set of affiliates, increases in royalty payments exceed 30 percent.

Our results collectively imply that U.S. multinationals respond to changes in IPR regimes abroad by

significantly increasing technology transfer to reforming countries.



Lee G. Branstetter                 Raymond Fisman                     C. Fritz Foley
Columbia Business School           Uris 823                           Harvard Business School
Uris Hall 815                      Graduate School of Business        Soldiers Field
3022 Broadway                      Columbia University                Boston, MA 02163
New York, NY 10027-6902            3022 Broadway                      and NBER
and NBER                           New York, NY 10027                 ffoley@hbs.edu
lgb2001@columbia.edu               and NBER
                                   rf250@columbia.edu
1. Introduction

        Over the past twenty years, there has been a global trend toward stronger

intellectual property rights (IPR).1 By the mid-1990s, a minimum global standard for

intellectual property rights had been enshrined in the WTO Charter through the

incorporation of the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights.

The shift in international economic policy making from its traditional postwar focus on

the lowering of tariff and nontariff trade barriers to the embrace of strong IPR is deeply

controversial. Lanjouw (1997) and McCalman (2001), among others, have argued that

the move toward stronger IPR in developing countries may work against national

economic interests, transferring rents to multinational corporate patent holders

headquartered in the world’s most advanced countries, especially the United States. IPR

advocates counter that strengthening IPR will induce more innovation in the global

economy, thereby fostering more rapid economic growth.2 Furthermore, these advocates

claim that even if the additional innovation is mostly concentrated in advanced countries,

a strengthening of IPR will accelerate the transfer of technology between countries,

ensuring that all countries benefit.

        In this paper we attempt to assess this latter claim. We use affiliate-level data on

U.S. multinational firms and aggregate patent data to test if legal reforms that strengthen

IPR increase the transfer of technology to multinational affiliates operating in reforming

countries. Throughout the 1980s and 1990s, a number of countries undertook substantial

reforms of their patent systems. We find that royalty payments for the use or sale of

1
  Maskus (2000) provides an extremely useful summary of this policy history.
2
  Theoretical work by Helpman (1993), Lai (1998), Glass and Saggi (2002), and Grossman and Lai (2005)
demonstrates that this may not occur. The ultimate impact of stronger IPR on the global rate of innovation
depends very much on how multinational firms respond to it.


                                                                                                         1
intangible assets made by affiliates to parent firms, which capture the value of technology

transfer, increase in the wake of strengthened patent regimes. This increase is

concentrated among the affiliates of firms that make extensive use of U.S. patents prior to

reform and is more than 30 percent for this subsample.

        The interpretation that IPR reform results in an increase in technology transfer

among U.S. multinationals is strengthened by the fact that R&D spending by affiliates –

usually viewed as a complement to technology imports from the parent – increases after

IPR reform. Both the level and growth rate of non-resident patenting also increase in the

post reform period, and these changes provide additional indications that at least one

component of the observable increase in licensing flows is associated with the

introduction of new technology following patent reform. Consistent with earlier work,

we find no corresponding reaction in resident patent filings. Collectively, our results

provide evidence that improvements in IPR result in real increases in technology transfer

within multinational enterprises.

        Existing empirical work that analyzes the impact of IPR reforms has a number of

shortcomings. Many studies consider reactions to specific changes in the IPR regime of a

single country, which raises concerns about whether their results generalize. In addition,

these studies focus on the impact of stronger IPR on domestic innovation, omitting

analysis of technology transfer.3 Lerner (2002a, 2002b) analyzes changes in patenting

activity of foreign and domestic issuers following patent reforms in sixty countries over a

150 year period. He finds an increase in patenting activity among foreigners, which is



3
  Evidence on the impact of stronger IPR on domestic innovation is mixed. Scherer and Weisburst (1995),
Bessen and Maskin (2000), Sakakibara and Branstetter (2001), and Lerner (2002a, 2002b) find no positive
impact, while Evenson and Kumar (2001) and Chen and Puttitanum (2005) do find such an effect.


                                                                                                     2
suggestive of increased technology transfer, but he does not directly examine technology

transfer, nor does he study the heterogeneity of responses across firms.

         Other empirical work has tried to identify the effects of IPR reform by analyzing

the cross-sectional relationship between IPR and measures of international trade and

investment at the country or regional level, finding a strong positive effect of IPR on

trade, but a less clear effect of IPR on FDI.4 However, the measures of IPR utilized do

not generally take into account the effectiveness of enforcement, they are highly

correlated with other important country characteristics, and they have limited time-series

variation. Since FDI data are typically not disaggregated, even by industry, it has also

not been possible to look at the impact of IPR reform on the composition of multinational

activity.5 Furthermore, much of this literature addresses the crucial issue of the impact on

technology transfer only indirectly, if at all. 6

         In our examination of the impact of stronger IPR on international technology

transfer within multinational firms, we are able to bring to bear considerably richer data

than has been used by prior researchers. Firm and affiliate-level data for multinationals

operating in multiple countries allow us to deal more effectively with issues of causality

and identification. As a consequence, we are able to offer the strongest evidence to date



4
  For example, Maskus and Penubarti (1995) found a strong positive effect of IPR on imports, and Smith
(1999, 2001) reports results that are consistent with a role for IPR in encouraging U.S. exports. In looking
at the effect of IPR on FDI, Maskus and Eby-Konan (1994) find no effect; Maskus (1998), however, points
out that studies that consider FDI in isolation may not be conclusive because investment is only one part of
the broader set of decisions that a multinational firm makes in entering a market. He reports regressions
that are consistent with a positive effect of IPR on FDI, but only for more developed countries. Yang and
Maskus (2001) examine the impact of IPR on technology licensing.
5
   One recent exception is Javorcik (2004), who examines the composition of FDI in Eastern Europe in the
1990s and relates this composition to differences across countries in IPR regimes. Because this study
focuses on a small number of countries in a single region of the developing world, natural questions arise
about the extent to which these findings can be generalized outside the regional context.
6
   Much of the recent literature on international technology diffusion, reviewed in Keller (2004), ignores
the potential impact of changes in intellectual property rights on knowledge spillovers.


                                                                                                           3
for the proposition that stronger IPR enhances at least one kind of international

technology transfer.

         The rest of this paper is structured as follows: Section 2 puts forth the hypotheses

we test and our empirical specifications. Section 3 describes the data, and Section 4

discusses the results. Section 5 concludes with a brief explanation of the implications of

our results for the ongoing international policy debate as well as the economic literature.

2. Intellectual Property Rights and Technology Transfer

         One of the potential benefits of strengthening intellectual property rights is that

such protections may induce foreign firms to produce and sell technologically advanced

goods in the reforming country. Surveys of multinational managers suggest that

technology transfer within multinational firms is sensitive to the perceived strength of

IPR protection.7 When a firm transfers sensitive technology to an affiliate, it generally

has to instruct local engineers and other local skilled workers concerning key elements of

its technology. Some of these elements may have been deliberately withheld from the

firm’s patents, in the U.S. and in the foreign country, in order to prevent other parties

from being able to copy its technology simply by reading its patents. When it transfers

this knowledge to local employees, there is a risk that these employees will defect to a

local manufacturer, taking sensitive technology with them. These employees are able to




7
   We note, among other studies, the survey research of Lee and Mansfield (1996) in which a large sample
of U.S. multinationals identified countries to which they would not transfer their latest, most useful
technologies, even if the transfer was done within the firm. In the same study, managers made it clear that
they generally sought to avoid the transfer of strategically sensitive technology to unaffiliated parties,
regardless of the perceived strength of the IPR regime. The reluctance to license strategically sensitive
technology outside the firm has been confirmed in our own conversations with multinational managers.


                                                                                                          4
combine the patented and unpatented elements of the firms’ technology, effectively

competing with it in the local market.8

        In a weak IPR environment, the multinational firm has little recourse. In the

context of a stronger IPR environment with good patent protection, the firm can prevent

the infringing firm from using the patented components of its technology. In addition, a

number of the patent reforms examined below explicitly included new protection of trade

secrets or strengthened existing protection.

        Basic intuition suggests that if IPR regime shifts have a material impact on true

intellectual property protection, then there should be an increase in the value of

technology flows from parents to affiliates following regime changes. It is possible to

test for this effect using regressions of the form:

         Transferilt = α 0 + α il + α t + β 0 y jt + β1 Pit + β 2 H jt + β 3 Ailt +
(1)
         β 4 R jt + β 5 R jt * Patil + ε ilt

where l indexes the individual affiliate, i the affiliate’s parent firm, j the affiliate’s host

country, and t the year. The dependent variable measures the volume of intrafirm royalty

payments for intangible assets – our proxy for technology transfer. The key variable of

interest is Rjt, the post reform dummy variable, equal to one in the year of and years

following patent reform in country j. The specification contains a number of controls

including time-invariant fixed effects for the parent-affiliate pair ( α il ), year fixed effects



8
   There are many anecdotes that illustrate this point. For example, in late 2003, the world’s leading
contract semiconductor manufacturing firm, Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Co. (TSMC), charged
mainland Chinese rival Semiconductor Manufacturing International Corp. (SMIC) with theft of its
intellectual property. According to public statements by TSMC representatives, SMIC hired away more
than one hundred TSMC employees, who brought with them valuable trade secrets. SMIC was later sued
for infringing multiple TSMC patents. Conversations with parties familiar with this lawsuit confirmed that
TSMC had not transferred its most advanced technology to its mainland Chinese operations, in anticipation
of the possibility of such an outcome.


                                                                                                         5
for the entire sample ( α t ), and a vector of country-specific time trends (yjt).9 Pit, Hjt, and

Ailt are vectors of time-varying parent, host country, and affiliate characteristics

respectively. Pit includes measures of parent firm sales and R&D investment. Hjt

includes measures of income per capita, trade and FDI openness, corporate income tax

rates, and withholding tax rates.

         If any observed increase in the value of technology flows from parent firms to

affiliates results from improved IPR protection (and not, for example, from correlated

reforms), the effect should be largest for firms that value patent protection the most. In

order to study the differential effects of patent reforms across firms, affiliates are split

into two groups according to the extent to which their parents use U.S. patents prior to the

reform. Affiliates of parents that, over the four years prior to a particular reform, average

at least as many U.S. patent applications as the parent of the median affiliate in the

reforming country over the same period are assigned a high patent use dummy, Patil,

equal to one. For other affiliates that have parents that can be matched to the NBER

patent database, Patil equals zero.10 This dummy variable is interacted with the post

reform dummy variable to assess the differential effect of reform on the affiliates of high

patent parents.

         Changes in the value of licensing payments could reflect changes in the volume of

technology transferred or merely changes in the price charged for that technology.

Analyzing changes in the R&D expenditures of affiliates is helpful in distinguishing


9
  The parent-affiliate pair fixed effect is generally indistinguishable from an affiliate fixed effect, except in
the few cases where an affiliate moved from one parent system to another through mergers or acquisitions.
Because an affiliate that has undergone such a move has access to a different portfolio of technologies, we
treat it as a different entity.
10
   Alternative ways of specifying Patil yield similar results. A four year window is used in these
calculations because the sample begins in 1982 and the first reform occurs in 1986.


                                                                                                                6
between these two possibilities. There is a considerable body of work that details the

relationship between affiliate and parent-firm R&D.11 U.S.-based multinationals do

undertake some basic and applied research abroad. However, this is concentrated in the

most advanced countries where the local scientific and engineering community is highly

accomplished and the infrastructure for frontier research is well-developed. R&D

conducted by affiliates in less developed countries, which account for almost all of the

countries in our sample, is focused on the absorption of parent firm technology and on its

modification for local markets.12 The literature review presented in Kuemmerle (1999)

lists a number of studies that provide evidence that the co-location of R&D with foreign

manufacturing facilitates the “transfer of knowledge and prototypes from the firm’s home

location to actual manufacturing.” Affiliate R&D and technology transfer from the parent

may thus be considered complements, so that IPR reform should also generate an

increase in R&D spending. To test if this is the case, we use variations of specification

(1) that employ measures of the level of R&D spending conducted by individual affiliates

as dependent variables.

         If multinationals do change the volume of technology transferred in a sustained

manner and if these changes are a consequence of stronger IPR, then this should also be




11
    For an early study on this topic, see Mansfield, Teece, and Romeo (1979). Kuemmerle (1999) provides
a survey of the literature as of 1999.
12
    Our patent data allow us to identify where inventions for which U.S. patent protection is sought were
generated. We can thus get a rough sense of the extent to which R&D in affiliates based in our sample of
countries was devoted to modification of existing products (which would produce few patents) as opposed
to research designed to advance the technological frontier (which would produce many patents). We find
that the ratio of R&D spending to U.S. patents produced for foreign affiliates in countries other than Japan
(a highly advanced country) is 8.4 times higher than the ratio for the domestic R&D operations of the
parent firm. This strongly suggests that the nature of R&D at home and abroad is qualitatively very
different and confirms that the characterization of affiliate R&D activity in the literature holds for our
sample firms. We also note that the results on affiliate R&D in Table IV are robust to dropping Japan from
the sample of reforming countries.


                                                                                                           7
reflected in the data on foreign patenting in reforming countries.13 A foreign

multinational has little incentive to incur the costs of preparing and filing patent

applications in a country where patent law or enforcement is weak – and firms anticipate

this. After IPR reform, multinationals may have an incentive to file patents primarily for

the technologies already employed in the country.14 This would imply that reform would

only generate a temporary increase in foreign patent filing that falls off as firms

completed protecting the portfolio of technologies used prior to reform. However, if

reforms induce multinationals to transfer new technologies into the country on an

ongoing basis, both the level and growth rate of foreign patenting should increase after

reform. Specifications that test these predictions take the form:

(2)      Patent jt = α 0 + α j + α t + β 0 y jt + β1 H jt + β 2 R jt + β 3 R jt * T jt + ε jt

The dependent variable measures the number of patents filed by domestic or foreign

applicants in country j in year t. We estimate (2) separately for domestic and foreign

patenting in the countries that underwent IPR reform. Patent applications in year t are a

function of country ( α j ) and year ( α t ) fixed effects, a vector of country-specific time

trends (yjt), as well as host country characteristics (Hjt). This specification yields

estimates of the effect of reform on both the level of patenting and its growth rate, which

is captured by the coefficient on the interaction term of the reform dummy and a time

trend that is equal to the number of years that have passed relative to the reform year (Tjt).

3. Data Sources

3.1 Data from BEA Surveys
13
    In an influential paper, Eaton and Kortum (1996) use international patenting data to measure
international technology transfer.
14
    International patenting rules generally require applicants to file patent applications in all countries in
which protection will be sought within one year of filing an application in any country. However, some of
the patent reforms we study allowed for exceptions to this rule.


                                                                                                                 8
         Annual data on U.S. multinational firms over the 1982-1999 period come from

the U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) Survey of U.S. Direct Investment Abroad

and the Balance of Payments Survey.15 In addition to reporting extensive information on

measures of parent and affiliate operating activity including R&D expenditures,

multinationals must also report the value of royalties paid by affiliates to parents for the

sale or use of intangible property. Royalty payments are reported at the affiliate level,

and they include payment for industrial products and processes, which capture

technology licensing fees, as well as franchise fees, fees for the use of trademarks, and

payments for other intangibles. In 1989, the BEA collected data on technology licensing

fees specifically. In that year, the value of technology licensing fees accounted for more

than 88 percent of total royalty payments, indicating that it is appropriate to use aggregate

royalty payments as a proxy for the value of technology transfers.16

         One concern with the use of royalty payments to proxy for the transfer of

technology worth noting is that it only captures the value of transfers that firms report. If

firms have discretion with respect to reporting when IPR is weak, any observed increases

in royalties could merely reflect increases in the extent to which firms report technology

transfers at the time of patent reform. There are three main reasons such changes in

reporting are unlikely to affect our results.


15
   The forms that firms are required to complete vary depending on the year, size of the affiliate, and U.S.
parent’s ownership stake. The most extensive data are collected in benchmark years – 1982, 1989, 1994,
1999. BEA uses reported data to estimate universe totals when surveys cover only larger affiliates or when
only certain affiliates provide information on particular survey forms. To avoid working with estimated
data, only affiliates required to provide all the information associated with a particular analysis are
considered in this paper. Additional information on the BEA data can be found in Mataloni (1995).
16
   It is important to note that our methodology does not require that the recorded intrafirm technology
transfers be a full, complete accounting of the value of technology, broadly defined, that is provided by the
parent to the affiliate. Recall that we are basing our identification on changes over time for individual
affiliates. It is only necessary that the recorded numbers be roughly proportional to actual transfers, and
that the factor of proportionality not change at the time of patent reform.


                                                                                                            9
        First, Section 482 of the U.S. tax code and similar legislation in countries abroad

require U.S. multinationals to make royalty payments for the transfer of technology and

impose constraints on how transfers are valued. These laws generally demand that firms

ascribe a value to transfers that would be realized in an arm’s-length setting, and U.S. and

foreign governments have opposing incentives to ensure that royalties are not set at rates

that are excessively high or low.

        Second, U.S. multinationals typically transfer similar technology to different parts

of the world, and they charge the same royalties for transfers going to different locations,

irrespective of the strength of patent law, to avoid IRS scrutiny. In most multinationals,

transfers of technology and the royalty payments they trigger are centrally managed, and

parent firms keep careful internal records in order to track how their technology is being

deployed around the world. Audits by tax authorities are common, and if a U.S. audit is

undertaken, the IRS carefully examines any cases in which a firm receives royalty flows

that imply that similar transfers receive distinct reporting treatment in different countries.

To avoid such scrutiny, firms generally apply the same royalty charges for transfers

regardless of where the transfers occur.17

        Finally, to the extent firms do have discretion in reporting royalties, tax

considerations would factor prominently in reporting decisions, and these considerations

would not necessarily encourage firms to report lower royalties before reform. To avoid

tax payments, multinationals prefer to report profits in low tax jurisdictions. Parent

companies therefore have the incentive to set low royalty rates for transfers to low tax

countries. However, they also have the incentive to set high royalty rates for transfers to


17
  We thank accountants at the Big Four accounting firms for providing us with a detailed understanding of
the accounting treatment of royalties and technology transfers.


                                                                                                       10
high tax jurisdictions, thereby shifting profits back to the relatively low-taxed U.S.

parent. Hines (1995), Grubert (1998), and Collins and Shakelford (1998) present

evidence that firms respond to the tax incentives to keep royalties off the books in low tax

jurisdictions by adjusting their real activity or their reporting. These papers indicate that

host country income tax rates and withholding tax rates can be used to control for the

effects of tax incentives on reported intrafirm royalties; we use these tax variables as

controls in our econometric specifications. In addition, robustness tests described in

Section 4.1 provide evidence against the hypothesis that increases in royalties around the

time of patent reform are focused in low tax countries where the incentives to under

report prior to reform are strongest.

       The use of reported R&D expenditures from different countries also raises some

important issues. Although data on R&D expenditures from firms based in different

countries are subject to concerns about comparability, the BEA survey requires all

affiliates, regardless of location, to account for R&D expenditures in the same way. The

definition of R&D used in these surveys, based on FASB guidelines, has not

substantively changed over the course of our sample period. A second issue is that

scientific and engineering labor costs or other factor prices might differ across countries,

and these differences might distort international comparisons of the level of R&D

expenditure at a point in time. Our analysis below examines changes over time in

affiliate R&D spending in the aftermath of IPR reform, controlling for country and year

fixed effects as well as country-specific time trends. Since factor price differentials

typically evolve slowly over time, it is unlikely that our results merely capture a sharp

contemporaneous movement in the local price of R&D inputs.




                                                                                            11
3.2 Data from Other Sources

         A number of other databases are used to augment the information on U.S. firms in

the BEA data. In order to obtain information on parent firm R&D expenditures in years

in which this item was not captured in BEA surveys, the BEA data on publicly traded

parents are linked to COMPUSTAT using employee identification numbers. To

characterize the extent to which firms use the U.S. patent system, parent firm data are

also linked to data on patenting activity captured in the NBER patent citation database.18

This comprehensive database covers all patents granted by the U.S. Patent and

Trademark Office (U.S. PTO) throughout the 1982-1999 sample period. Data on patent

filings in the countries that undergo patent reform provide additional information on the

level of technology being transferred. Data on patent applications, broken out for foreign

and domestic applicants over the 1982-1999 period, are primarily drawn from the World

Intellectual Property Rights Organization (WIPO).19

         We also utilize host country controls from a variety of sources. Corporate tax

rates and withholding tax rates are imputed from the BEA data.20 Measures of inward

FDI restrictions are taken from Brune (2004), and measures of capital controls come from




18
   This data set is documented in Hall et. al. (2001).
19
   Eaton, Kortum, and Lerner (2003) point out that these data may double count some non-resident patent
applications. To correct for this, WIPO data from 1991 forward are replaced with the data used in Eaton et
al. for the sample of countries covered in that paper. We thank Sam Kortum for these data. In addition, we
use data drawn from the OECD’s Basic Science and Technology Statistics for all years for OECD countries
not covered by Eaton et al. and for the years prior to 1991 for countries in the Eaton et al. sample.
20
   Corporate tax rates are calculated from BEA data by taking the ratio of foreign income taxes paid to
foreign pretax income for each affiliate, and using the medians of these rates as country-level observations
for each country and year. Affiliates with negative net income are excluded for the purposes of calculating
country tax rates. Withholding tax rates are calculated by taking the ratio of withholding taxes paid to
royalty payments made for each affiliate, and using medians of these rates as country-level observations for
each country and year.


                                                                                                         12
Shatz (2000).21 The trade openness index is drawn from Heston, Summers, and Aten

(2002) and GDP per capita from the World Bank World Development Indicators (2003).

         Table I displays descriptive statistics of variables used in the analysis that follows

for the benchmark survey years as well as for the entire 1982-1999 period.22 The sample

only includes firms in countries that undertook the IPR regime changes described below.

In the most recent benchmark year, 1999, the sample includes more than 5,000 affiliates

of more than 1,000 parent companies.

3.3 Patent Reforms

         Details of the sample construction, including descriptions of our discussions with

local patent experts in reforming countries, can be found in the Appendix associated with

this paper, which is available online.23 We provide an abbreviated discussion here in the

interests of space. We began by constructing as exhaustive a list as possible of patent

reforms over the 1982-1999 sample period. This initial list drew upon the reforms

identified by Maskus (2000) and Qian (2004), as well as countries for which the widely

used Ginarte and Park (1997) index of the strength of patent protection showed a

significant change.24 These sources identified an initial list of 42 nations.

         Unfortunately, data limitations sharply constrain the number of reform episodes

we can examine using our empirical methodology. We require both pre- and post reform

data, and since our affiliate-level data are only available for the period 1982-1999,

reforms that fall outside this window must be omitted. We also distinguish the responses

21
   The Brune (2004) measure is drawn from the 2001 version of the index she creates. Host Country
Capital Controls is a dummy equal to one when Shatz (2000) classifies openness with respect to both
capital and profit remittances at less than 3.
22
   Since the size reporting requirements are higher in nonbenchmark years than in benchmark years, means
and standard deviations of variables like affiliate sales are larger for the full sample than for each of the
benchmark years.
23
    Please see http:/ www0.gsb.columbia.edu/faculty/lbranstetter/research/tech_transfer_appendix.
24
   We thank Walter Park for providing us with an update to the data used in his paper.


                                                                                                           13
of affiliates to IPR reform based on the extent to which their parent firms make use of the

U.S. patent system. In order to ensure that such a comparison is meaningful in each

reform we examine, we required that there be at least 20 affiliates in manufacturing that

report before and after a reform and that can be linked to the patenting entities in the

NBER patent citation database.

         These data restrictions excluded all but 18 countries. Extremely poor countries

like Ghana, small economies like Iceland, and formerly communist countries like Russia

failed to attract sufficient U.S. FDI. Finally, as discussed at length in the Appendix,

Canada and Singapore were excluded due to the limited significance of the actual patent

reform undertaken. This leaves us with 16 countries with sufficient data to estimate the

impact of reform. Table II displays the list of patent reforms used in the analysis that

follows.25

         Each reform can be classified according to whether or not it expanded or

strengthened patent rights along five dimensions: 1) an expansion in the range of goods

eligible for patent protection, 2) an expansion in the effective scope of patent protection,

3) an increase in the length of patent protection, 4) an improvement in the enforcement of

patent rights, and 5) an improvement in the administration of the patent system. There is

a surprising degree of similarity in the 16 reforms, with 15 out of 16 exhibiting expansion

of patent rights along at least 4 of the 5 dimensions listed above. These substantive

reforms could have a material impact on intrafirm technology transfer and are well-suited

to the empirical approach outlined in Section 2. A detailed discussion of the individual

25
  To test whether sample selection decisions affect the results, the main tests of the paper have also been
conducted with a broader sample generated by reducing the affiliate count cutoff from 20 to 10 affiliates
and including Canadian affiliates of firms in the pharmaceutical and foodstuffs industries. As indicated in
the Appendix, some might argue that the 1987 reform in Canada was a meaningful reform in these sectors.
The main results are robust to using this alternative sample.


                                                                                                         14
reform episodes, their distinctive characteristics, and their common features, is also

provided in the Appendix.

4. Results

4.1 Technology Transfer to Affiliates

         To provide a general sense of trends in technology transfer, Figure 1 displays pre-

and post reform averages of the ratio of aggregate royalties to aggregate sales in each

country and year. Each of the unshaded bars illustrates the average pre-reform ratios, and

the shaded bars illustrate similar averages for the post reform period. These

unconditional averages are suggestive of an increase in the value of royalty payments

relative to sales around the time of IPR reform. Furthermore, it is clear that affiliates in

the high patent sample make more extensive use of technology provided by the parent

and that the ratio of royalty payments to sales increases by the largest amount for this

sub-sample after reform.

         Results of regression analyses of royalty payments made by affiliates located in

the reforming countries to their parents based on specification (1) are reported in Table

III; standard errors allow for clustering by country. Columns (1)-(3) report the impact of

IPR reform on the log of the value of royalty payments to the parent firm.26 The

specification in the first column is run on the full sample of affiliates; the coefficient on

the post reform dummy is positive and significant at the one percent level, indicating that

intrafirm royalty payments increase at the time of reforms. As additional regressors, all

specifications in the table include host country controls, including the corporate income


26
    A large number of affiliates, particularly those in low-tech industries, report zero values for technology
transfer in most years. We thus added 1 to all observations and took the log of the resulting values. This
transformation is standard in the older R&D and productivity literature. Robustness checks described in
the text remove affiliates that do not make royalty payments from the sample.


                                                                                                            15
tax rate, the withholding tax rate, indicators of FDI restrictions and capital controls,

measures of openness to trade, and the log of GDP per capita.

       The specifications in columns (2) and (3) examine the differential effect of IPR

reform for affiliates of parents that make more extensive use of patents in the U.S. Since

these specifications require information on the patent activity of parents, only affiliates of

firms that can be linked to firms in the NBER patent database are included. The high

patent use dummy is equal to one for affiliates of parents that, over the four years prior to

a particular reform, average at least as many U.S. patent applications as the parent of the

median affiliate in the reforming country over the same period. The coefficient on the

post reform dummy in column (2) is small and insignificantly different from zero, while

the coefficient on the post reform dummy interacted with the high patent use dummy is

positive, large, and significant at the one percent level.

       These results imply that the increases in technology transfer as measured by

royalty payments that occur around the time of IPR reform are concentrated among

affiliates of parents that use patents extensively. These affiliates experience an increase

in royalty payments of about 34 percent. This is an annual increase in technology flows

from parent to affiliate which, cumulated over several years, implies a substantial

increase in the technological intensity of affiliate activity. Similar results are obtained

from the specification presented in column (3) that also includes the log of affiliate sales,

the log of parent R&D expenditures, and the log of parent system sales. These

collectively control for the expanding demand for technology of a growing affiliate and




                                                                                              16
the expanding potential supply of technology of a parent as it invests in R&D and

grows.27

         The dependent variable in the specifications presented in columns (4)-(6) of Table

III is 100 times the log of one plus the ratio of royalty payments to sales.28 This

dependent variable is used to assess whether affiliates use technology provided by the

parent more intensively after reforms occur. We find results that parallel those reported

in columns (1)-(3): there is a significant effect of reform on the rate of royalty payments,

and this effect is concentrated among high patent use firms. To allow for a more direct

comparison with the effects reported in columns (1)-(3), it is helpful to calculate the

elasticity of the royalty to sales ratio with respect to reform. Defining ratio =

royalties/sales and differentiating log(1 + royalties/sales) with respect to reform:

                  ⎛ dratio ⎞           ⎛ dratio ⎞
                  ⎜           ⎟        ⎜⎜         ⎟⎟
d log(1 + ratio) ⎜⎝ dreform ⎟⎠          ⎝ dreform ⎠ * ratio = ε
                =               ≅                               ratio * ratio
    dreform         1 + ratio              ratio



where εratio is the elasticity of the royalty to sales ratio with respect to reform. From

specification (1), we observe that εratio*ratio is given by β4/100, or 0.0008. Since the

mean value of ratio is approximately 0.005, this implies that εratio is approximately 16

percent. For the high patent subsample, the implied effect of reform on log(1+ratio),

based on the last two specifications, is 0.0019, which implies an elasticity of 38 percent.




27
    We recognize the potential endogeneity of these variables in this context. The purpose here is not to
derive structural estimates of, for instance, affiliate size on technology transfer. Rather, we only include
these variables to control for parent specific changes in technology supply and affiliate specific changes in
technology demand.
28
   This variable is scaled for expositional reasons.


                                                                                                           17
These values are roughly comparable to those generated by the level regressions reported

in columns (1) – (3).

           We subject these results to a number of robustness checks. To ensure that

measured responses to reforms do not simply reflect increased reporting of royalties by

affiliates that face tax incentives to under report royalties prior to reform, we include a

dummy equal to one if the host country tax rate is below the U.S. tax rate and this dummy

interacted with the post reform dummy.29 We include region–year fixed effects in our

regression using the five regions designated in the BEA data to control for regional

factors. We drop all affiliates that report zero licensing payments. We expand the

sample to incorporate affiliates in all countries – not just those that underwent reform

during our sample period. We also repeat our analyses omitting Argentina and China, the

countries where we have less confidence that patent reforms were effectively

implemented. To address the concern that our results might be driven by pharmaceutical

firms, we drop all affiliates in that industry. None of these alternative specifications

qualitatively change our results.

4.2 Affiliate R&D Spending

           As discussed in Section 2, affiliate R&D is often focused on the absorption and

modification of the parent firm’s technology to meet local market conditions and is hence

a complement to technology imports from the parent. If IPR reform stimulates an

increase in the volume of technology deployed, then it should also stimulate an increase

in affiliate R&D spending. To examine this hypothesis, the analysis in Table IV

examines the impact of IPR reform on affiliate R&D activity. The specifications

presented parallel those presented in Table III, with the only difference being that the log
29
     We also include an interaction of the post reform dummy and the host country withholding tax rate.


                                                                                                          18
of affiliate R&D expenditures and 100 times the log of affiliate R&D expenditures scaled

by sales are used as dependent variables.30 The results presented in column (1) imply a

positive effect of IPR reform on the R&D spending of the average affiliate in the full

sample, but this effect is only significant at the ten percent level.

         The specifications in columns (2) and (3) include the post reform dummy

interacted with the high patent use dummy to test whether the effects of IPR reform are

particularly concentrated among firms that make more extensive use of patents in the

U.S. The large, positive and significant coefficients on the interaction terms imply that

this is the case. For instance, the results in column (2) imply that IPR reform leads to a

23 percent increase in R&D spending by the affiliates of patent-intensive parents, and a t-

test that corrects for clustering at the country level indicates that this increase is

significantly different from zero at the five percent level. Because R&D represents a cost

born by the parent system, the coincidence of the measured increase in R&D spending

with the measured increase in royalty payments suggests that at least some component of

the latter represents a real increase in the deployment of technology to affiliates.

Columns (4)-(6) of Table IV provide the results of specifications in which R&D

expenditure is scaled by affiliate sales. The results parallel those for the unscaled

regressions: R&D intensity increases significantly among patent intensive firms.

         We test the robustness of these results on affiliate R&D spending in a number of

alternative specifications. We incorporate region–year fixed effects into our

specification. We drop observations for affiliates that report zero R&D spending. We

30
  It is important to make two caveats about the R&D data. First, data on affiliate R&D expenditures were
not collected from 1983-1988 so the sample does not include data from these years. Second, since many
affiliates report zero values for R&D expenditures in most years, we add 1 to all observations of affiliate
R&D and affiliate R&D scaled by sales and took the log of the resulting values. Robustness checks
described in the text remove affiliates that do not conduct R&D from the sample.


                                                                                                          19
expand the sample to include all available countries, not just those undergoing IPR

reform over our sample period. We remove Japan from the sample, since it is the one

country where affiliate R&D is not primarily focused on absorption and adaptation of the

parent firms’ technology. None of these alternative specifications qualitatively changed

our results.

4.3 Resident versus Non-Resident Patenting

        Figure 2 illustrates the patterns in patent filings by foreigners and domestic

residents before and after IPR reform, comparing ratios of patent filings in the years

around the time of reform to the level recorded in the year immediately preceding patent

reform. This figure suggests that, relative to the pre-reform period, patenting grows for

non-residents after reform, while remaining flat for domestic residents. This pattern is

broadly consistent with the findings of Lerner (2002a, 2002b). It also implies that at least

one component of the observed increase in licensing payments is connected to an

increase in the volume of technology transferred.

        The analysis presented in Table V measures the impact of IPR reform on patent

filings by both domestic and foreign innovators. We regress the log of the counts of

patent filings (resident or non-resident) on a post reform dummy, an interaction term

between the post reform dummy and a time trend that measures the number of years that

have passed since the reform year, country and year fixed effects, country-specific time

trends, and the same country level controls used in the previous tables. Columns (1) and

(2) present specifications in which the dependent variable is the log of resident patent

filings. In column (1), the coefficient on the post reform dummy is indistinguishable

from zero, indicating that resident patent filings do not increase when reforms occur.




                                                                                            20
Column (2) shows that the post reform dummy interacted with the time trend is also

insignificant, indicating that the resident patent filings do not grow after reforms.

       Columns (3) and (4) present similar specifications for non-resident patent filings.

There is robust evidence that these filings increase and continue to grow after reforms.

The coefficient on the post reform dummy in column (3) implies an increase in non-

resident filings of about 52 percent. The positive and statistically significant coefficient

on the post reform dummy interacted with the time trend in column (4) implies that the

number of non-resident filings grows more rapidly after reforms. This evidence is

consistent with the hypothesis that multinationals do not just patent technologies that had

been used prior to reforms but also transfer new technologies to reforming countries.

4.4 Endogeneity and Timing of Reforms

       Our estimation strategy treats the timing of IPR reform in a given country as

exogenous, at least with respect to the activities of U.S.-based multinational firms and

their affiliates. It may be that other changes that are coincident with patent reform drive

both the changes in the patent regime and the measured changes in affiliate behavior. For

example, once a nation reaches a certain threshold level of development, internal and

external pressure may build for a stronger patent system. Alternatively, pressure by U.S.

multinationals (exerted indirectly via the U.S. government) may cause countries to adopt

reforms when companies have a need to increase technology transfer.

       While we cannot completely rule out these alternative explanations, we can

examine their plausibility more carefully. First, many explanations related to coincident

changes and reverse causation predict that technology transfer begins to increase in the

years prior to the date of reform. The specifications displayed in Table VI provide more




                                                                                           21
detailed estimates of the timing of changes in affiliate royalty payments, affiliate R&D

expenditures, and non-resident patent filings. These specifications are similar to those

described above, but they do not include country-specific time trends, and they yield

coefficient estimates for a set of dummy variables that correspond to periods of fixed

length before and after reform. The Reform (t-4) dummy is equal to one for all years that

predate the reform by four or more years and is equal to zero in all other years, and the

Reform (t+4) dummy is equal to one for all years at least four years after reform and zero

during other years. The other reform dummies are equal to one in specific years relative

to reform and zero during other years. There is no dummy for the year immediately

preceding reform (i.e., year t-1); the coefficients on the reform dummies provide

estimates relative to that year.

        Columns (1) and (2) present specifications using royalty payments and scaled

royalty payments respectively as the dependent variable. The results indicate that while

the coefficients on the dummies for years prior to reform are negative, they are all

insignificant and fail to show any evidence of a clear upward trend prior to reform. The

coefficients on the dummies for the year of reform are positive but insignificant, and the

dummies for the years after reform are large, positive, and significant. Thus, the

estimated timing of changes is consistent with a shift in activities that follows soon after

the enactment of reform. A fairly rapid reaction is reasonable. Our sample of U.S.

multinationals includes firms that possess a portfolio of technologies employed around

the world and that are familiar with strong patent system environments. While

indigenous firms might require some time to adjust to a strong IPR regime with which

they have no previous experience, it is plausible that our U.S. multinationals could




                                                                                            22
respond quickly, redeploying their existing technologies to take advantage of

opportunities created by the new regime.

        Column (3) presents results of a specification using the log of affiliate R&D

expenditures as the dependent variable. Again, there is no clear upward trend prior to

reforms and the post reform coefficients are, with one exception, larger than the pre-

reform coefficients. The post reform coefficients are jointly significant and suggest a

substantial post reform increase in R&D spending, though the relationship between patent

reform and the timing of measured changes in affiliate activity does not appear to be as

clear as it is for technology transfer.31 The dependent variable in the specification in

column (4) is the log of non-resident patent filings. As suggested by the pattern in Figure

4, there is an increase in patent filings precisely timed to our reform dates, and these

filings continue to grow once reforms take place.

        Several other considerations also help to ease concerns about the endogeneity of

IPR reform. First, it is clear from a casual look at the wide divergence in per-capita

income among the IPR reforming countries in our sample that these countries were at

very different levels of economic development at the time of reform. It is therefore very

unlikely that these countries were reaching a common development threshold at the time

of their IPR reform.

        The argument that reforms were driven by the desire of U.S. multinationals to

obtain advantages in reforming markets is premised on the assumption that these firms

developed a list of lucrative potential markets, and pushed the U.S. government to apply

diplomatic pressure on selected countries at precisely the time that they wished to

31
  This may be a consequence of the nature of the affiliate R&D data since these data were not collected
from 1983-1988. Given that a number of reforms occur during this period, obtaining precise estimates of
effects in years relative to reform years is difficult.


                                                                                                          23
increase technology transfer. Econometric evidence, derived from a unique feature of

U.S. trade law, casts doubt on the possibility that U.S. multinationals were able to

effectively control the timing of reform to their advantage. Since the passage of the

Omnibus Trade and Competitiveness Act of 1988, the U.S. government has been required

by law to identify nations that violate the intellectual property rights of U.S. firms. In

accordance with this requirement, every year the United States announces a “Special 301

Watch List” and a “Special 301 Priority Watch List” of nations in which violations are

deemed to be especially injurious and where changes in the national IPR environment are

a U.S. diplomatic priority. For reforms after 1988, we estimated hazard models of the

timing of IPR reform using the presence of a country on one of these lists as an

explanatory variable. This variable had no statistically significant explanatory power in

our regressions.32 Hence, the timing of reforms is not correlated with this measure of

U.S. diplomatic pressure.

         This econometric result is consistent with the historical accounts of Ryan (1996)

and Uphoff (1990), and with our own interviews with multinational managers and

resident legal experts in the reforming countries. All of these sources indicate that US

pressure interacted in complicated ways with domestic counter pressure, and this

interaction introduced an element of randomness into the timing of reforms that is

exogenous to the wishes of U.S. multinationals.33

5. Conclusion



32
  These regression results are available from the authors upon request.
33
  Further evidence of America’s lack of diplomatic omnipotence is provided by the timing of other reforms
that multinationals would obviously have an interest in promoting – such as a lifting of FDI restrictions and
an expansion of openness to trade. In most cases, these other reforms were not coincident with patent
reform.


                                                                                                          24
       Over the past 20 years, the international economic policy agenda has increasingly

taken the enactment of strong, globally enforced intellectual property rights as a priority.

This represents a significant departure for international economic policy, and it remains

deeply controversial. Advocates of stronger IPR have asserted, with little evidence, that

stronger IPR will yield benefits by inducing multinational firms to engage in more

technology transfer. This paper empirically tests that hypothesis by analyzing the effects

of reform on the royalty payments and R&D expenditures of U.S. multinational affiliates,

as well as the level and growth rate of patent filings by non-residents, and finds that all of

these increase following reforms. Increases in affiliate royalties and R&D are

concentrated among affiliates of firms that make extensive use of the U.S. patent system

prior to reforms and are therefore likely to value reforms the most. For these patent

intensive firms, we estimate that increases in affiliate royalties exceed 30 percent. Our

results collectively imply that U.S. multinationals respond to changes in IPR regimes

abroad by significantly increasing technology transfer to reforming countries.

       These results are not, of course, sufficient to demonstrate that IPR reform is

welfare enhancing for reforming countries. The analysis does not consider the impact of

reforms on locally owned firms that may be displaced after reforms nor does it examine

the effects of the reforms on the pace of innovation in non-reforming countries.

However, given the limited evidence that IPR reform spurs domestic innovation,

increases in technology transfer are likely to be a necessary condition for IPR reform to

increase welfare in reforming countries. Our results suggest that for at least one type of

transfer, international technology transfer with multinational firms, this condition is met.




                                                                                             25
References Cited


Bessen, J. and E. Maskin, 2000. Sequential Innovation, Patents, and Imitation. MIT
       Department of Economics Working Paper No. 00-01.

Brune, N., 2004. In Search of Credible Commitments: The IMF and Capital Account
       Liberalization in the Developing World. Working Paper, Yale University.

Collins, J. and D. Shackelford, 1998. Global Organizations and Taxes: An Analysis of
       the Dividend, Interest, Royalty, and Management Fee Payments Between U.S.
       Multinationals’ Foreign Affiliates. Journal of Accounting and Economics, 24:
       151-173.

Chen, Y. and T. Puttitanum, 2005. Intellectual Property Rights and Innovation in
       Developing Countries. Forthcoming in Journal of Development Economics.

Eaton, J. and S. Kortum, 1996. Trade in Ideas: Patenting and Productivity in the OECD.
       Journal of International Economics, 40: 251-278.

Eaton, J., S. Kortum, and J. Lerner, 2003. International Patenting and the European
       Patent Office: A Quantitative Assessment. NBER CRIW Working Paper.

Evenson, R. and S. Kumar, 2001. Does Intellectual Property Protection Spur
      Technological Change? Yale Economic Growth Center Discussion Paper No.
      831.

Ginarte, J. and W. Park, 1997. Determinants of Patent Rights: A Cross-National Study.
       Research Policy, 26: 283-301.

Glass, A. and K. Saggi, 2002. Intellectual Property Rights and Foreign Direct
       Investment. Journal of International Economics, 56: 387-410.

Grossman, G. and E. L. C. Lai, 2005. International Protection of Intellectual Property.
      American Economic Review, 94: 1635-1653.

Grubert, H., 1998. Taxes and the Division of Foreign Operating Income among
       Royalties, Interest, Dividends, and Retained Earnings. Journal of Public
       Economics, 68: 269-290.

Hall, B., A. Jaffe, and M. Trajtenberg, 2001. The NBER Patent Citation Data File:
       Lessons, Insights, and Methodological Tools. NBER Working Paper 8498.

Helpman, E., 1993. Innovation, Imitation, and Intellectual Property Rights,
      Econometrica, 61: 1247-1280.




                                                                                          26
Heston, A., R. Summers, and B. Aten, 2002. Penn World Table Version 6.1. Center for
       International Comparisons at the University of Pennsylvania (CICUP).

Hines, J., 1995. Taxes, Technology Transfer, and R&D by Multinational Firms. In M.
       Feldstein, J. Hines, and R. G. Hubbard, eds., Taxing Multinational Corporations.
       University of Chicago Press: Chicago.

Javorcik, Beata, 2004. The Composition of Foreign Direct Investment and Protection of
       Intellectual Property Rights: Evidence from Transition Economies. European
       Economic Review, 48: 39-62.

Keller, W., 2004. International Technology Diffusion. Journal of Economic Literature,
        42: 752-782.

Kuemmerle, W., 1999. The Drivers of Foreign Direct Investment into Research and
     Development: An Empirical Investigation. Journal of International Business
     Studies, 30 (1), pp. 1-24.

Lai, E., 1998. International Intellectual Property Rights Protection and the Rate of
        Product Innovation. Journal of Development Economics, 55: pp. 133-153.

Lanjouw, J., 1997. The Introduction of Pharmaceutical Product Patents in India:
      “Heartless Exploitation of the Poor and Suffering”? NBER Working Paper 6366.

Lee, J. Y. and E. Mansfield, 1996. Intellectual Property Protection and U.S. Foreign
        Direct Investment. The Review of Economics and Statistics, 78: 181-186.

Lerner, J., 2002a. 150 Years of Patent Protection. American Economic Review Papers
       and Proceedings, 92: 221-225.

Lerner, J., 2002b. Patent Protection and Innovation over 150 Years. NBER Working
       Paper No. 8977.

Mansfield, E., D. Teece, and A. Romeo, 1979. Overseas Research and Development by
      US-Based Firms. Economica, 46: 187-96.

Maskus, K., 1998. The International Regulation of Intellectual Property.
      Weltwirtschaftliches Archiv, 134: 186-208.

Maskus, K., 2000. Intellectual Property Rights in the Global Economy. Institute for
      International Economics: Washington, D.C.

Maskus, K. and D. Eby-Konan, 1994. Trade-Related Intellectual Property Rights: Issues
      and Exploratory Results, in Analytical and Negotiating Issues in the Global
      Trading System, ed. by Alan Deardorff and Robert M. Stern. University of
      Michigan Press: Ann Arbor, MI.



                                                                                       27
Maskus, K. and M. Penubarti, 1995. How Trade-Related Are Intellectual Property
      Rights? Journal of International Economics, 39: 227-48.

Mataloni, R., 1995. A Guide to BEA Statistics on U.S. Multinational Companies.
      Survey of Current Business, 75: 38-53.

McCalman, P., 2001. Reaping What you Sow: An Empirical Analysis of International
     Patent Harmonization. Journal of International Economics, 55: 161-186.

OECD, 1993 and 1999. Basic Science and Technology Statistics. OECD Publications
     and Information Center: Washington, DC.

Qian, Yi, 2004. Do Additional National Patent Laws Stimulate Domestic Innovation in a
       Global Patenting Environment: A Cross-Country Analysis of Pharmaceutical
       Patent Protection: 1978-1999. Working paper, Harvard University.

Ryan, M., 1998. Knowledge Diplomacy: Global Competition and the Politics of
      Intellectual Property. Brookings Institution Press: Washington, DC.

Sakakibara, M. and L. Branstetter, 2001. Do Stronger Patents Induce More Innovation?
       Evidence from the 1988 Japanese Patent Reforms. Rand Journal of Economics,
       32: 771-100.

Scherer, F. M. and S. Weisburst, 1995. Economics Effects of Strengthening
       Pharmaceutical Patent Protection in Italy. International Review of Industrial
       Property and Copyright Law, 26: 1009-24.

Shatz, H., 2000. The Location of U.S. Multinational Affiliates. Ph.D. dissertation.
       Harvard University.

Smith, P., 1999. Are Weak Patent Rights a Barrier to U.S. Exports? Journal of
       International Economics, 48: 151-77.

Smith, P., 2001. How do Foreign Patent Rights Affect U.S. Exports, Affiliate Sales, and
       Licenses? Journal of International Economics, 55: 411-439.

Uphoff, E., 1990. Intellectual Property and U.S. Relations with Indonesia, Malaysia,
      Singapore, and Thailand. Cornell Southeast Asia Program: Ithaca, NY.

The World Bank, 2003. World Bank Development Indicators 2003.

Yang, G. and K. Maskus, 2001. Intellectual Property Rights and Licensing: An
      Econometric Investigation. Weltwirtschaftliches Archiv, 137: 58-79.




                                                                                       28
Figure 1: Aggregate royalty payments/aggregate sales. The clear bars indicate the average annual aggregate royalty payment to sales
ratio for various samples of affiliates in reforming countries before reforms occur. Averages are calculated as the mean of annual ratios in
each country over all years in the pre-reform period. The shaded bars depict average ratios for the year of and years following reform.
The first two bars are for the full sample, the next two for affiliates of parents that cannot be matched to the NBER patent citation
database, the third pair of bars are for the sample of affiliates of parents that do not make extensive use of patents in the U.S. prior to
reforms, and the final pair are for affiliates in the high patent use sample.


                0.016

                0.014

                0.012

                    0.01
                                                                                                                      Before Reform
                0.008
                                                                                                                      After Reform
                0.006

                0.004

                0.002

                         0
                                  Full             Unmatched               Low Patent         High Patent
                                                                 Sample

Figure 2: Resident and non-resident patent filings around the time of reforms. The Non-Resident Patent Filings line traces out an
index of foreign patenting around the time of reforms. This index is calculated by first computing the ratio of the number of patent filings
by foreigners in a particular year relative to reform to the number of patent filinings by foreigners in the year prior to a reform and then
selecting the median ratio across reforming countries. The Resident Patent Filings line displays the index for resident patent filings.




              2.5


                2
                                                                             Non-Resident Patent Filings


              1.5


                1
                                                                                        Resident Patent Filings

              0.5


                0
                    -3              -2               -1                0                 1                 2               3
                                                      Year Relative to Reform
                                                                       Table I
                           Descriptive Statistics for U.S. Multinational Activity in Reforming Countries
The top panel provides descriptive statistics for the data obtained from BEA surveys and from WIPO. Intrafirm royalty payments are royalty payments
made by affiliates to their parents and like the other financial data are measured in thousands of dollars. Parent R&D Expenditures are the R&D
expenditures of the domestic operations of the parent. Parent System Sales are the total sales of the parent and its affiliates. The Number of Non-Resident
Patent Filings and the Number of Resident Patent Filings are counts of patent applications by non-residents and residents in a particular country and year.
The bottom panel provides descriptive statistics for the country level control variables that are used in the analysis. The Host Country Corporate Tax Rate
and the Host Country Withholding Tax Rate are annual median tax rates paid by affiliates in a host country. Host Country Inward FDI Restrictions and
Host Country Capital Controls are dummies equal to one when inward FDI restrictions and capital controls exist, and they are drawn from Brune (2004)
and Shatz (2000), respectively. Host Country Trade Openness is the index of constant price openness taken from Heston, Summers, and Aten (2002).
The Log of Host Country GDP is derived from data provided in the World Bank World Development Indicators (2003).


                                                                                  Benchmark Years                                        Full Sample
                                                             1982                1989         1994                        1999           1982-1999
Number of Affiliates                                            3,970               4,115         4,888                      5,785             12,961
Number of Parents                                                 836                 902         1,114                      1,132              2,156

Intrafirm Royalty Payments
   Mean                                                             157                552                  932                 988                 997
   Standard Deviation                                             2,335             13,873               14,989              14,870              16,622

R&D Expenditures
 Mean                                                               117                 407                 482                 570                 635
 Standard Deviation                                                 911               9,470               4,397               6,595               6,538

Sales
  Mean                                                          57,129              77,604              90,229             106,866             115,406
  Standard Deviation                                           299,376             460,023             517,553             463,536             534,787

Parent R&D Expenditures
  Mean                                                          80,836              81,805              72,647              94,310             109,491
  Standard Deviation                                           282,188             358,908             338,329             392,521             398,687

Parent System Sales
  Mean                                                      3,262,647           3,940,225           4,151,990           6,007,838           5,512,638
  Standard Deviation                                        9,552,341          11,500,000          13,100,000          17,300,000          14,800,000

Number of Non-Resident Patent Filings
  Mean                                                            4,669              8,276               13,953              41,482              13,761
  Standard Deviation                                              7,035             12,281               15,488              29,231              18,543

Number of Resident Patent Filings
  Mean                                                          19,805              23,973               26,239              33,896              26,461
  Standard Deviation                                            63,383              84,541               84,956              99,531              83,687


Descriptive Statistics for all Affiliate Years                                   Mean               St. Dev
Host Country Corporate Tax Rate                                                 0.3375               0.1309
Host Country Withholding Tax Rate                                               0.0707               0.0889
Host Country Inward FDI Restrictions                                            0.0661               0.2485
Host Country Capital Controls                                                   0.1125               0.3160
Host Country Trade Openness                                                    36.7459              22.8795
Log of Host Country GDP per Capita                                              8.9843               0.6759
                                          Table II

                           Timing of Major Patent Reforms

This table provides information about the timing of reforms in the countries that strengthen their
intellectual property rights and are included in the sample.


                  Country                                      Year of Reform
                 Argentina                                          1996
                   Brazil                                           1997
                   Chile                                            1991
                   China                                            1993
                 Colombia                                           1994
                 Indonesia                                          1991
                   Japan                                            1987
                  Mexico                                            1991
                Philippines                                         1997
                  Portugal                                          1992
                South Korea                                         1987
                   Spain                                            1986
                  Taiwan                                            1986
                 Thailand                                           1992
                  Turkey                                            1995
                 Venezuela                                          1994
                                                                       Table III
                                         Intrafirm Royalty Payments and IPR Regime Changes
The dependent variable in the first three columns is the log of one plus the value of royalty payments made by affiliates to their parents, and the dependen
variable in columns 4-6 is the log of one plus the ratio of intrafirm royalty payments to affiliate sales, multiplied by 100. The Post Reform Dummy is a
dummy equal to one in the year of reform and in the years following the reforms identified in Table II. The High Patent Use Dummy is a dummy that is
equal to one for affiliates of parents that over the four years prior to a reform average at least as many patent applications as the parent of the median
affiliate in the reforming country. Host Country Corporate Tax Rate and Host Country Withholding Tax Rate are annual median tax rates paid by
affiliates in a host country. Host Country Inward FDI Restrictions and Host Country Capital Controls are dummies equal to one when inward FDI
restrictions and capital controls exist, and they are drawn from Brune (2004) and Shatz (2000), respectively. Host Country Trade Openness is the index
of constant price openness taken from Heston, Summers, and Aten (2002). The Log of Host Country GDP per capita is derived from data
provided in the World Bank World Development Indicators (2003). Log of Affiliate Sales is the log of the value of affiliate sales, and Log of Parent
R&D Expenditures is the log of the affiliate's parent R&D expenditures. The Log of Parent System Sales is the log of total sales of the parent and its
affiliates. All specifications include affiliate and year fixed effects as well as country-specific time trends. Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors
that correct for clustering at the country level appear in parentheses.

                                                                                                               100 X Log of Intrafirm Royalty
             Dependent Variable:                          Log of Intrafirm Royalty Payments
                                                                                                                  Payments/Affiliate Sales
                                                             (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)              (5)               (6)
Constant                                                     3.2650          16.5317          37.9012           -4.9088          -8.6826          -4.3862
                                                          (33.9656)        (48.1874)        (49.8304)         (18.4389)        (30.9809)        (30.6403)

Post Reform Dummy                                            0.1663           -0.0006          -0.0080           0.0788          -0.0095           -0.0025
                                                           (0.0619)          (0.0856)         (0.0872)         (0.0333)         (0.0448)          (0.0459)

Post Reform Dummy * High Patent Use                                            0.3362           0.3107                            0.2043            0.1866
Dummy                                                                        (0.0850)         (0.1004)                          (0.0483)          (0.0519)

Host Country Corporate Tax Rate                             -0.0625            0.2083           0.0612          -0.0726          -0.0672           -0.1058
                                                           (0.4482)          (0.5273)         (0.5753)         (0.1893)         (0.2491)          (0.2544)

Host Country Withholding Tax Rate                           -0.1815            0.4360           0.3218          -0.3515          -0.3652           -0.3844
                                                           (0.5124)          (0.7530)         (0.7408)         (0.3397)         (0.4438)          (0.4512)

Host Country Inward FDI Restrictions                        -0.0644           -0.0470          -0.0514           0.0399           0.0342            0.0337
                                                           (0.0445)          (0.1436)         (0.1387)         (0.0359)         (0.1243)          (0.1220)

Host Country Capital Controls                               -0.2561           -0.4771          -0.4662          -0.0587          -0.1083           -0.1094
                                                           (0.1163)          (0.1287)         (0.1454)         (0.0453)         (0.0359)          (0.0385)

Host Country Trade Openness                                 -0.0053           -0.0172          -0.0176          -0.0048          -0.0125           -0.0121
                                                           (0.0043)          (0.0077)         (0.0080)         (0.0031)         (0.0056)          (0.0056)

Log of Host Country GDP per Capita                           1.2070            1.8739           1.8584           0.5165           0.6821            0.7196
                                                           (0.3213)          (0.4770)         (0.5060)         (0.1472)         (0.2754)          (0.2917)

Log of Affiliate Sales                                                                          0.0976
                                                                                              (0.0342)

Log of Parent R&D Expenditures                                                                  0.0272                                              0.0121
                                                                                              (0.0126)                                            (0.0035)

Log of Parent System Sales                                                                      0.0296                                             -0.0131
                                                                                              (0.0428)                                            (0.0256)

Affiliate and Year Fixed Effects?                            Y                Y                 Y                Y                Y                Y
Country-Specific Time Trends?                                Y                Y                 Y                Y                Y                Y

No. of Obs.                                                  52,067           18,401           17,737           49,970           18,029            17,384
R-Squared                                                     0.7408           0.7149           0.7155           0.6763           0.6751            0.6750
                                                                       Table IV
                                             Affiliate R&D Expenses and IPR Regime Changes
The dependent variable in the first three columns is the log of one plus the value of affiliate R&D expenditures, and the dependent variable in columns 4-6
is the log of one plus the ratio of affiliate R&D expenditures to affiliate sales, multiplied by 100. The Post Reform Dummy is a dummy equal to one in
the year of reform and in the years following the reforms identified in Table II. The High Patent Use Dummy is a dummy that is equal to one for
affiliates of parents that over the four years prior to a reform average at least as many patent applications as the parent of the median affiliate in the
reforming country. Host Country Corporate Tax Rate and Host Country Withholding Tax Rate are annual median tax rates paid by affiliates in a host
country. Host Country Inward FDI Restrictions and Host Country Capital Controls are dummies equal to one when inward FDI restrictions and capital
controls exist, and they are drawn from Brune (2004) and Shatz (2000), respectively. Host Country Trade Openness is the index of constant price
openness taken from Heston, Summers, and Aten (2002). The Log of Host Country GDP per capita is derived from data provided in the
World Bank World Development Indicators (2003). Log of Affiliate Sales is the log of the value of affiliate sales, and Log of Parent R&D Expenditures
is the log of the affiliate's parent R&D expenditures. The Log of Parent System Sales is the log of total sales of the parent and its affiliates. All
specifications include affiliate and year fixed effects as well as country-specific time trends. Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors that correct for
clustering at the country level appear in parentheses.

                                                                                                                     100 X Log of R&D
              Dependent Variable:                              Log of R&D Expenditures
                                                                                                                  Expenditures/Affiliate Sales
                                                             (1)              (2)              (3)               (4)              (5)              (6)
Constant                                                   -22.5850         -14.5488          -17.7987         -11.3471          -6.3190          -6.4074
                                                          (32.8691)        (53.1728)         (51.2915)        (12.0184)        (18.5573)        (18.5184)

Post Reform Dummy                                             0.0908          -0.1079          -0.1277           0.0049           -0.0716          -0.0704
                                                            (0.0512)         (0.1153)         (0.1191)         (0.0257)          (0.0475)         (0.0474)

Post Reform Dummy * High Patent Use                                            0.3374           0.3250                             0.1058           0.1026
Dummy                                                                        (0.1507)         (0.1510)                           (0.0522)         (0.0516)

Host Country Corporate Tax Rate                               0.8715           0.5898           0.4829           0.3968            0.1047           0.1041
                                                            (0.3201)         (0.4738)         (0.4745)         (0.2189)          (0.1553)         (0.1547)

Host Country Withholding Tax Rate                             1.1364           0.1351           0.0504           0.5258            0.1642           0.1632
                                                            (0.3461)         (0.7787)         (0.8027)         (0.2757)          (0.3073)         (0.3058)

Host Country Inward FDI Restrictions                         -0.0506           0.0234           0.0235          -0.0528           -0.0899          -0.0902
                                                            (0.0573)         (0.1388)         (0.1402)         (0.0179)          (0.0330)         (0.0333)

Host Country Capital Controls                                -0.1948          -0.2725          -0.2613          -0.0145           -0.0479          -0.0476
                                                            (0.0932)         (0.1243)         (0.1196)         (0.0268)          (0.0230)         (0.0226)

Host Country Trade Openness                                   0.0058           0.0073           0.0076           0.0022            0.0024           0.0025
                                                            (0.0045)         (0.0048)         (0.0050)         (0.0036)          (0.0040)         (0.0040)

Log of Host Country GDP per Capita                            0.1796          -0.2321          -0.4775           0.0050           -0.0103          -0.0089
                                                            (0.4405)         (0.6959)         (0.7283)         (0.0983)          (0.1937)         (0.1935)

Log of Affiliate Sales                                                                          0.1352
                                                                                              (0.0412)

Log of Parent R&D Expenditures                                                                  0.0311                                              0.0074
                                                                                              (0.0096)                                            (0.0024)

Log of Parent System Sales                                                                     -0.0645                                             -0.0029
                                                                                              (0.0305)                                            (0.0053)

Affiliate and Year Fixed Effects?                             Y                Y                Y                Y                 Y                Y
Country-Specific Time Trends?                                 Y                Y                Y                Y                 Y                Y

No. of Obs.                                                  31,739           10,238           10,238            31,588           10,182           10,182
R-Squared                                                     0.7310           0.6838           0.6858            0.6684           0.6710           0.6710
                                                           Table V
                           Host Country Patenting Activity and IPR Regime Changes

The dependent variable in the first two specifications is the log of the number of patents filed in a particular country by residents
of that country, and the dependent variable in the last two specifications is the log of the number of patents filed in a particular
country by non-residents. The Post Reform Dummy is a dummy equal to one in the year of reform and the years following the
reforms identified in Table II. Host Country Corporate Tax Rate and Host Country Withholding Tax Rate are annual median tax
rates paid by affiliates in a host country. Host Country Inward FDI Restrictions and Host Country Capital Controls are dummies
equal to one when inward FDI restrictions and capital controls exist, and they are drawn from Brune (2004) and Shatz (2000),
respectively. Host Country Trade Openness is the index of constant price openness taken from Heston, Summers, and Aten
(2002). The Log of Host Country GDP per capita is derived from data provided in the World BankWorld Development
Indicators (2003). All specifications include country and year fixed effects as well as country-specific time trends.
Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors that correct for clustering at the country level appear in parentheses.


                                                                                                Log of Non-Resident Patent
Dependent Variable:                                    Log of Resident Patent Filings
                                                                                                         Filings

                                                              (1)                 (2)                 (3)                 (4)
Constant                                                       -3.7953             12.7808           -20.0926             39.1461
                                                             (46.6012)           (50.1311)          (78.3782)           (81.7430)

Post Reform Dummy                                               0.0216              0.0563              0.5232              0.6425
                                                              (0.1792)            (0.1832)            (0.1955)            (0.2172)

Post Reform Dummy * Number of Years                                                 0.0564                                  0.1968
Since Reform                                                                      (0.0820)                                (0.0846)

Host Country Corporate Tax Rate                                 1.1227              1.1212             -0.7735             -0.7643
                                                              (0.6728)            (0.6755)            (0.7756)            (0.6524)

Host Country Withholding Tax Rate                              -0.5192             -0.2306             -0.1672              0.8723
                                                              (1.2679)            (1.3648)            (1.0045)            (1.1015)

Host Country Inward FDI Restrictions                            0.7533              0.7749             -0.0646              0.0031
                                                              (0.3344)            (0.3529)            (0.1641)            (0.1696)

Host Country Capital Controls                                   0.0032             -0.0374             -0.0150             -0.1528
                                                              (0.1210)            (0.1322)            (0.1349)            (0.1533)

Host Country Trade Openness                                     0.0030              0.0061              0.0172              0.0263
                                                              (0.0128)            (0.0129)            (0.0125)            (0.0136)

Log of Host Country GDP per Capita                             -1.0645             -1.1958              0.1481             -0.2200
                                                              (0.6728)            (0.6851)            (1.5014)            (1.4581)

Country and Year Fixed Effects?                                Y                   Y                   Y                  Y
Country-Specific Time Trends?                                  Y                   Y                   Y                  Y

No. of Obs.                                                        223                223                 226                 226
R-Squared                                                        0.9600             0.9600              0.9696              0.9723
                                                                                                       Table VI
                                                                                                  Timing of reforms
The dependent variable in the first column is the log of one plus the value of royalty payments made by affiliates to their parents; the dependent variable in the second column is the log of one plus the ratio of intrafirm
royalty payments to affiliate sales, multiplied by 100; the dependent variable in the third column is the log of one plus the value of affiliate R&D expenditures; and the dependent variable in the last specification is the
log of the number of patents filed in a particular country by non-residents. Reform (t-4) is a dummy that is equal to one for observations from four or more years before a reform. Reform(t+4) is equal to one for
observations from four or more years after a reform. Other reform dummies are equal to one in particular years relative to reform. As controls, each specification includes the Host Country Corporate Tax Rate, Host
Country Withholding Tax Rate, Host Country Inward FDI Restrictions, Host Country Capital Controls, Host Country Trade Openness, and the Log of Host Country GDP per Capita. Specifications (1)-(3) include
affiliate and year fixed effects, and specification (4) includes country and year fixed effects. Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors that correct for clustering at the country level appear in parenthese

                                                    Log of Intrafirm Royalty                100 X Log of Intrafirm Royalty                                                             Log of Non-Resident Patent
         Dependent Variable:                                                                                                               Log of R&D Expenditures
                                                           Payments                            Payments/Affiliate Sales                                                                         Filings

                                                                  (1)                                         (2)                                         (3)                                         (4)
Constant                                                         -2.0441                                      0.7016                                     -0.8979                                      0.8188
                                                                (2.3708)                                    (1.6815)                                    (2.0430)                                    (4.7270)

Reform(t-4)                                                      -0.0780                                     -0.0305                                     -0.0147                                     -0.2616
                                                                (0.1048)                                    (0.0569)                                    (0.0777)                                    (0.1801)

Reform(t-3)                                                      -0.1139                                     -0.0195                                      0.0842                                     -0.0541
                                                                (0.1036)                                    (0.0552)                                    (0.0667)                                    (0.1041)

Reform(t-2)                                                      -0.0638                                     -0.0199                                      0.0802                                     -0.0105
                                                                (0.0319)                                    (0.0254)                                    (0.0358)                                    (0.1015)

Reform(t)                                                         0.0432                                      0.0267                                      0.1509                                      0.2272
                                                                (0.0560)                                    (0.0280)                                    (0.0368)                                    (0.1024)

Reform(t+1)                                                       0.1265                                      0.0835                                      0.1145                                      0.7052
                                                                (0.0403)                                    (0.0296)                                    (0.0577)                                    (0.2646)

Reform(t+2)                                                       0.2172                                      0.1196                                      0.1639                                      0.6654
                                                                (0.0631)                                    (0.0362)                                    (0.0827)                                    (0.2948)

Reform(t+3)                                                       0.1990                                      0.1561                                      0.0475                                      0.6764
                                                                (0.0745)                                    (0.0475)                                    (0.1050)                                    (0.2864)

Reform(t+4)                                                       0.2261                                      0.1480                                      0.2093                                      0.7309
                                                                (0.1160)                                    (0.0827)                                    (0.1234)                                    (0.2681)
Controls?                                                          Y                                           Y                                           Y                                           Y
Affiliate and Year Fixed Effects?                                  Y                                           Y                                           Y                                           N
Country and Year Fixed Effects?                                    N                                           N                                           N                                           Y
No. of Obs.                                                      52,067                                      49,970                                      31,739                                         226
R-Squared                                                         0.7387                                      0.6746                                      0.7307                                      0.9410
