NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

BEHAVIORAL PUBLIC ECONOMICS: WELFARE AND
POLICY ANALYSIS WITH NON-STANDARD
DECISION MAKERS
B. Douglas Bernheim
Antonio Rangel
Working Paper 11518
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11518
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2005

This paper is forthcoming in Economic Institutions and Behavioral Economics, edited by Peter Diamond and
Hannu Vartiainen. We would like to thank Colin Camerer, Peter Diamond, Emmanuel Saez, and Nick Stern
for useful comments. Antonio Rangel gratefully acknowledges financial support from the NSF (SES0134618) and SIEPR. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by B. Douglas Bernheim and Antonio Rangel. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Behavioral Public Economics: Welfare and Policy Analysis with Non-Standard Decision-Makers
B. Douglas Bernheim and Antonio Rangel
NBER Working Paper No. 11518
July 2005
JEL No. D0, D1, D6, D9, H0, H1, H4
ABSTRACT

This paper has two goals. First, we discuss several emerging approaches to applied welfare analysis
under non-standard ("behavioral") assumptions concerning consumer choice. This provides a
foundation for Behavioral Public Economics. Second, we illustrate applications of these approaches
by surveying behavioral studies of policy problems involving saving, addiction, and public goods.
We argue that the literature on behavioral public economics, though in its infancy, has already
fundamentally changed our understanding of public policy in each of these domains.

B. Douglas Bernheim
Department of Economics
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-6072
and NBER
bernheim@stanford.edu
Antonio Rangel
Department of Economics
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
rangel@stanford.edu

1. Introduction
Public economics has positive and normative objectives; it aims both to describe the
effects of public policies and to evaluate them. This agenda requires us to formulate models of
human decision-making with two components – one describing choices, and the other describing
well-being.

Using the first component, we can forecast the effects of policy reforms on

individuals’ actions, as well as on prices and allocations. Using the second component, we can
determine whether these changes benefit consumers or harm them.
Traditionally, economists have made no distinction between the behavioral and welfare
components of economic models. Such a distinction has not been necessary because standard
welfare analysis is grounded in the doctrine of revealed preference. That is, we infer what people
want from what they choose. When evaluating policies, we attempt to act as each individual’s
proxy, extrapolating his or her likely policy choices from observed consumption choices in
related situations.
Interest in behavioral economics has grown in recent years, stimulated largely by
accumulating evidence that the standard model of consumer decision-making provides an
inadequate positive description of human behavior. Scholars have begun to propose alternative
models that incorporate insights from psychology and neuroscience. Some of the pertinent
literature focuses on behaviors commonly considered “dysfunctional,” such as addiction, obesity,
risky sexual behavior, and crime. However, there is also considerable interest in alternative
approaches to more standard economic problems involving, for example, saving, risk-taking, and
charitable contributions.
Behavioral economists have proposed a variety of models that raise difficult issues
concerning welfare evaluation. No consensus concerning appropriate standards and criteria has
yet emerged. Broadly speaking, there are two main schools of thought.
One school of thought insists on strict adherence to the doctrine of revealed preference
for the purpose of economic policy evaluation. In this view, observed “anomalies” should be
explained, when possible, by expanding the preference domain. Indeed, in the view of some
economists, the only legitimate objective of behavioral economics is to identify preferences that
robustly rationalize choices (Gul and Pesendorfer [2001,2004a,b]). This perspective maintains
the tight correspondence between the behavioral and welfare components of economic models.
A second school of thought holds that behavioral economics can in principle justify
modifying, relaxing, or even jettisoning the principle of revealed preference for the purpose of

2

welfare analysis. A number of possibilities have been explored. If people make systematic
mistakes in identifiable circumstances, it may be appropriate to apply the principle of revealed
preference selectively rather than systematically. If an individual’s choices reveal several distinct
sets of mutually inconsistent preferences, then normative evaluation may require the adoption of a
particular perspective. If choices do not reveal coherent preferences, then perhaps normative
evaluations should emphasize other aspects of well-being, such as opportunities. To pursue any
of these possibilities, one must formulate separate, and potentially divergent, positive and
normative models.
Adopting alternatives to the principle of revealed preference allows economists to engage
on issues that specialists in other fields, as well as the public at large, regard as central policy
concerns. For example, they can meaningfully address the “self-destructive” behavior of addicts
or make sense of the claim that American’s save “too little” for retirement.
However, there is also a danger. Revealed preference is an attractive political principle
because it guards against abuse (albeit quite imperfectly in practice). Once we relax this doctrine,
we potentially legitimize government condemnation of almost any chosen lifestyle on the grounds
that it is contrary to a “natural” welfare criterion reflecting the individual's “true” interests. If we
can classify, say, the consumption of an addictive substance as contrary to an individual’s
interests, what about choices involving literature, religion, or sexual orientation? If choices do
not unambiguously reveal an individual's notions of good and bad, then “true preferences”
become the subject of debate, and every “beneficial” restriction of personal choice becomes fair
game.2
Given these dangers, if we are to relax the principle of revealed preference when
evaluating public policy, it behooves us to set a high scientific threshold for reaching a
determination, based on objective evidence, that a given problem calls for divergent positive and
normative models. It is important to emphasize that any justification for modifying or replacing
the principle of revealed preference must necessarily appeal to evidence other than observations
of choice. After all, in the absence of additional assumptions, it is impossible to disprove the
hypothesis that people prefer what they choose simply by examining their choices. As we argue
in detail below, this is one respect in which direct evidence on the neural mechanisms of
decision-making is beginning to prove valuable.
Unfortunately, behavioral economists have typically been somewhat cavalier in adopting
normative criteria. For example, in the literature on quasi-hyperbolic discounting, it is now

2

McCaffrey and Slemrod [2005] make a similar argument.

3

standard practice to adopt the “long-run” perspective (β = 1) for welfare analysis, rather than the
perspective that governs “short-run” choices (β < 1). This approach has been criticized on the
grounds that, according to the principle of revealed preference, the short-run perspective also has
status as a welfare criterion. The arguments that have been offered in defense of the “long-run”
perspective have not convinced skeptics that it is appropriate to attach absolutely no normative
significance to short-run preferences. The foundations for welfare analysis therefore require
closer attention.
This paper has two goals. First, we discuss emerging methods for normative policy
analysis in behavioral economics, as well as potentially fruitful lines of inquiry. We explicitly
argue against the view that any departure from the doctrine of revealed preference renders welfare
analysis either infeasible or entirely subjective. Instead, we argue that it is sometimes possible to
replace revealed preference with other compelling normative principles. For example, if one
knows enough about the nature of decision-making malfunctions, it may be possible to recover
tastes by relying on a selective application of the revealed preference principle. Accordingly,
practicing behavioral economics requires us to modify – not to abandon – the key methodological
principles of modern economics (see Rabin [2002] for a related argument).
Second, we review a collection of applications of behavioral economics to the field of
public economics. In preparing this selective review, we have intentionally favored depth over
breadth in the hope of providing a substantive discussion of welfare issues and policy
implications. We focus on three specific policy issues: saving, addiction, and public goods.
While each literature is still in its infancy, we argue that behavioral economics has already
provided fundamental insights concerning public policy in each of these domains.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses alternative
approaches to the problem of welfare. This section is an abbreviated version of Bernheim and
Rangel [2005a], to which we refer the reader for additional details. Section 3, 4 and 5 survey
applications to, respectively, saving, addictive substances, and public goods. Section 6 provides a
brief discussion the future of behavioral public economics.

2. Conceptualizing and Measuring Welfare
Welfare analysis has two main components. First, one determines how policies affect the
well-being of each individual. Second, one aggregates across individuals. As is well-known, the
second step involves some thorny issues (e.g., those raised by Arrow’s Impossibility Theorem).

4

However, since these are common to both neoclassical and behavioral approaches, we will say no
more about them. Instead, we will focus on the assessment of each individual’s well-being.
There is widespread agreement that normative criteria should respect the principle of
individual sovereignty, which holds that notions of good and bad for society should be rooted in
the notions of good and bad held by the affected individuals. This principle instructs policy
analysts to act as each individual's proxy when comparing alternative policies. It precludes the
analyst from imposing his or her own value judgments. Our focus here is, in effect, on the
meaning of the phrase, “acting as each individual’s proxy.”
In the neoclassical paradigm, the analyst attempts to determine which policy choice the
individual would make, given the opportunity. This is obviously difficult, since the policy
choices under consideration differ considerably from the private choices that people ordinarily
make. The beauty and power of standard consumer theory resides in the fact that it allows us to
extrapolate choices among public policy outcomes from observations of private choices.
One common interpretation of the neoclassical approach is that people have well-defined
preference rankings which the analyst discovers by examining evidence on choices (through the
principle of revealed preference).
evaluations.

These rankings are then taken as the basis for welfare

As detailed in Bernheim and Rangel [2005a], this interpretation rests on the

following four assumptions.
Assumption 1: Coherent preferences.

Each individual has coherent, well-behaved

preferences.
Assumption 2: Preference domain. The domain of each individual’s preference rankings
is the set of lifetime state-contingent consumption paths.
Assumption 3: Fixed lifetime preferences. Each individual’s ranking of lifetime statecontingent consumption paths remains constant across time and states of nature.
Assumption 4: No mistakes.

Each individual always selects the most preferred

alternative from the feasible set.
It is important to emphasize that the third assumption does not rule out the possibility that
tastes vary over time or across states of nature. To illustrate, consider the following problem:
choose either an immediate five-day vacation, or a ten-day vacation after a three month delay.
The third assumption allows for the possibility that the preferred choice changes with age, or
fluctuates randomly with mood. For example, if an individual is under stress, the immediate
vacation may be more attractive. The assumption does not, however, allow for the possibility that,
while in a relaxed mood, the individual would wish to prescribe for himself a different choice
than he would actually make at other points in time while in an stressed mood. On the contrary,

5

while in a relaxed mood, he should regard the decisions he makes at other points in time while in
stressed moods as optimal. Though he is willing to make different tradeoffs at different points in
time and in different states of nature, his notion of a “life well-lived” remains fixed.
Another interpretation of the neoclassical approach, discussed at greater length in
Bernheim and Rangel [2005a], holds that revealed preferences are merely constructs for
systematizing information concerning choices. This view does not require one to take a position
as to whether people actually have preferences, or whether revealed preferences coincide with
“true” preferences.

Rather, it posits that people act as if they optimize given particular

preferences, and uses this representation to extrapolate choices among policy alternatives.
According to this view, the neoclassical paradigm is only about choice.
Throughout the remainder of this section, we adopt the perspective that preferences are
“real” objects. In our view, the concept of preference is something that we all understand in
concrete terms. Even if we are limited to inferring others’ preferences from their choices, this
does not call the existence of preferences into question. After all, most of us believe we can learn
much about our own preferences from introspection. None of us have ever chosen between
spending two weeks on Maui and two years in prison, yet we know we would be happier with the
first alternative; we do not need to infer this preference from an actual choice. From this
perspective, the discovery of true preferences is a central objective of welfare economics.
One can think of the various approaches to welfare analysis that have appeared in the
behavioral literature as efforts to grapple with the distinctive issues that arise when we relax each
of the four assumptions listed above. We will consider each of them in turn.

2.A. Relaxing the first assumption (coherent preferences)
The first assumption holds that people have well-defined, coherent preferences.

If

observed choices are highly context-dependent, with significant decisions turning on minor and
seemingly irrelevant aspects of framing (see, e.g., Tversky and Kahneman [1986]), then it may be
appropriate to assume that people have poorly behaved or incoherent preferences (or possibly no
preferences at all). In this case, how does one evaluate an individual’s well-being?
One possibility is to abandon the principle that the welfare criterion used to evaluate
public policy should be based on individual notions of good and bad allocations. Unlike the
standard approach, this leads to a sharp separation between positive models describing choice,
and normative models describing welfare. One interesting example of this approach appears in
Sugden [2004], who argues for a notion of welfare based on opportunities. Sugden formulates a
rigorous welfare criterion along these lines, and proves a counterpart to the first welfare theorem.

6

There are many practical and philosophical reasons to consider welfare standards based
on opportunities rather than allocations (see, e.g., Cohen [1989], Sen [1992], and Roemer [1998]).
This certainly simplifies some aspects of measurement, and it avoids the need to systematize
behavioral observations by imposing untested assumptions. Yet we suspect that most economists
will resist such a radical departure from the standard approach. Even if we acknowledge that
opportunities are important, people also appear to care a great deal about allocations and
subjective perceptions of well-being. And while there is some evidence of context-dependence
and incoherence, we doubt anyone would claim that preferences are entirely incoherent (e.g., one
can’t induce the typical person to exchange two weeks at a resort in Maui for two years in prison
by manipulating framing). An approach based exclusively on opportunities would appear to
ignore this potentially valuable information.

2.B. Relaxing the second assumption (preference domain)
Some behavioral anomalies that defy explanation within the standard approach may
become explicable if we expand the preference domain. Conceptually, this permits us to conduct
welfare analysis by applying the principle of revealed preference, as in the standard approach
(that is, we can use essentially the same model to describe choices and welfare). We discuss two
examples.
The first example involves temptation and self-control. Motivating behavioral anomalies
include evidence of apparent time-inconsistency and various forms of precommitment. Gul and
Pesendorfer [2001] argue that it is possible to account for a range of otherwise puzzling
behavioral observations if preferences are defined over both allocations and choice sets (see also
Gul and Pesendorfer [2004a,b]). If some choices feel tempting when they are available, and if
this detracts from well-being, then an individual may prefer small choice sets to large ones. This
provides a reason to constrain future alternatives even when constraints have no impact on
choices. In the Gul-Pesendorfer framework, a desire to constrain future choices does not imply
that preferences change over time. On the contrary, as in the standard framework, the individual
applies the same set of lifetime preferences at every moment in time. Even though, at time t, he
might wish to constrain his available options for time s > t, he nevertheless approves of the choice
he would actually make at time s in the absence of this constraint (because he understands the
significance of temptation). In this framework, if one imposes suitable structure on choice data,
one can discover lifetime preferences over allocations and choice sets by applying the principle of
revealed preference, and one can use these preferences to make welfare evaluations, just as in the
standard approach.

7

The second example involves social preferences.

Motivating behavioral anomalies

include, among others, a tendency to give money away in settings where there is no room for
reciprocity (see, e.g., Camerer [2003] for a review of evidence on the dictator game), an apparent
aversion to inequality (e.g., Fehr and Schmidt [1999] and Bolton and Ockenfels [2000]), and a
desire to conform to group norms (see Jones [1984] for a review of pertinent evidence). For the
purpose of positive modeling, behavioral economists frequently assume that preferences are
defined not only over an individual’s own consumption bundle, but also over social outcomes,
such as the consumption bundles of others. If one imposes suitable structure on choice data, one
can once again discover these tastes by applying the principle of revealed preference. These
preferences provide a foundation for normative evaluation (in other words, one again uses
essentially the same model to describe choices and welfare).

2.C. Relaxing the third assumption (fixed lifetime preferences)
The third assumption states that preferences over lifetime state-contingent consumption
paths do not change over time or across states of nature. Behavioral anomalies motivating
relaxation of this assumption include, again, evidence of apparent time-inconsistency and various
forms of precommitment. From a positive perspective, a common modeling strategy involves
endowing the individual with different well-behaved lifetime preferences at different points in
time (Laibson [1997], O’Donoghue and Rabin [1999b, 2001]); one could, of course, also allow
lifetime preferences to vary across states of nature (Loewenstein [1996], Loewenstein and
O’Donoghue [2004]). Assuming we’ve properly measured these preferences, welfare analysis
requires us, in effect, to adjudicate conflicts among them. The problem is analogous to welfare
aggregation involving many individuals; here, we aggregate over multiple “selves.”
One branch of the literature exploits this analogy. Effectively, it envisions person A at
time t as the “child” of person A at time t-1. It then applies standard multi-person welfare
principles. One possibility is to apply the Pareto criterion (see, e.g., Phelps and Pollack [1968], or
Laibson [1997] and Battacharya and Lakdawalla [2004] for recent examples). The main problem
with this approach is that the criterion is not very discerning. As a result, it is often impossible to
rank interesting classes of policies. One usually ends up being able to offer policy makers little in
the way of clear guidance.

A second possibility is to aggregate preferences through the

application of some welfare function. As in problems with multiple consumers, one can write
down a class of well-behaved aggregators (i.e., the analog of Samuelson-Bergson social welfare
functions) and attempt to derive general results. However, unless one has a basis for making
specific assumptions about the aggregator, this approach fails to sharpen the prescriptions

8

generated from application of the Pareto criterion. Alternatively, one could in principle provide
the policy maker with a mapping from properties of the aggregator (e.g., welfare weights) to
prescriptions.
A second branch of the literature makes welfare evaluations based on some reasonably
stable component of preferences. For example, O’Donoghue and Rabin [1999b] argue for the
application of a “long-run” welfare criterion (β = 1) in models with quasi-hyperbolic discounting.
In Bernheim and Rangel [2005a], we provide a formal justification of this criterion based on
aggregation principles.

In particular, we demonstrate that if the consumer’s horizon is

sufficiently long, and if the policy analyst applies any member of a large class of well-behaved
aggregators, the resulting welfare criterion is “close” to long-run preferences. The intuition for
this result is that the consumer judges tradeoffs between period t and t + 1 by exactly the same
criteria in all periods but one, and the influence of any one “self” must decline to zero as the
number of selves becomes large.
One can make a similar point concerning states of nature. To illustrate, consider an
individual who lives in continuous time. Choices are essentially instantaneous but have longlasting consequences (as an example, think of drug use). The individual’s mental state is either
“cold,” which corresponds to one set of lifetime preferences, or “hot,” which corresponds to
another. Normally, the individual operates in a cold mode. At each moment, there’s some
chance that he enters the hot state, which has a fixed duration of ε. Suppose we model the arrival
of the hot state as a failure-time process, with a fixed hazard parameter. As ε approaches zero,
the fraction of time spent in the cold state converges to unity. Accordingly, if we aggregate
preferences according to the frequency with which they prevail, we end up using the cold
preferences for normative analysis. Even so, cold preferences do not describe behavior in this
limit. Since hot states can create “momentary lapses” with long-lasting effects, the appropriate
positive and normative models diverge.

See Bernheim and Rangel [2005a] for a formal

treatment.

2.D. Relaxing the fourth assumption (no mistakes)
The fourth assumption holds that choice and preferences do not diverge.

Gul and

Pesendorfer [2002] defend this assumption as follows: “Revealed preference theory defines the
interest of people to be what they do. Since there is no objective standard of self-interested
behavior it is unclear what it would mean for an agent to act against his self-interest.”

9

Yet there are clearly situations where virtually everyone would agree that divergence
does occur – where a choice is obviously not in someone's interest. There are also situations in
which most would agree that public policy should recognize these divergences.
Consider the following example. American visitors in London suffer numerous injuries
and fatalities because they often look only to the left before stepping into streets, even though
they know traffic approaches from the right. This is a systematic pattern; one can't dismiss it as
an isolated incident. A literal application of the revealed preference compels us to conclude
either that these people simply have a very strong preference look left, or that they're masochistic.
If we use these revealed preferences for welfare analysis, there's no legitimate basis for
preventing someone from stepping in front of a truck. And yet, it's safe to say that, after
recognizing the purpose of the intervention, anyone would be grateful. The pedestrian's objective
-- to cross the street safely -- is clear, and the decision is plainly a mistake.
As another example, consider the treatment of children. Few economists would apply
notions of consumer sovereignty and revealed preference to evaluate the welfare of a child. We
acknowledge that children do not know what's best, and that their actions often fail to reflect valid
preferences, probably because they give insufficient weight to consequences. Policies prohibiting
the sale of cigarettes and alcohol to minors are therefore relatively uncontroversial. And yet, it's
difficult to justify, objectively, the sense in which the revealed preferences of an irresponsible
nineteen-year-old are legitimate, whereas those of a fourteen-year-old are not. While turning
eighteen has profound legal significance, it doesn't discontinuously change the mechanics of
decision-making.
There are other contexts for which revealed preference seems untenable as a guiding
principle for public policy evaluation. For example, when people have sufficiently severe
diagnosed psychiatric disorders, the state can and should step in to protect them.

Eating

disorders, while not quite as extreme, provide another illustration. For the purpose of public
policy, we probably should not proceed on the assumption that an anorexic's refusal to eat is just
an expression of valid preferences. On the contrary, we should and generally do regard this as
dysfunctional. These examples are instructive because they suggest that, in some circumstances,
it is reasonable to use evidence of brain process malfunctions – something other than choice data
– to trump the principle of revealed preference. In these situations, denying the possibility of
mistakes while rigidly adhering to the principle of revealed preference guarantees the use of an
improper welfare criterion.
So far, we have confined our discussion to “dysfunctional” choices. More generally,
almost any behavioral anomaly motivating some relaxation of the first three assumptions can also

10

motivate relaxation of the fourth. For example, evidence of time-inconsistent present-bias may
reflect a systematic tendency to “over-consume.” Likewise, people may make precommitments
to prevent themselves from repeating a pattern of mistakes.
A natural analytic strategy involves endowing the individual with well-behaved lifetime
preferences, while simultaneously specifying a decision process (or decision criterion) that does
not necessarily involve selecting the maximal element in the preference ordering. To conduct
positive analysis, one employs a model of the decision process (or criterion).
normative analysis, one uses a model of lifetime preferences.

To conduct

In contrast to the standard

approach, these positive and normative models potentially diverge.
Our model of addiction (Bernheim and Rangel [2004]), discussed in greater detail below,
exemplifies this approach.

We assume that people attempt to optimize given their true

preferences, but randomly encounter conditions that trigger systematic mistakes, the likelihood of
which evolves with previous substance use. One can also interpret the familiar model of quasihyperbolic discounting along similar lines (indeed, many of those who advocate this model favor
this interpretation). In this interpretation, present-biased behavior is a mistake that results from
the decision making processes’ tendency to place too much weight on immediate rewards relative
to future rewards.3
In justifying and implementing this approach, we encounter two critical and difficult
issues. First, how do we know that choices and preferences diverge? That is, what is the basis
for overturning the principle of revealed preference? Second, if we find compelling evidence of
divergence, how do we identify preferences empirically? Both questions are addressed in the
literature, though not in a single paper.
1. Criteria for overturning revealed preferences. With respect to the first issue, it is
important to acknowledge that, strictly speaking, it is impossible to overturn the principle of
revealed preference using only observations of choices. While choice experiments can overturn
specific structural assumptions, overturning the principle itself necessarily requires other types of
evidence. It is always possible to rationalize choice data by assuming that tastes are sufficiently
context-specific.
One promising approach is to use evidence from neuroscience and psychology on the
neural processes at work in decision making. For example, if it is possible to isolate a process
that provides inputs for decision-making, and to show that this process either has substantive
limitations, or that it malfunctions under identifiable circumstances, then the evidence may
provide a foundation both for asserting the existence of errors, and for a particular reduced-form
3

McClure et. al. [2004] present evidence that potentially supports this interpretation.

11

model of the error-producing mechanism. In this regard, brain processes of particular interest
include those involved in anticipating and evaluating the outcomes of different choices,
remembering pertinent information (memory), and attending to relevant data and options
(attention). An example of this approach appears in Bernheim and Rangel [2004], where we
argue that addictive substances interfere with the proper operation of an automatic neural
forecasting system, thereby skewing decisions. We elaborate on this example in Section 4.E,
below.

2. Strategies for identifying preferences. With respect to the second issue, it may be
possible in a given instance to identify preferences by interpreting the available data through the
lens of structural modeling. This approach requires one to formulate two tightly parameterized
models – one for preferences, and one for choices. Ideally, it should be possible to justify the
major structural assumptions of the decision-making model through the type of neurological and
psychological evidence used to establish the existence of a discrepancy between preferences and
choices.
As long as true preferences influence choices, even if the individual does not optimize,
there will be some relationship between the parameters of the positive and normative models, and
this will be useful for purposes of identification. Indeed, for the two examples mentioned so far
(stochastic mistakes, as in Bernheim and Rangel [2004, 2005b], and quasi-hyperbolic
discounting, as in Laibson [1997] and O’Donoghue and Rabin [1999b, 2001]), the parameters of
the normative model are a subset of the parameters of the positive model (certain parameters
describe true preferences, and others describe discrepancies between choices and preferences).
Consequently, by estimating the positive model, one can recover preferences under the
maintained hypothesis that the structural assumptions are correct.
Ideally, the assumed structure should subsume the possibility that there is no discrepancy
between preferences and choices, so that it is possible to test this hypothesis. Both of the
examples considered above satisfy this requirement.
Identification of preferences through choice data. As long as the parameters of the
normative model are a subset of the parameters of the positive model, one can in principle
estimate these parameters using data on choices, and nothing else. For example, Laibson et. al.
[2004] use consumption data to parameterize a model with quasi-hyperbolic discounting. This in
turn implies that it is possible to test the hypothesis of no mistakes (e.g., β=1 in the context of
quasi-hyperbolic discounting) without considering anything other than choices. This statement
seems inconsistent with the principle that it is impossible to falsify the principle of revealed
preference with choice data alone. The explanation for this apparent inconsistency is that one

12

tests the hypothesis of no mistakes jointly with the assumptions of the structural model. Even if
this joint hypothesis is rejected, there is some other structural model for which the hypothesis of
no mistakes would not be rejected. When interpreting the results, one therefore necessarily relies
on the non-choice evidence used to justify the assumed structure. Accordingly, the reliability and
strength of this non-choice evidence limits the force of one’s conclusions.
The observations in the preceding paragraph remain valid even if one uses data on nonstandard types of choices, such as decisions made in advance of consequences, precommitments,
and expenditures on self-control. For any given structural decision-making model, this type of
evidence may prove extremely useful from the perspective of estimating parameters precisely and
convincingly, and it may allow one to reject the hypothesis of no mistakes for a much broader
class of preferences (e.g., any preference for which the decision-maker would exhibit timeconsistent behavior). However, stepping outside of the assumed structure, there will always be
other formulations of preferences that can explain the choice data without assuming a divergence
between preferences and decisions. Of course, any such formulation will necessarily diverge
from the standard model (as in Gul and Pesendorfer [2001]), and, in any given case,
rationalization of the data may require strange assumptions about preferences.
It is worth emphasizing that the estimation of separate positive and normative models
does not require us to abandon the principle of revealed preference completely. Instead, one
implicitly invokes a principle of selectively revealed preference. Depending on the structural
model, identifiable decisions (e.g., in the context of quasi-hyperbolic discounting, choices well in
advance of consequences) may, by assumption, reveal preferences with certainty, or there may be
uncertainty as to whether a given decision conforms to preferences (as in models with stochastic
mistakes). In the latter case, one can model this uncertainty explicitly, proceeding, for example,
as in the literature on switching regimes.
Identification of preferences through both choice and non-choice data.

Another

largely unexplored possibility would involve the use of both choice and non-choice data in
structural estimation. Data of potential interest could include self-reported information about
preferences and/or well-being, as well as measures of physical states such as arousal and stress.
This additional data could facilitate more precise and reliable estimation of key structural
parameters. One might, for example, use self-reported data on preferences along with choice data
to estimate the parameters of a normative model. In principle, the normative model could even
include parameters that do not appear in the positive model. Likewise, non-choice data might
prove useful in identifying circumstances in which choices reliably reflect preferences, and those
in which they do not. If, for example, there is reason to believe that people are more prone to

13

make mistakes when they are under stress, data on cortisol levels might help to identify choices
that more reliably reveal preferences.
The use of non-choice data raises at least two concerns. First, one can interpret this data
through the lens of structural modeling only if one is willing to make additional assumptions, for
example about how the non-choice data relate to decision-making processes. Advocates of the
revealed preference approach view these assumptions with considerable suspicion (Gul and
Psendorfer [2001,2004a,b]). However, an emerging theme in Behavioral Economics is that it is
possible to justify, defend, and test these assumptions through the careful use of data from
psychology and neuroscience. Furthermore, in practice the revealed preference approach relies
on assumptions that are not directly supported by choice data – e.g., structural estimation always
entails untested restrictions on the form of preferences – and people have different opinions as to
which of these assumptions are most “reasonable” in a given instance. To the extent we judge an
assumption as reasonable based on evidence not involving choice, it behooves us to make the
basis of our inference explicit, regardless of whether we follow the standard approach or a
behavioral alternative. One cannot claim an advantage for the standard approach simply by
sweeping the implicit reliance on non-choice evidence under the rug, or by theorizing about an
idealized procedure that is impossible to follow in practice (see Bernheim and Rangel [2005a]
and Koszegi [2002] for elaborations of this point).
Second, economists generally view non-choice data as significantly less reliable and
considerably more ambiguous than information on choices. In part, this view is justified by
evidence indicating that certain types of self-reported data are unreliable (Diamond and Hausman
[1994], Schwarz and Strack [1999]). In our view, this deficiency is exaggerated, particularly with
regard to evidence concerning limitations and malfunctions of specific brain processes involving
forecasting, memory, and attention (as discussed above). There is every reason to believe that the
quality of this and other non-choice evidence, as well as our ability to interpret it, will improve
with time. Furthermore, given the potential value of non-choice data, concerns about the quality
of this information should motivate the development of better procedures for acquiring and
interpreting it, rather than a policy of ignoring it on “conceptual” grounds.
We conclude this section by acknowledging two concerns. First, the feasibility and value
of the empirical approach to measuring welfare discussed in this section has yet to be established
through a series of persuasive applications. Only a few studies (discussed below) have made a
start in this direction. There are many unresolved issues, e.g., concerning how to elicit and use
data on self-reported preferences. Nevertheless, at a conceptual level, it does appear that one can

14

meaningfully conduct empirical welfare analysis allowing for some types of divergences between
preferences and choices.
Second, there are significant political dangers associated with the research agenda
described in this section. As we mentioned in Section 1, revealed preference is an attractive
political principle because it prevents critics of any particular choice (e.g., concerning literature,
sexual orientation, or religion) from condemning it on the grounds that it is contrary to a “natural”
welfare criterion reflecting the individual's "true" interests. While we do not condone casual
departures from this principle, we do think it is possible to insist on a high standard of proof,
based in scientific evidence. In classifying certain behavioral patterns, such as psychoses, eating
disorders, and addiction, as mental illnesses, the medical profession has grappled with essentially
the same issues. While there have certainly been some dubious decisions (e.g., the classification,
until relatively recently, of homosexuality as a psychiatric disorder), the process has, on the
whole, reflected the balanced application of sound scientific principles.

3. Saving
For more that fifty years, the framework of intertemporal utility maximization has
dominated economists’ thinking about personal saving. This framework traces its roots to Irving
Fisher (1930), and lies at the heart of the Life Cycle Hypothesis articulated by Modigliani and
Brumberg (1954). In recent years it has become controversial, and an increasing number of
economists have expressed doubts concerning its general validity. Many have turned to new
approaches.
In this section, we survey some of the pertinent empirical evidence motivating the
growing interest in alternatives to the standard model, describe some leading behavioral models,
and explore some of their key policy implications. Our objective is to cover central themes.
Given the size and rapid growth of this literature, we make no attempt to be comprehensive. Also,
in describing competing models of saving, we focus on basic formulations, and ignore
complications arising from liquidity constraints, intertemporal complementarities, and uncertainty
about length of life and market parameters.

3.A. The policy issues
The last few decades have witnessed sharp declines in rates of saving for many developed
countries. For example, according to statistics from the National Income and Product Accounts

15

(NIPA), the rate of net national saving for the U.S. dropped from 8.3 percent of net national
product in 1980 to 1.8 percent in 2003. Low rates of saving have created widespread concern
over investment, growth, the balance of payments, and the financial security of individual
households.

As a result, policymakers worldwide have become increasingly interested in

developing strategies for stimulating thrift.
Public policies affecting private saving are highly contentious. In the U.S., policy makers
are currently debating a variety of critical questions: Should the US partially replace its traditional
social security system with individual savings accounts? If so, how should we structure the new
system? Should the government impose more stringent regulations on defined contribution
pension plans, which appear to be replacing defined benefit plans at a steady rate? Should we
create or expand tax-deferred savings accounts for special needs, such as medical care and
education? Or should we consider more fundamental tax reform that would reduce or eliminate
the tax burden on capital income across the board?
To answer these and other critical questions, public economists require a theory of
personal financial decision making that can explain observed behavior and generate credible outof-sample predictions.

It must also provide clear answers to normative questions, such as

whether people save enough for retirement, and whether they invest their savings wisely.

3.B. The neoclassical perspective on saving
We begin by reviewing a simple version of the standard model. An individual lives for
T+1 periods. In each period t = 0,…,T, he consumes ct units of an aggregate consumption good.
His preferences are defined over consumption bundles of the form c = (c0,…,cT). We assume that
it is possible to represent these preferences with a separable utility function of the form
T

U (c1 ,..., cT ) = ! " t u (ct ) ,
t =0

where δ is a constant rate of time preference. The individual selects a consumption bundle from
some feasible set, which reflects the distribution of earnings over time, interest rates, liquidity
constraints, and the like. In practice, he chooses each element of c sequentially, rather than
selecting the entire bundle at time 0. However, as time passes, he continues to apply the same
lifetime preferences. This means that, as of time s, he evaluates continuation bundles, (cs,…,cT),
according to the utility function

16

T

U s (c s ,..., cT ) = A! # t " s u (ct ) + B ,
t =s

where A = δs and B =

s "1

! # u (c ) .
t

t =0

t

When writing down this model, economists usually follow the convention of
renormalizing utility so that A = 1 and B = 0 in every period. This normalization obscures the
fact that the individual has the same lifetime preferences at every moment in time. Since lifetime
preferences are fixed, the appropriate welfare standard is unambiguous. Behavior is dynamically
consistent in the sense that, fixing (c0,…,ct-1), he would choose the same continuation bundle,
(ct,…,cT), regardless of whether he made the decision in period t or some prior period.
Accordingly, the individual behaves exactly as he would if he chose the entire bundle at time 0,
which rules out any demand for precommitment.
The literature pertaining to the standard model is vast, and we make no attempt to review
it here. However, in keeping with our objectives, it is important to summarize some of the key
implications for public policy. The neoclassical approach assumes that people make appropriate
decisions, provided they are well informed. If the government can provide relevant information
more effectively and efficiently than private markets, educational policies are potentially
beneficial. Assuming information is not an issue, there is no role for government in the absence
of pre-existing distortions. It may be appropriate for the government to tax or subsidize capital
income as part of a second-best policy in the presence of revenue requirements, to ensure an
adequate level of competition in financial markets, to minimize fraud, and to alleviate adverse
selection problems. However, under the standard view, there is nothing wrong with the choices
people make, given the constraints they face. Reasons for government intervention involve
market failures, not individual decision-making failures.
In practice, policy makers worry that people are not saving enough for their own security
and future well-being. This is part of the motivation for proposals involving subsidized saving
and/or mandatory accumulation.

The standard model does not, however, recognize the

legitimacy of this concern (except insofar as it results from a market failure). Under this view,
saying that someone saves “too little” is comparable to asserting that he or she doesn’t listen to
enough classical music – thrift is simply a matter of taste (Lazear [1994]). In contrast, if
households potentially make systematic mistakes, the adequacy of saving becomes a well-posed
and important empirical issue.

17

In the ensuing sections, we review some of the evidence that calls the legitimacy of the
standard approach into question, and we explore the implications of several emerging
alternatives.

3.C. Some problematic observations
In some respects, saving behavior conforms reasonably well to the predictions of the
Life-Cycle Hypothesis. For example, most people tend to accumulate wealth, broadly defined to
include things like pension and social security entitlements, over the course of their working
lives, and use either some or all of it to finance consumption after retirement. Yet there are also
sound reasons to question the general applicability of this model and to examine alternatives.
Here we list a number of problematic patterns identified in the literature. While it may be
possible to account for some of these within the context of the Life-Cycle framework, collectively
they pose a serious challenge to this approach.
1. Changes in consumption near retirement. The standard framework implies that
people should smooth consumption, avoiding sudden and predictable changes in living standard.
Yet a variety of studies have found that consumption declines sharply at retirement, when
households experience a predictable decline in disposable income (Hammermesh [1984], Mariger
[1987], Hausman and Paquette [1987], Robb and Burbridge [1989], Banks et. al. [1998],
Bernheim et. a. [2001]). The decline in consumption is strongly correlated with accumulated
wealth; those who accumulate less experience larger declines (Bernheim et. al [2001]).
One can try to account for this pattern within the standard model in several ways. First,
retirement may be associated with a decline in work-related expenses and/or consumption goods
that are substitutes for leisure. If these effects are anticipated, and if their magnitudes vary across
the population, then people who plan for larger spending cuts after retirement will intentionally
accumulate less wealth. Yet the evidence does not support this interpretation, as the effect is
equally strong for categories of spending that would appear complementary to leisure and
unrelated to work (Bernheim et. al. [2001]). Second, for those who stop working earlier than
expected (e.g., due to disability), retirement reflects “bad news” to which consumption must
adjust.

Moreover, these same individuals find themselves with less-than-average wealth at

retirement. However, even when the effects of unexpected retirement are removed through
statistical procedures, one still observes both a decline in consumption at retirement, and a strong
correlation between the size of this effect and accumulated wealth.
Notably, the sharp drop in consumption at retirement is also larger for households with
lower rates of income replacement from social security and pension plans (Bernheim et. a.

18

[2001]). Once again, this pattern is observed even when the effects of unexpected retirement are
removed. Since income replacement rates are easily anticipated, and since this variable is not
likely to be strongly correlated with work-related expenses or a preference for leisure substitutes,
standard theory is hard-pressed to account for the evidence.
This evidence would appear to indicate that people reduce consumption at retirement
because they are surprised, either by the decline in their disposable income or by the inadequacy
of their accumulated wealth. Yet other evidence suggests that the decline in consumption at
retirement is anticipated (Hurd and Rohwedder [2003]). The explanation for this apparent puzzle
remains an open question.
2. Self-reported mistakes. Several studies document large gaps between self-reported
behavior and self-reported plans and/or preferences. A large fraction of the population reports
saving too little – that is, significantly less than planned, or less than appropriate – for retirement
(Bernheim [1995], Farkas and Johnson [1997], Choi et. al. [2004]). The reported gap is quite
large, and few people report saving too much. Of those who express an intention to increase their
saving, only a small fraction follow through (Choi et. al. [2004]). Taking these self-reports
literally, one would conclude that pro-saving policies are potentially welfare-improving.
Skeptics counter that people are inclined to report “ideal” or “virtuous” behavior in
answer to questions about plans or preferences; they might well also report that they watch too
much television. This is a serious concern. However, the finding appears to be robust across
samples, contexts, and phrasing of the pertinent questions. While the evidence is imperfect, in
our view it should not be dismissed.
Others minimize the significance of the self-reported savings gap on the grounds that
carefully calibrated life-cycle models can replicate data on wealth accumulation (see, e.g., Scholz
et. al. [2004]). We find this line of argument unconvincing. At most, it supports an “as-if”
interpretation of the life-cycle model. This does not rule out the possibility that people actually
do make mistakes. Within the standard framework, one can rationalize a systematic tendency to
consume too much as impatience – that is, a low value of δ.

However, if overconsumption is

indeed a mistake, then the true value of δ is higher than the as-if value, and this rationalization
leads to an inappropriate welfare criterion. In addition, the models used to “explain” the level and
distribution of wealth have other counterfactual implications (e.g., they produce no decline in
consumption at retirement).
3. Limited planning skills. Most people are poorly equipped to engage in life cycle
planning without assistance.

Collectively, existing studies paint a rather bleak picture of

economic and financial literacy (see, e.g., Walstad and Soper [1988], Walstad and :Larsen [1992],

19

O’Neill [1993], Consumer Federation of America and the American Express Company [1991],
and Bernheim [1998]). For example, only 20 percent of adults can determine correct change
using prices from a menu, and many have trouble determining whether a mortgage rate of 8.6
percent is better or worse than 8 ¾ percent. People tend to underestimate the power of compound
interest, and many poorly understand common financial instruments.
In principle, financially illiterate individuals could seek guidance from experts.

In

practice, somewhere in the neighborhood of 60 percent of virtually every population subgroup
relies primarily on parents, relatives, friends, and personal judgment. People with less education
are actually more likely to rely on their own judgment. Only a minority consults financial
professionals or print media (Bernheim [1998]). Moreover, in some cases financial professionals
rely on simple rules of thumb (Doyle and Johnson [1991]), and even their relatively sophisticated
tools conflict in some ways with sound life-cycle planning principles (Bernheim et. al. [2002]).
Financial literacy is strongly related to behavior. Those who are less financially literate
also tend to save less (Bernheim [1998]). Moreover, measures designed to address financial
illiteracy appear to have significant effects on choices. Policies mandating financial education for
high school students result in higher asset accumulation once exposed students reach adulthood
(Bernheim, Garrett, and Maki [2001]). Likewise, financial education in the workplace increases
participation in employee-directed pension plans and stimulates saving (see Bernheim and Garrett
[2003], Bayer, Bernheim, and Scholz [1996], and Duflo and Saez [2003]).
4. Failure to formulate sophisticated plans. Under an “as-if” interpretation, the standard
model implies nothing about the process by which an individual arrives at consumption and
saving decisions. Yet it is difficult to see how someone would formulate coherent life-cycle
choices without extensive and deliberate planning. In practice, many people report spending little
if any effort formulating long-range financial plans; moreover, those who fail to plan tend to save
less (see Bernheim [1994], Lusardi [2000, 2003], Ameriks, Caplin, and Leahy [2003]).
When they exist, financial plans tend to be relatively unsophisticated. Many people
establish saving targets, and in most cases think of these targets as percentages of income.
However, the targets appear to reflect rough rules of thumb – in the vast majority of cases, they
are integer multiples of 5 percent, and they vary neither with stated expectations about earnings
growth nor with age (Bernheim [1994]).
In addition, important financial decisions often appear to turn on arguably irrelevant
considerations. People are significantly more likely to make tax-deductible IRA contributions if

20

they owe the IRS money at the end of the tax year (Feenberg and Skinner [1989]).4 There is a
striking tendency for household to make an IRA contribution equal to the single-person limit,
even when they are eligible to contribute more (Feenberg and Skinner [1989], Engen, Gale, and
Scholz [1994]). And IRA participation rates rose sharply when the system was expanded in
1982, even among groups that had been eligible prior to the expansion, and fell sharply once the
system was scaled back in 1986, even among groups that remained eligible (Long [1990], Venti
and Wise [1992]).
5. The importance of default options. We use the term “default option” to signify the
outcome resulting from inaction.

For a neoclassical consumer, choices depend only on

preferences and constraints. Consequently, in the absence of significant transaction costs, default
options should be inconsequential.

Yet in the context of decisions concerning saving and

investment, they appear to matter a great deal.
With respect to 401(k) plans, there is considerable evidence that default options affect
participation rates, contribution rates, and portfolios (Madrian and Shea [2001], Choi et. al.
[2004a]).

Also, automatic cash distributions for terminated employees with small balances

reduce retirement account balances, even though these employees are free to roll their funds into
an IRA (Choi et. al. [2004a]).5

Effects of defaults on portfolio allocation have also been

documented in the context of the recent privatization of social security in Sweden.

The

dissemination of information about investment alternatives appears to counter this effect
(Cronqvist and Thaler [2004]).
In the standard framework, defaults can matter if other choices are associated with
significant transaction costs.

Yet in the contexts described above, transactions costs are

presumably quite low. Alternatively, the effect of a default option may be related to the costs of
decision making. In pressing this explanation, one must explain why these costs favor the default
option over other alternatives (e.g., the simplest or most transparent choices). One possibility is
that people believe the default conveys information about the wisdom of a particular choice. This
may be a plausible assumption in the context of portfolio allocation within 401(k) plans, where
the employer has a fiduciary responsibility to its employees in its role as plan sponsor. In any
case, even if default options are viewed as informative, their strong effects tell us that people
regularly make significant decisions concerning saving on the basis of precious little information.

4

Gravelle [1991] attributes this to spurious correlations with income, tax filing status, and/or asset holdings, but the
pattern is apparent even when Feenberg and Skinner include plausible controls for these factors.
5
Choi et. al. [2004a] also contains a discussion of the “optimal defaults”.

21

6. Inefficient choices. In the standard framework, consumers always choose alternatives
on the efficient frontiers of their constraint sets. When evaluating evidence pertaining to this
implication, it would be unfair to interpret it too literally. In some instances (e.g., failure to
engage in sophisticated tax arbitrage), squeezing out the last dime involves complex
arrangements and potentially high transaction costs, so the appearance of inefficiency may be
illusory. However, in some cases, people select alternatives far from the efficient frontiers of
their choice sets in settings where superior alternatives are clearly available. Examples include
failures to take advantage of low interest loans available through life insurance policies
(Warshawsky [1987]), naïve diversification strategies (Bernartzi and Thaler [2001]), the tendency
to invest 401(k) balances heavily in the stock of one’s employer (Holden, Van Der Hei and Quick
[2000] and Bernartzi [2001]), the proclivity to maintain substantial balances on high-interest
credit cards (Laibson et. al. [2003], Laibson et. al. [2004], Gross and Souleles [2002]), and the
inclination to delay IRA contributions until the end of the tax year (Summers [1986]).

3.D. Insights from psychology
A number of the empirical puzzles described in the previous section may be related to
problems involving the exercise of self-control. There is a sizable and rapidly growing literature
in psychology and neuroscience concerning the properties, development, and limitations of selfcontrol processes. In this section we provide a brief introduction to this literature by summarizing
some of the evidence most relevant for savings. See Frederick, Loewenstein and O’Dohonue
[2002] and Loewenstein, Read, and Baumister [2003] for more comprehensive reviews of the
literature.
Evidence of dynamically inconsistent choice. Saving reflects a decision to accept a
lower level of consumption in one period in exchange for a higher level of consumption in
another.

The standard model assumes that the individual evaluates a tradeoff involving

consumption at two future fixed points in time, say s and t (with s < t), precisely the same way at
every moment r. Yet a large body of evidence finds that this evaluation in fact depends on the
proximity of r to s.

In particular, when s is sufficiently proximate, people tend to favor

consumption in the closer period s.
The direct evidence for this proposition is experimental. The typical experiment involves
two treatments. In the first, subjects are offered a small prize in s days, or a large prize in t days.
In the second, they are offered the same small prize in s + d days, or the same large prize in t + d
days, for some d > 0 (where we interpret d as “delay”). When s = 0 (that is, the subject decides
between an immediate reward and a delayed one in the first treatment), a significantly larger

22

fraction of subjects choose the small prize in the first treatment than in the second (see, e.g..,
Ainslie and Haendel [1983], or, for a recent review of the evidence, Frederick, Loewenstein, and
O’Donoghue [2002]).

For relatively small values of s (on the order of seven days), this

differential disappears (Harrison, Coller, and Rutstrom [2002]).
The simple experiment described in the previous paragraph potentially suffers from a
variety of confounds.

An immediate reward is usually distinguished by more than just its

immediacy. Arguably, it is less risky (that is, less likely to be forgotten by the subject or
neglected by the experimenter), and it involves lower transaction costs.

However, the

discrepancy between the two treatments persists even when reasonable steps are taken to
eliminate these confounds. Another concern is that, with state-contingent utility, evaluations of
tradeoffs may depend on “moods.” For an immediate reward, mood is known, while for a future
reward it is not. Under appropriate (if somewhat special) assumptions, this can account for the
observed pattern (Fernandez-Villaverde and Mukherji [2002]).
Notably, similar results are obtained regardless of whether the reward consists of money
or a consumption good. This is surprising in that, for a wide range of standard and non-standard
behavioral theories, the best choice with monetary rewards involves the maximization of present
discounted value (at least in the absence of binding liquidity constraints), which means it should
not vary with delay, d.
Pre-commitment. People who understand that their behavior is dynamically inconsistent
might want to exercise self-control through the use of pre-commitment devices.

There is

evidence that this occurs in practice. For example, Ariely and Wertenbroch [2002] study a field
experiment in which students are allowed to self-impose deadlines on assignments. They find that
many subjects choose these constraints. Wertenbroch [1998] discusses suggestive evidence that
people attempt to control their consumption of “tempting” foods by purchasing small packages,
even when the unit price is lower for larger packages.
The role of cues and cognitive processes in self-control. In an influential study, Shiv and
Fedorihin [1999] show that cognitive load can affect self-control. Subjects are given a number to
memorize, and are asked to report it in another room. In some cases the number has two digits,
and in others it has seven. Before reporting the number, they are asked to choose between two
deserts, chocolate cake and fruit salad, which are physically present. Individuals in the sevendigit treatment are roughly 50% more likely to choose the chocolate cake. This suggests that selfcontrol requires cognitive effort, and that this becomes more difficult when cognition is engaged
in other tasks.

23

Shiv and Fedorihin [1999] also consider a variation of this experiment in which the
deserts are not physically present; instead, subjects are shown pictures.

The differential in

choices between the two treatments disappears. This suggests that cues can impair self-control.
To account for this effect, psychologists hypothesize that self-control is difficult when the
individuals enter strong “visceral states,” and that the real items are more likely than pictures to
trigger such states.
These findings are consistent with the work of Mischel and co-authors, which shows that
self-control is affected by the deployment of attention and the presence of cues (see Mischel
[1974], Mischel and Moor [1973], Mischel, Shoda, and Rodriguez [1992] and Metcalfe and
Mischel [1999]). In a typical experiment, a subject (often a child) is placed in a room and is
offered a choice between an inferior and a superior prize (one or two pieces of candy). Subjects
can obtain the inferior prize at any time by calling the experimenter, but must wait until he returns
to obtain the superior prize. In practice, the child’s ability to wait depends crucially on whether
the inferior prize is visible. Merely covering the object significantly enhances self-control.
More generally, in Mischel’s experiments, the deployment of attention emerges as a key
determinant of self-control. Any stimulus that focuses attention on the “tempting” features of the
inferior prize increases the likelihood that the children will select it. Children are significantly
more likely to wait if they are advised to distract themselves by thinking about something else, or
if they are provided with a toy, even when children in a control group show no interest in the toy.
Discussion. The evidence suggests that exercising self-control is sometimes difficult.
The amount of effort devoted to imposing self-control appears to depend on a variety of
environmental and contextual factors that are arguably unrelated to true preferences.
Accordingly, lapses in self-control are potentially associated with divergences between choices
and true preferences (i.e., mistakes). Moreover, one expects such lapses to arise probabilistically,
as the result of chance encounters with cues and stimuli outside the individual’s control.
The models of decision making described in the next two sections attempt to capture
these ideas in different ways. They make different assumptions about the nature of the processes
responsible for the mistakes associated with self-control lapses, and they employ different
reduced-form representations of these processes.

3.E. Models of saving with quasi-hyperbolic discounting
Building on previous work by Strotz [1956], Phelps and Pollack [1968], and Akerlof
[1991], Laibson [1997] proposes a model of saving intended to capture some of the self-control
problems described in Sections 3.C and 3.D.

24

This framework is widely known as “quasi-

hyperbolic” or “(β,δ)” discounting.6 From a positive perspective, individuals behave as if they
optimize subject to lifetime preferences that change with time. In particular, in each period t, the
decision maker acts as if he picks the feasible consumption path that maximizes a utility function
of the form

u(ct ) + ! [

$

T

k #t

" u(c k )] .
k = t +1

This formulation differs from the standard model in only one respect: it includes an additional
discount factor, β > 0, that is applied to the utility associated with all future consumption. The
parameter β is meant to represent the degree of present bias, or myopia. The standard model
corresponds to the special case where β=1. With β < 1, the present is given special status relative
to all other time periods, and this creates a powerful tendency to consume immediately.
As long as " ! 1 , this model gives rise to dynamically inconsistent behavior. With β <
1, the individual always wishes to consume more in the current period than he would have chosen
for himself at any point in the past. This complicates positive analysis. One can no longer
characterize the individual’s behavior by solving a single optimization problem. Instead, the
model gives rise to a game played between “multiple selves.” The literature solves this game
under three different assumptions about the accuracy of the decision maker’s expectations
concerning his own future behavior.
A naive individual acts as if his future selves will be willing to follow through on his
current plans. In this case, one determines behavior by solving a sequence of optimization
problems. In each period, the naïve self divides his resources between current consumption and
saving, anticipating that he will use his wealth to finance his desired consumption path for the rest
of his life. He never actually follows this plan because, in the next period, he again attaches
disproportionate weight to the present. The naïve individual does not understand his self-control
problem, and makes no attempt to manage it.
A sophisticated decision maker perfectly anticipates his future actions. In particular, he
knows that, given the opportunity in any future period, he will consume a larger fraction of his
resources than he would like. Under this assumption, one determines behavior by solving for the
sub-game perfect equilibria of the dynamic game played between multiple selves. Frequently,
this setting gives rise to multiple equilibria, which means behavior is indeterminate unless one
applies a selection criterion or refinement (Laibson [1994], Krussel and Smith [2003], and
Bernheim, Ray, and Yeltekin [1999]). In contrast to naïve decision makers, a sophisticated
6

See O’Donohue and Rabin [1999a,b] for other early influential variations of the (β,δ) model.

25

decision maker perfectly understands his self-control problem, and may attempt to manage
anticipated lapses of self-control by limiting future choices.
Finally, a partially sophisticated decision maker understands that he will have a selfcontrol problem in the future, but underestimates its magnitude.

O’Donoghue and Rabin

[1999b,2001] parameterize the degree of sophistication to create a continuum between the two
extreme cases of complete naivete and perfect sophistication. See their papers for details, as well
as for further discussion of the relationships between these assumptions.
There has been much confusion in the literature concerning interpretations of the (β,δ)model. This confusion reflects the fact that the positive model described above is consistent with
at least two distinct approaches to the formulation of a normative model. One approach follows
the agenda outlined in section 2.C: think of person A at time t as the “child” of person A at time t1, and then apply standard multi-person welfare principles. The second approach follows the
agenda outlined in section 2.D: assume the individual has stable lifetime preferences, and
interpret the reduced-form parameter β as measuring the tendency to make present-biased
mistakes. With few exceptions, the leading advocates of the (β,δ)-model endorse the second
approach.7 Typically, they assume that true preferences correspond to a standard intertemporal
utility function with exponential discounting at the rate δ (“long-run” preferences).8 Yet much of
the profession continues to think of the (β,δ)-model literally as one with “multiple selves,” which
is in keeping with the first approach, but not the second.
Several papers have estimated (or calibrated) (β,δ) models using data on consumption
and saving. In principle, this permits one to test the hypothesis that β=1. Under the second
approach to normative analysis described in the preceding paragraph, it also allows one to recover
true preferences, and to conduct welfare analysis.
Angeletos et. al. (2001) simulate a 90 period life-cycle model with uncertain labor
income, probabilistic death, constant discount factors, additively separable preferences, and three
types of assets: riskless bonds, credit card borrowing, and an illiquid asset resembling housing
wealth. They calibrate the model to match the median level of wealth near retirement assuming β
= 1, and again assuming β = 0.7. Then they compare the model’s ability to track data from the
Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) under these two different assumptions. Both versions
generate similar consumption patterns, except that borrowing is higher earlier in life and

7
8

This statement is based in large part on personal conversations. Much of the literature is not explicit on this point.
As discussed in Section 2.C, one can justify the same welfare criterion under the first approach.

26

consumption is higher later in life with quasi-hyperbolic discounting. However, with β = 0.7, the
model performs substantially better in tracking credit card balances, the share of wealth held in
liquid form, the marginal propensity to consume out of anticipated income, and the discontinuity
in consumption at retirement.
Laibson et. al. [2004] develop and estimate a similar model with stochastic labor income,
liquidity constraints, child and adult dependents, liquid and illiquid assets, and revolving credit.
They use the Method of Simulated Moments to estimate many of the parameters of the model
based on data from the Survey of Consumer Finances. They formally reject the standard
exponential model in favor of quasi-hyperbolic discounting. According to their estimates, the
short-run annualized discount rate is 40%, while the long-run annualized discount rate is only 4%.
Their rejection of exponential discounting is driven by the observation that high levels of credit
card borrowing coexist with significant wealth accumulation. Paserman (2002) uses labor market
data on unemployment durations and market wages to estimate a related model. He finds a longrun discount rate of 0.1% and a short-term discount rate of 10-60%. Fang and Silverman (2002)
conduct a similar exercise using welfare participation data.
These studies exemplify the approach to empirical Behavioral Public Economics
described in section 2.D.

They demonstrate the feasibility of this approach, and provide

important evidence in support of a behavioral approach to savings policy. However, much
additional empirical work is required to establish the stability, robustness, and scope of these
findings.
It is important to emphasize that, while this collection of empirical papers provides
evidence against the standard model, they do not allow one to conclude that the (β,δ) model
outperforms other behavioral alternatives, such as those discussed in the ensuing sections. The
patterns in the data that produce estimates of β less than unity could result from other processes
that generate excessive consumption. To our knowledge, no one has yet undertaken empirical
comparisons of alternative behavioral models.
The policy implications of the (β,δ)-model are dramatically different from those of the
standard model. Since many individuals choose sub-optimally low levels of saving, there may be
welfare improving policy interventions even in the absence of capital market failures. First,
mandatory savings programs may be welfare-enhancing, provided they are large enough to crowd
out private savings (in the form of liquid assets) at some point during the life cycle (Imrohoroglu
et. al. [2003]). See Feldstein (1985) for a characterization the optimal level of social security
benefits in an overlapping generations economy with two-period lifetimes and heterogenous self-

27

control problems, and Diamond and Koszegi [2003] for an analysis of social security with quasihyperbolic discounting and endogenous retirement.9 Third, as long as the population includes
some individuals with self-control problems, and assuming the social welfare function is
continuous and concave, a small subsidy for saving financed with lump-sum taxes is welfare
improving. Intuitively, since individuals with self-control problems save too little, the subsidy
produces a first-order improvement in their well-being, and has only a second-order effect on the
welfare of those without self-control problems. For a discussion of optimal taxation in the (β,δ)model, see O’Donoghue and Rabin [2005] and

Krusell, Kuruscu, and Smith [2000,2002].

Finally, introducing restrictions on the availability of credit, for example by regulating the
distribution of revolving credit-lines and mandating credit ceilings, can significantly enhance the
well-being of those with self-control problems.

3.F. Models of savings with cue-triggered mistakes
Bernheim and Rangel [2005b] propose an alternative model of savings in which
individuals make stochastic mistakes. As in the standard model, true preferences correspond to an
additively separable function with exponential discounting. The individual makes decisions in
two distinct modes. With probability pt, decision processes function properly, and he optimizes as
in the standard model. With probability 1- pt, decision processes are in faulty (implicitly because
an environmental cue triggers a lapse of self-control), and he consumers excessively. He can
influence the probability of encountering cues that trigger the faulty decision mode through
choices of activities (for example, whether to shop at expensive stores).
In the functional mode, the decision-maker is sophisticated about his self-control
problem: he selects the optimal level of current consumption recognizing the probabilities and
consequences of entering the faulty mode in the future, as well as the manner in which his actions
affect the distribution of future decision modes. In the faulty mode, he “binges.” This response is
mechanical, reflecting simple impulses. In the simplest versions of the model, the size of the
binge is proportional either to intended consumption (e.g., because he has chosen to shop in an
expensive store), or to remaining lifetime resources (where the factor of proportionality is
sufficiently large to ensure that the binge exceeds intended consumption). In either case, the size
of the binge is constrained by his available liquid resources.
The model has two straightforward implications. First, pre-commitment technologies are
valuable because they can reduce size of a mistake when the faulty mode is triggered. Second, the

9

Feldstein does not use the (β,δ) language, but his model is a special case of this framework.

28

consumer can actively manage his self-control problem, for example by choosing activities that
reduce the likelihood of encountering cues that trigger binges. If the size of the binge is related to
intended consumption, he can also reduce the size of mistakes, when they occur, by planning to
consume less (e.g., lapses are less costly if he shops at less expensive stores).
Other implications of the model are less immediate. While an increase in the probability
or size of a binge always reduces welfare, it can either increase or decrease the level of saving
(depending on parameter values). Additional saving becomes more attractive because it allows
the individual to self-insure against future mistakes. However, it also becomes less attractive
because it leads to greater waste. The net effect on savings depends on the balance of these two
forces.
The model also predicts the existence of low-asset traps. For an individual with few
assets, the size of a binge is constrained by liquid resources. If he saves an additional dollar and
then experiences a binge, the entire dollar is wasted. For an individual with substantial wealth,
the size of a binge is ordinarily not constrained by liquid resources. If he saves an additional
dollar and then experiences a binge, only a fraction of the dollar is wasted. Consequently, saving
is relatively less attractive when wealth is low.
With respect to durable consumption goods, the implications of this model potentially
differ from those of the (β,δ)-framework. The (β,δ)-model envisions present-bias with respect to
consumption flows. Consequently, it cannot explain excessive consumption of durable goods
with long lives, for which the bulk of consumption occurs in the future. In contrast, since an
individual may act impulsively with respect to both present and future consumption, a model with
stochastic cue-conditioned decision modes can easily generate excessive consumption of durable
goods.

Accordingly, this model potentially justifies cooling-off periods for automobile

purchases, whereas the (β,δ)-model does not.
Many of the policy implications of this model parallel those (β,δ)-framework. Even in the
absence of capital market imperfections, government intervention is potentially welfareimproving. The introduction of mandatory savings can enhance the well-being of those with selfcontrol problems, but only if the program is large enough to crowd out all liquid assets at some
point during the life-cycle, in some state of nature. Regulations that restrict the availability of
credit are also potentially beneficial.
There are, however, important differences between the two models. Perhaps most
notably, whereas optimal policy in the (β,δ)-model entails subsidized savings, in this model either
taxation or subsidization of saving may be optimal. To understand why, note that there are two

29

key differences between the models. First, in the (β,δ)-model consumers always make presentbiased mistakes, while in this model mistakes are stochastic. This means that social insurance
considerations come into play. To partially insure the consumer against bad realizations, the
government should give him money when random events reduce his wealth, and take money
away when random events increase his wealth. In this context, the random event that potentially
reduces his wealth is a cue-triggered binge. A capital income tax (coupled with a lump-sum
subsidy) supplements the individual’s wealth when he experiences a binge (because his saving is
low), and reduces his wealth when he does not binge (because his saving is high). Second, in the
(β,δ)-model, the decision maker responds to future economic incentives even while making
mistakes, whereas this model assumes that errors result from a mechanical and largely inflexible
impulses. Accordingly, taxation directly reduces the magnitude decision errors in the (β,δ)
framework, but has a limited effect on binges in this model. 10
In models with cue-triggered binges, there is also a natural role for cognitive policies
such as the regulation of advertising and marketing. If advertising increases the likelihood and
size of mistakes by proliferating cues, restrictions on advertisements are potentially welfareimproving, particularly if their information content is small. However, for the reasons discussed
above, the impact of such restrictions on the level of saving is ambiguous. One could incorporate
the same forces in the (β,δ)-model by assuming that advertising reduces the value of β. In
contrast to the current model, this would necessarily reduce saving (provided the consumer’s
horizon is finite).
One can also rationalize framing effects in this model by assuming that the probability of
entering the faulty mode depends on cues embedded in the presentation of a decision problem. It
may then be possible to design savings plans that increase thrift without providing new
information or changing budget constraints, as claimed by Thaler and Shefrin [2004].
The model of savings described in this section is closely related to the processmalfunction theory of addiction discussed below in section 4.E. Since we advocate the use of
reduced form models of decision making justified by evidence on underlying psychological and
neural processes, we end this section with a disclaimer.

In the context of addiction, the

hypothesis that people make cue-triggered mistakes has a solid foundation in neuroscience. In
the context of saving, the foundations are less solid. As emphasized in section 4.D, it is known
that self-control plays a critical role in determining saving, and a significant body of evidence
10

It is worth mentioning that the (β,δ) model also fails to explain an important general fact about present-bias – that the
phenomenon persists even in experiments where participants are rewarded in dollars, rather than with rewards
experienced at fixed points in time. Even a (β,δ) discounter should always maximize the present discounted value of
resources.

30

suggests that cues influence the ability to impose self-control. However, it is difficult to draw a
clear distinction between a lapse of self-control and, say, a temporary (and possibly cuetriggered) state of impatience. Our understanding of the neurobiology of self-control, and how it
relates to intertemporal choice, is still preliminary.

3.G. Models of savings with non-standard preferences
Gul and Psendorfer [2004a,b] propose an alternative model to account for the role of selfcontrol in determining saving. In contrast to the approaches discussed in the preceding sections,
they adhere to the principle of revealed preference, thereby excluding the possibility that lapses of
self-control involve mistakes. According to their model, the consumer acts as if he maximizes an
intertemporal utility function of the following form:
T

U(c 1 ,..., cT ; B1 ,..., BT ) = " ! t u(ct , Bt ) ,
t =0

where Bt denotes the budget set in period t. The inclusion of Bt as an argument of u differentiates
this framework from the standard approach.

The budget constraint enters preferences in a

specific way:

u(ct , Bt ) = v(ct ) ! [ max# (c) ! # (ct )] ,
c"Bt

where v(.), the flow of utility of consumption, and τ(.), the level of temptation associated with a
given option, are increasing concave functions satisfying the usual properties. The second term
(in brackets) reflects the unpleasant sensation of temptation experienced by the consumer when
he fails to select the most tempting alternative in his budget set.
To understand how the model works, it is useful to consider a simple consumption-saving
problem with two periods, no discounting, and zero interest. Let R denote the amount of resources
available to the individual in period 1, and let s=R-c1 denote the level of saving. The period 2
value function is given by

V2 (s) = v(s) ! [ max# (c) ! # (s)] = v(s) .
c"[0, s ]

That is, since the individual spends all his resources in the second period, he does not experience
unpleasant temptation. Using this expression, we can write lifetime utility as a function of firstperiod saving:

V1 (s) = v(R ! s) ! [ max# (R ! t) ! # (R ! s)] + V2 (s) .
t "[0, R]

= v( R ! s ) ! [" ( R) ! " ( R ! s )] + v( s )

31

In the absence of temptation, the individual would simply maximize v(R ! s) + v(s) . At an
interior solution, this requires v'(R ! s) = v'(s) . The introduction of temptation increases the
cost of savings by ! '(R " s) , which causes saving to fall.
Several properties of the model are worth highlighting. First, the presence of temptation
can decrease well-being even if does not affect behavior. In this sense, self-control is costly.
Second, the individual is always (weakly) better off when a planner removes all discretion and
forces him to consume the allocation that would be optimal in the absence of temptation. Third,
the individual experiences temptation with respect to current choices, but not with respect to
future choices. (He is not, for example, tempted to purchase a sports car delivered with some
lag.) As a result, in the absence of uncertainty, an individual who has the ability to lock in
choices one period in advance can achieve the first-best (except in the first period). Fourth, as in
the standard model, choices are dynamically consistent.
Gul and Psendorfer’s model can be interpreted as a reduced form representation of the
process that generates the costs associated with temptation and the exercise of self-control. A
closely related model, pioneered by Thaler and Shefrin [1981] and recently revisited by
Fudenberg and Levine [2005], makes the sources of these costs more explicit. Preferences are
given by an intertemporal utility function of the form
T

U(c 1 ,..., cT ;a1 ,..., aT ) = " ! t u(ct , at ) ,
t =0

where at measures the intensity with which the individual deploys self-control in period t. The
consumer chooses at at the outset of each period with the object of maximizing intertemporal
utility; he then chooses ct myopically, based on immediate benefits. The imposition of selfcontrol is costly in the sense that !u / !a < 0 , but it leads to lower consumption.
As shown by Benabou and Pycia [2002], O’Donoghue and Loewenstein [2004], and
Fudenberg and Levine [2005], this framework is equivalent over consumption-saving choices to
Gul and Pesendorfer’s theory of temptation. See also Loewenstein-O’Donoghue [2004] for an
insightful discussion of the relationship between this class of models and the (β,δ)-framework.
Gul and Psendorfer [2004a,b] emphasize that their approach is conceptually consistent
with the method of revealed preference. Supposedly, this eliminates the need for non-choice
data, and prevents the policy analyst from imposing his or her own judgments when evaluating
welfare. We disagree. Practical implementation of the revealed preference methodology requires
the analyst to make assumptions about the data generating process (e.g. about functional forms, or
similarities across individuals). There are always untested assumptions, which the analyst selects

32

based on other information, instinct, introspection, or fuzzy notions of “reasonableness.” We
believe it is fair to say that these assumptions are not chosen exclusively on the basis of choice
data. Moreover, as all veterans of empirical policy debates are aware, the analyst’s judgments
about untested assumptions translate directly into judgments about welfare.

There are also

theoretical considerations, which we discuss at length in Bernheim and Rangel [2005b].
Assuming one restricts attention to data on choices over allocations and constraint sets, both the
standard theory and Gul and Pesendorfer’s model are observationally equivalent to other models
with different welfare implications. Hence, the analyst’s judgment, expressed through axioms
and assumptions, is unavoidable.
What are the novel policy implications of the temptation model? First, mandatory savings
programs can improve welfare even if they do not increase savings. This follows from the fact
that any limit on consumption reduces temptation. In contrast to models with (β,δ) discounting
and cue-triggered mistakes, a small program of mandatory saving can enhance welfare even if
people still retain positive liquid assets in all time periods and states of nature. Second, unlike
models with (β,δ) discounting and cue-triggered mistakes, there is no role for corrective taxation.
See Krusell, Kuruscu, and Smith (2001) for further results and discussion.

3.H. Discussion
Economists have only recently begun to study saving using tools from behavioral
economics. Even so, the models described in this section have already provided valuable insights.
We conclude this section with a brief description of some important open questions.
The models described in this survey provide an explanation for some of the patterns
described in sections 2.C and 2.D, including time inconsistency, self-reported mistakes, and some
types of inefficient financial choices. However, it is not clear that they can adequately account for
other patterns, such as the discontinuity of consumption near retirement, the role of default
options, the failure to plan, and the use of rough rules of thumb.

None provides a fully

satisfactory explanation for the success of the Saving for Tomorrow Savings PlanTM designed by
Thaler and Shefrin [2004], which relies on framing effects instead of changes in budget
constraints. Nor do they incorporate limitations on financial skills. In focusing on self-control
problems, they ignore issues associated with the complexity of financial decision-making.
Likewise, the theoretical work described in the previous sections has formalized only a
few of the behavioral channels through which public policy could affect choices and welfare. It

33

is important to study other behavioral mechanisms with the same level of rigor. Interesting
possibilities include the following.
1. The role of financial professionals. Many people rely on advice from financial
professionals. One can therefore potentially learn about behavior by studying the methods
used to generate this advice (see e.g. Bernheim et. al. [2002]).

For example, the most

common retirement planning technique involves setting some fixed target for retirement
(usually derived from an arbitrary earnings replacement rate) and computing the annual
inflation-adjusted contribution to savings sufficient to achieve this target (see Doyle and
Johnson [1991]). This generates a negative interest elasticity of saving because higher rates
of return make it easier to accumulate the resources required to reach the target.
2. Social influences.

When saving incentives are in place, boundedly rational

individuals may be more likely to learn that others regard the benefits of saving as important.
For example, the availability of a 401(k) in an employment setting may stimulate
conversations about contributions and investments, and thereby produce “peer group”
influences involving both demonstration and competition (see, e.g., Duflo and Saez [2002,
2003]). The very existence of a pro-saving policy may indicate that “authorities” perceive
the need for greater thrift, or endorse a particular level of saving (e.g., the contribution
limit).
3. Keeping score. By segmenting retirement saving from other forms of saving,
certain kinds of tax-favored accounts may make it easier to monitor progress towards longterm objectives.

Information on total accumulated balances is usually provided

automatically, or is readily available.

This gives individuals a convenient yardstick for

measuring the adequacy or inadequacy of their thrift. This may have the effect of making
the costs of short-sightedness more explicit. It could also help people formulate goals and
simple behavioral rules. According to Thaler and Shefrin (1981), "[s]imply keeping track
seems to act as a tax on any behavior which the planner views as deviant."
4. Intrinsic motivation.

Scitovsky [1976] has raised the possibility that some

individuals may view saving as a virtuous activity in and of itself, without any explicit
contemplation of future consequences (see also Katona [1975]). Pro-saving policies may
promote this outlook by reinforcing the notion that, as something worthy of encouragement,
saving is intrinsically rewarding and immediately gratifying.
5. Intrinsic gratification from tax avoidance. We have noted that people are more
likely to contribute to IRAs if they owe money at the end of the tax year. This suggests that
immediate tax avoidance is intrinsically gratifying.

If so, “front-loaded” plans, wherein

contributions are deductible and withdrawals are fully taxable, may be more effective in

34

stimulating saving than “back-loaded” plans, wherein contributions are not deductible and
withdrawals of principal are not taxable.
6. Mental accounting. Shefrin and Thaler [1988] and Lowenstein and Prelec [1998]
argue that people exercise self-control by separating resources into “mental accounts,” each
associated with a different objective.

IRAs and 401(k)s may reinforce the discipline of

mental accounting by earmarking certain resources for retirement, particularly in the
presence of penalties for early withdrawal.
7. Education and promotion. The existence of tax-deferred savings accounts may
stimulate promotional activities and advertisements by financial services firms. Policies that
favor the development of employee-directed pensions (like 401(k)s) may encourage
employers to provide retirement education. While advertising and education appear to affect
financial decisions, the precise mechanisms are poorly understood.
These types of considerations potentially have important implications for critical
policy questions, such as the choice between broad-based policies for promoting saving (e.g.,
consumption taxation) and more targeted strategies (e.g., IRAs).

From a behavioral

perspective, narrow measures can focus attention on a single issue (such as the adequacy of
saving for retirement), expose individuals to information concerning the importance of
saving, provide a natural context for the development and enforcement of private rules, and
promote the growth of pro-saving institutions. Contribution limits may actually stimulate
saving if they validate specific targets, provide natural focal points for the formation of
private rules, or make it easier to monitor compliance with these rules.

4. Addiction
Although more than four million chemical compounds have been catalogued to date, only
a few score are classified as addictive by clinical consensus (Gardner and David (1999)). These
include alcohol, barbiturates, amphetamines, cocaine, caffeine and related methylxanthine
stimulants, cannabis, hallucinogens, nicotine, opioids, dissociative anesthetics, and volatile
solvents. There is also some debate as to whether other substances, such as fats and sugars, or
activities, such as shopping, shoplifting, sex, television viewing, and internet use, are clinically
addictive.

These substances and activities pose challenges both for public policy, and for

standard economic analysis.
This section reviews the distinctive behavioral patterns associated with the consumption
of addictive substances, describes the neuroscientific foundations of addiction, summarizes
several competing economic models, and reviews their policy implications.

35

4.A. The policy issues
The consumption of addictive substances raises important social issues affecting
members of all socioeconomic strata, and citizens of virtually every nation. Readily available
statistics for the United States illustrate the scope of the phenomenon.11 Estimates for 1999 place
total expenditures on tobacco products, alcoholic beverages, cocaine, heroin, marijuana, and
methamphetamines at more than $150 billion. During a single month in 1999, more than 57
million individuals smoked at least one cigarette, more than 41 million engaged in binge drinking
(involving five or more drinks on one occasion), and roughly 12 million used marijuana. In 1998,
slightly more than 5 million Americans qualified as "hard-core" chronic drug users. Roughly 4.6
million persons in the workforce met the criterion for a diagnosis of drug dependence and 24.5
million had a history of clinical alcohol dependence. In 1998, additional social costs resulting
from health care expenditures, loss of life, impaired productivity, motor vehicle accidents, crime,
law enforcement, and welfare totaled $185 billion for alcohol and $143 billion for other addictive
substances. Smoking killed roughly 418,000 people in 1990, alcohol accounted for 107,400
deaths in 1992, and drug use resulted in 19,277 deaths during 1998. Alcohol abuse contributed to
25 to 30 percent of violent crimes.
Even within jurisdictions, public policy toward various addictive substances is far from
uniform, despite the commonalities suggested by their shared clinical classification. Policies
range from laissez faire to taxation, subsidization (e.g. of rehabilitation programs), regulated
dispensation, criminalization, product liability, and public health campaigns. Each alternative
policy approach has passionate advocates and detractors.
Despite sharp disagreements about the ideal treatment of addictive substances, there is
reasonably widespread agreement that most existing policies work poorly. The U.S. “War on
Drugs” is, for example, often labeled a “failed policy.”

Use of banned substances remains

widespread, and the resulting health costs are high. Prohibitions on certain substances, like
marijuana, lack credibility among younger Americans, who fail to see why alcohol is singled out
as socially acceptable. While the incidence of criminal activity among drug addicts is relatively
high, it is important to acknowledge that drug related-crime is, to a significant extent, a
consequence of current policy, rather than a justification for it. Criminalization promotes black
11

The statistics in this paragraph were obtained from the following sources: Office of National Drug Control Policy
[2001a,b], U.S. Census Bureau [2001], National Institute on Drug Abuse [1998], National Institute on Alcohol Abuse
and Alcoholism [2001], and Center for Disease Control [1993]. There is, of course, disagreement as to many of the
reported figures.

36

markets, fosters organized crime, enriches criminals, and contributes to a culture of violence. As
a result, more than 625,000 citizens were incarcerated for drug-related offenses curing 1999.
These people were disproportionately poor, black, and among society's most economically
vulnerable members.
While existing policies have serious drawbacks, alternatives are also potentially
problematic. For example, the high incidence of alcohol abuse and smoking, along with the
attendant social costs, at a minimum raise serious concerns about the potential consequences of
across-the-board legalization. The apparent intractability of social problems related to addiction
underscores the importance of creatively and openly rethinking policy strategies.

4.B. The neoclassical perspective on addiction
Prior to the 1990s, neurological theories of addiction were based on the “pleasure
principle”. It was widely believed that people start using drugs to achieve a pleasurable “high,”
and continue using them despite a deterioration of the high (a phenomenon known as “tolerance”)
to avoid unpleasant feelings associated with cravings and withdrawal. These hedonic properties
are easily incorporated into standard models of consumer choice. Early work in this tradition
includes papers by Stigler and Becker [1977], Iannacone [1986], and Becker and Murphy [1988].
The last of these is widely viewed as the definitive articulation of the neoclassical perspective on
addictive behavior, also known as the theory of “rational addiction.”
In Becker and Murphy’s model, the individual’s well-being depends on consumption of
an addictive good, consumption of a non-addictive good, and a state variable summarizing past
consumption of the addictive good. This addictive state rises with use of the substance and falls
with abstinence. To model tolerance, one assumes that utility declines as the addictive state rises.
To model the effects of cravings and the pain of withdrawal on the inclination to use a substance,
one assumes that the marginal utility of the addictive good rises with the addictive state. This
assumption is necessary (but not sufficient) to generate a property known as “adjacent
complementarity,” which means that greater current consumption leads to greater consumption in
the future. According to Becker and Murphy, this is the distinguishing feature of an addictive
substance.
Becker and Murphy’s model generates a variety of interesting positive results regarding
the use of addictive substances. For example, with appropriate parameterizations, the model
generates behavior that is consistent with aspects of bingeing cycles and abrupt withdrawals. It
distinguishes between conditions that lead to certain behaviors which they associate with
addiction, and conditions that do not. It also predicts that an anticipated future increase in the

37

price of an addictive substance leads to an immediate decrease in drug use (see Gruber and
Koszegi [2001] and Chaloupka and Warner [2001] for a review of supporting evidence).
From a normative perspective, the theory of rational addiction makes no distinction
between addictive substances and other goods.
apply.

Accordingly, the standard welfare theorems

It follows that government intervention is justified only if markets for addictive

substances function imperfectly. There are two main concerns in this regard. First, if people are
either poorly informed or misinformed about the effects of addictive substances, they may make
poor decisions. As long as the government can provide relevant information more effectively and
efficiently than private markets, educational policies (e.g., public health campaigns) are
potentially beneficial. Second, the consumption of addictive substances may generate
externalities. For example, driving under the influence leads to accidents, addicts commit crimes
to support their habits, and addiction can be devastating to family members. The standard policy
prescription for externalities involves a Pigouvian tax per-unit of the substance equal to the
marginal external damage that it imposes on others.
Since the publication of Becker and Murphy’s paper, others have extended the theory of
rational addiction in a variety of ways, mainly to account for other observed features of addictive
behavior.

For example, in Orphanides and Zervos [1995], different people have different

susceptibilities to addiction, which they discover through experimentation. The paper shows that
a highly susceptible individual can control his addictive tendencies if he discovers his
susceptibility quickly, but not if he discovers it slowly. The authors briefly discuss a few policy
implications. Clearly, consumers benefit from accurate information concerning the distribution
of susceptibilities. Moreover, since people are uncertain about their addictive susceptibilities,
imperfections in private markets for rehabilitation insurance can leave them with residual risk,
which potentially creates a role for government as a provider of social insurance. Other
contributions include (but are not limited to) Dockner and Feichtinger [1993], who show how the
theory of rational addiction can account for cyclical consumption patterns, and Orphanides and
Zervos [1998], who introduce impulsiveness by allowing the consumer’s discount rate to depend
(in a time-consistent way) on use.

4.C. Some problematic empirical observations
In some ways, consumption patterns for addictive substances are no different than for
other goods. A number of studies have shown that aggregate drug use responds both to prices
and to information about the effects of addictive substances. For example, an aggressive U.S.
public health campaign is widely credited with reductions in smoking rates. There is also

38

evidence that users engage in sophisticated forward-looking deliberation, reducing current
consumption in response to anticipated price increases.12

What, then, makes addiction a

distinctive phenomenon? Bernheim and Rangel [2004] list five important behavioral patterns
distilled from the extensive body of research on addiction in neuroscience, psychology, and
clinical practice.
1. Unsuccessful attempts to quit.

Addicts often express a desire to stop using a

substance permanently and unconditionally but are unable to follow through.

Short-term

abstention is common while long-term recidivism rates are high. For example, during 2000, 70
percent of current smokers expressed a desire to quit completely and 41 percent stopped smoking
for at least one day in an attempt to quit, but only 4.7 percent successfully abstained for more than
three months.13 This pattern is particularly striking because regular users initially experience
painful withdrawal symptoms when they first attempt to quit, and these symptoms decline over
time with successful abstention. Thus, recidivism often occurs after users have borne the most
significant costs of quitting, sometimes following years of determined abstention.
2. Cue-triggered recidivism. Recidivism rates are especially high when addicts are
exposed to cues related to past drug consumption. Long-term usage is considerably lower among
those who experience significant changes of environment.14 Treatment programs often advise
recovering addicts to move to new locations and to avoid the places where previous consumption
took place. Stress and “priming” (exposure to a small taste of the substance) have also been
shown to trigger recidivism.15
3. Self-described mistakes. Addicts often describe past use as a mistake in a very strong
sense: they think that they would have been better off in the past as well as the present had they
acted differently. They recognize that they are likely to make similar errors in the future, and that
this will undermine their desire to abstain. When they succumb to cravings, they sometimes
characterize choices as mistakes even while in the act of consumption. It is instructive that the
twelve-step program of Alcoholic Anonymous begins: "We admit we are powerless over alcohol
- that our lives have become unmanageable."
As an example, Goldstein [2001,p.249] describes an addict who had been
12

See Chaloupka and Warner [2001], MacCoun and Reuter [2001], and Gruber and Koszegi [2001] for a review of the
evidence.
13
See Trosclair et. al. [2002], Goldstein [2001], Hser, Anglin, and Powers [1993], Harris [1993], and O'Brien [1997].
14
See Goldstein [2001], Goldstein and Kalant [1990], O'Brien [1976,1997], and Hser et. al. [1993,2001]. Robins
[1974] and Robins et.al. [1974] found that Vietnam veterans who were addicted to heroin and/or opium at the end of
the war experienced much lower relapse rates than other young male addicts during the same period. A plausible
explanation is that veterans encountered fewer environmental triggers (familiar circumstances associated with drug use)
upon returning to the U.S.
15
See Goldstein [2001] and Robinson and Berridge [2003].

39

"...suddenly overwhelmed by an irresistible craving, and he had rushed out of his house
to find some heroin. ... it was as though he were driven by some external force he was
powerless to resist, even though he knew while it was happening that it was a disastrous
course of action for him" (italics added).
4. Self-control through precommitment. Recovering users often manage their tendency
to make mistakes by voluntarily removing or degrading future options. They voluntarily admit
themselves into "lock-up" rehabilitation facilities, often not to avoid cravings, but precisely
because they expect to experience cravings and wish to control their actions. They also consume
medications that either generate unpleasant side effects, or reduce pleasurable sensations, if the
substance is subsequently consumed.16 Severe addicts sometimes enlist others to assist with
physical confinement to assure abstinence through the withdrawal process.
5. Self-control through behavioral and cognitive therapy. Recovering addicts attempt to
minimize the probability of relapse through behavioral and cognitive therapies.

Successful

behavioral therapies teach cue-avoidance, often by encouraging the adoption of new life-styles
and the development of new interests. Successful cognitive therapies teach cue-management,
which entails refocusing attention on alternative consequences and objectives, often with the
assistance of a mentor or trusted friend or through a meditative activity such as prayer. Notably,
these therapeutic strategies affect addict's choices without providing new information.17
The clinical definition of addiction makes reference to some of these patterns. Substance
addiction is said to occur when, after significant exposure, users find themselves engaging in
compulsive, repeated, and unwanted use despite clearly harmful consequences, and often despite
a strong desire to quit unconditionally (see e.g. the American Psychological Association’s
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, known as DSM-IV).
From the perspective of traditional economic analysis, each of the patterns listed above is
at least somewhat puzzling. The rational consumers of economic textbooks have no trouble
following through on plans, and therefore should manifest neither of the first two patterns.
Contrary to the third pattern, rational consumers always choose what they want, so, armed with
good information, they can't make systematic mistakes. The notion that someone might be
powerless over a consumption good is an anethema to a neoclassical economist. The standard
16

Disulfiram interferes with the liver's ability to metabolize alcohol; as a result, ingestion of alcohol produces a highly
unpleasant physical reaction for a period of time. Methadone, an agonist, activates the same opioid receptors as heroin,
and thus produces a mild high, but has a slow-onset and a long-lasting effect, and it reduces the high produced by
heroin. Naltrexone, an antagonist, blocks specific brain receptors, and thereby diminishes the high produced by opioids.
All of these treatments reduce the frequency of relapse. See O'Brien [1997] and Goldstein [2001].
17
Goldstein [2001] reports that there is a shared impression among the professional community that 12-step programs
such as AA (p. 149) "are effective for many (if not most) alcohol addicts." However, given the nature of these
programs, objective performance tests are not available. The AA treatment philosophy is based on "keeping it simple
by putting the focus on not drinking, on attending meetings, and on reaching out to other alcoholics."

40

theory of consumer behavior embraces the principle that expanding or improving the set of
available alternatives necessarily makes an individual better off, so precommitments can only be
counterproductive, contrary to the fourth pattern. Finally, since in the standard model individuals
never make mistakes, there is no role for expenditures on self-control.
Creative extensions of the basic model may provide rationalizations for some of these
patterns without overturning the basic paradigm. For example, Laibson [2001] has proposed a
variant of the Becker-Murphy framework in which preferences become state-contingent with
experience, and which can in principle account for cue management and avoidance. Even so, the
five patterns described above collectively pose a serious challenge to neoclassical perspective,
and provide motivation for economists to think “outside the box.”

4.D. Recent insights from the neuroscience of addiction
Over the last 10 years, a new scientific consensus has begun to emerge concerning the
nature of addiction. It now appears that addiction does not result primarily from the pleasurable
effects of substances on the hedonic system. Instead, the new view of addiction holds that certain
substances interfere with the proper operation of a neural system that plays an important role in
learning. This is not to say that pleasure is unimportant. However, the key feature of addiction
appears to be the fact that addictive substances cause a specific learning process to malfunction.
Figure 1 shows, at a high level of abstraction, how the brain normally makes decisions
about standard consumption goods. Our senses provide us with information about environmental
conditions. We process this information, along with information about our internal states -- things
like hunger, fatigue, and so forth -- and this results in a decision. The decision is followed by
experience, including rewards. The experienced relationship between environmental conditions,
decisions, and rewards induces learning, which normally improves the quality of future decisions.

41

Figure 1: Decision Processes for Standard Consumption Goods

Basic
forecasting
mechanism

Environmental
conditions

Other
cognitive
processes

Consumption
Decision

Learning

Post-choice
experience
and
reward

Learning

On left-hand side of this diagram, we've broken out an important component of the
decision-making system, which we've labeled the “basic forecasting mechanism.” This is a hardwired system for measuring correlations between conditions, decisions, and short-term rewards.
It does not involve higher reasoning; in fact, it's present in lower life forms as well as humans.
For non-addictive substances, the basic forecasting mechanism learns with experience to
construct an accurate forecast of the subsequent hedonic experiences.
It is worth emphasizing that the brain appears to have a variety of mechanisms for
forecasting the possible consequences of decisions. Some involve higher cognition (represented
on the right hand side of the diagram); for example, we sometimes develop causal models of the
world and reason out the implications of our actions.

Some – like the basic forecasting

mechanism – are more mechanical.
Both types of forecasting mechanisms play a role in decision making. Sometimes we act
based on the “gut reactions” generated by the basic forecasting mechanism. Sometimes higher
cognition overrides a gut reaction. This is how the brain is designed to work. Each process has its
advantages and disadvantages. The basic forecasting mechanism is very fast, but it's inflexible
and unsophisticated. Higher cognition is flexible and sophisticated, but comparatively slow.
When we have to make decisions quickly, we rely on our gut reactions. When there's no time
pressure, we take the time to think things through. A balance between these systems emerged
through evolution as nature's compromise. Consequently, the mere fact that we rely in some
instances on impulses and gut reactions rather than reasoned deliberation does not mean that our

42

Figure 2: Decision Processes for Addictive Substances

Basic
forecasting
mechanism

Direct effect

Learning

Environmental
conditions

Other
cognitive
processes

Consumption
Decision

Post-choice
experience
and
reward

Learning

choices are irrational or dysfunctional. For non-addictive substances, these mechanisms,
operating in parallel, typically produce reasonable decisions.
Figure 2 shows how addictive substances interfere with the proper operation of these
decision-making processes. In a nutshell, the problem with the addictive substances is that they
act directly on the learning process underlying the basic forecasting mechanism, short-circuiting
the neurological process by which this mechanism discovers correlations between environmental
conditions, decisions, and rewards. As a result, the mechanism massively overstates the
correlation between drug use and actual experienced pleasure. Loosely speaking, drugs fool a
subconscious, hard-wired brain process into anticipating an exaggerated level of pleasure. An
addict can try to compensate for this effect by exercising cognitive control, but he can't
consciously correct the malfunction of the basic forecasting mechanism.
More specifically, the available neurological evidence supports four specific hypotheses
that justify the new view of addictive substances (see Bernheim and Rangel [2004] for a more
detailed discussion):
First, the mesolimbic dopamine system (MDS) serves, at least in part, as a basic
forecasting mechanism which, with experience, learns to produce a response to situations and
opportunities, the magnitude of which constitutes a forecast of near-term pleasure (see Schultz,
Dayan, and Montague [1997] and Schultz [1998, 2000]).

43

Second, MDS forecasting does not appear to directly produce or reflect the experience of
pleasure.

Indeed, the human brain appears to contain a separate hedonic system that is

responsible for producing sensations of “well-being.” (see Berridge [1996,1999], Berridge and
Robinson [1998,2003], and Robinson and Berridge [1993,2000,2003]).
Third, MDS-generated forecasts directly influence choices (see Berridge and Robinson
[1998,2003] and Robinson and Berridge [1993,2000,2003])). In an organism with a sufficiently
developed frontal cortex, higher cognitive mechanisms can override impulses resulting from
MDS forecasts, for example by identifying alternative courses of action or projecting the future
consequences of choices. The outcome depends on the intensity of the MDS forecast and on the
ability of the frontal cortex to engage the necessary cognitive operations. A strong MDS forecast
can impair this ability by influencing attention to stimuli, cognitive focus, and memory. Thus, a
more attractive MDS-generated forecast makes cognitive override less likely.
We emphasize that the basic forecasting mechanism and higher cognitive processes are
not two different sets of “preferences” or “selves” competing for control of decisions. Hedonic
experiences are generated separately, and an individual maximizes the quality of these
experiences by appropriately deploying both forecasting processes to anticipate outcomes.
Fourth, addictive substances act directly on the basic forecasting mechanism, disrupting
its ability to construct accurate hedonic forecasts and exaggerating the anticipated hedonic
benefits of consumption. Although addictive substances differ considerably in their chemical and
psychological properties, there is a large and growing consensus in neuroscience that they share
an ability to activate the firing of dopamine into the nucleus accumbens with much greater
intensity and persistence than other substances. They do this either by activating the MDS
directly, or by activating other networks that have a similar effect (see Nestler and Malenka
[2004], Hyman and Malenka [2001], Nestler [2001], Wickelgreen [1997], and Robinson and
Berridge [2003]). For non-addictive substances, the MDS learns to assign a hedonic forecast that
bears some normal relation to the subsequent hedonic experience. For addictive substances,
consumption activates dopamine firing directly, so the MDS learns to assign a hedonic forecast
that is out of proportion to the subsequent hedonic experience. This not only creates a strong (and
misleading) impulse to seek and use the substance, but also undermines the potential for cognitive
override. Cognitive override still occurs, but in a limited range of circumstances.
The preceding discussion implies that, in some circumstances, drug use can literally be a
mistake, in the sense that the brain is fooled into making a choice. It does not, however, imply
that drug use is always a mistake. Even if the integrity of the basic forecasting mechanism is
compromised, higher cognition can still either agree with it or override it. In different people,

44

brain chemistry appears to strike different balances between these mechanisms. This may explain
why some people become addicts, while others use repeatedly without becoming addicted. Use
can be rational in some instances and irrational in others. It is important to bear this point in mind
when evaluating public policies alternatives.
In emphasizing the effects of addictive substances on decision processes, we do not mean
to discount the significance of their hedonic effects. The typical user is initially drawn to an
addictive substance because it produces a hedonic “high.”

Over time, regular use leads to

hedonic and physical tolerance. That is, the drug loses its ability to produce a high unless the user
abstains for a while, and any attempt to discontinue the drug may have unpleasant side effects
(withdrawal). Cue-conditioned “cravings” may have hedonic implications as well as non-hedonic
causes. All of these effects are clearly important. However, there is an emerging consensus in
neuroscience and psychology that decision-process effects, rather than hedonic effects, provide
the key to understanding addictive behavior (see Wise [1989], Robbins and Everitt [1996], Di
Chiara [1999], Kelley [1999], Nestler and Malenka [2004], Hyman and Malenka [2001], Berridge
and Robinson [2003], Robinson and Berridge [2000], and Redish [2004]).

4.E. Modeling addiction as a decision-process malfunction
Bernheim and Rangel [2004] present a theory of addiction that departs from the fourth
assumption discussed in Section 2 (that choices are always aligned with preferences). The theory
is based on the following three main premises.
First, use among addicts is sometimes a mistake, in the sense that actions diverge from
preferences, and sometimes rational.
Second, experience with an addictive substance sensitizes an individual to environmental
cues that trigger mistaken usage.
Third, addicts understand their susceptibility to cue-triggered mistakes and attempt to
manage the process with some degree of sophistication.
The first two premises are justified by the body of research described in section 3.D,
which shows that, after repeated exposure to an addictive substance, the brain tends to make
skewed hedonic forecasts upon encountering environmental cues that are associated with past
substance use. The third premise is justified by behavioral evidence indicating that users are
often surprisingly sophisticated and forward looking.

For example, they reduce current

consumption in response to expected future price increases (Gruber and Koszegi [2001]). Some
also enter detox not because they intend to remain sober, but rather because they want to increase
the intensity of the next high.

45

A summary of the model. The formal model in Bernheim and Rangel [2004] envisions
an individual who makes a sequence of decisions regarding lifestyle, the use of an addictive
substance, and the consumption of non-addictive substances. It assumes that, at any point in
time, the individual operates in one of two modes: a "cold" mode in which properly functioning
decision-making processes lead to the selection of his most preferred alternative, and a
dysfunctional "hot" mode in which decisions and preferences may diverge (because he responds
to distorted MDS-generated forecasts).18 The hot mode is transient, but always results in use of
the substance.

The likelihood of entering the hot mode at any moment depends on the

individual's history of substance use, his chosen lifestyle (e.g., partying exposes the individual to
more intense substance-related cues), and random events (e.g., the frequency and intensity of
recently encountered environmental cues to which he has been sensitized through prior use).
The history of use is summarized through the notion of an addictive state. Use moves the
individual to a higher addictive state, and abstention moves him to a lower addictive state. An
increase in the addictive state raises the likelihood of entering the hot mode at any moment (e.g.,
because it implies increased sensitivity to randomly occurring environment cues).

Higher

addictive states are also associated with lower baseline well-being (e.g., due to deteriorating
health), lower financial resources (due to decreased productivity, absenteeism, and out-of-pocket
medical expenses), and possible a greater “boost” from consuming the addictive substance.
By varying assumptions about the properties of the substance in question, the model can
replicate a wide range of observed behaviors. In particular, it can account for each of the patterns
discussed in Section 3.C (see Bernheim and Rangel [2004] for details and Bernheim and Rangel
[2005c] for simulations of the model).
Policy implications.

This theory admits two classes of rationales for government

intervention. First, as in the theory of rational addiction, intervention may be justified to correct
market failures involving addictive substances – that is, the government can address externalities,
misinformation, and ignorance. Second, policies may also affect the frequency and consequences
of mistakes. This consideration gives rise to a number of non-standard policy implications.
1. Limitations of informational policy. In practice, public education campaigns (such as
the U.S. anti-smoking and anti-drug initiatives) have achieved mixed results.

The process-

malfunction theory of addiction highlights a fundamental limitation of informational policy:

18

Our analysis is related to work by Loewenstein [1996, 1999], who considers simple models in which an individual
can operate either in a hot or cold decision-making mode. Notably, Loewenstein’s approach relaxes the assumption of
fixed life-time preferences. He assumes that behavior in the hot mode reflects the application of a "false" utility
function, rather than a breakdown of the processes by which a utility function is maximized. He also argues, contrary to
our findings, that imperfect self-understanding is necessary for addiction-like behaviors.

46

contrary to standard theory, one cannot assume that even a highly knowledgeable addict always
makes informed choices. Information about the consequences of substance abuse may affect
initial experimentation with drugs, but cannot alter the neurological mechanisms through which
addictive substances subvert deliberative decision making.
2. Counterproductive disincentives.

Policies such as “sin taxes” and criminalization

strive to discourage use by making substances costly.

As we’ve noted, this is potentially

justifiable on the grounds that use generates negative externalities. In the context of the theory
described in this section, even higher taxes (whether implicit or explicit) might be justified if they
reduce excessive use in “hot” decision states. Unfortunately, it is likely that compulsive use of
addictive substances is much less sensitive to costs and consequences than is deliberative use.
Consequently, imposing costs in excess of external diseconomies is likely to distort cold-state
choices detrimentally, without significantly reducing problematic hot-state usage.

Indeed,

policies that impose high costs on use may thwart social insurance objectives by exacerbating the
consequences of uninsurable risks associated with the use of addictive substances.19 Accordingly,
the optimal rate of taxation for addictive substances may be significant lower than that implied by
externalities (see Bernheim and Rangel [2005c] for simulation results).20
3. Supply disruption.

Standard reasoning suggests that taxation is preferable to

criminalization. Both impose costs, but taxes generate revenues, while criminalization dissipates
social resources. In the context of the theory discussed in this section, criminalization offers an
offsetting benefit: it disrupts supply, making it particularly difficult for users to obtain a banned
substance on short notice. The effect on use is likely to be larger in hot states, when people act
impulsively, than in cold states, when people plan deliberatively. This is exactly what one would
hope to achieve, and precisely opposite the effect of a tax. To put it somewhat differently,
criminalization may help some addicts impose self-control, without (as a practical matter)
preventing deliberate use. There is, however, an associated disadvantage: while in the hot state,
addicts may engage in costly and potentially dangerous search.
4. Beneficial harm reduction. If addiction results in significant part from randomly
occurring mistakes, various interventions can serve social insurance objectives by ameliorating
some of its worst consequences. For instance, subsidization of rehabilitation centers and treatment
programs (particularly for the indigent) can moderate the financial impact of addiction and
promote recovery. Likewise, the free distribution of clean needles can moderate the incidence of
diseases among heroin addicts. In some cases, it may even be beneficial to make substances
19

In practice, addicts often suffer severe economic deprivation, turning to crime and prostitution for support. High
substance costs aggravate these consequences.
20
As shown in Bernheim and Rangel [2004], this result depends on usage patterns.

47

available to severe addicts at low cost.21 As is usually the case, one must trade off the benefits
from insurance against incentive effects: by moderating consequences, harm-reducing policies
could in principle encourage casual use and experimentation.
5. Policies affecting cues.

Since environmental cues frequently trigger addictive

behaviors, public policy can also influence use by changing the cues that people normally
encounter. One approach involves the elimination of problematic cues. For example, advertising
and marketing restrictions of the type imposed on sellers of tobacco and alcohol suppresses one
possible artificial trigger for compulsive use. Since one person’s decision to smoke may trigger
another, confining use to designated areas may reduce unintended use. A second approach
involves the creation of counter-cues. For example, Brazil and Canada require every pack of
cigarettes to display a prominent, viscerally charged image depicting some deleterious
consequences of smoking, such as lung disease and neonatal morbidity. In principle, a sufficiently
strong counter-cue could trigger thought processes that induce users to resist cravings, even
though the same information is ineffective when offered in a less provocative format. Policies
that eliminate problematic cues or promote counter-cues are potentially beneficial because they
combat compulsive use while imposing a minimal inconvenience and restrictions on deliberate
rational users.
6. Facilitation of self-control.

The process-malfunction theory of addiction places a

high value on policies that provide better opportunities for self-regulation without making
particular choices compulsory. This potentially helps those who are vulnerable to compulsive use,
without encroaching on the freedoms of those who would deliberately choose to use. Laws that
limit the sale of a substance to particular times, places, and circumstances frequently provide
limited opportunities along these lines (see e.g. Ornstein and Hanssens [1985], Norstrom and
Skog [2005], and Tigerstedt and Sutton [2000]).

Well-designed policies could in principle

accomplish this objective more effectively. For example, a number of states have enacted laws
allowing problem gamblers to voluntarily ban themselves from casinos (Yerak [2001]).
Alternatively, if a substance is available only by prescription, and if prescription orders are filled
on a "next day" basis, then deliberate forward-looking planning becomes a prerequisite for
availability. Recovering heroin addicts could self-regulate problematic compulsive use by
carefully choosing when, and when not, to file requests for refills.

21

For example, Swiss policy makes heroin available at low cost to severe addicts.

48

4.F. Modeling addiction with quasi-hyperbolic discounting
One important line of work modifies Becker and Murphy’s model of “rational addiction”
by adding quasi-hyperbolic (β,δ)-discounting (see Gruber and Koszegi [2001, 2004] and
O’Donoghue and Rabin [2000]).22 In contrast to the theory of rational addiction, the consumer
acts as if he attaches disproportionate importance (1/β) to current well-being when making
decisions about current consumption.
Gruber and Koszegi use this model to compute optimal cigarette taxes. When evaluating
individual welfare, they assume that true preferences correspond to standard exponential
discounting. Implicitly, they adopt the interpretation of quasi-hyperbolic discounting discussed in
Section 2.D: true preferences are standard, but the decision-making process leads individuals to
make present-biased mistakes, which the (β,δ)-model captures in reduced form.
In principle, one could defend this interpretation with reference to the evidence described
in Section 2.D. Unfortunately, the model does not fit these facts in two important respects. First,
the evidence indicates that mistakes are domain-specific. In contrast, the proclivity to make
present-biased mistakes in the (β,δ)-model cuts across all domains.

Second, the evidence

indicates that mistakes are triggered by intermittent environmental cues. In contrast, the decision
maker always suffers from present-bias in Gruber and Koszegi’s framework.
One could, of course, formulate a variant of Gruber and Koszegi’s model with narrowdomain, cue-triggered present-bias. The resulting model would be a close cousin of the processmalfunction theory of addiction discussed in the previous section. However, one significant
difference would remain. In the β-δ framework with the proposed modifications, the decision
maker would remain sophisticated, forward-looking, and responsive to economic incentives even
when suffering from present-bias. In contrast, the process-malfunction theory holds that mistakes
result from simple impulses generated by a hard-wired process that encompasses a limited range
of consequences.
In some respects, the policy implications of this approach are similar to those discussed
in the preceding section. Informational policy alone is limited because it cannot address the
causes of present-bias. Supply disruption is potentially beneficial, as are policies that facilitate
the exercise of self-control.
In other respects, the policy implications described by Gruber and Koszegi differ sharply
from those discussed in the preceding section. Most notably, the β-δ framework provides a
rationale for “sin taxes” (see also O’Donoghue and Rabin [2005]). When making decisions, the
22

In an earlier related paper, Winston [1980] modeled addiction by assuming that lifetime preferences vary with states
of nature.

49

consumer always puts too little weight on future consequences, including those resulting from
adjacent complementarities.

The government can address these “internalities” (externalities

imposed on future selves) by imposing a Pigouvian tax on current consumption. Accordingly, the
rate of taxation for addictive substances should be higher than that justified by marginal
externalities. For example, according to Gruber and Koszegi’s simulations, the optimal tax on
each pack of cigarettes is at least a dollar higher than would be justified by externalities alone.
Why do the models of Bernheim-Rangel and Gruber-Koszegi lead to sharply differing
conclusions concerning substance taxation? The answer lies in two of the issues discussed above.
First, Gruber and Koszegi assume that consumers always make present-biased mistakes, while
Bernheim and Rangel assume that mistakes occur only in the presence of intermittent
environmental cues. Accordingly, social insurance can enhance the consumer’s well-being in
Bernheim-Rangel, but not in Gruber-Koszegi. In other words, Gruber and Koszegi’s assumptions
eliminate the factor that argues against high tax burdens in Bernheim and Rangel’s model.
Second, Gruber and Koszegi assume that the decision maker remains sophisticated, forwardlooking, and responsive to economic incentives even while committing errors, whereas Bernheim
and Rangel assume that errors result from a mechanical and largely inflexible process.
Accordingly, taxation directly reduces decision errors in Gruber-Koszegi, but has a limited effect
along these lines in Bernheim-Rangel.

4.G. Modeling addiction with temptation preferences
Gul and Pesendorfer [2005] propose a model of addiction based on the temptation
preferences discussed in section 3.G.

Following their earlier work on temptation (Gul and

Pesendorfer [2001]), they assume that the consumer’s preferences are defined both over
consumption bundles and over the sets from which these bundles are chosen. In each period of
life, the consumer divides his resources between two goods, one of which is addictive, with the
object of maximizing an intertemporal utility function. This function is standard in all respects,
except that it is modified to include, for each period, a penalty representing net temptation from
the most tempting unchosen alternative in the choice set. Even though the consumer applies the
same lifetime preferences at every moment in time and makes no mistakes, precommitments are
still potentially valuable because they reduce the unpleasant feelings associated with the
temptation to consume addictive substances.
Gul and Pesendorfer’s model invokes a number of important assumptions. The following
three deserve emphasis. First, the level of temptation associated with an alternative depends only
on the level of the addictive good, and not at all on the level of the non-addictive good. Second,

50

recent consumption of the addictive substance increases the weight given to temptation, but does
not enter the “standard” portion of the utility function. According to this assumption, as long as
an individual is forced to abstain from the addictive substance, his experienced well-being is
unrelated to his past consumption. As a result, this assumption is in sharp conflict with evidence
on cravings and withdrawal. Third, the consumer only experiences temptation with respect to
current choices. For example, when deciding whether to enter rehabilitation for the next period,
he is not tempted by the prospect of future drug use.
In the Gul-Pesendorfer model, private markets tend to work poorly relative to the firstbest. Markets provide people with choices, and choices create costly temptation.

Unless it is

possible to irrevocably lock in all choices in advance, a consumer is typically happier with the
first-best consumption trajectory when someone else chooses it for him, than when he chooses it
himself in “real time” (it is first-best in the first instance, but not in the second).
Even though the laissez faire solution is inefficient, the optimal rate of taxation or
subsidization for an addictive good is zero.

The same result holds in standard models of

commodity taxation (when the government has no revenue requirement), for essentially the same
reasons. However, we conjecture that this is a knife-edge case, driven by the first assumption
mentioned above. It would appear that if, contrary to the assumption, temptation depends, at least
to some extent, on immediate rewards from the non-addictive good (in addition to consumption
of the addictive substance), the optimal rate of sin taxation is strictly positive.23
Other policy implications resemble those discussed in previous sections. Informational
policy alone is limited because it cannot address the causes of temptation. Supply disruption is
potentially beneficial because it removes tempting alternatives. Policies that facilitate self-control
can also enhance welfare by allowing consumers to eliminate alternatives that would otherwise
prove tempting in the future.

4.H. Looking Ahead
The case of addiction exemplifies the potential for improving policy analysis through the
integration of psychology, neuroscience, and economics. Though progress is evident, much work
remains.

We close this section with a brief discussion of some important open questions.

23

Holding the consumption level for the addictive substance fixed, an increase in the rate of sin taxation reduces the
consumption level of the non-addictive good, rendering the alternative less attractive. Since the size of this effect is
proportional to the quantity of the addictive substance, taxation presumably reduces the “temptation gap” between
alternatives with low and high levels of addictive consumption. Furthermore, this is a first-order effect. Accordingly,
one suspects, intuitively, that a small positive tax is welfare-enhancing. We have not yet attempted to verify this
conjecture formally.

51

Estimation and testing of competing behavioral models. Almost all of the existing
empirical work on addictive behavior is either atheoretical (i.e., it documents factual patterns) or
based on the framework of rational addiction. So far, research on behavioral alternatives has
been almost exclusively theoretical.

It is important to explore the feasibility of estimating

parsimonious structural versions of the various competing behavioral models, using both choice
data and a combination of choice and non-choice data.

Insights from ongoing research in

neuroscience should be exploited to develop procedures for acquiring and using new types of
pertinent non-choice data (e.g., on physical states).

Future research should compare the

performance of the models in explaining observed behavior, and examine testable implications
that distinguish between them. Empirical research can potentially shed light on the relative
importance of the various forces at work in these models.
Imperfect foresight. Most of the economic literature on addiction assumes that people
perfectly understand the benefits and costs of substance use, including its effects on future tastes
and decision-making processes.

The evidence suggests that this extreme assumption is

unrealistic. For example, in a study of high-school seniors who smoked cigarettes, 56% predicted
that they would not be smoking in 5 years, but in fact only 31% were able to quit (USDHH
[1994]).
Under the assumption that decision makers are completely or partially naïve, models with
quasi-hyperbolic discounting incorporate imperfect self-understanding. While this represents a
step in the right direction, further work is clearly needed. Models of naïve behavior should draw
on new and existing empirical research concerning the nature of unsophisticated decision making.
They should allow for the possibility that people lack perfect foresight not only with respect to
their own future tastes and choices, but also with respect to other consequences, such as health
effects (e.g., as in Hung [2000]). They should also introduce the possibility that people learn
about their self-control problems with experience.
The literature on “projection bias” (e.g., Loewenstein, O’Donoghue, and Rabin [2003])
illustrates the potential to discover important regularities concerning the structure of naïve
decision making through empirical research. This phrase refers to the tendency for people to
assume that their future likes and dislikes will be more similar to their current likes and dislikes
than is actually the case.24 Loewenstein, O’Donoghue, and Rabin [2003] briefly and informally
discuss several provocative implications for addiction. Victims of projection bias are more likely

24

Projection bias does not imply that lifetime preferences vary from one point in time to another. On the contrary, an
otherwise standard consumer suffering from projection bias wants future tastes to govern future choices. However, he
makes decisions based on biased forecasts of future tastes.

52

to become addicted against their interests because they underestimate both the effects of habit
formation and the degree to which current consumption has negative consequences for future
health. Once addicted, they are more likely to try to quit when they are not experiencing
cravings, because they underestimate future cravings. Conditional on attempting to quit, they are
also more likely to “fall off the wagon” because, upon experiencing cravings, they overestimate
the difficulty of continued abstention in the future.
Differences across substances and populations. It is important to emphasize that there
is no single combination of policies that is ideal for all addictive substances. For example, while
alcohol and crack cocaine are both addictive, public policy should (and does) treat them
differently. A number of factors affect the relative desirability of the various policy alternatives,
including (but not limited to) the typical individual’s susceptibility to addiction, the
responsiveness of compulsive and deliberative use to prices and other incentives, and the
magnitude of the externalities imposed on third parties. It is also important to stress that the ideal
policy regime for any particular substance may evolve over time as our ability to treat, control,
and/or predict addiction develops. Ideally, economists should attempt to estimate parametric
behavioral models for a wide range of substances and populations, and to use these estimates as a
basis for determining the best policy for each substance.

5. Public Goods
In this section, we review the contributions of behavioral public economics to our
understanding of public goods. As in previous sections, we identify the key policy issues,
summarize the standard approach, and discuss empirical evidence that calls this approach into
question. We then review the leading behavioral alternative and discuss its implications.

5.A. The policy problem
A large number and wide variety of public policy issues –from the environment to school
finance, and from the war on poverty to the financing of basic research – involve the provision of
public goods. Funding for these goods flows from both public and private sources. At the
community level, philanthropic activities in the U.S. address a large class of socially valuable
activities, from assisting the poor to financing cultural events. Andreoni [2004] reports that, for
the U.S., contributions to the philanthropic sector totaled 240.3 billion dollars in 2003; moreover,
in 1997, roughly 45,000 charitable, religious, and other non-for-profit organizations were

53

registered with the government.25 Voluntarily provided public goods also play important roles in
smaller groups, such as families.
In each of these domains, public goods give rise to a common problem: how can the
group best overcome free riding and provide funding at an appropriate level? Should the group
provide its members with incentives to contribute (e.g., tax breaks)? Should it require mandatory
contributions (e.g,, through taxes)? Is it best to have a hybrid system that draws on both public
and private contributions?
To answer these questions, economists require a theory of public goods that explains
observed patterns of voluntary giving. The theory must explain why people give, how they select
the causes to which they contribute, and how their contributions respond to economic variables,
government policies, and the behavior of others. It should also account for the existence of
philanthropic organizations, and explain how the activities of these entities respond to
government policy.

5.B. The neoclassical perspective on public goods
The standard model of public goods assumes that each member of a group of N
individuals has true preferences over consumption of private goods (denoted xi) and public goods
(denoted G). These preferences are represented by a utility function Ui(xi,G). For expositional
simplicity, we focus here on a simple model with only one private good and one public good,
where one unit of the private good is required to produce each unit of the public good, and where
each individual i is endowed with wi units of the private good. All of the results described below
generalize to more complicated settings. Each individual contributes an amount gi to the public
good. In addition, individual i pays a lump-sum tax, Ti, and the government contributes all
revenues to the public good. Consequently, G = (g1 + T1) + … + (gN + TN). Individuals
simultaneously select their contributions after learning the values of the lump-sum taxes.
Behavior is governed by Nash equilibrium. Let gi* denote the equilibrium level of contributions,
and G* = g1*+ … + g N* denote the equilibrium level of public goods.
It is useful to highlight the key assumptions built into this framework. First, individuals
only care about their consumption of private and public goods. They do not benefit directly from
making contributions, nor do they care about others’ consumption or well-being. Second,
individuals do not care about the process through which allocations are determined. For example,
they are indifferent between public and private provision as long as the level of private
25

The sources of these funds are as follows: 76.3% came from individuals, 11.2% came from foundations, 7.5% from
bequests, and the remaining 5.1% was given by corporations.

54

consumption and public good provision is the same in both instances. Notice also that, in this
simple model, there is no obvious role for charitable fundraising. For example, since people are
fully informed about the public good, there is no reason for charities to disseminate information.
This model has featured prominently in several important strands of the literature. These
include work on optimal tax and regulatory policy in the presence of externalities, the design of
efficient mechanisms for public goods problems , and political economy models of public goods
provision. From a positive perspective, the model has a number of sharp, testable implications,
including the following (see Bergstrom, Blume, and Varian [1986] and Andreoni [1988] for
details):
1.Extreme income elasticities. If individuals have identical preferences, there exists an
endowment level w* such that (a) only those with an endowment larger than w* contribute, and
(b) gi*= wi – w* otherwise. The result extends to the case of heterogeneous tastes as long as each
taste-type is represented across the income distribution. It follows that the marginal propensity to
contribute to the public good is exactly unity (measured in the cross-section, controlling for
individual characteristics) for those with sufficiently high resources,26 and exactly zero for the
rest of the population. It also follows that all contributors (of the same type) consume the same
amount of private goods.
2. Only the wealthy contribute. In large groups only the very upper tail of the income
distribution contributes to the public good. Furthermore, as the population grows (fixing the
distribution of wealth), contributors account for a smaller fraction of the population. As a result,
the effect of population size on total contributions converges to zero for sufficiently large
populations. Unless the group is small, the level of public goods depends only on the wealth of
the very rich: changes in wealth for the rest of the population have no impact on total provision.
3. Neutrality of public provision.

Public provision of public goods financed through

lump-sum taxation is neutral as long as no individual pays a lump-sum tax greater than the
contribution he would make in the absence of government intervention. In this case public
contributions fully crowd out of private contributions. While the conditions required for neutrality
seem stark, the result generalizes to other environments. For example, Bernheim [1986] and
Andreoni [1988] have shown that the total level of the public goods is invariant, or approximately
invariant, with respect to public provision financed by distortionary taxes, and with respect to
subsidized giving. These results build on earlier work by Warr [1982] and Roberts [1984].

26

In response to an exogenous increase in resources (as opposed to cross-sectional variation), a contributor will
increase private consumption. However, if the number of contributors is large, the recipeint’s marginal propensity to
consume the private good is approximately zero.

55

4.Contributions from external sources (almost) fully crowd out internal funding. In a
large economy, exogenous contributions to the public good (made by someone outside the group,
say a higher level of government) have a negligible impact on the level of provision. In other
words, external funding almost fully crowds out of private contributions. It follows, for example,
that contributions from a higher level of government to a local charity cannot measurably increase
total funding, assuming the number of contributors is reasonably large.
5. Neutrality of redistribution. Redistributing wealth among contributors has no effect
on the total level of contributions. In contrast, redistributing wealth from the group of contributors
to the group of non-contributors decreases the total level of the public good.
These results are valuable because they provide stark and robust testable implications of
the standard model. How well do they match the data?

5.C. Some problematic observations
One of the most influential empirical tests of the standard model is Kingma [1989]. In
contrast to the bulk of the literature that preceded it, this paper studies contributions to a
particular public good – the operation of public radio stations – rather than aggregate
contributions. The narrow focus is desirable because, when analyzing aggregates, it is difficult to
harmonize the scope of data pertaining to public and private contributions. Moreover, a high rate
of giving in the aggregate may mask low rates of giving to individual causes. The paper uses a
unique cross-sectional dataset on the funding sources and member contributions to 66 public
radio stations across the U.S. serving non-overlapping markets. It has two main findings. First,
about half of the subjects in the sample (who were recruited for a study of listening habits)
contribute positive amounts. The average contribution given was $45. Contributors were
wealthier and more educated on average, but not by a significant amount. This finding stands in
sharp contrast to implications 1 and 2 from the previous section. Second, a $10,000 increase in
“exogenous” public contributions to the station (that is, contributions financed by federal taxes
rather than taxes on local members) reduces private contributions by $1,350 for a typical station
with 9,000 members. This contradicts implication 4.
Kingma’s first finding is consistent with patterns observed in the aggregate data. For
example, Andreoni [2004] reports that, in 1995, 68.5% of all households gave to charity, and the
average gift amount was $1081. Even relatively poor households gave almost 5% of their
incomes, on average, to charity; as a fraction of income, households in upper-income brackets
actually gave less.

56

Kingma’s second finding is also roughly consistent with other studies based on aggregate
data. For example, Abrams and Schmitz [1978a,b] and Clotfelter [1985] find that public transfers
to the ‘non-for-profit’ sector crowd out private giving at the rate of 5 to 28 cents on the dollar.
The first four implications listed in the previous section have also been tested in the
laboratory. Isaac and Walker [1988] study the effect of group size in linear public good
experiments. Subjects play repeatedly with either 3 or 9 other participants. Each round they
receive an endowment of tokens and decide how many tokens to contribute to the public good.
Tokens are valuable because they are exchangeable for cash at the end of the experiment. Each
token contributed to the public good yields either 0.3 or 0.7 tokens for everyone in the group,
including the contributor. Since each token contributed entails a net loss, the standard model
predicts that it is a dominant strategy for every subject to contribute nothing. As in many other
experiments in this literature, subjects initially contribute roughly 50% of tokens on average, but
this figure falls as the experiment is repeated. Neither average individual contributions nor the
fraction of subjects contributing a positive amount decline with group size. These findings
contradict implication 2.
Andreoni [1993] studies a variant of the previous experiment in which payoffs vary nonlinearly with the number of tokens. This generates a Nash equilibrium with strictly positive
contributions. He tests the neutrality of public provision (implication 3) by comparing behavior
in two closely related treatments. In each case, subjects choose how many tokens to contribute
and are given a 2-dimensional table that describes how their payoffs change as a function of their
contribution and the aggregate contributions of others. In one treatment, they are, in effect,
required to contribute at least two tokens; in the other treatment, they are not required to
contribute anything.27

Andreoni’s results imply that public contributions crowd out private

contributions at the rate of 71 cents on the dollar. While this rate of crowding-out is high in
comparison with other estimates in the literature, it is still inconsistent with implication 3.
These papers, together with a growing body of related evidence (see Ledyard [1995] and
Camerer [2003] for reviews), have lead many economists to reject the standard model, and to
search for superior alternatives. The rest of this section reviews the state of the literature and
summarizes its implications for public economics.

5.D. Models involving “warm glow”
27

Given the importance of framing effects in social exchange experiments, it is noteworthy that the minimum
contribution level is imposed by restating the payoffs associated with a given contribution profile, rather than by
retaining the same payoff mapping and restricting choices.

57

To account for the evidence described in the preceding section, Andreoni [1989,1990]
proposed a “warm-glow” model of public good contributions, which builds on ideas in earlier
papers by Blinder [1974], Becker [1974], Cornes and Sandler [1984] and Steinberg [1987]. His
approach entails a straightforward modification of the standard model: individuals are assumed to
behave as if they maximize a utility function of the form Ui(xi, gi, G) instead of Ui(xi,G). In this
formulation, each individual cares directly about the amount he contributes to the public good, in
addition to his consumption of the private and public goods.
This modification overturns each of the implications discussed in the preceding section,
and leads to more sensible policy implications. For example, as the size of the population
increases, choosing a contribution level becomes more and more like picking the level of
consumption for any conventional good. In the limit, the contributor simply weighs the relative
merits of spending money on two different private goods, xi and gi; the effect on his well-being
through G becomes negligible Accordingly, the model can produce sensible income elasticities
and high rates of charitable giving throughout the income distribution. The level of the public
good is responsive to changes in the income distribution, public provision increases funding
levels whether financed by taxes on group members or by external sources, and redistributions
among contributors are non-neutral. In fact, in the warm-glow model, the optimal tax treatment
of charitable contributions qualitatively resembles the U.S. tax code (Diamond [2005]). In short,
the implications of the warm-glow model are more consistent than the standard framework both
with the empirical findings described in the previous section, and with the perspective of policy
makers.
In contrast to some of the work on addiction or saving summarized in the last two
sections, the literature on warm-glow giving has had little to say about the mechanisms
responsible for generating departures from the standard framework. While it is plainly
appropriate to think of the model as a reduced form representation of a more complex underlying
process, the nature of this process is largely unexplained.
A partial list of possible warm-glow mechanisms includes the following. First, people
may experience positive emotions (e.g., pride) when they conform to or exceed certain standards
of “virtuous” behavior, or negative emotions (e.g., guilt) when they fall short of these standards.
Second, they may be concerned about the inferences that others draw from their actions (for
example, whether they are generous or public-spirited), and this may increase their willingness to
contribute (Harbaugh [1998], Shang and Croson [2005]). Third, upon forming a group, people
may contribute to establish a norm of positive reciprocity, thereby promoting future cooperation.
Fourth, when it is possible for group members to inflict harm on each other, giving may rise in

58

response to implicit or explicit threats (negative reciprocity) that become credible as a result of
emotional responses, such as anger (see Fehr and Gachter [2000,2002], Ferhr and Fischbacher
[2003,2004], Sefton et. al. [2002] and Masclet et. al. [2003]).
One of the main themes of this paper is that a good understanding of pertinent
psychological and neural processes is often helpful in formulating reduced form models that can
faithfully reproduce observed patterns and reliably predict behavior out of sample, as well as in
justifying specific normative criteria. Unfortunately, in the context of warm glow giving and
public goods, these processes are not yet well understood. The warm glow model remains a
“black box,” and one can interpret it as a reduced form for a variety of mechanisms with starkly
differing welfare implications. Diamond [2005] argues that, given the limited state of knowledge
concerning processes, measures of social welfare should exclude the apparent benefits from the
warm glow. He advocates using the warm-glow model for positive purposes (that is, to describe
behavior), but favors the standard model for evaluating welfare. Andreoni [2004] expresses a
similar view, and in addition argues that economists are unlikely to shed much light on the nature
of the true preferences that give rise to warm-glow behavior. While we are more sanguine about
the prospects for meaningful progress, we agree that economists do not yet understand warmglow mechanisms sufficiently well to resolve important questions about positive and normative
analysis.
One concern is that apparent warm glow behavior may sometimes reflect a divergence
between choices and true preferences. In some instances, people may give because they derive
pleasure from the act. For example, giving to a worthy cause may make them feel proud to have
taken constructive action, or it may assuage their guilt. In such cases, revealed preference
provides a reasonable basis for welfare evaluation (subject to the further qualifications discussed
below). However, in other situations, exposure to an emotionally manipulative message may
precipitate giving by triggering a short-lived emotional reaction such as shame, and people may
experience remorse shortly thereafter (see Loewenstein [1996] and Loewenstein and O’Donoghue
[2004] for other interesting examples of this type of phenomena). Different implications for
welfare follow depending on whether the individual, when in a normal state of mind, wishes to
limit his ability to give upon encountering an emotional trigger. If behavior is dynamically
consistent, it may be appropriate to adopt a state-contingent version of the warm-glow model for
both positive and normative analysis. However, if behavior is dynamically inconsistent, it may
be appropriate to discount the “revealed” impact of giving on transient perceptions of well-being
(e.g., for the reasons discussed at the end of Section 2.C).

59

A second concern is that warm glow effects appear to be context-dependent.
Experiments have shown that the amount of giving depends on framing, the identity of the group,
the emotional state of the subjects, and the history of play. Here we mention two examples. First,
Andreoni [1995] finds that a change in the phrasing of instructions can have a sizable effect on
contributions, even when strategy sets and payoffs are unchanged. Second, Isaac and Walker
[1988] (and dozens of subsequent studies) find that the level of contributions decreases with
repetition in both small and large groups.28 Furthermore, the rate of decline depends on the
behavior of others: subjects are more likely to stop acting cooperatively if others behave selfishly
(see Ledyard [1986] and Camerer [2003] for surveys of the literature).
This concern is relevant for policy analysis. The appropriate reduced-form representation
of warm-glow giving may vary from one set of policies and institutions to another. The practice
of forecasting the behavioral effects of a policy change based on fixed warm-glow parameters is
therefore vulnerable to the Lucas critique. For example, if people experience less pride when
making contributions in the presence of economic incentives, subsidization of contributions will
stimulate less giving than anticipated, and could even reduce it. Alternatively, people may
become less resistant to taxation if they are regularly supplied with more concrete and visual
evidence of the benefits derived from public expenditures. Public relation campaigns that show
“your tax dollars at work” are, in effect, intended to foster a warm glow.
One could, of course, modify the warm-glow model to account for context-dependence
by linking the taste for giving to features of the environment in just the right way. However, this
solution is conceptually unsatisfactory. One cannot usefully explain a phenomenon by selecting
ad hoc preferences that rationalize choices ex post (Stigler and Becker [1977]). If every context
is potentially associated with a different mode of behavior, out-of-sample prediction is
impossible. To anticipate the positive effects of policy changes, one therefore needs a broad
theory that accounts for the relevance of context. This requires us to open the black box.
Since the warm-glow mechanism may differ from one context to another, a deeper
understanding of context-dependence is also essential for welfare analysis. To illustrate the
problem, consider the following hypothetical example. How should we evaluate a policy that
replaces private contributions to a public good with tax-financed contributions, without changing
either the total amount obtained from any individual or the overall level of funding? Are people
worse off because they lose the beneficial warm glow associated with giving? Are they better off
28

Palfrey and Prisbey [1997] argue that the implied decline in the warm-glow taste parameter may in part reflect falling
rates of decision errors. To our knowledge, there is no evidence that distinguishes between the hypothesis that tastes
evolve with repetition and the possibility that error rates decline. However, errors do not appear to explain many other
findings in this literature.

60

because public funding relieves them of guilt?

Or are they equally well off because they

experience the same warm glow from giving voluntarily and from paying their taxes? While it
may be difficult to resolve this issue, we are optimistic about the prospects for progress through
further research involving a combination of psychology, neuroscience, and experimental
economics.
Despite these concerns, the theoretical and empirical literatures concerning warm-glow
giving have already contributed significantly to our understanding of public goods, and have
changed the way many public economists think about related policies. We can now say with
some confidence that people act as if they care about the levels of their own contributions. We
know that the intensity of this effect depends on context. While we lack a good theory of
context-dependence, we have a good set of empirical regularities from which to build. We have
good reason to believe that people feel differently about public and private contributions. We
have both direct and indirect evidence that public contributions crowd out private contributions at
a rate significantly less than dollar-for-dollar.

Accordingly, even low levels of public

contributions can significantly raise total funding. There is strong evidence that people give more
when institutions activate psychological mechanisms, such as concerns about reciprocity and
fairness, that play central roles in giving. From a policy perspective, this suggests that relatively
inexpensive strategies involving advertising and the promotion of community leadership may
deserve greater emphasis.

5.E. Looking Ahead
Given the crucial role that public goods and externalities play in many important policy
problems, one of the main challenges ahead for public economics is to build and test better
models of public goods, and to apply them to basic questions in public finance, political
economy, and mechanism design. We are still far from a satisfactory model of public goods that
can become a new workhorse for economic applications across the board. However, based on the
rapidly growing body of evidence concerning the psychological and neural processes at work,
including research on the neural basis of empathy, punishment, and cooperation (see DeQuervain
et. al. [2004], McCabe et. al. [2001], Singer et. al. [2004], and Rilling [2002,2004]), we are
optimistic that such a framework is on the horizon. Given the number of likely forces at work –
reciprocity, social norms, social emotions, social signaling, and so forth – it seems likely that a
relatively complex and multifaceted approach is needed. Yet it is also likely that the discovery of
new organizing principles will permit useful simplifications that render the problem more
tractable.

61

In focusing here on individual behavior, we have largely neglected the role of
philanthropic organizations. As Andreoni [2004] convincingly argues, it is also essential to
understand the behavior of the philanthropic sector. A growing body of evidence shows that
charities significantly stimulate giving, and that their activities respond both to government policy
and to the behavior of other not-for-profit institutions. For example, Andreoni and Payne [2003]
show that government grants to charities reduce fund-raising activities; Andreoni and Petrie
[2004] document the role of charities in disseminating information; and Harbaugh [1998]
provides evidence that charities exploit social signaling in their fundraising campaigns. For
reviews of the economics of philanthropy, see Andreoni [2004] and Rose-Ackerman [1996].

6. The Road Ahead
In our view, Behavioral Public Economics has enormous potential, and has already
demonstrated its value by making important contributions to critical policy discussions. We have
emphasized that the behavioral perspective does not preclude coherent normative analysis.
Indeed, in many cases, it is possible to modify and extend the tools of empirical welfare analysis
without abandoning familiar methodological principles. We have also reviewed recent behavioral
work concerning policies affecting saving, addiction, and public goods. Each of these literatures
offers novel and important insights, as well as the potential for groundbreaking innovation.
The goal of this final section is to briefly highlight some critical directions for future
research.
Better models.

While the current generation of behavioral models improves the

explanatory power of economic theory, many behavioral patterns remain unexplained. Among
other things, recent research has deemphasized considerations for which satisfactory and tractable
formal models are not yet available, such as framing effects, the adoption of rules-of-thumb, and
other responses to environmental complexity.

To study the policy implications of these

phenomena, better models are required. For example, we need theories that explain how people
adopt rules of thumb, and how they adapt these rules to new environments.
New types and sources of data. With sufficiently restrictive structural assumptions, it is
possible to estimate positive and normative behavioral models using data only on choices. The
use of non-choice data would potentially allow economists to estimate these models more
reliably, and to formulate more discriminating and robust tests of competing alternatives.
Future research should examine the possibility of measuring preferences directly, instead
of inferring them from choices. Self-reporting is a natural source of information about tastes. In

62

practice, there are several problems with self-reported preferences. First, when choices are not
involved, questions about preferences are inherently hypothetical.

There is some reason to

believe that people do not give reliable answers to hypothetical questions (see, e.g., List [2001]
and the references therein). For example, unless there is something at stake, they may not take
these questions seriously. Second, true preferences may conflict with social and moral norms,
leading subjects to either rationalize or report false preferences.

Third, people may make

mistakes in assessing their own preferences. For example, a sizable body of literature has
documented systematic errors in affective forecasting (see Loewenstein and Schkade [1999] for a
review).

Fourth, context may affect an individual’s ability to cognitively access his true

preferences.
Despite considerable evidence that self-reporting is susceptible to these problems (see
Schwartz and Strack [1999] for a review), there is cause for optimism. For the most part, the
object of this body of work has been to identify experimental manipulations that lead to
nonsensical self-reports. While this demonstrates that there are important pitfalls associated with
the direct elicitation of preferences, it does not prove that this approach is worthless. As far as we
know, there has been no systematic attempt to design elicitation protocols that are stable and
resistant to manipulation.
Many other types of data merit consideration.

Even without eliciting complete

preferences, one can potentially learn whether an individual regards a particular choice as a
mistake, whether his choices correspond to his intentions, or whether he systematically fails to
follow through on plans (see, e.g., Choi et. al. [2004] and Bernheim [1995]). One can also elicit
information about expectations and make comparisons with realizations (see, e.g., Bernheim
[1988, 1989], Hurd and McGarry [2002], Loewenstein, O’Donoghue, and Rabin [2003]).
Obviously, information along these lines raises many of the same concerns as self-reported
preferences. Finally, economists have only just started to tap data on physical states, brain
activity, and the like. While the value of neuroeconomic data remains largely unproven, the
potential payoffs are high, and the possibilities are worth exploring.
Difficult issues in welfare economics.

The nascent field of “Behavioral Welfare

Economics” is far from settled. Many thorny issues remain. The following hypothetical problem
illustrates one challenging issue. An individual is presented with a choice between two options, A
and B. He is indifferent between them. However, his preferences change as a result of his
choice. If he chooses A, he prefers B (call this the “A self”). If he chooses B, he prefers A (call
this the “B self”). Suppose he chooses A. Since only the initial self and the A self actually exist,
it seems natural to place no weight on the preferences of the B self. But if we place any weight

63

on the A self, B is the welfare optimum. Of course, if we enforce this choice through public
policy, the A self vanishes and the B self materializes, in which case A is the welfare optimum. Is
there a coherent way to resolve this ambiguity? See Bernheim and Rangel [2005a] for a more
systematic treatment of welfare economics in behavioral settings.
Non-standard policies. In the standard model, public policy affects behavior only
through its effect on information and budget constraints. A growing body of literature, partially
reviewed in the previous three sections, suggests that policy can also have powerful effects on
behavior through other channels. For example, it can provide or suppress cues, and it can alter
the way decision problems are framed. If economists can develop reliable formal models of these
effects, it should be possible to study the optimal design of unconventional economic policies
(e.g., restrictions on advertising, warning labels, and clever manipulations of framing effects as in
Thaler and Shefrin’s [2004] Saving for Tomorrow Savings PlanTM) with the same rigor as
traditional tax and expenditure policy.
New applications. The interesting collection of papers in this volume show that, as time
passes, economists are applying behavioral economics to increasingly wide range of economic
problems. No doubt this trend will continue within the field of Public Economics. Many of the
tools described in this paper should prove useful in understanding issues pertaining to poverty,
crime, corruption, and other important topics.

64

References
Abrams, Burton A. and Mark A. Schmitz (1978) “The Crowding Out Effect of Government Transfers on
Private Charitable Contributions,” Public Choice, 29-39
Abrams, Burton A. and Mark A. Schmitz (1978) “The Crowding Out Effect of Government Transfers on
Private Charitable Contributions: Cross Sectional Evidence,” National Tax Journal, 563-68
Ainslie, George, and Varda Haendel (1983), “The Motives of the Will,” in E. Gotteheil et. al. (eds.),
Etiologic Aspects of Alcohol and Drug Abuse. Springfiled, Illinois: Thomas.
Akerlof, George (1991) “Procrastination and Obedience,” American Economic Review, LXXXI, 1-19
Ameriks, John, Andrew Caplin, and John Leahy (2003) “Wealth Accumulation and the Propensity to Plan,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1007-47
Andreoni, James (1988) “Privately Provided Public Goods in a Large Economy: The Limits of Altruism,”
Journal of Public Economics, 57-73
Andreoni, James (1989) “Giving with Impure Altruism: Applications to Charity and Ricardian
Equivalence,” Journal of Political Economy, 1147-58
Andreoni, James (1990) “Impure Altruism and Donations to Public Goods: A Theory of Warm Glow
Giving,” Economic Journal, 464-77
Andreoni, James (1993) “An Experimental Test of the Public-Goods Crowding-Out Hypothesis,” American
Economic Review, 1317-27
Andreoni, James (1995) “Warm-glow versus Cold-pickle: The Effects of Positive and Negative Framing on
Cooperation Experiments,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2-21
Andreoni, James (1998) “Towards a Theory of Charitable Fundraising,” Journal of Political Economy,
1186-1213
Andreoni, James (2004) “Philanthropy,” forthcoming in the Handbook of Giving, Reciprocity, and
Altruism,” L.A. Gerard-Vared, Serge-Christopher Kolm and Jean Mercier Ythier eds, Elseveir/NorthHolland.
Andreoni, James and Abigail Payne (2003) “Do Government Grants to Private Charities Crowd Out Giving
or Fund-Raising?” American Economic Review, 93:792-812.
Andreoni, James and Ragan Petrie (2004) “Public Goods Experiments Without Confidentiality: A Glimpse
Into Fund-raising,” Journal of Public Economics, 88, 1605-23
Angeletos George-Marios, David Laibson, Andrea Repetto, Jeremy Tobacman and Stephen Weinberg
(2001) “The Hyperbolic Consumption Model: Calibration, Simulation, and Empirical Evaluation,” Journal
of Economic Perspectives, 15(3):47-68
Ariely, Dan and Ken Wertenbroch (2002) “Procrastination, Deadlines and Performance: Using
Precommitment to Regulate One’s Behavior,” 13(3):219-24
Banks, James, Richard Blundell, and Sara Tanner (1988), “Is there a Retirement-Savings Puzzle?”
American Economic Review, 88(4):769-88.

65

Bayer, Patrick J., B. Douglas Bernheim, and J. Karl Scholz (1996) “The Effects of Financial Education in
the Workplace: Evidence from a Survey of Employers,” mimeo, Stanford University.
Becker, Gary (1974) “A Theory of Social Interactions,” Journal of Political Economy, 82:1063-93
Becker, Gary and Kevin Murphy (1988) “A Theory of Rational Addiction,” Journal
of Political Economy, 96(4):675-700
Benabou, Roland and Marek Pycia [2002] “Dynamic Inconsistency and Self-Control,” Economics Letters,
77:419-24
Bergstrom, Theodore, Lawrence Blume, and Hal Varian (1986) “On the Private Provision of Public
Goods,” Journal of Public Economics, 25-49
Bernartzi, Sholomo (2001) “Excessive Extrapolation and the Allocation of 401(k) Accounts to Company
Stock,” Journal of Finance, 56(5):1747-64
Bernartzi, Shlomo and Richard Thaler (2001) “Naïve Diversification Strategies in Defined Contribution
Savings Plans,” American Economic Review, 91(1):71-98
Bernheim, B. Douglas (1986) “On the Voluntary and Involuntary Provision of Public Goods,” American
Economic Review, 789-93
Bernheim, B. Douglas (1988), “Social Security Benefits: An Empirical Study of Expectations and
Realizations,” in E. Lazear and R. Ricardo-Campbell (eds.), Issues in Contemporary Retirement. Hoover
Instution Press: Stanford, 312-345.
Bernehime, B. Douglas (1989), “The Timing of Retirement: A Comparison of Expectations and
Realizations,” in D. Wise (ed.), The Economics of Aging. NBER-University of Chicago Press: Chicago,
335-355.
Bernheim, B. Douglas (1994) “Personal Saving, Information, and Economic Literacy: New Directions for
Public Policy,” in Tax Policy for Economic Growth in the 1990s, Washington, D.C.: American Council for
Capital Formation
Bernheim, B. Douglas (1995) “Do Households Appreciate Their Financial Vulnerabilities? An Analysis of
Actions, Perceptions, and Public Policy,” in Tax Policy for Economic Growth in the 1990s, Washington,
D.C.: American Council for Capital Formation, 1-30.
Bernheim, B. Douglas (1998) “Financial Illiteracy, Education, and Retirement Saving,” in Living with
Defined Contribution Pensions, Olivia S. Mitchell and Sylvester J. Schieber, editors, Philadelphia:
University of Pennsylvania Press, 38-68
Bernheim, B. Douglas, Lorenzo Forni, Jagadeesh Gokhale, and Laurence Kotlikoff (2002), “An Economic
Approach to Setting Retirement Saving Goals,” in Olivia Mitchell, Zvi Bodie, Brett Hammond, and Steve
Zeldes (eds.), Innovations in Financing Retirement. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 77105.
Bernheim, B. Douglas, and Daniel M. Garrett (2003), “The Effects of Financial Education in the
Workplace: Evidence from a Survey of Households,” Journal of Public Economics, 87(7-8):1487-1519.
Bernheim, B. Douglas, Daniel M. Garrett, and Dean Maki (2001), “Education and Saving: The Long-Term
Effects of High School Financial Curriculum Mandates,” Journal of Public Economics, 80(3):435-465.

66

Bernheim, B. Douglas and Antonio Rangel (2004) “Addiction and Cue-Triggered Decision Processes,”
American Economic Review, 94(5):1558-90
Bernheim, B. Douglas and Antonio Rangel (2005a) “Behavioral Welfare Economics,” manuscript
Bernheim, B. Douglas and Antonio Rangel (2005b) “Savings and Cue-Triggered Decision Processes,”
manuscript
Bernheim, B. Douglas, and Antonio Rangel (2005c), “From Neuroscience to Public Policy: A New
Economic View of Addiction,” mimeo, Stanford University.
Bernheim, B. Douglas, Debraj Ray, and Sevin Yeltekin (1999), “Self-Control, Saving, and the Low Asset
Trap,” mimeo, Stanford University.
Bernheim, B. Douglas, Jonathan Skinner, and Steven Weinberg (2001), “What Accounts for the Variation
in Retirement Wealth Among U.S. Households?” American Economic Review, 91(4), 832-857.
Berridge, K. (1996) “Food Reward: Brain Substrates of Wanting and Liking,”
Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 20(1):1-25
Berridge, K. (1999) “Pleasure, Pain, Desire, and Dread: Hidden Core Processes of
Emotion,” in Well-Being: The Foundations of Hedonic Psychology, D. Kaheman,
E. Diener, and N. Schwarz, editors, 525-57
Berridge, Kent, and Terry Robinson (1998) “What is the role of dopamine in
reward: hedonic impact, reward learning, or incentive salience?”, Brain Research
Review, 28:309-69
Berridge, Kent and Terry Robinson (2003) “Parsing Reward,” Trends in Neuroscience,
26(9):507-513
Beshears, John, James Choi, David Laibson, and Brigitte C. Madrian (2005) “Early Decisions: A
Regulatory Framework,” forthcoming in Swedish Policy Review
Bhattacharya, Jay, and Darius Lackdawalla (2004), “Time-Inconsistency and Welfare,” mimeo, Stanford
University.
Blinder, Alan S. (1974). Toward an Economic Theory of Income Distribution. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Bolton, Gary E., and Axel Ockenfels (2000), “ERC: A Theory of Equity, Reciprocity, and Competition,”
American Economic Review, 20, 166-93.
Camerer, Colin (2003) Behavioral Game Theory: Experiments in Strategic Interaction. Princeton: Russell
Sage Foundation.
Center for Disease Control (1993) “Smoking-Attributable Mortality and Years of
Potential Life Lost - United States, 1990,” Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report,
42(33):645-8.
Chaloupka, F. and K. Warner (2001) “The Economics of Smoking”, in Handbook of Health Economics, J.
Newhouse and D. Cutler, editors, North-Holland
Choi, James J., David Laibson, Brigitte C. Madrian, and Andrew Metrick (2004a) “Optimal Defaults and
Active Decisions,” manuscript

67

Choi, James J., David Laibson, Brigitte C. Madrian, and Andrew Metrick (2004b) “Saving For Retirement
on the Path of Least Resistance,” manuscript
Clotfelter, Charles (1985). Federal Tax Policy and Charitable Giving. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
Cohen, G. A. (1989), “On the Currency of Egalitarianism Justice,” Ethics, 99(4):906-44.
Consumer Federation of America and the American Express Company (1991), High School Competency
Test Report of Findings, Washington D.C.
Cornes, Richard and Todd Sandler (1999) “Easy Riders, Joint Production and Public Goods,” Economic
Journal, 94:580-98
Cronqvist, Henrik and Richard Thaler (2004) “Design Choices in Privatized Social Security Systems:
Learning from the Swedish Experience,” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 94(2):42428
DeQuervain, Dominique, et. al. (2004) “The Neural Basis of Altruistic Punishment,” Science, 305:1254-58
Diamond, Peter (2005) “Optimal Tax Treatment of Private Contributions for Public Goods with and
without warm-glow preferences,” Journal of Public Economics, forthcoming
Diamond, Peter and Jerry Hausman (1994) “ Contingent Valuation: Is Some Number Better than No
Number?” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 8(4):45-64
Diamond, Peter and Botond Koszegi (2003) “Quasi-Hyperbolic Discounting and Retirement,” Journal of
Public Economics, 87(9-10):1839-72
Dockner, E. J., and G. Feichtinger (1993), “Cyclical Consumption Patterns and Rational Addiction,”
American Economic Review, 83:256-63.
Doyle, Robert J., Jr., and Eric T. Johnson (1991) Readings in Wealth Accumulation Planning, fourth
edition, Bryn Mawr, Pennsylvania: The American College
Duflo, Esther and Emmanuel Saez (2002), “Participation and Investment Decisions in a Retirement Plan:
the Influence of Colleagues’ Choices,” Journal of Public Economics, 85:121-48.
Duflo, Esther and Emmanuel Saez (2003) “The Role of Information and Social Interactions in Retirement
Plans Decisions: Evidence from a Randomized Experiment,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(3): 815842.
Engen, Eric M., William G. Gale, and John Karl Scholz (1994) “Do Saving Incentives Work?” Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity, 85-151
Fang, Hanming and Dan Silverman (2002) “Time-Inconsistency and Welfare Program Participation:
Evidence from the NLSY,” manuscript
Farkas, Steve and Jean Johnson (1997) “Miles to Go: A Status Report on Americans’ Plans for
Retirement,” Public Agenda
Feenberg, Daniel R. and Jonathan Skinner (1989) “Sources of IRA Saving,” Tax Policy and the Economy,
25-46

68

Fehr, Ernst and Simon Gachter (2000) “Cooperation and Punishment in Public Good Experiments,”
American Economic Review, 980-94.
Fehr, Ernst and Simon Gachter (2002) “Altruistic Punishment in Humans,” Nautre, 415:137-40.
Fehr, Ernst and Urs Fischbacher (2003) “The Nature of Human Altruism,” Nature, 425, 785-9
Fehr, Ernst and Urs Fischbacher (2004) “Social norms and human cooperation,” TRENDS in Cognitive
Sciences, 8(4):185-90
Fehr, Ernst, and Klaus M. Schmidt (1999), “A Theory of Fairness, Competition, and Cooperation,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114, 817-68.
Feldstein, Martin (1985) “The Optimal Level of Social Security Benefits,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
100(2):303-20
Fernandez-Villaverde, Jesus, and Arijit Mukherji (2002), “Can We Really Observe Hyperbolic
Discounting?” mimeo, University of Pennsylvania.
Fisher, Irving, The Theory of Interest, London: MacMillan, 1930
Frederick, Shane, George Loewenstein, and Ted O’Donoghue (2002) “Time Discounting and Time
Preference: A Critical Review” Journal of Economic Literature, 40(2):351-401
Fudenberg, Drew and David K. Levine (2005) “A Dual Self Model of Impulse Control,” manuscript
Gardner, Eliot and James David (1999) “The Neurobiology of Chemical Addiction,”in Getting Hooked:
Rationality and Addiction, Jon Elster and Ole-Jorgen Skog, editors, Cambridge: Cambridge University
Goldstein, A. (2001) Addiction: From Biology to Drug Policy, Second Edition, New York: Oxford
University Press
Goldstein, A. and H. Kalant (1990) “Drug Policy: Striking the Right Balance,” Science 249:1513-21
Gross, David and Nicholas Souleles (2002) “Do Liquidity Constraints and Interest Rates Matter for
Consumer Behaviors? Evidence from Credit Card Data, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117(1):149-86
Gruber, Jonathan and Botond Koszegi (2001) “Is Addiction “Rational”? Theory and Evidence,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 116(4): 1261-1303
Gruber, Jonathan, and Botond Koszegi (2004), “A Theory of Government Regulation of Addictive Bads:
Tax Levels and Tax Incidence for Cigarette Excise Taxation,” Journal of Public Economics, 88(910):1959-1987.
Gul, Faruk and Wolfgang Pesendorfer (2001), “Temptation and Self-Control”, Econometrica 69(6): 140335
Gul, Faruk and Wolfgang Pesendorfer (2004a) “Self Control, Revealed Preference and Consumption
Choice,” forthcoming in Review of Economic Dynamics
Gul, Faruk and Wolfgang Pesendorfer (2004b) “Self Control and the Theory of Consumption,”
forthcoming in Econometrica
Gul, Faruk, and Wolfgang Psendorfer (2005) “Harmful Addiction,” forthcoming in Review of Economic
Studies.

69

Hammermesh, Daniel S. (1984), “Consumption During Retirement: The Missing Link in the Life Cycle,”
Review of Economics and Statistics, 66(1): 1-7.
Harbaugh, William (1998) “What do donations buy? A model of philanthropy based on prestige and warmglow,” Journal of Public Economics, 67:269-84.
Harris, J.E. (1993) Deadly Choices: Coping with Health Risks in Everyday Life, New York: Basic Books
Hausman, Jerry A., and Lynn Paquette (1987), “Involuntary Early Retirement and Consumption,” in Gary
Burtless, ed., Work, Health, and Income Among the Elderly. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press,
151-75.
Holden, Sarah, Jack VanDerHei, and Carol Quick (2001) “401(k) Plan Asset Allocation, Account
Balances, and Loan Activity in 1998,” Investment Company Institute Perspective 6(1):
Hser, Y.I., D. Anglin, and K. Powers (1993) “A 24-year follow-up study of California narcotics addicts,”
Archives of General Psychiatry, 50:577-84
Hser, Y.I., V. Hollman, C. Grella, and M.D. Anglin (2001) “A 33 year follow-up of narcotics addicts,”
Archives of General Psychiatry, 58:503-8
Hurd, Michael, and Kathleen McGarry (2002), “The Predictive Validity of Subjective Probabilities of
Survival,” Economic Journal, 112:966-985.
Hurd, Michael, and Susanne Rohwedder (2003), “The Retirement-Consumption Puzzle: Anticipated and
Actual Declines in Spending at Retirement,” NBER Working Paper No. 9586.
Hyman, Steven and Robert Malenka (2001) “Addiction and the Brain: The Neurobiology
of Compulsion and Its Persistence,” Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 2:695-703
Iannacone, Laurence R. (1986), “Addiction and Satiation,” Economic Letters, 21(1):95-99.
Imrohorglu, Selo, Ayse Imrohoroglu, and Douglas Joines (2003) “Time Inconsistent Preferences and Social
Security,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(2):745-84
Isaac, Mark and James Walker (1988) “Group Size Effects in Public Goods Provision: The Voluntary
Contributions Mechanism,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 179-99.
Jones, Stephen R. G. (1984) The Economics of Conformism, Oxford: Basil Blackwell
Katona, George (1975). Psychological Economics. Amsertdam: Elsevier.
Kingma, Robert (1989) “An Accurate Measurement of the Crowd-out Effect, Income Effect, and Price
Effect for Charitable Contributions,” Journal of Political Economy, 1197-1207
Koszegi (2002) “Note: Any Model Features an Untestable Assumption About Preferences,” Berkeley
manuscript
Krusell, Per, and Anthony Smith (2003), “Consumption-Saving Decisions with Quasi-geometric
Discounting,” Econometrica, 71:365-75.
Krusell, Per, Burhanettin Kuruscu, and Anthony Smith (2000) “Tax Policy with Quasi-geometric
discounting,” International Economic Journal, 14(3):1-40
Krusell, Per, Burhanettin Kuruscu, and Anthony Smith (2002) “Equilibrium Welfare and Government
Policy with Quasi-geometric Discounting,” Journal of Economic Theory, 105:42-72

70

Krusell, Per, Burhanettin Kuruscu, and Anthony Smith (2001) “Temptation and Taxation,” mimeo,
Princeton University.
Laibson, David (1994), “Self-Control and Saving,” mimeo, MIT.
Laibson, David (1997) “Golden Eggs and Hyperbolic Discounting,” Quaterly Journal of Economics,
112(2):443-477
Laibson, David (1998), “Life-Cycle Consumption and Hyperbolic Discount Functions,” European
Economic Review, 42(3-5): 861-871.
Laibson, David (2001) “A Cue-Theory of Consumption,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116(1): 81-120
Laibson, David, Andrea Repetto, and Jeremy Tobacman (2003) “A Debt Puzzle,” in Phillip Aghion,
Roman Frydman, Joseph Stiglitz, and Michael Woodford, eds., Knowledge, Information, and Expectations
in Modern Economics: In Honor of Edmund Phelps, Princeton: Princeton University Press
Laibson, David, Andrea Repetto, and Jeremy Tobacman (2004) “Estimating Discount Functions from
Lifecycle Consumption Choices,” manuscript
Lazear, Edward P. (1994), “Some Thoughts on Saving,” in David A. Wise, ed., Studies in the Economics of
Aging. Chicago: University of Chicago Press and NBER, 143-69.
Ledyard, John (1995) “Public Goods: A Survey of Experimental Research,” in Handbook of Experimental
Economics, John Kagel and Alvin Roth eds, Princeton University Press, 111-94
List, John A., (2001), “Do Explicit Warnings Eliminate the Hypothetical Bias in Elicitation Procedures?
Evidence from Field Auctions for Sportscards,” American Economic Review, 91(5):1498-507.
Loewenstein, George (1996) “Out of Control: Visceral Influences on Behavior,” Organizational Behavior
and Human Decision Processes, 65:272-92
Loewenstein, George (1999) “A Visceral Account of Addiction,” in Rationality and Addiction, Jon Elster
and Ole-Jorgen Skog, editors, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press
Loewenstein, George and Drazen Prelec (1998) “The Red and the Black: Mental accounting of savings and
debt,” Marketing Science, 1998, 17: 4-28
Loewenstein, George and David Schkade (1999) “Wouldn't It Be Nice? Predicting Future Feelings,” in
Well-Being: the Foundations of Hedonic Psychology, Daniel Kahneman, Ed Diener and Norbert Schwarz
editors, New York, New York: Russell Sage Foundation, 85-104
Loewenstein, George, Ted O'Donoghue, and Matthew Rabin (2003) “Projection Bias in Predicting Future
Utility” , Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(4):1209-1248
Loewenstein, George, Daniel Read, and Roy Baumister (eds) (2003), Time and Decision: Economic and
Psychological Perspectives on Intertemporal Choice, New York: Russell Sage Foundation
Loewenstein, George and Ted O’Donoghue (2004) “Animal Spirits: Affective and Deliberative Processes
in Economic Behavior,” manuscript
Long, James E. (1990) “Marginal Tax Rates and IRA Contributions,” National Tax Journal 43(2):143-53
Lusardi, Annamaria (2000), “Saving for Retirement: The Importance of Planning,” TIAA-CREF Institute,
Issue No. 66.

71

Lusardi, Annamaria (2003), “Planning and Savings for Retirement,” mimeo, Dartmouth College.
MacCoun, R. and P. Reuter (2001) Drug War Heresies: Learning from Other
Vices, Times, and Places, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press
Madrian, Brigitte and Dennis Shea (2001) “The Power of Suggestion: Inertian in 401(k) Participation and
Savings Behavior,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116(4):1149-87
Mariger, Randall P. (1987), “A Life-Cycle Consumption Model with Liquidity Constraints: Theory and
Empirical Results,” Econometrica, May 1987, 55(3):533-57.
Masclet, David, Charles Noussair, Steven Tucker and Marie-Claire Villeval (2003) “Monetary and NonMonetary Punishment in the Voluntary Contributions Mechanims,” American Economic Review,
93(1):366-380
McCabe, Kevin, et. al. (2001) “A functional imaging study of cooperation in two-person reciprocal
exchange,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 98(20):11832-35
McCaffrey, Edward and Joel Slemrod (2005) “Toward an Agenda for Behavioral Public Finance,”
manuscript
McClure, Sam et. al. (2004) “Separate Neural Systems Value Immediate and Delayed Monetary Rewards,”
Science 306: 503-507
Metcalfe, Janet, and Walter Mischel (1999) “A Hot/Cool-System Analysis of Delay of Gratification:
Dynamics of Willpower,” Psychological Review, 106(1):3-19
Mischel, Walter (1974) “Processes in delay of gratification,” In Advances in Experimental Social
Psychology, vol. 7, D. Berkowitz editor, 249-72
Mischel, Walter and B. Moore (1973) “Cognitive Appraisals and Transformations in Delay of
Gratification,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 28:172-9
Mischel, W., Y. Shoda, and M. Rodriguez (1992) “Delay of Gratification in Children,” in Choice Over
Time, G. Loewenstein and J. Elster editors, New York: Rusell Sage
Modigliani, Franco, and Richard Brumberg, “Utility Analysis and the Consumption Function: An
Interpretation of Cross-Section Data,” in Post Keynsian Economics, K.K. Kurihara, editor, New Brunswick,
NJ: Rutgers University Press, 1954
National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism (2001) “Economic Perspectives in Alcoholism
Research,” Alcohol Alert, National Institutes of Health, No. 51
National Institute on Drug Abuse (1998) The Economic Costs of Alcohol and Drug Abuse in the United
States, 1992, Bethesda, MD: National Institutes of Health
Nestler, E.J. (2001) “Molecular Basis of Long-term Plasticity Underlying Addiction,”
Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 2:119-28
Nestler, E. and RobertMalenka (2004) “The Addicted Brain,” Scientific American,
March:78-85
Norstrom, Thor, and Ole-Jorgen Skog (2005) “Saturday Opening and Alcohol Retail Shops in Sweden: An
Experiment in Two Phases,” Addiction, 100:767-776

72

O’Brien, C. (1976) “Experimental analysis of conditioning factors in human narcotic addiction,”
Pharmacological Review, 25:533-43
O’Brien, C. (1997) “A Range of Research-Based Pharmacotherapies for Addiction,”
Science, 278:66-70
O’Donoghue, Ted and Matthew Rabin (1999a) “Procrastination in Preparing for Retirement,” in Henry J.
Aaron, ed., Behavioral Dimensions of Retirement Economics, Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution
Press; New York, NY, 125-56
O’Donoghue, Ted and Matthew Rabin (1999b) “Doing It Now or Later,” American Economic Review,
89(1):103-24
O’Donoghue, Ted and Matthew Rabin (2001) “Choice and Procrastination,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 121-60
O’Donoghue, Ted and Matthew Rabin (2005) “Optimal Sin Taxes,” manuscript
Office of National Drug Control Policy (2001a) “What American Users Spend on Illegal Drugs,”
Washington, DC: Executive Office of the President (Publication No. NCJ-192334)
Office of National Drug Control Policy (2001b) “The Economic Costs of Drug Abuse in the United States,”
1992-1998, Washington, DC: Executive Office of the President (Publication No. NCJ-190636).
O'Neill, Barbara (1993), "Assessing America's Financial IQ: Realities, Consequences, and Potential for
Change," mimeo, Rutgers Cooperative Extension.
Ornstein, Stanley I. , and Dominique M. Hanssens (1985) “Alcohol Control Laws and the Consumption of
Distilled Spirits and Beer,” Journal of Consumer Research, 12:200-212
Orphanides, Athanasios, and David Zervos (1995) “Rational Addiction with Learning and Regret,” Journal
of Political Economy, 103: 739-58
Orphanides, Athanasios, and David Zervos (1995), “Myopia and Addictive Behavior,” Economic Journal,
108:75-91.
Palfrey, Thomas and Jeffrey Prisbrey (1997) “Anomalous Behavior in Public Goods Experiments: How
Much and Why?,” American Economic Review, 829-46.
Paserman, Daniele (2002) “Job Search and Hyperbolic Discounting: Structural Estimation and Policy
Evaluation,” manuscript
Phelps, Edmund and Robert Pollack (1968) “On Second-Best National Savings and Game Equilibrium
Growth,” Review of Economic Studies, XXXV, 185-99
Rabin, Matthew (2002) “A Perspective on Psychology and Economics,” European Economic Review,
46(4-5):657-85
Rainwater, Lee (1970) Behind Ghetto Walls: Black Families in a Federal Slum, Chicago: Aldine
Redish, A. David (2004), “Addiction as a Computational Process Gone Awry,” Science, 306:1944-1947.
Rilling, James, et. al. (2002) “A Neural Basis for Social Cooperation,” Neuron, 35:395-405

73

Rilling, James, et. al. (2004) “Opposing Bold Responses to Recriprocated and Unreciprocated Altruism in
Putative Reward Pathways,” Neuroreport, 15(16): 2539-243.
Robb, A. Leslie, and John B. Burbidge (1989), “Consumption, Income, and Retirement,” Canadian Journal
of Economics, 22(3):522-42.
Robbins, T.W. and Everitt B.J. (1999) “Interaction of depaminergic system with mechanisms of associative
learning and cognition: implications for drug abuse,” Psychological Science, 10:199-202
Roberts, Russell (1984) “A Positive Model of Private Charity and Public Transfers,” Journal of Political
Economy, 136-8
Robins, L. (1994) “Vietnam Veterans’ Rapid Recovery from Heroin Addiction: a Fluke or Normal
Expectation,” Addiction, 1041-54
Robins, L., D. Davis, and D. Goodwin (1974) “Drug Use by U.S. Army Enlisted Men in Vietnam: a
Follow-up on their Return Home,” American Journal of Epidemiology, 235-49
Robinson. T. and K. Berridge (1993) “The Neural Basis of Drug Craving: An Incentive-Sensitization
Theory of Addiction,” Brain Research Reviews, 18(3):247-91
Robinson, T. and K. Berridge (2000) “The psychology and neurobiology of addiction:
an incentive sensitization view,” Addiction, Suppl 2:91-117
Robinson, Terry and Kent Berridge (2003) “Addiction,” Annual Reviews of Psychology, 54:25-53
Roemer, John E. (1998). Equality of Opportunity. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Rose-Ackerman, Susan (1996) “Altruism, Nonprofits, and Economic Theory,” Journal of Economic
Literature, XXXIV,701-28
Scholz, J. Karl, Ananth Seshadri, and Surachai Khitatrakun (2004), “Are Americans Saving Adequately for
Retirement?” mimeo, University of Wisconsin, Madison.
Schultz, W. (2000) “Multiple Reward Signals in the Brain,” Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 1:199-207
Schultz, W., P. Dayan, and P.R. Montague (1997) “A neural substrate of prediction and reward,” 275:159399
Schultz, W. (1998) “Predictive reward signal of dopamine neurons,” Journal of Neurophysiology, 80:1-27
Schwarz, Norbert, and Fritz Strack (1999) “Reports of Subjective Well-Being: Judgmental Processes and
Their Methodological Implications,” in Well-Being: the Foundations of Hedonic Psychology, Daniel
Kahneman, Ed Diener and Norbert Schwarz editors, New York, New York: Russell Sage Foundation, 6184
Scitovsky, Tibor (1976). The Joyless Economy. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Sefton, Martin, Robert Shupp, and James Walker (2002) “The Effect of Rewards and Sanctions in the
Provision of Public Goods,” CEDEX Research Paper, 2002, University of Nottingham
Sen, Amartya (1992). Inequality Reexamined. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Shang, Jeng and Rachel Croson (2005) “Field Experiments in Charitable Contributions: The Impact of
Social Influence on the Voluntary Provision of Public Goods,” manuscript

74

Shefrin, H.M. and Richard Thaler (1981) “An Economic Theory of Self-Control,” Journal of Political
Economy
Shiv, B. and A. Fedorikin (1999) “Heart and Mind in Conflict: The Interplay of Affect and Cognition in
Consumer Decision Making,” Journal of Consumer Research, 26:72-89
Singer, Tania, et. al. (2004) “Brain Responses to the Acquired Moral Status of Faces,” Neuron, 41(4):65362.
Stack, Carol B. (1974) All Our Kin: Strategies for Survival in a Black Community, New York: Harper &
Row
Steinberg, R. (1987) “Voluntary Donations and Public Expenditures in a Federalist System,” American
Economic Review, 77:24-36
Stigler, George and Gary Becker (1977) “De Gustibus Non Est Disputandum,” American Economic
Review, 67:76-90
Strotz, Robert H. (1956) “Myopia and Inconsistency in Dynamic Utility Maximization,” Review of
Economic Studies, XXIII, 165-80
Sugden, Robert (2004), “The Opportunity Criterion: Consumer Sovereignty Without the Assumption of
Coherent Preferences,” American Economic Review, 94(4):1014-1033.
Summers, Lawrence H. (1986) “Summers Replies to Galper and Byce on IRAs,” Tax Notes, 31(10):10141016
Sunstein, C. and Thaler, R. (2003) “Libertarian Paternalism,” The American Economic Review, Vol. 93:2,
175-179
Thaler, Richard (1985) “Mental Accounting and Consumer Choice,” Marketing Science, ***
Thaler, Richard and Shlomo Benartzi (2004) “Save More Tomorrow: Using Behavioral Economics to
Increase Employee Saving,” Journal of Political Economy, 112(1):S164-187
Thaler, Richard and H.M Shefrin (1981) “An Economic Theory of Self-Control,” Journal of Political
Economy, 89(2): 392-406
Tigerstedt, Christoffer, and Caroline Sutton (2000) “Exclusion and Inclusion – Saturday Closings and SelfService Stores,” in Broken Spirits. Power and Ideas in Nordic Alcohol Control, edited by Pekka Sulkunen,
Caroline Sutton, Christoffer Tigerstedt and Katariina Warpenius, Nordic Council for Alchohol and Drug
Research, 185-201.
Trosclair, A., C. Huston, L. Pederson, and I. Dillon (2002) “Cigarette Smoking Among Adults — United
States, 2000,” Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, 51(29): 642-645.
Tversky, Amos and Daniel Kahneman (1986) “Rational Choice and the Framing of Decisions,” Journal of
Business, 59(4):5251-78
United States Census Bureau (2001) Statistical Abstract of the United States, Washington, DC: US
Government Printing Office
United States Department of Health and Human Services (1994) “Preventing Tobacco Use Among Young
People: A Report of the Surgeon General,” National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health
Promotion, Office of Smoking and Health

75

Venti, Steven F., and David A. Wise (1992) “Government Policy and Personal Retirement Saving,” Tax
Policy and the Economy 6, 1-41
Walstad, William B. and Max Larsen (1992), "A National Survey of American Economic Literacy,"
National Council on Economics Education.
Walstad, William B. and John C. Soper (1988), "A Report Card on the Economic Literacy of U.S. High
School Students," American Economic Review 78(2):251-56.
Warshawsky, Mark (1987), "Sensitivity to Market Incentives: The Case of Policy Loans," The Review of
Economics and Statistics 69(2):286-95.
Warr, Peter (1982) “Pareto Optimal Redistribution and Private Charity,” Journal of Public Economics, 13138
Wertenbroch, K. (1998) ‘Consumption and Self-Control for Rationing Purchase Quantities of Virtue and
Vice,” Marketing Science, 17:317-37
Whyte, William F. (1943) Street Corner Society, Chicago: The University of Chicago Press
Wickelgren (1997) “Getting the Brain’s Attention,” Science, 278:35-37
Wise, Roy (1989) “The Brain and Reward,” in The Neuropharmacological Basis of Reward, J.M. Liebman
and S.J. Cooper, editors, New York: Oxford University Press, pp. 377-424
Yerak, Becky (2001) “Program helps gamblers quit,” The Detroit News, Sunday, Dec 2.

76

