                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         DUMB MONEY: MUTUAL FUND FLOWS AND
                          THE CROSS-SECTION OF STOCK RETURNS

                                             Andrea Frazzini
                                             Owen A. Lamont

                                          Working Paper 11526
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w11526


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       July 2005




We thank Nicholas Barberis, Judith Chevalier, David Musto, Stefan Nagel, and seminar participants at
Goldman Sachs, the NBER and Yale for helpful comments. We thank Breno Schmidt for research assistance.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by Andrea Frazzini and Owen A. Lamont. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
Dumb Money: Mutual Fund Flows and the Cross-Section of Stock Returns
Andrea Frazzini and Owen A. Lamont
NBER Working Paper No. 11526
July 2005
JEL No. G14, G23, G32

                                           ABSTRACT




We use mutual fund flows as a measure for individual investor sentiment for different stocks, and

find that high sentiment predicts low future returns at long horizons. Fund flows are dumb money

  by reallocating across different mutual funds, retail investors reduce their wealth in the long run.

This dumb money effect is strongly related to the value effect. High sentiment also is associated high

corporate issuance, interpretable as companies increasing the supply of shares in response to investor

demand.



Andrea Frazzini
The University of Chicago
Graduate School of Business
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
andrea.frazzini@chicagogsb.edu

Owen A. Lamont
Yale School of Management
135 Prospect Street
PO Box 208200
New Haven, CT 06520-8200
and NBER
owen.lamont@yale.edu
       Individual retail investors actively reallocate their money across different mutual funds.

Individuals tend to transfer money from funds with low recent returns to funds with high recent

returns. In addition to looking at past returns of funds, individuals also may consider economic

themes or investment styles in reallocating funds. Collectively, one can measure individual

sentiment by looking at which funds have inflows and which have outflows, and can relate this

sentiment to different stocks by examining the holdings of mutual funds. This paper tests

whether sentiment affects stock prices, and specifically whether one can predict future stock

returns using a flow-based measure of sentiment. If sentiment pushes stock prices above

fundamental value, high sentiment stocks should have low future returns.

       For example, using our data we calculate that in 1999 investors sent $37 billion to Janus

funds but only $16 billion to Fidelity funds, despite the fact that Fidelity had three times the

assets under management at the beginning of the year. Thus in 1999 retail investors as a group

made an active allocation decision to give greater weight to Janus funds, and in doing so they

increased their portfolio weight in tech stocks held by Janus. By 2001, investors had changed

their minds about their allocations, and pulled about $12 billion out of Janus while adding $31

billion to Fidelity. In this instance, the reallocation caused wealth destruction to mutual fund

investors as Janus and tech stocks performed horribly after 1999.

       According to the “smart money” hypothesis of Gruber (1996) and Zheng (1999), some

fund managers have skill and some individual investors can detect that skill, and send their

money to skilled managers. Thus (in contrast to the Janus example) flows should be positively

correlated with future returns. Gruber (1996) and Zheng (1999) show that the short term

performance of funds that experience inflows (in the last three months) is significantly better

than those that experience outflows, suggesting that mutual fund investors have selection ability.



                                      Dumb money – Page 1
       Our focus is on stocks, not on funds. We are interested in how investor sentiment affects

stocks prices, and see fund flows as a convenient (and economically important) measure of

sentiment. To test whether investor sentiment causes mispricing, one must test whether high

sentiment today predicts low return in the future, and we focus on cross-sectional stock return

predictability over periods of months and years. We ask the question of whether, over the long-

term, investors are earning higher returns as a result of their reallocation across funds.

       For each stock, we calculate the mutual fund ownership of the stock that is due to

reallocation decisions reflected in fund flows. For example, in December 1999, 18% of the

shares outstanding of Cisco were owned by the mutual fund sector (using our sample of funds),

of which 3% was attributable to disproportionately high inflows over the previous 3 years. That

is, under certain assumptions, if flows had occurred proportionately to asset value (instead of

disproportionately to funds like Janus), the level of mutual fund ownership would have been only

15%. This 3% difference is our measure of investor sentiment. We then test whether this

measure predicts differential returns on stocks.

       Our main results are as follows. First, as suggested the example of Janus and Cisco in

1999, on average from 1980 to 2003, retail investors direct their money to funds which invest in

stocks that have low future returns. To achieve high returns, it is best to do the opposite of these

investors. We calculate that mutual fund investors experience total returns that are significantly

lower due to their reallocations. Therefore, mutual fund investors are dumb in the sense that

their reallocations reduce their wealth on average. We call this predictability the “dumb money”

effect. This dumb money effect poses a challenge to rational theories of fund flows.

       Second, the dumb money effect is related to the value effect. Money flows into mutual

funds that own growth stocks, and flows out of mutual funds that own value stocks. The value



                                       Dumb money – Page 2
effect explains some, but not all, of the dumb money effect. The fact that flows go into growth

stocks poses a challenge to risk-based theories of the value effect, which would need to explain

why one class of investors (individuals) is engaged in a complex dynamic trading strategy of

selling “high risk” value stocks and buying “low risk” growth stocks.

       Third, demand by individuals and supply from firms are correlated. When individuals

indirectly buy more stock of a specific company (via mutual fund inflows), we also observe that

company increasing the number of shares outstanding (for example, through seasoned equity

offerings, stock-financed mergers, and other issuance mechanisms). This pattern is consistent

with the interpretation that individual investors are dumb, and smart firms are opportunistically

exploiting their demand for shares.

       These results give a different perspective on the issue of individuals vs. institutions. A

large literature explores whether institutions have better average performance than individuals.

In the case of mutual funds, for example, Daniel, Grinblatt, Titman, and Wermers (1997) show

that stocks held by mutual funds have higher returns, and Chen, Jegadeesh, and Wermers (2000)

show that stocks bought by mutual funds outperform stocks sold by mutual funds. Both results

suggest that mutual fund managers have stock-picking skill.

       Unfortunately, since individuals ultimately control fund managers, it can be difficult to

infer the views of fund managers by looking only at their holdings. For example, when the

manager of tech fund experiences large inflows, his job is to buy more technology stocks, even if

he thinks the tech sector is overvalued. So if we observe the mutual fund sector as a whole

holding technology stocks, that does not imply that mutual managers as a whole believe tech

stocks will outperform. It is hard for a fund manager to be smarter than his clients. Mutual fund

holdings are driven by both managerial choices in picking stocks and retail investor choices in



                                      Dumb money – Page 3
picking managers. We provide some estimates of the relative importance of these two effects.

       This paper is organized as follows. Section I reviews the literature. Section II discusses

the basic measure of sentiment, describes the data, and examines the relation of corporate

issuance and flows. Section III looks at the relation between flows and stock returns. Section

IV looks at the relation between flows and mutual fund returns. Section V uses calendar time

portfolios to put the results in economic context, showing the magnitude of wealth destruction

caused by flows and providing evidence on whether mutual fund managers have stock-picking

skill. Section VI looks at issuance by firms. Section VII presents conclusions.

                               I. Background and literature review

A. Determinants of fund flows

       A series of papers have documented a strong positive relation between mutual fund past

performance and subsequent fund inflows (see, for example, Ippolito (1992), Chevalier and

Ellison (1997), and Sirri and Tufano (1998)). In addition, retail investors appear to allocate their

wealth to funds that have caught their attention through marketing (see Jain and Wu (2000), and

Barber, Odean and Zheng (2004)), or funds with names that reflect hot investment styles

(Cooper, Gulen, and Rau (2005)). Benartzi and Thaler (2001) report evidence that retail

investors employ simple rule-of–thumbs in allocating across different types of mutual funds.

       For individual stocks, the picture looks different. Odean (1999), and Barber and Odean

(2000, 2001, 2004) present extensive evidence that individual investors suffer from biased-self

attribution, and tend be overconfident, thus engaging in (wealth-destroying) excessive trading.

But in contrast to their return-chasing behavior in mutual funds, a variety of evidence suggests

that individual investors act as contrarians when trading individual stocks (see Grinblatt and

Keloharju (2000), Goetzmann and Massa (2002)).



                                      Dumb money – Page 4
       While this apparent contradiction between return-chasing and contrarianism is

interesting, the hypothesis we wish to test does not depend on resolving this issue. We are

interested in testing whether individual investor sentiment predicts future returns, so our

hypothesis is not contingent on measuring whether investors are ultimately return-chasing or not.

If individual investor sentiment causes prices to be wrong and prices eventually revert to

fundamental value, then sentiment should negatively predict future returns no matter what –

whether individuals over-react or under-react, whether they return-chase or not. As it turns out,

in the data we study, mutual fund flows are indeed return-chasing, and flows tend to go to stocks

that have gone up recently.

B. Causal effects of flows on prices

         There is evidence that fund flows have positively contemporaneous correlations with

stock returns (see, for example, Brown et al (2002)). Although it is difficult to infer causality

from correlation, one interpretation of this fact is that inflows drive up stock prices. We do not

attempt to test this hypothesis with our data, for three reasons. First, we are interested in whether

sentiment causes long-term mispricing, not the short term dynamics of precisely how trading

affects prices. Second, we observe flows and holdings at fairly low frequency (quarterly), so our

data is not well suited to studying short-term price dynamics. Third, although the fund flows we

consider are certainly economically large, we view them as an imperfect measure of sentiment

since individual investor sentiment can be manifested in many other ways. While individuals

were sending mutual fund money to tech funds in 1999, and thus indirectly purchasing tech

stocks, they may have also been buying tech stocks directly in their brokerage accounts, or

investing in hedge funds that bought tech stocks. In addition, flows can understate the effects of

sentiment on the mutual fund sector itself. If Janus experiences inflows, then other funds



                                       Dumb money – Page 5
experiencing outflows might seek to imitate Janus in order to appeal to whatever is in fashion.

Thus flows are a way to measure sentiment, but are not the only channel for sentiment to work.

       Thus the hypothesis we wish to test is that stocks owned by funds with big inflows are

overpriced. These stocks could be overpriced because inflows force mutual funds to buy more

shares and thus push stock prices higher, or they could be overpriced because overall demand

(not just from mutual fund inflows) pushes stock prices higher. In either case, inflows reflect the

types of stocks with high investor demand.

C. Styles and sentiment

       A paper closely related to ours is Teo and Woo (2004), who also find evidence for a

dumb money effect. Following Barberis and Shleifer (2003), Teo and Woo (2004) consider

categorical thinking by mutual fund investors along the dimensions of large/small or

value/growth. They show that when a particular category has large inflows, stocks in that

category subsequently underperform. Like us, they relate mutual fund flows to stock returns, but

unlike us they look only at style returns, not individual stock returns.

       While Teo and Woo (2004) provide valuable evidence, our approach is more general.

The benefit is that we do not have to define specific styles or categories, such as value/growth.

While categorical thinking and style classification are undoubtedly important in determining

fund flows, from a practical point of view it is difficult for the researcher to identify all relevant

categories used by investors over time. For example, the growth/value category was not widely

used in 1980. Instead, we impose no categorical structure on the data and just follow the flows.

Most strikingly, we are able to document that the fund flow effect is highly related to the value

effect, a finding that could not have been discovered using the method of Teo and Woo (2004).

       More generally, one could devise many different measures of investor sentiment based on



                                       Dumb money – Page 6
prices, returns, or characteristics of stocks (see for example Baker and Wurgler (2005) and Polk

and Sapienza (2004)). If sentiment effects stocks prices and creates stock return predictability

(as prices deviate from fundamentals and eventually return), as long as trading volume is not

zero it must be that someone somewhere is buying overpriced stocks and selling underpriced

stocks. To prove that some class of investors overweights high sentiment stocks, it is necessary

to prove that these investors lose money on average from trading (before trading costs). Our

measure of sentiment is based on the actions of one good candidate for sentiment-prone

investors, namely individuals. Using their trades, we infer which stocks are high sentiment and

which stocks are low sentiment. We show that this class of investors does indeed lose money on

average from their mutual fund reallocations, confirming that they are the dumb money who buy

high sentiment stocks.

                                  II. Constructing the flow variable

       Previous research has focused on different ownership levels, such as mutual fund

ownership as a fraction of shares outstanding (for example, Chen, Jegadeesh, and Wermers,

2000). We want to devise a measure that is similar, but is based on flows. Specifically, we want

to take mutual fund ownership and decompose it into the portion due to flows and the portion not

due to flows. By “flows,” we mean flows from one fund to another fund (not flows in and out of

the entire mutual fund sector).

       Our central variable is FLOW, the percent of the shares of a given stock owned by

mutual funds that are attributable to fund flows. This variable is defined as the actual ownership

by mutual funds minus the ownership that would have occurred if every fund had received

identical proportional inflows (instead of experiencing different inflows and outflows), every

fund manager chose the same portfolio weights in different stocks as he actually did, and stock



                                       Dumb money – Page 7
prices were the same as they actually were. We define the precise formula later, but the

following example shows the basic idea.

       Suppose at quarter 0, the entire mutual fund sector consists of two funds: a technology

fund with $20 B in assets and a value fund with $80 B. Suppose at quarter 1, the technology

fund has an inflow of $11 B and has capital gains of $9 B (bringing its total assets to $40 B),

while the value fund has an outflow of $1 B and capital gains of $1 B (so that its assets remain

constant). Suppose that in quarter 1 we observe the technology fund has 10% of its assets in

Cisco, while the value fund has no shares of Cisco. Thus in quarter 1, the mutual fund sector as

a whole owns $4 B in Cisco. If Cisco has $16 B in market capitalization in quarter 1, the entire

mutual fund sector owns 25% of Cisco.

       We now construct a world where investors simply allocate flows in proportion to initial

fund asset value. Since in quarter 0 the total mutual fund sector has $100 B in assets and the

total inflow is $10 B, the counterfactual assumption is that all funds get an inflow equal to 10%

of their initial asset value. To simplify, we assume that the flows all occur at the end of the

quarter (thus the capital gains earned by the funds are not affected by these inflows). Thus in the

counterfactual world the technology fund would receive (.20)*(10) = $2 B (giving it total assets

of $31 B), while the value fund would receive (.80)*(10) = $8 B (giving it total assets of $89).

In the counterfactual world the total investment in CISCO is given by (.1)*(31) = $3.1, which is

19.4% of its market capitalization. Hence, the FLOW for CISCO, the percent ownership of

Cisco due to the non-proportional allocation of flows to mutual funds, is 25 – 19.4 = 5.6%.

       FLOW is an indicator of what types of stocks are owned by funds experiencing big

inflows. It is a number that can be positive, as in this example, or negative (if the stock is owned

by funds experiencing outflows or lower-than-average inflows). It reflects the active reallocation



                                       Dumb money – Page 8
decisions by investors. What FLOW does not measure is the amount of stock that is purchased

with inflows; one cannot infer from this example that the technology fund necessarily used its

inflows to buy Cisco. To the contrary, our assumption in constructing the counterfactual is that

mutual fund managers choose their percent allocation to different stocks in a way that is

independent of inflows and outflows.

       Is it reasonable to assume that managers choose their portfolio weights across stocks

without regard to inflows? Obviously, there are many frictions (for example, taxes and

transaction costs) that would cause mutual funds to change their stock portfolio weights in

different stocks in response to different inflows. Thus, we view FLOW as an imperfect measure

of demand for stocks due to retail sentiment.

       In equilibrium, of course, a world with different flows would also be a world with

different stock prices, so once cannot interpret the counterfactual world as an implementable

alternative for the aggregate mutual fund sector. Later, when we discuss the effects of flows on

investor wealth, we consider an individual investor (who is too small to affect prices by himself)

who behaves like the aggregate investor. We test whether this individual representative investor

benefits from the active reallocation decision implicit in fund flows. For individual investors,

refraining from active reallocation is an implementable strategy.

A. Flows

       We calculate mutual fund flows using the CRSP US Mutual Fund Database. The

universe of mutual funds we study includes all domestic equity funds that exists at any date

between 1980 and 2003 for which quarterly net asset values (NAV) are available and for which

we can match CRSP data with the common stock holdings data from Thomson Financial

(described in the next subsection). Since we do not observe flows directly, we infer flows from



                                       Dumb money – Page 9
fund return and NAV as reported by CRSP. Let N ti be the total NAV of a fund i and let R ti be

its return between quarter t − 1 and quarter t . Following the standard practice in the literature

(e.g. Zheng (1999), Sapp and Tiwari (2004)), we compute flows for fund i in quarter t, Ft i , as the

dollar value of net new issues and redemptions using

                              Ft i = N ti − (1 + Rti ) ⋅ N ti−1 − MGN ti          (1)

where MGN is the increase in total net assets due to mergers during quarter t . Note that (1)

implicitly assumes that inflows and outflows occur at the end of the quarter, and that existing

investors reinvest dividends and other distributions in the fund. We assume that investors in the

merged funds place their money in the surviving fund. Funds that are born have inflows equal to

their initial NAV, while funds that die have outflows equal to their terminal NAV.

       Counterfactual flows are computed under the assumption that each fund receives a pro

rata share of the total dollar flows to the mutual fund sector between date t − k and date t , with

the proportion depending on NAV as of quarter t − k . More precisely, in order to compute the

FLOW at date t , we start by looking at the net asset value of the fund at date t − k . Then, for

every date s we track the evolution of the fund’s counterfactual NAV using:

                                   N ti− k Agg
                               F̂ = Agg Fs
                                 s
                                  i
                                                                      (2)
                                   N t −k

                               N̂ is = (1 + Rti ) N̂ is -1 + F̂si           (3)

                               t−k ≤ s≤t

where F̂ i and N̂ i are counterfactual flows and NAV’s. F Agg is the actual aggregate flows for the


                                   t - k is the actual aggregate NAV at date t − k . Equations (2)
entire mutual fund sector, while N Agg

and (3) describe the dynamics of funds that exist both in quarter t − k and in quarter t. For funds


                                        Dumb money – Page 10
that were newly created in the past k quarters, N̂ i is automatically zero – all new funds by

                                                                                    i
definition represent new flows. The resulting counterfactual net asset value N̂ t at date t

represents the fund size in a world with proportional flows in the last k quarters.

        For a detailed numerical example of our counterfactual calculations, see the appendix

(which also discusses other details on equations (2) and (3)). We obtain a quarterly time series of

counterfactual net asset values for every fund by repeating the counterfactual exercise every

quarter t , and storing the resulting N̂ i t at the end of each rolling window.

        Consider a representative investor who represents a tiny fraction, call it q , of the mutual

fund sector. Suppose that this investor behaves exactly like the aggregate of mutual investors,

sending flows in and out of different funds at different times. The counterfactual strategy

described above is an alternative strategy for this investor, and is implementable using the same

information and approximately the same amount of trading by the investor. To implement this

strategy, this investor only needs to know lagged fund NAV’s and aggregate flows. For this

investor, qN̂ it is his dollar holding in any particular fund.

        In designing this strategy, our aim is to create a neutral alternative to active reallocation,

which matches the total flows to the mutual fund sector. One could describe this strategy as a

more passive, lower turnover, value-weighting alternative to the active reallocation strategy

pursued by the aggregate investor. It is similar in spirit to the techniques of Daniel, Grinblatt,

Titman, and Wermers (1999) and Odean (1999) in that it compares the alternative of active

trading to a more passive strategy based on lagged asset holdings. A feature of our

counterfactual calculations is that they do not mechanically depend on the actual performance of

the funds. A simpler strategy would have been to simply hold funds in proportion to their lagged

NAV. The problem with this strategy is that it mechanically tends to sell funds with high returns
                                       Dumb money – Page 11
and buy funds with low returns. Since we wanted to devise a strategy that reflected only flow

decisions by investors (not return patterns in stocks), we did not used this simpler strategy.

       Let xit be the net asset value of fund i in month t as a percentage of total asset of the

mutual fund sector:

                                  N ti
                       xit =                    (4)
                                 N tAgg

       The counterfactual under proportional flows is:

                                  Nˆ ti
                       xˆ it =                  (5)
                                 N tAgg

The difference between xit and x̂it reflects the active decisions of investors to reallocate money

from one manager to another over the past k quarters in a way that is not proportional to the

NAV of the funds. This difference reflects any deviation from value weighting by the NAV of

the fund in marking new contributions. In theory, this difference could reflect rebalancing away

from high performing funds and into poorly performing funds, in order to maintain some fixed

weights (instead of market weights). In practice, investors tend to unbalance (not rebalance),

sending money from poorly performing funds to high performing funds.

B. Holdings

       Thomson Financial provides the CDA/Spectrum mutual funds database, which includes

all registered domestic mutual funds filing with the SEC. The data show holdings of individual

funds collected via fund prospectuses and SEC N30D filings. The holdings constitute almost all

the equity holdings of the fund (see the appendix for a few small exceptions). The holdings data

in this study run from January 1980 to December 2003.

       While the SEC requires mutual funds to disclose their holdings on a semi-annual basis,

approximately 60% of funds additionally report quarterly holdings. The last day of the quarter is
                                          Dumb money – Page 12
most commonly the report day. A typical fund-quarter-stock observation would be as follows: as

of March 30th, 1998, Fidelity Magellan owned 20,000 shares of IBM. The holdings data are

notably error-ridden, with obvious typographical errors. Furthermore, some reports are missing

from the database.1 We use a series of filters to eliminate data errors (see appendix).

       In matching the holdings data to the CRSP mutual fund database, we utilized fund

tickers, fund names and total net asset values. For each fund and each quarter, we calculate wij

as the portfolio weight of fund i in stock j based on the latest available holdings data. Hence the

portfolios weights wij reflect fluctuations of the market price of the security held.

       Let z be the actual percent of the shares outstanding held by the mutual fund sector,


                                 zj =          xi ⋅ wij ⋅ N tAgg / MKTCAPj                        (6)
                                          i



where MKTCAPj is the market capitalization of firm j . The ownership that would have

occurred with proportional flows into all funds and unchanged fund stock allocation and stock

prices would be


                                 zˆ j =        xˆ i ⋅ wij ⋅ N tAgg / MKTCAPj                      (7)
                                          i



       For each stock, we calculate our central variable, FLOW, as the percent of the shares

outstanding with mutual fund ownership attributable to flows. The flow of security j is given by


                  FLOW j ,t = z j ,t − zˆ j ,t =        [x   i ,t   − xˆ i ,t ]⋅ wij ⋅ N tAgg / MKTCAPj ,t   (8)
                                                    i



This flow has the following interpretation. If each portfolio manager had made exactly the same

decisions in terms of percent allocation of his total assets to different stocks, and if stock prices

were unchanged, but the dollars had flown to each portfolio manager in proportion to their NAV


                                              Dumb money – Page 13
for the last k periods, then mutual fund ownership in stock j would be lower by FLOW. Stocks

with high FLOW are stocks that are owned by mutual funds that have experienced high inflows.

C. Describing the data

       We first describe the data for funds. Table I shows the top and bottom funds at year end

for two years out of our sample, 1988 and 1999, ranked on the difference between actual fraction

of the fund universe (x) and counterfactual fraction ( x̂ ). In 1999, the Magellan fund has assets

that constituted 3.8% of our sample mutual fund universe, but had been receiving below average

inflows over the past three years. Had Magellan received flows in proportion to its size over the

previous three years, it would have been 5.4% of the universe instead of 3.8%. The table shows

that in 1999, the funds receiving big inflows tended to be technology and growth funds.

       Table II shows some results for individual firms for the years 1999 and 1988. The table

shows the top and bottom firms ranked on total dollar flows over the past three years (in the

analysis, we focus on flows as a percent of market value, but here we rank on dollar flows in

order to generate familiar names). The effect of flows on mutual fund ownership can be fairly

sizeable, with flows raising the total ownership of Sun Microsystems in 1999 from 16.6% to

20.5%. In 1999, stocks with the biggest inflows tend to be technology stocks, while stocks with

the biggest outflows tend to be financial or manufacturing firms, closely correspond to our

perceptions of investor sentiment in the three year period ending 1999. In contrast, in 1988,

technology stocks such as DEC and IBM were experiencing outflows, while consumer goods

companies like RJR and Pillsbury were experiencing inflows. Thus sentiment favors different

types of stocks at different times.

       In interpreting the flow variable, it is important to remember that flow is a relative

concept driven only by differences in flows and holdings across different funds holding different



                                      Dumb money – Page 14
stocks. Flow is not intended to capture any notion of the absolute popularity of stock. For

example, consider Alcoa in 1999. The fact the flow variable is large and negative in Table II

does not mean that Alcoa was unpopular with mutual funds, nor does it mean that mutual funds

were selling Alcoa. It could be that every mutual fund loved Alcoa, held a lot of it, and bought

more of it in 1999. What the negative flow means is that the funds which overweighted Alcoa in

1999 received lower-than-average inflows (or perhaps outflows) in 1999. Individual investors

favored funds which tilted toward stocks like Cisco more than funds which tilted towards stocks

like Alcoa.

       Table III shows summary statistics for the different types of data in our sample. Our

sample starts in 1980. In table III we describe statistics for flows over the past three years, thus

the table describes data for flows starting in 1983. One important feature of the sample is its

changing nature over time. We have more information for the latter part of the sample, so our

matching algorithm system works better in the later years. As shown in the table, our coverage

of large stocks is much more complete in the early part of the sample: in 1983, we have flow data

for 92% of the universe of stocks on a value-weighted basis, but only 47% on an equal weighted

basis.2 This difference partially reflects the fact that funds tend to own large stocks, but also the

fact that we are failing to match some small funds in the early part of the sample period. One

possible concern is survivorship bias, which we address in section IV by using a method that

does not involve matching funds with stocks.

       Table III shows summary statistics for three year flows. One way of describing FLOW is

that it is the actual percent ownership by the mutual fund sector, minus the counterfactual percent

ownership. Since the actual percent ownership is bounded above by 100%, FLOW is bounded

above by 100%. In the counterfactual case, there is no accounting identity enforcing that the



                                      Dumb money – Page 15
dollar value of fund holdings is less than the market capitalization of the stock. Thus FLOW is

unbounded below. Values of FLOW less than -100% are very rare, occurring less than 0.01% of

the time for three year flows.

                                   III. Flows and stock returns

A. Excess returns

       Table IV shows the basic results of this paper. We form calendar time portfolios and

examine monthly excess returns on portfolios constructed using our flow measure. We show

both equally weighted returns and value weighted returns in month t for five portfolios formed

by sorting on the latest available flows as of month t − 1 . The table shows flows over horizons

stretching from three months (one quarter, the shortest interval we have for calculating flows) to

five years. The rightmost column shows the difference between the high flow stocks and the low

flow stocks.

       Quintile one is the bottom 20 percent of all stocks sorted on flows. It turns out that, for

long-horizon flows, the bottom quintile reflects stocks that are not just experiencing lower-than-

average inflows, they are experiencing outflows. That is, quintile one contains stocks that

individual investors are selling (indirectly via mutual funds) and quintile five contains stocks that

individuals are most heavily buying.

       Looking at the difference between high flow and low flow stocks, it is striking that for

every horizon but three months, high flows today predict low future stock returns. This relation

is statistically significant at the three and five year horizon. This dumb money effect is sizeable:

looking at three-year, equal weight results, the difference between high flow and low flow stocks

is 61 basis points per month or approximately 8 percent per year. Remarkably, the dumb money

effect is slightly larger using value weighting instead of equal weighting. This result stands in



                                       Dumb money – Page 16
contrast to many other patterns in stock returns, which tend to be concentrated in small cap

stocks.3

       Perhaps surprisingly, in this table we find no solid evidence for the smart money effect in

raw returns, even at the horizons of three to twelve months where one might expect price

momentum to dominate. Gruber (1996) and Zheng (1999) look at quarterly flows and find that

high flows predict high returns: one can see a hint of this in the three month flow results,

although one cannot reject the null hypothesis. We return to this issue later; it turns out that this

particular result is sensitive to alternative methods of measuring, and one can find specifications

with a significant smart money effect at short horizons.

       Figure 1 shows how flows predict returns at various different horizons. We show the

average returns in month t + k on long/short portfolios formed on three month flows in month t.

The figure shows average returns over time with accompanying 95% confidence interval.

       For k < 0 , the figure shows how lagged returns predict today'
                                                                    s flows. The figure shows

that flows into an individual stock are very strongly influenced by past returns on that stock.

This result is expected given the previous literature documenting high inflows to high

performing funds. Flows tend to go to funds that have high past returns, and since funds returns

are driven by the stocks that they own, flows tend to go to stocks that have high past returns. It

appears that returns over the past twelve months are especially important, with the effect

decreasing as one goes earlier than a year. For k > 0 , the figure shows the (insignificant) smart

money effect at one month horizon, becoming a significant dumb money effect after about a year

has passed. The predictable negative returns persist for about a year after that, then fade away.

       We focus on the three-year results in Table IV. Which horizon is it appropriate to focus

on? Why do we focus on the three-year results (where inflows negatively forecast returns)



                                      Dumb money – Page 17
instead of the three month results (where inflows positively forecast returns)? Isn'
                                                                                   t the horizon

arbitrary? This is an important question. The answer is that the horizon one should use depends

on what one is trying to measure. Since our goal is to understand the long-term effects on

trading on individual investor wealth, the longer the horizon, the better. The results for longer

horizons show that although mutual fund flows do seem to predict short term returns, this effect

is swamped as we look longer horizons (which cumulate the returns over time).

       To understand whether individuals are "smart" or "dumb", one needs to measure whether

their trading is raising or lowering their total wealth (compared to some alternative involving

refraining from trading) over their lifetime. To take an example, suppose Joe buys a stock from

Sally for $10, and the next day the price rises to $11. Based on this evidence alone, one might

conclude that Joe is smart (and Sally is dumb). However, if Joe continues to hold the stock, and

it declines to $5 (at which point he sells it), Joe seems less smart. Joe could increase his wealth

by refraining from trade. In this sense, longer horizons are better horizons for inferring the net

effect of Joe'
             s trading.

       In terms of measuring investor experience, however, the evidence given in Table IV

cannot resolve the question of smart or dumb, because this evidence does not correspond to the

dollar holdings of any class of investors. One needs to look at all trades and all dollar allocations

to different securities over time. In section V, we do this for the aggregate mutual fund investor,

and show that trading does in fact decrease both average returns and the return/risk ratio for an

individual who is behaving like the aggregate mutual fund investor. In turns out that when one

looks at the whole portfolio, the answer no longer depends on the horizon: the dumb money

effect exists at all horizons. From this perspective, then, individual investors in aggregate are

unambiguously dumb.



                                      Dumb money – Page 18
B. Robustness tests

       Figure 2 shows evidence on the dumb money effect over time. It shows cumulative

returns on the long/short portfolio formed on three year equal weighted flows (we simply sum

each monthly return over time). Figure 2 shows that the last few years of the sample are quite

influential, with about 100 out of the total of 150 percent coming after 1998. But the dumb

money effect is not due only to these years. The differential return is negative for 17 of the 21

calendar years available. One interpretation of the time pattern is that the period around 1999-

2001 was a time of particularly high irrationality, when irrational traders earned particularly low

returns.4 Many anomalies grew larger in this period (see Ofek and Richardson (2003)). Indeed,

one might propose that if a return pattern does not grow stronger in this period, then it is

probably not attributable to irrational behavior.

       Table V shows robustness tests. First, to address the evidence in Figure 2, we split the

sample into pre-1998 and post-1998 periods. Although the magnitude of the dumb money effect

is much larger in the post-1998 period, it has the same sign in both subperiods. For equal

weighted portfolios, the three year dumb money effect remains statistically significant in both

subperiods, while for value weighted portfolios (although the magnitudes are similar to equal

weighted) the effect is not significantly different from zero in the first part of the sample. Table

V also shows results for the sample of stocks which have market cap above and below the CRSP

median market cap. Again, over the full sample the dumb money effect remains quite strong

among large cap stocks.

       One might ask whether the dumb money effect is an implementable strategy for outside

investors using information available in real time. Our methodology involves substantial built-in

staleness of flows, largely reflecting the way that Thomson Financial has structured the data.5 So



                                      Dumb money – Page 19
the variables in Table IV are certainly in the information set of any investor who has access to all

the regulatory filings and reports from mutual funds, as they are filed. Currently, holdings data

appear on the SEC EDGAR system on the next business days following a filing, but information

lags were probably longer at the beginning of the sample period.

       To address this issue, Table V shows results with the flow variables generously lagged an

additional twelve months. Even lagged a full year, the three year flow variable remains a

statistically significant predictor of equal weight returns and close to significant for value weight

returns (the additional lagging decreases the number of available observations, making inference

more difficult). As one might expect given Figure 1, the lagging produces a substantial and

significant dumb money effect at the short horizons as well. Thus the dumb money effect is not

primarily about short-term information contained in flows, it is about long-term mispricing.

       In summary, three year mutual fund flows strongly negatively predict future stock

returns, and there is no horizon at which flows reliable positively predict excess returns. The

dumb money effect is present in both large and small cap stocks, and present in different time

periods.

C. Controlling for size, momentum, and value

       Table VI shows results for returns controlling for size, value, and price momentum.

These variables are known to predict returns and likely to be correlated with flows. Sapp and

Tiwari (2004), for example, argue that the short-horizon smart money effect merely reflects the

price momentum effect of Jegadeesh and Titman (1993). If an individual follows a strategy of

sending money to funds with past high returns in the last year and withdrawing money from

funds with low returns, then he will end up with a portfolio that overweights high momentum

stocks and underweights low momentum stocks. This strategy might be a smart (although high



                                      Dumb money – Page 20
turnover) strategy to follow, as long as he keeps rebalancing the strategy. However, if the

individual fails to rebalance promptly, eventually he will be holding a portfolio with a strong

growth tilt. Thus over long horizons, stocks with high inflows are likely to be stocks with high

past returns and are therefore likely to be growth stocks. So it is useful to know whether flows

have incremental forecasting power for returns or just reflect known patterns of short horizon

momentum and long horizon value/reversals in stock returns.

       The left hand side of Table VI shows results where returns have been adjusted to control

for value, size, and momentum. Following Daniel, Grinblatt, Titman, and Wermers (1997), it

subtracts from each stock return the return on a portfolio of firms matched on market equity,

market-book, and prior one-year return quintiles (a total of 125 matching portfolios).6 Here the

dumb money effect is substantially reduced, with the coefficient falling from -0.61 to -0.22 for

three year equal weighted flows, still significantly negative but less than half as large. This

reduction largely reflects the fact that (as we shall see) high sentiment stocks tend to be stocks

with high market-book.

       The right-hand side of Table VI shows alphas from a Fama and French (1993) three

factor regression. Here the reduction of the long-horizon dumb money effect is not as

substantial, as the three-year equal weighted differential return falls from -0.61 to -0.45. Both

methods cause the smart money effect to rise for equal weight returns, although it is still below

conventional significance levels.

       In Table VII, we take a closer look at the relation between the dumb money effect and the

value effect by independently sorting all stocks into five flow categories and five market-book

categories, with a resulting 25 portfolios. We sort on three year flows, and on market-book ratio

following the definition of Fama and French (1993). The right-most column in each panel shows



                                      Dumb money – Page 21
whether there is a flow effect within market-to-book quintiles. Thus if the value effect subsumes

the dumb money effect, this column should be all zeros. The bottom row in each panel shows

whether there is a value effect controlling for flows. If the dumb money effect subsumes the

value effect, this row should be all zeros. If the two effects are statistically indistinguishable,

then both the row and the column should be all zeros.

        Table VII shows that, generally, neither effect dominates the other. Looking at equal

weighted returns, the value effect appears to be much larger than the dumb money effect, with

magnitudes of approximately one percent per month and high t-statistics. As before, the dumb

money effect survives the correction for market-book. However, looking at value weighted

returns, the dumb money effect looks stronger than value effect, with similar magnitudes and

generally higher t-statistics.

        Table VIII shows double sort portfolios for three year past stock returns instead of

market-book, to explore the reversal effect of De Bondt and Thaler (1985). In order to make the

reversal effect as powerful as possible, we sort on past returns lagged one year (in other words,

we sort on stock returns from month t-48 to t-12). Here, looking at equal weighted returns, the

results are similar to Table VII, with the dumb money effect looking slightly weaker. Looking at

value weighted returns, the dumb money effect and the reversal effect have similar magnitudes

and levels of significance.

        To summarize, using standard adjustment techniques, the dumb money effect is not

completely explained by the value effect. Neither the dumb money effect nor the value/reversal

effect dominates the other. However, the dumb money and value/reversal effect are clearly quite

related, and perhaps reflect the same underlying phenomenon.




                                      Dumb money – Page 22
                               IV. Flows and mutual fund returns

       In this section, we set aside our main focus on stock returns, and examine the relation

between mutual fund flows and mutual fund returns. This evidence is useful for two purposes.

First, it shows how our results relate to the previous work of Zheng (1999) and Gruber (1996).

Second, it shows whether our results are driven by problems in matching the CRSP mutual fund

database with the holdings database. Table IX shows results using monthly mutual fund returns

(instead of stock returns) and sorting on flows into funds instead of flows into stocks. The

mutual fund returns reflect, in addition to the returns of the stocks held by the fund, the expenses

and trading costs of each fund. The universe of funds includes all domestic equity funds in the

CRSP mutual fund database. We show returns for both equally weighted and value weighted

portfolios of funds (where the value weights reflect the NAV of the fund).

       We first sort on actual flows minus counterfactual flows. Table IX shows first, using

excess returns, that the dumb money effect comes in fairly strongly at the 3 year horizon, while

the smart money effect comes in weakly at the 3 month horizon. Turning next to three-factor

alphas, here the smart money effect comes in significant at the three-month and six-month

horizon, while the dumb money effect is weaker for equal weighted results, while still strong for

value weighted results. As a robustness check, we also sort on actual inflows (dollar inflows

divided by assets under management) instead of actual inflows minus counterfactual inflows.

This slightly different sorting most closely corresponds to the method of Zheng (1999) and

Gruber (1996). The results are about the same using this sorting variable.

       How should one interpret these results? Take for example the equal weighted 3-factor

alpha results, where three month inflows predict a positive and significant differential of 19 basis

points per month, while three year inflows predict a negative but insignificant 10 basis points.



                                     Dumb money – Page 23
Suppose one believes that the Fama-French (1993) model is an appropriate risk adjustment. The

fact that the differential is -0.10 percent for three year inflows means that the trading of

individuals is not helping them achieve higher risk-adjusted average returns. Despite the fact

that individuals earn significant and positive 0.19 percent differential in the first three months,

this outperformance is wasted because the individuals are not following a dynamic strategy of

buying the best-performing funds, holding them for a quarter, and them selling them. Instead,

they are in aggregate following a strategy of buying the best-performing funds, and holding them

for a long period of time. So the longer horizon return shows that investors are not actually

benefiting from their trading.

       To summarize, looking at mutual fund returns, there is a strong dumb money effect

among large funds (when value weighting). Looking at smaller funds (equal weighting), the

dumb money effect is weaker, especially when correcting for value. Similar to previous results,

we find a smart money effect at the quarterly horizon. However, this smart money effect is not

enough to boost investor returns over the long term. For a more economically relevant measure

of how these two effects balance out, in the next section we look at how the aggregate mutual

fund investor is helped or hurt by his trading.

                        V. Economic significance to the aggregate investor

A. The magnitude of wealth destruction

       So far, we have shown that stocks owned by funds with large inflows have poor

subsequent returns. In this section, we measure the wealth consequences of active reallocation

across funds, for the average investor. We assess the economic significance by measuring the

average return earned by a representative investor, and comparing it to the return he could have

earned by simply refraining from engaging in non-proportional flows. We examine both returns



                                      Dumb money – Page 24
on stocks and returns on mutual funds.

       Define RACTUAL as the return earned by a representative mutual investor who owns a tiny

fraction of each existing mutual fund. The returns would reflect a portfolio of stocks where the

portfolio weights reflect the portfolio weights of the aggregate mutual fund sector:


                                 RtACTUAL =       x i ,t        wij ,t Rt j   (9)
                                              i             j



where RJ is the return on stock j. The return from a strategy of refraining from non-proportional

flows, RNOFLOW, is


                                 RtNOFLOW =       xˆ i ,t       wij ,t Rt j   (10)
                                              i             j



We use three year flows in these calculations. Table X shows excess returns on these two

portfolios, and for comparison shows the value weighted market return as well. Since the two

mutual fund portfolios use weights based on dollar holdings, they are of course quite similar to

each other and to the market portfolio.

       Although very similar, these portfolios are not identical. Table X shows investor flows

cause a significant reduction in both average returns and Sharpe ratios earned by mutual fund

investors. A representative investor who is currently behaving like the aggregate mutual fund

sector could increase his Sharpe ratio 9% (from a monthly Sharpe ratio of 0.137 to 0.149) by

refraining from active reallocation and just directing his flows proportionally.7

       One can assess the significance of this difference in mean returns by looking at the

returns on the long-short portfolio RACTUAL - RNOFLOW. This return is similar to the long-short

portfolio studied in Table IV, except that here all stocks owned by the mutual fund sector are

included, and the weights are proportional to the dollar value of the holdings. The differential

returns are negative and highly significant. Thus investor flows cause wealth destruction. This

                                     Dumb money – Page 25
conclusion is, of course, a partial equilibrium statement. If all investors switched to proportional

flows, presumably stock prices would change to reflect that. But for one individual investor, it

appears that fund flows are harmful to wealth.

B. Better identification of mutual fund manager skill

Table X also helps disentangle the effect of flows from the effect of manager stock picking. We

start by considering the average of RACTUAL – RM, which measures the net return benefit of

owning the aggregate fund holdings instead of holding the market (ignoring trading costs and

expenses). RM is the return on the CRSP value weighted market. The average of this difference,

0.03, consists of two components. The first, RACTUAL - RNOFLOW, is the net benefit of

reallocations. We already have seen that this dumb money effect is negative. The second,

RNOFLOW – RM, measures the ability of the mutual fund managers to pick stocks which

outperform the market (using value weights for managers). As shown in the table, using raw

returns, this stock picking effect is 0.08 per month, with a t-statistic of 1.8. Thus there is some

modest evidence that mutual fund managers do have the ability to pick stocks that outperform

the market, once one controls for their clients’ tendencies of switching money from one fund to

another. As shown in the table, this modest skill is obscured (when looking only at actual

holdings) by their clients anti-skill at picking funds.

C. Different measures of economic significance

       We explore the robustness of the economic significance in two ways. First, in the bottom

part of Table X, we repeat the basic analysis, again using three year flows but using funds

instead of stocks. We define RACTUAL and RNOFLOW using fund returns instead of stock returns

(plugging in actual fund returns for the term in brackets in equations (9) and (10)). Again, as in

section IV, using mutual fund returns allows us to avoid issues involving matching funds with



                                      Dumb money – Page 26
holdings. On the other hand, the cost of this specification is that the results now also reflect

issues such as fund expenses, fund turnover and trading costs, and fund cash holdings.

       Looking at the dumb money effect, the results using mutual funds are nearly identical to

the results using stocks: -0.05 percent per month. So, measured using either mutual fund returns

or stock returns, investors are lowering their wealth and their Sharpe ratios by engaging in

disproportionate fund flows. A simple passive strategy would dominate the actual strategy of the

aggregate mutual fund investors.

       The results for mutual funds also give us some context for the economic magnitude of the

wealth destruction due to fund flows. The total net benefit of mutual funds, RACTUAL – RM, is

-0.12 percent per month, or about 1.4 percent cost per year. Of this -0.12, almost half, -0.05, is

explained by dumb money effect. Of course, this calculation may be misleading because the

return earned by the CRSP value weight portfolio is not a viable free alternative. We have

redone the calculation, substituting the return on the Vanguard index fund for RM (these returns

includes fees and costs). In this case, the total wealth destruction is -0.16 instead of -0.12

(reflecting the fact the Vanguard fund outperformed the CRSP value weight portfolio during this

period), while the dumb money effect remains of course at -0.05. Thus looking at the two

measures, fund flows appear to account for between a third and a half of the dismal performance

earned by the average mutual fund investor: individual investors have only themselves to blame.

Still, mutual managers do not emerge unscathed from Table X. As usual (see for example

Malkiel, 1995), costs and expenses eat up any stock picking ability managers have, so that the

net benefit of stock picking in Table X is -0.07 per month.

        In Table XI, we show the stock return measures of wealth destruction and stock picking

for different horizons. It turns out that, although the short horizon smart money effect has



                                      Dumb money – Page 27
showed up in some the specifications, it does not show up here. Even at the three month

horizon, we find no evidence that trading helps investors earn higher returns. Thus from an

economic perspective, the short term trading done by mutual fund investors does not seem smart.

                                           VI. Issuance

       If individual investors (acting through mutual funds) lose money on their trades, who is

making money? Possible candidates include hedge funds, pension funds, other institutions, or

individuals trading individual stocks. Here we focus on another class of traders: firms. In

contrast to trading by individuals, reflecting uninformed and possibly irrational demand, the

actions of firms represents informed and probably more rational supply. A substantial body of

research studies whether firms opportunistically take advantage of mispricing by issuing equity

when it is overpriced and buying it back when it is underpriced (for example Loughran and

Ritter, 1995). Corporate managers certainly say they are trying to time the market (Graham and

Harvey, 2001).

       We measure firm behavior using the composite share issuance measure of Daniel and

Titman (2004), which combines a variety of previously documented effects involving

repurchases, mergers, and seasoned equity issues (see also Pontiff and Woodgate, 2005). Our

version of their variable is 1 minus the firm’s ratio of the number of shares outstanding one year

ago to the number of shares outstanding today.8 For example, if the company has 100 shares and

has a seasoned equity issue of an additional 50 shares, the composite issuance measure is 33%,

meaning that 33% of the existing shares today were issued in the last year. The measure can be

negative (reflecting for example repurchases) or positive (reflecting for example executive stock

options, seasoned equity offerings, or stock-financed mergers). Issuance and market-book ratios

are strongly related: growth firms tend to issue stock, value firms tend to repurchase stock.



                                     Dumb money – Page 28
Daniel and Titman (2004), show that when issuance is high, returns are low over the next year.

This pattern suggests that firms issue and repurchase stock in response to mispricing.

       Table XII shows the relation of annual issuance to past three-year flows, using the usual

format but studying issuance instead of returns. The table shows issuance between January and

December of year t, sorted on 3-year flows as of December in year t-1. The table uses the

standard portfolio logic of forming groups, taking the average in each group for each of the 20

years available, and reporting the mean and t-statistic for the resulting 20 time series

observations.

       The first row shows that firms with the lowest three year inflows issue one percent less

stock than firms with the highest inflows. Thus inflows are positively associated with issuance

by firms. Firms tend to increase shares outstanding this year when previous year’s flows are

high. One interpretation of this pattern is that firms are seizing the opportunity to issue stock

when sentiment is high, and repurchase stock when sentiment is low. Since the average issuance

measure (which is as a fraction of shares outstanding) is around three percent per year in this

sample, one percent is a large number.

       The rest of the table shows robustness tests for this basic result. The next row shows

value weighted results, which (as usual for flows) are somewhat stronger. The next row shows a

truncated version of the issuance variable. Since the issuance variable as defined is unbounded

below, we define trimmed issuance as max ( -100, issuance). This change has little effect. We

also look at the relation in the two different halves of the sample. As before, the relation is

stronger in the second half of the sample, but significant always. Lastly, because issuance is

known to be correlated with valuation, we create characteristic-adjusted issuance in the same

way we create characteristic-adjusted returns in Table VI. The last row of Table XII shows the



                                      Dumb money – Page 29
average deviations of issuance from a group of matching firms with similar size, valuation, and

price momentum as of December. The results are about the same as with raw issuance, so that

once again value does not subsume the effect of flows.

       To understand the economic magnitudes shown in Table XII, it is useful to know that the

difference in the sorting variable (three year flows) is about 12 percent between the top and

bottom quintile. That is, the top quintile has had three year flows that are on average 12 percent

more as a percent of shares outstanding than the bottom quintile. This number is the same units

as the numbers in Table XII since both flows and issuance are expressed as a fraction of current

shares outstanding. Thus firms with flows that are 12 percent higher as a fraction of shares

outstanding tend to increase shares by 1 percent of shares outstanding. Over three years, the firm

would issue shares equivalent to three percent of shares outstanding. Thus over time, one can

loosely say that firms respond to $12 billion in flows by issuing $3 billion in stock. Supply

accommodates approximately one quarter of the increase in demand.

                                          VII. Conclusion

     In this paper, we have shown that individual investors have a striking ability to do the

wrong thing. They send their money to mutual funds which own stocks that do poorly over the

subsequent years. Individual investors are dumb money, and one can use their mutual fund

reallocation decisions to predict future stock returns. The dumb money effect is robust to a

variety of different control variables, is not entirely due to one particular time period (although

concentrated around the year 2000), and is implementable using real-time information. By doing

the opposite of individuals, one can construct a portfolio with high returns. Individuals hurt

themselves by their decisions, and we calculate that aggregate mutual fund investor could raise

his Sharpe ratio by 9% simply by refraining from destructive behavior. These facts pose a



                                      Dumb money – Page 30
challenge to rational theories of fund flows. Of course, rational theories of mutual fund investor

behavior already face many formidable challenges, such as explaining why investors consistently

invest in active managers when lower cost, better performing index funds are available.

      We have found mixed evidence on a smart money effect of short-term flows positively

predicting short-term returns. One interpretation of this effect is that there is some short-term

manager skill which is detected by investors. Another hypothesis, explored by Wermers (2004)

and Coval and Stafford (2005), is that mutual fund inflows actually push prices higher. Another

possibility, explored by Sapp and Tiwari (2004) is that by chasing past returns, investors are

stumbling into a valuable momentum strategy. Whatever the explanation, it is clear that the

higher returns earned at the short horizon are not effectively captured by individual investors. Of

course, it could be that some subset of individuals benefit from trading, but looking at the

aggregate holdings of mutual funds by all individuals, we show that individuals as a whole are

hurt in the long run by their reallocations.

      Although the dumb money effect is statistically distinct from the value/reversal effect, it is

clear these two effects are highly related. It is remarkable that one is able to recover many

features of the value effect without actually looking at prices or returns for individual stocks. In

our sample, the value effect is generally bigger than the dumb money effect among small cap

stocks, but the dumb money effect looks at least as big among large cap stocks.

        The evidence on issuers and flows presents a somewhat nonstandard portrait of capital

markets. Past papers have looked at institutions vs. individuals, and tried to test if institutions

take advantage of individuals. Here, the story is different. Individuals do trade poorly, but these

trades are executed through their dynamic allocation across mutual funds, that is, via financial

institutions. As far as we can tell, it is not financial institutions that exploit the individuals, but



                                       Dumb money – Page 31
rather the non-financial institutions that issue stock and repurchase stock. Stocks go in and out

of favor with individual investors, and firms exploit this sentiment by trading in the opposite

direction of individuals, selling stock when individuals want to buy it. We find some modest

evidence that mutual fund managers have stock picking skill, but that any skill is swamped by

other effects including the actions of retail investors in switching their money across funds. In

our data, financial institutions seem more like passive intermediaries who facilitate trade

between the dumb money, individuals, and the smart money, firms.

       It is clear that any satisfactory theory of the value effect will need to explain three facts.

First, value stocks have higher average returns than growth stocks. Second, using various

issuance mechanisms, the corporate sector tends to sell growth stocks and buy value stocks.

Third, individuals, using mutual funds, tend to buy growth stocks and sell value stocks. One

coherent explanation of these three facts is that individual investor sentiment causes some stocks

to be misvalued relative to other stocks, and that firms exploit this mispricing.




                                      Dumb money – Page 32
ENDNOTES

1
    We handle missing reports as follows: whenever a fund has a missing report between two valid

report dates, we assume that the fund did not change its holdings with respect to the previous

report.
2
    As shown in Table III, we are only able to match 70% of the funds in the CRSP mutual fund

database to the holdings data base in 1983; this number rises over time but is never 100%. In

addition to this pure data problem, mutual funds as a whole grew larger as a fraction of the entire

stock market. Thus our coverage of individual stocks rises over time for these two reasons.
3
    Zheng (1999), for example, shows the smart money effect is concentrated in small cap stocks.
4
    Another possible explanation is that the pattern in Figure 2 is somehow due to our ability to

match funds with stocks, which improves over the sample period. To address this, we have

calculated a version of Figure 2 based only on the mutual fund returns and flows used in section

IV, and found very similar results. Thus the pattern in Figure 2 is not an artifact of our data

matching process.
5
    The data shows holdings for points in time that reflect both a “vintage” file date (FDATE) and

a report date. Neither of the two dates corresponds to the actual filing date with the SEC. The

report date is the calendar day when a snapshot of the portfolio is recorded, while Thomson

Financial always assigns file dates to the corresponding quarter ends of the filings. The report

date coincides with the file date about 60% of the time, but in some cases dates back as much as

6 months prior to the file date, as fund manager have discretion about when to take a snapshot of

their portfolio to be filed at a subsequent date. These holdings eventually become public

information. For accuracy, we always use the end of quarter file date assigned by Thomson

Financial. This quarterly interval introduces a source of staleness into the holdings data.

                                       Dumb money – Page 33
6
    These 125 portfolios are reformed every month based on the market equity, M/B ratio, and

prior year return from the previous month. The portfolios are equal weighted and the quintiles

are defined with respect to the entire universe in that month.
7
    Lamont (2002) finds similar results for the policy of refraining from buying new issues.
8
    We split-adjust the number of shares using CRSP "factor to adjust shares"




                                       Dumb money – Page 34
                                          References

Baker, Malcolm, and Jeffrey Wurgler, 2005, Investor sentiment and the cross-section of stock
returns, Journal of Finance, forthcoming

Barber, B. and Odean T., 2000, Trading is Hazardous to Your Wealth: The Common Stock
Investment Performance of Individual Investors with Brad Barber, Journal of Finance, Vol. LV,
No. 2, 773-806.

Barber, B. and Odean T., 2001, Boys will be Boys: Gender, Overconfidence, and Common Stock
Investment, Quarterly Journal of Economics, February 2001, Vol. 116, No. 1, 261-292

Barber, B. and Odean T., 2004, All that Glitters: The Effect of Attention and News on the
Buying Behavior of Individual and Institutional Investors, working paper

Barber, B., Odean T. and Zheng L. (2004) Out of Sight, Out of Mind: The Effects of Expenses
on Mutual Fund Flows, Journal of Business, forthcoming

Barberis, N, and Shleifer, A., 2004, Style investing, Journal of Financial Economics, Volume
68, Issue 2, May 2003, Pages 161-199

Brown, Stephen J., Goetzmann, William N., Hiraki, Takato, Shiraishi, Noriyoshi and Watanabe,
Masahiro, 2002, Investor Sentiment in Japanese and U.S. Daily Mutual Fund Flows (September
2002). Yale ICF Working Paper No. 02-09

Chen, H., Jegadeesh, N., Wermers, R., 2000. The value of active mutual fund management: an
examination of the stockholdings and trades of fund managers. Journal of Financial and
Quantitative Analysis 35, 343–368.

Chevalier, Judith, and Glenn Ellison, 1997, Risk taking by mutual funds as a response to
incentives, Journal of Political Economy 105, 1167-1200.

Cohen, Randolph B., Coval, Joshua and Pástor, Lubos, 2003 Judging fund managers by the
company they keep; Working paper 04-023.; Boston: Division of Research Harvard Business
School, 2003.

Cooper, Michael, Huseyin Gulen, and P. Raghavendra Rau, 2005, Changing Names With Style:
Mutual Fund Name Changes And Their Effects On Fund Flows, Working Paper

Coval, Joshua and Stafford E., 2005, Asset Fire Sales in Equity Markets, Working paper

Daniel, K., Grinblatt, M., Titman, S., Wermers, R., 1997. Measuring mutual fund performance
with characteristic-based benchmarks. Journal of Finance 52, 1035-1058.

Daniel, Kent, and Sheridan Titman, 2004, Market reaction to tangible and intangible

                                    Dumb money – Page 35
information, working paper

De Bondt, W.F.M., and Thaler, R. (1985). Does the stock market overreact?, Journal of Finance,
40, 793-805.

Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 1993, Common Risk Factors in the Returns on Stocks
and Bonds, Journal of Financial Economics 33, 3—56.

Goetzmann, W., and Massa, M., 2002. Daily momentum and contrarian behavior of index fund
investors. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 37, 375-390.

Graham, John R., and Campbell Harvey, 2001, The Theory and Practice of Corporate Finance:
Evidence from the Field, Journal of Financial Economics 60, 187-243.

Grinblatt, M., and S. Titman, and R. Wermers, 1995, Momentum Investment Strategies,
Portfolio Performance and Herding, A Study of Mutual Fund Behavior, American Economic
Review, 85, 1088-1105

Grinblatt, M., and Keloharju, M., 2000. The investment behavior and performance of
various investor types: A study of Finland’s unique data set. Journal of Financial
Economics 55, 43-67.

Gruber, Martin, 1996, Another puzzle: The growth in actively managed mutual funds, Journal of
Finance 51, 783-810

Ippolito, Richard A., 1992, Consumer reaction to measures of poor quality: evidence from the
mutual fund industry, Journal of Law and Economics 35 (April 1992), 45-70.

Jain, Prem C., and Wu, Joanna Shuang, 2000, Truth in mutual fund advertising: Evidence on
future performance and fund flows, Journal of Finance 55, 937-958.

Jegadeesh, N. and S. Titman, 1993. Returns to Buying Winners and Selling Losers: Implications
for Stock Market Efficiency, Journal of Finance, 48, 65-91.

Kacperczyk E. , Marcin T., Clemens Sialm, and Lu Zheng (2005): On the Industry Concentration
of Actively Managed Equity Mutual Funds, Forthcoming: Journal of Finance, 2005.

Lamont, Owen A., 2002, Evaluating value weighting: Corporate events and market timing,
NBER Working Paper No. 9049.

Loughran, Tim, and Jay R. Ritter, 1995, The New Issues Puzzle, Journal of Finance 50, 23-51.

Malkiel, Burton G., 1995, Returns from Investing in Equity Mutual Funds 1971 to 1991, Journal
of Finance 50, 549-572.


                                   Dumb money – Page 36
Odean T., 1999, Do Investors Trade Too Much?, American Economic Review, Vol. 89, 1279-
1298.

Ofek, Eli and Matthew Richardson, 2003, DotCom mania: The rise and fall of Internet stock
prices, Journal of Finance 58, 1113-1137.

Pontiff, Jeffrey, and Artemiza Woodgate, 2005, Shares outstanding and cross-sectional returns,
working paper

Polk, Christopher and Paola Sapienza, 2004, The Real Effects of Investor Sentiment, NBER
working paper 10563

Sirri, Erik R. and Peter Tufano, 1998, .Costly Search And Mutual Fund Flows,. Journal of
Finance, 53, pp. 1589-1622

Teo, Melvyn and Sung-Jun Woo, 2004, Style effects in the cross-section of stock returns ,
Journal of Financial Economics,7, 367-398

Travis Sapp and Ashish Tiwari, 2004, Does Stock Return Momentum Explain the Smart Money
Effect?, Journal of Finance, forthcoming

Wermers, R., 1999, Mutual Fund Trading and the Impact on Stock Prices, Journal of Finance,
54, 581-62

Wermers R., 2000, Mutual Fund Performance: An Empirical Decomposition into Stock-Picking
Talent, Style, Transactions Costs, and Expenses, Journal of Finance, 55, 1655-1695

Wermers, Russell, 2004, Is Money Really Smart? New Evidence on the Relation Between
Mutual Fund Flows, Manager Behavior, and Performance Persistence, Working Paper

Zheng, Lu, 1999, Is money smart? A study of mutual fund investors’ fund selection ability,
Journal of Finance 54, 901-933.




                                    Dumb money – Page 37
Data Appendix

A. Holdings data and error screens

          We obtain data on stock holdings from the Thomson Financial CDA/Spectrum Mutual

Funds database. Since our focus is on US equity funds, we remove all US-based international

funds, fixed-income funds, real estate funds and precious metal funds.

       Holdings are identified by CUSIPs, they constitute most of the equities, but are not

necessarily the entire equity holdings of the manager or fund. The potential exclusions include:

small holdings (typically under 10,000 shares or $200,000), cases where there may be

confidentiality issues, reported holdings that could not be matched to a master security file, and

cases where two or more managers share control (since the SEC requires only one manager in

such a case to include the holdings information in their report).

       Thomson identifies funds using a five-digit number (FUNDNO) but unfortunately

numbered identifiers are reused in the data, hence we use a filter to identify new born-funds and

generate a unique fund identifier. We start tracking funds as they appear in the database, a fund

is then classified as a new-born fund and assigned a new unique identifier whenever there is a

gap of more than 1 year between the current report and the last available report. A gap of more

than one year between two consecutive reports typically reflects a different and unrelated

manager or a major reorganization of the fund.

       Holding are adjusted for stock splits, stock distributions, mergers and acquisitions and

other corporate events that occur between the report date and the file date. This adjustment relies

on the assumption by Thomson that funds report shares held on a pre-adjustment basis.

       We merge the holdings with the CRSP/COMPUSTAT data and we use a series of filters


                                     Dumb money – Page 38
to eliminate potential anomalies, probably due to misreporting, errors in data collecting or in

computing adjustments. Holdings are set to missing whenever:

   1. The report date is subsequent to the file date

   2. The number of shares in a fund portfolio exceeds the total amount of shares outstanding

         at a particular date

   3. The total amount of shares outstanding reported by CRSP is zero at a particular date

B. Merging Thomson and CRSP data

         The CRSP mutual fund database utilizes a five character alpha-numeric identifier (ICDI).

Both database report funds names but they use a different character string with different

abbreviations. To match the two datasets we use a matching procedure base on TICKER symbols

and fund names, similar in spirit to the technique proposed by Wermers (2000).

         Thomson Financial reports fund tickers on a quarterly basis starting from the first quarter

of 1999. For fund portfolios offering multiple share classes, multiple ticker symbols are

provided. A combination of ticker-date typically uniquely identifies a mutual fund. First, we

merge the two databases using a ticker-date match between the first quarter of 1999 and the last

quarter of 2003. We generate a list of unique matches between the CRSP fund identifier and the

unique identifier in the Thomson data computed above, and extrapolate backwards for the prior

years.

         After this initial merge, we use a “fuzzy” string matching algorithm to match the

remaining funds. We use a “SOUNDEX” algorithm to match funds using their name and the

corresponding date. The SOUNDEX algorithms were patented by Margaret I. Odell in 1918 and

Robert C. Russell in 1922. They are based on an underlying principle of English and other Indo-


                                      Dumb money – Page 39
     European languages. That is, most of the words can be reasonably represented by consonants

     alone. All the names are reduced to a phonetic equivalent character strings which can later be

     compared. We transform fund names into an alpha-numeric indicator by using the following

     steps:

                 1. Retain the first letter of the fund name and discard the letters A E H I O U W Y

                 2. Assign a numeric value to the following consonant: 1 → B F P V, 2 → C G J K

                     Q S Z, 3 → D T, 4 → L, 5 → M N, 6 → R

                 3. Discard all duplicate classification values if they are adjacent (that is BB will
                     results in the single value 1)


              We use the resulting strings to match the remaining funds at every quarterly date, and we

     discard every fund for which we could not find a corresponding match. Below we show a portion

     of the matched file:

   date       CDA              Thomson name               CRSP                      CRSP name
              Fund                                        ICDI
               ID
12/31/2003    204     LORD ABBETT RES LG CAP S           13848    Lord Abbett Large Cap Research Fund/Y
03/31/1995    205     HERITAGE SER TR-VAL EQTY           13596    Heritage Series Trust:Value Equity Fund/A
06/30/1995    205     HERITAGE SER TR-VAL EQTY           13596    Heritage Series Trust:Value Equity Fund/A
06/30/1995    205     HERITAGE SER TR-VAL EQTY           13598    Heritage Series Trust:Value Equity Fund/C
09/30/1995    205     HERITAGE SER TR-VAL EQTY           13596    Heritage Series Trust:Value Equity Fund/A
09/30/1995    205     HERITAGE SER TR-VAL EQTY           13598    Heritage Series Trust:Value Equity Fund/C
12/31/1995    205     HERITAGE SER TR-VAL EQTY           13596    Heritage Series Trust:Value Equity Fund/A
12/31/1995    205     HERITAGE SER TR-VAL EQTY           13598    Heritage Series Trust:Value Equity Fund/C
09/30/2000    252     LIBERTY STRATEGIC BALANC           12722    Liberty Strategic Balanced Fund/B
09/30/2000    252     LIBERTY STRATEGIC BALANC           12724    Liberty Strategic Balanced Fund/C
01/31/1995    253     GOLDMAN S BALANCED FD              13706    Goldman Sachs Tr:Balanced Fund
07/31/1995    253     GOLDMAN S BALANCED FD              13706    Goldman Sachs Tr:Balanced Fund
01/31/1996    253     GOLDMAN S BALANCED FD              13706    Goldman Sachs Tr:Balanced Fund
07/31/1996    253     GOLDMAN S BALANCED FD              13706    Goldman Sachs Tr:Balanced Fund
01/31/1997    253     GOLDMAN S BALANCED FD              13706    Goldman Sachs Equity Port:Balanced Fund/A
07/31/1997    253     GOLDMAN S BALANCED FD              09039    Goldman Sachs Equity Port:Balanced Fund/C



              In the CRSP database, if a fund has multiple share classes, each share class is classified
                                          Dumb money – Page 40
as a separate entity. Different share classes have the same portfolio composition and are treated

as a single fund in the Thomson database (for example fund # 205 in the table above). Therefore

we combine multiple share classes in the CRSP data into a unique “super fund” by aggregating

the corresponding net asset values, and computing the weighted average return of the fund using

the total net asset value of the different share classes as weights.

       As a final step, to ensure matching quality, we compare the net asset values of the

matched funds reported by CRSP to the dollar value of their holdings, and discard matches

where the total asset value of the fund reported by CRSP differs from the sum of the dollar

holdings value by more than 100%.

       The universe of mutual funds in our final sample tends to be larger than those in previous

studies that use similar string matching algorithms. Wermers (2000) obtain a sample of 1,788

funds matched between 1975 and 1994. Kacperczyk, Sialm and Zheng (2005) use a sample of

1,917 unique equity funds between 1984 and 1999. Cohen, Coval and Pastor (2004) reported

235 funds matched at the end of 1980 and 1,526 matched funds in the second quarter of 2002.

Our sample includes 3,221 unique funds between the first quarter of 1980 and the last quarter of

2003, with the number of funds starting from 200 funds in 1980 to 2,297 in 2003. Our matched

sample covers on average about 81% of the dollar assets of the total universe of CRSP equity

funds, with the level starting from 70% in 1980 and rising to 95% in 2003. As a final check of

matching quality, we randomly extract 100 matched funds from the merged file and we hand-

checked using both databases. In all 100 cases, we could not find errors in the matching process.

C. Construction of the counterfactual flows

       We assign a counterfactual net asset value of zero to funds that were newly created in the


                                      Dumb money – Page 41
past k quarters. New funds represent new flows, but in the counterfactual exercise they do not

receive assets for the first k quarters. The universe of funds we consider when computing the

counterfactual flows between date t − k and date t is funds there were alive at both date t − k

and t .

          More specifically, consider at generic date t and let FsAgg be the actual aggregate flows

for all funds alive in quarter t (including funds who were recently born, but excluding funds that

die in month t), for t − k ≤ s ≤ t . Let N Agg
                                           t - k be the lagged actual aggregate NAV aggregating only



over those funds that exist in both month t − k and in month t . We compute the counterfactual

flows by assigning to each fund a share of total as follows:

                                          N ti− k Agg
                                      F̂ = Agg Fs
                                       s
                                        i
                                                                  (1)
                                          N t −k

                                      t−k ≤ s ≤t                  (2)

          For funds that die in quarter s + 1 (so that their last NAV is quarter s ), we set F̂si+1 =

− N̂ si and Nˆ si + h = 0 for all h > 0 .

          Table A shows a simplified example where we set k = 1 year. Fund # 3 is born in 1981,

therefore in 1981 we register a net inflow equal to its initial NAV and set the counterfactual

NAV to zero. In 1981 two funds are alive, fund # 1 and fund #2, and in 1980 they represented

2/3 and 1/3 of the total fund sector. Aggregate flows in 1981 were equal to $150, hence in the

counterfactual exercise we assign a flow of $100 to fund # 1 (as opposed to the actual realized

flow of $50) and a flow of $50 to fund # 2. Given the return of the two funds between 1980 and

1981, we can compute the counterfactual net asset value of fund # 1 and # 2 in 1981. Proceeding

in the same manner whenever a fund is alive at date t − k and t , we track the evolution of the
                                            Dumb money – Page 42
fund’s counterfactual NAV using the recursion:

                                N̂ it = (1 + Rti ) N̂ it -1 + F̂ti   (3)

Between 1982 and 1993 fund # 2 dies, hence in the counterfactual world we assign an outflow in

1983 equal to the NAV in 1982 and set the counterfactual NAV to zero thereafter. Note that (2)

does not guarantee that counterfactual net asset values are always non-negative in quarters where

we have aggregate outflows ( FtAgg < 0 ). In this case we override (2) , set N̂ it = 0 and redistribute

the corresponding counterfactual flows to the remaining funds, to keep the total aggregate dollar

outflow the same in both the counterfactual and actual case. Measuring FLOW over 12 quarters,

negative counterfactual NAVs occur for only 0.12% of the sample.

       Finally, we handle mergers as follows: we assume that investors keep earning returns on

the existing assets of the surviving fund. For consistency, when constructing the counterfactual

                                                                                         N ti− k
NAV, we also merge the lagged NAV of the two funds when we compute the ratio                     used to
                                                                                         N tAgg
                                                                                            −k


determine the pro-rata share of the total flows.




                                         Dumb money – Page 43
                                            Figure 1

This figure shows the average returns in month t+k on a long/short portfolios formed on three
month flows in month t. The figure shows average returns over time of a zero cost portfolio that
holds the top 20% stocks and sells short the bottom 20% stocks and the accompanying 95%
confidence interval.


            Portfolio returns for month t+k sorted on flows in month t
                         One-quarter flow s, 95% confidence interval
       2
       1
  Percent
       0
       -1




            -30    -20      -10       0        10        20       30        40        50
                                                k
                                  Return                      Upper Bound
                                  Lower Bound




                                    Dumb money – Page 44
                                           Figure 2

This figure shows cumulative returns on a long/short portfolios formed on three year flows in
month t. At the beginning of every calendar month stocks are ranked in ascending order based on
the last available flow. The figure shows the cumulative sum of monthly returns over time of a
zero cost portfolio that holds the top 20% stocks and sells short the bottom 20% stocks.



                    Cumulative returns on dumb money effect
                         Equal w eight 3-year flow s long/short strategy
        0
        -50
  Percent
        -100
        -150




               81   84       87       90       92       95       98        01       03
                                              Year




                                     Dumb money – Page 45
                             Table I: Flows by fund, selected dates

This table shows the top and bottom funds ranked on the difference between then actual and
counterfactual weight in the aggregate mutual fund sector. x is the fund’s actual percent of
dollar value of the total mutual fund universe in the sample. x̂ is counterfactual percent, using a
horizon of three years.


                                             Percent of fund Percent of fund
                                                universe,       universe,    Difference
                                                 actual      counterfactual
                                                    x               x̂
                                         December 1999
     Bottom 5 funds
     FIDELITY MAGELLAN FUND                        3.75               5.35           -1.60
     INVEST. CO. OF AMERICA                        1.99               2.73           -0.74
     VANGUARD WINDSOR FUND                         1.55               2.20           -0.65
     FIDELITY CONTRAFUND                           1.71               2.30           -0.59
     TWENTIETH CENTURY ULTRA                       1.55               2.04           -0.49
     Top 5 funds
     VANGUARD INDEX - GROWTH                       0.56               0.09           0.47
     ALLIANCE PRMIER GROWTH                        0.63               0.07           0.56
     JANUS WORLDWIDE FUND                          1.20               0.60           0.60
     JANUS VALUE FUND                              1.31               0.69           0.62
     VANGUARD INDEX TRUST                          3.71               2.96           0.75

                                         December 1988
     Bottom 5 funds
     WINDSOR FUND                                  4.60               5.82           -1.22
     DREYFUS FUND                                  1.78               2.71           -0.93
     PRICE (ROWE) GROWTH STK.                      1.02               1.91           -0.88
     IDS STOCK FUND                                0.96               1.79           -0.83
     INVEST. CO. OF AMERICA                        3.25               4.04           -0.78
     Top 5 funds
     FIDELITY OTC PORTFOLIO                        0.57               0.20           0.37
     FRANKLIN UTILITIES                            0.48               0.10           0.38
     EVERGREEN TOTAL RETURN                        1.02               0.27           0.75
     WASH. MUTUAL INVESTORS                        2.18               1.27           0.91
     FIDELITY MAGELLAN FUND                        7.08               5.66           1.42



                                     Dumb money – Page 46
                            Table II: Flows by stock, selected dates

This table shows the top and bottom stocks ranked on dollar FLOW, using three year flows. z is
the stock’s actual percent of the total dollar value of mutual fund holdings divided by the stock’s
market capitalization. ẑ is counterfactual percent, using a horizon of three years. Flow is the
three year FLOW, defined as the stock’s actual percent of the total dollar value of mutual fund
holdings divided by the stock’s market capitalization minus the counterfactual percent, using a
horizon of three years.

                                      Percent owned by mutual funds
                                       Actual      Counterfactual
                                          z              ẑ         FLOW
                           December 1999
       BOTTOM FIVE STOCKS
CENDANT CORP                            35.6           46.5          -10.9
VIACOM INC                              42.8           48.3           -5.5
FEDERATED DEPT STORES INC DEL           34.2           45.0          -10.8
ALCOA INC                               26.9           31.2           -4.3
ASSOCIATES FIRST CAPITAL CORP           37.5           43.6           -6.0

         TOP FIVE STOCKS
CISCO SYSTEMS INC                      17.8                             15.2            2.6
MICROSOFT CORP                         12.6                             11.6            1.0
SUN MICROSYSTEMS INC                   20.5                             16.6            3.9
DELL INC                               12.3                              9.0            3.2
INTEL CORP                             11.4                             10.2            1.2
                          December 1988
       BOTTOM FIVE STOCKS
DIGITAL EQUIPMENT CORP                  7.6                              9.1            -1.6
CITICORP                               16.7                             18.9            -2.2
AMERICAN INTERNATIONAL GROUP INC        7.1                              8.6            -1.5
FORD MOTOR CO DEL                      10.4                             11.0            -0.6
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHS COR        3.0                              3.2            -0.2

         TOP FIVE STOCKS
REYNOLDS R J INDUSTRIES INC                            2.7              1.7             1.0
PILLSBURY COMPANY                                      4.0              0.4             3.6
PLACER DOME INC                                        8.7              2.3             6.4
DISNEY WALT CO                                         5.4              3.4             2.0
BRISTOL MYERS SQUIBB CO                                3.9              2.8             1.1




                                     Dumb money – Page 47
                Table III: Summary statistics for three year flows, 1983-2003

This table shows summary statistics as of December of each year. Percent coverage of stock
universe (EW) is the number of stocks with a valid three year FLOW, divided by total number of
CRSP stocks. Percent coverage of stock universe (VW) is the total market capitalization of
stocks with a valid three year FLOW, divided by the total market value of the CRSP stock
universe. Percent coverage of fund universe (EW) is the total number of funds in the sample
divided by the total number of equity funds in the CRSP mutual fund universe. Percent coverage
of fund universe (VW) is the total net asset value of funds in the sample divided by the total net
asset value of equity funds in the CRSP mutual fund universe. NAV is the total net asset value of
a fund, in millions. x is the fund’s actual percent of dollar value of the total mutual fund
universe in the sample. x̂ is counterfactual percent, using a horizon of three years. z is the
stock’s actual percent of the total dollar value of mutual fund holdings divided by the stock’s
market capitalization. ẑ is counterfactual percent, using a horizon of three years. Flow is the
three year FLOW, defined as the stock’s actual percent of the total dollar value of mutual fund
holdings divided by the stock’s market capitalization minus the counterfactual percent, using a
horizon of three years.

                                                                            Std
                                                 Min       Max     Mean                  Mean
                                                                           Dev
                                                     Full sample, 1983-2003          1983   2003
                        Time-series (21 annual observations, 1983-2003)
Number of funds in the sample per year           253       2439     1110      811    253    2297
Number of stocks in the sample per year          2875      6763     4822     1349    2875   4907
Percent coverage of stock universe (EW)          48.5      91.7     71.2     15.8    48.5   91.7
Percent coverage of stock universe (VW)          84.5      99.7     97.0      4.0    91.6   99.6
Percent coverage of fund universe (EW)           51.1      85.9     68.3     11.6    70.2   85.9
Percent coverage of fund universe (VW)           75.6      97.3     86.8      7.5    79.6   95.1
                 Funds (23 thousand pooled year-fund observations, 1983-2003)
NAV, millions of dollars                           0      109073    819      3355    210     811
Number of holdings per fund                        1       4162     149       253     70     183
x (Percent of fund universe, actual)             0.00      7.97     0.13     0.38    0.49    0.05
x̂ (Percent of fund universe, counterfactual)    0.00      9.69     0.15     0.47    0.67    0.06
                Stocks (333 thousand pooled stock-fund observations, 1983-2003)
Number of funds per stock                           1      1001      26       54       5      50
z (Percent owned by funds, actual)                0.00     99.75   10.10    10.23    6.07   10.60
 ẑ (Percent owned by funds, counterfactual)      0.00    563.77    9.82    11.27    4.57    9.41
Flow                                            -497.01   84.35    0.36      5.93    1.21    2.16



                                     Dumb money – Page 48
               Table IV : Calendar time portfolio, excess returns 1980 – 2003

This table shows calendar time portfolio returns. At the beginning of every calendar month
stocks are ranked in ascending order based on the last available flow. Stocks are assigned to one
of five portfolios. L/S is a zero cost portfolio that holds the top 20% stocks and sells short the
bottom 20% stocks. Portfolios are rebalanced monthly to maintain equal or value weights. We
report average returns in excess of the Treasury bill rate. Returns are in monthly percent, t-
statistics are shown below the coefficient estimates.

                               Low                              High    High flow minus
                               flow                             flow       low flow
                                Q1      Q2     Q3       Q4       Q5           L/S
                                          Equal weight
         Three month flow      0.73    0.80   0.80     0.71     0.84          0.11
                              (2.05) (2.34) (2.13) (1.91) (2.15)              (0.57)

          Six month flow       0.77   0.84   0.83   0.73   0.74                -0.03
                              (2.16) (2.43) (2.20) (1.95) (1.87)              (0.15)

           One year flow       0.79   0.95   0.83   0.67   0.67                -0.12
                              (2.29) (2.79) (2.16) (1.78) (1.67)              (0.56)

          Three year flow      1.03   1.07   0.83   0.66   0.42                -0.61
                              (2.98) (3.01) (2.16) (1.65) (1.02)              (3.37)

           Five year flow  0.99   0.99   0.97    0.79  0.67                    -0.32
                          (2.72) (2.56) (2.25) (1.96) (1.58)                  (2.37)
                                     Value weight
         Three month flow 0.67    0.69   0.34    0.58  0.71                    0.04
                          (2.10) (2.40) (1.12) (1.96) (1.91)                  (0.17)

          Six month flow       0.73   0.67   0.61   0.54   0.53                -0.19
                              (2.29) (2.31) (2.17) (1.77) (1.44)              (0.73)

           One year flow       0.74   0.87   0.59   0.45   0.46                -0.27
                              (2.41) (3.01) (2.14) (1.43) (1.24)              (1.09)

          Three year flow      0.96   0.93   0.79   0.52   0.29                -0.67
                              (3.07) (3.35) (2.77) (1.64) (0.73)              (2.79)

           Five year flow      0.95   0.76   0.69   0.54   0.45                -0.50
                              (3.00) (2.53) (2.14) (1.47) (1.05)              (1.92)


                                      Dumb money – Page 49
                                   Table V: Robustness tests

This table shows returns on high flow stocks minus returns on low flow stocks, using calendar
time portfolio returns. “Larger cap stocks” are all stocks with market capitalization above the
median of the CRSP universe that month, smaller stocks are below median. Returns are in
monthly percent, t-statistics are shown below the coefficient estimates

                           1981-1997 1998-2003 Larger Smaller      Flows
                                                  cap  Cap    Lagged 12 months
                                       Equal weight
      Three month flow        0.01         0.41       0.18      0.20           -0.45
                             (0.06)       (0.60)     (0.80)    (1.18)          (2.37)

      Six month flow         -0.10         0.15      -0.03      0.05           -0.49
                             (0.81)       (0.22)     (0.13)    (0.28)          (2.62)

      One year flow           0.03        -0.53      -0.07     -0.13           -0.59
                             (0.26)       (0.76)     (0.28)    (0.69)          (3.01)

      Three year flow        -0.28        -1.41      -0.52     -0.56           -0.38
                             (2.19)       (2.67)     (2.66)    (2.57)          (2.59)

      Five year flow         -0.30        -0.38     -0.23      -0.41           -0.24
                             (2.45)       (1.11)    (1.50)     (2.14)          (2.08)
                                          Value weight
      Three month flow       -0.12         0.48      0.03       0.44           -0.59
                             (0.75)       (0.55)    (0.13)     (2.57)          (2.10)

      Six month flow         -0.33         0.18      -0.21      0.24           -0.62
                             (1.96)       (0.20)     (0.77)    (1.39)          (2.17)

      One year flow          -0.05        -0.89      -0.28      0.07           -0.66
                             (0.29)       (1.08)     (1.10)    (0.34)          (2.54)

      Three year flow        -0.21        -1.77      -0.66     -0.43           -0.42
                             (1.20)       (2.59)     (2.76)    (2.09)          (1.85)

      Five year flow         -0.18        -1.18      -0.50     -0.37           -0.26
                             (0.96)       (1.67)     (1.88)    (1.97)          (1.02)



                                      Dumb money – Page 50
                        Table VI: Controlling for value, size, and momentum

This table shows calendar time portfolio abnormal returns. We report average characteristics adjusted returns and
Fama and French (1993) alphas. Characteristic-adjusted returns are defined as raw monthly returns minus the returns
on an equally weighted portfolio of all CRSP firms in the same size, market-book, and one year momentum quintile.
Three factor alphas are defined as the intercept in a regression of the monthly excess return of the Treasury bill rate
on the monthly returns from Fama and French (1993) mimicking portfolios. Returns and alphas are in monthly
percent, t-statistics are shown below the coefficient estimates.

                                       Characteristic                                  Fama-French
                                      adjusted returns                                 3 factor alpha
                                 Q1          Q5         L/S                   Q1             Q5             L/S
                                               Equal weight
  Three month flow              0.02        0.17        0.15                 -0.18          0.14           0.32
                               (0.28)      (3.07)      (1.88)               (1.18)         (1.67)         (1.81)

  Six month flow                0.05           0.08           0.03           -0.16          0.05           0.21
                               (0.91)         (1.57)         (0.40)         (1.13)         (0.54)         (1.20)

  One year flow                 0.03           0.07           0.04           -0.13          0.00           0.14
                               (0.54)         (1.20)         (0.45)         (1.01)         (0.01)         (0.79)

  Three year flow               0.14           -0.08          -0.22          0.16           -0.29          -0.45
                               (2.56)         (1.26)         (2.49)         (1.35)         (2.13)         (2.95)

  Five year flow                0.12           -0.03       -0.15             0.10           -0.16          -0.26
                               (2.15)         (0.49)      (1.88)            (0.90)         (1.25)         (2.31)
                                                   Value weight
  Three month flow              -0.02          -0.02       0.01              -0.20          0.15           0.35
                               (0.33)         (0.20)      (0.08)            (1.64)         (1.20)         (1.61)

  Six month flow                0.02           -0.14          -0.16          -0.16          0.01           0.17
                               (0.24)         (1.82)         (1.31)         (1.25)         (0.09)         (0.77)

  One year flow                 -0.01          -0.13          -0.12          -0.10          -0.11          -0.01
                               (0.10)         (1.47)         (0.89)         (0.82)         (0.80)         (0.05)

  Three year flow               0.13           -0.26          -0.39          0.18           -0.35          -0.53
                               (1.50)         (2.51)         (2.76)         (1.50)         (2.73)         (2.59)

  Five year flow                0.12           -0.18          -0.30          0.14           -0.24          -0.38
                               (1.34)         (1.99)         (2.06)         (1.31)         (1.79)         (1.97)

                                            Dumb money – Page 51
                               Table VII: 3 year flows vs. value

This table shows calendar time portfolio returns. At the beginning of every calendar month
stocks are ranked in ascending order based on the last available flow and market-book ratio
(M/B). M/B is market-book ratio (market value of equity divided by Compustat book value of
equity). The timing of M/B follows Fama and French (1993) and is as of the previous December
year-end. Stocks are assigned to one of twenty-five portfolios. L/S is a zero cost portfolio that
holds the top 20% stocks and sells short the bottom 20% stocks. Portfolios are rebalanced
monthly to maintain equal or value weights. We report average returns in excess of the Treasury
bill rate. Returns are in monthly percent, t-statistics are shown below the coefficient estimates.

                              Low                                  High       High flow
                              Flow                                 Flow     Minus Low flow
                               Q1        Q2      Q3        Q4       Q5           L/S
                                           Equal weight
          Value        Q1     1.29      1.42    1.38       1.07     1.04         -0.25
                             (3.80)    (3.84) (3.57)      (2.97)   (2.99)       (1.46)
                       Q2     1.17      1.17    1.20       1.05     0.85         -0.32
                             (3.82)    (3.85) (3.76)      (3.36)   (2.62)       (2.22)
                       Q3     1.05      1.14    0.95       0.84     0.75         -0.30
                             (3.11)    (3.54) (2.87)      (2.45)   (2.00)       (2.07)
                       Q4     0.77      0.84    0.57       0.61     0.47         -0.30
                             (2.06)    (2.27) (1.38)      (1.51)   (1.10)       (1.92)
          Growth       Q5     0.55      0.59    0.08       0.07     0.01         -0.54
                             (1.22)    (1.25) (0.14)      (0.13)   (0.03)       (2.34)

      Growth minus L/S        -0.68     -0.76   -1.21      -0.91    -0.95
         Value               (2.55)    (2.70) (4.16)      (2.77)   (3.08)
                                           Value weight
          Value        Q1     0.92      1.14    0.98       0.67     0.96         0.04
                             (2.77)    (3.59) (2.98)      (2.13)   (2.86)       (0.16)
                       Q2     0.79      0.79    0.85       0.81     0.59         -0.20
                             (2.59)    (2.77) (2.76)      (2.79)   (1.90)       (0.99)
                       Q3     0.98      0.89    0.92       0.64     0.61         -0.37
                             (3.00)    (3.18) (3.15)      (1.98)   (1.72)       (1.88)
                       Q4     0.78      0.85    0.84       0.59     0.24         -0.54
                             (2.31)    (2.85) (2.68)      (1.74)   (0.59)       (2.36)
          Growth       Q5     0.91      0.87    0.58       0.23     0.16         -0.75
                             (2.37)    (2.62) (1.64)      (0.57)   (0.32)       (2.68)

      Growth minus L/S        -0.01     -0.25    -0.37     -0.41    -0.74
         Value               (0.02)    (0.89)   (1.20)    (1.44)   (2.26)

                                      Dumb money – Page 52
                               Table VIII: 3 year flows vs. reversals

This table shows calendar time portfolio returns. At the beginning of every calendar month
stocks are ranked in ascending order based on the last available flow and lagged three year
returns. The returns have been lagged 12 months. Stocks are assigned to one of twenty-five
portfolios. L/S is a zero cost portfolio that holds the top 20% stocks and sells short the bottom
20% stocks. Portfolios are rebalanced monthly to maintain equal or value weights. We report
average returns in excess of the Treasury bill rate. Returns are in monthly percent, t-statistics are
shown below the coefficient estimates.

                                                                                 High flow
                                  Low                                   High
                                                                                  minus
                                  Flow                                  Flow
                                                                                 Low flow
                                   Q1       Q2      Q3         Q4        Q5         L/S
                                            Equal weight
             Losers       Q1      1.64      1.46     1.47      1.52      1.17       -0.47
                                 (3.26)    (2.65)   (2.30)    (2.56)    (2.23)     (1.55)
                          Q2      1.04      1.09     0.99      0.80      0.99       -0.05
                                 (2.98)    (2.99)   (2.48)    (2.05)    (2.60)     (0.29)
                          Q3      0.99      1.07     0.94      0.95      0.72       -0.27
                                 (3.38)    (3.82)   (3.30)    (2.99)    (2.20)     (1.89)
                          Q4      0.88      1.04     0.65      0.78      0.60       -0.28
                                 (2.93)    (3.72)   (2.39)    (2.72)    (1.85)     (2.07)
            Winners       Q5      0.77      0.53     0.47      0.48      0.18       -0.59
                                 (2.04)    (1.52)   (1.23)    (1.29)    (0.43)     (3.23)

          Losers minus L/S       -0.80     -0.86   -0.93      -0.96     -0.91
            Winners              (2.46)    (2.29) (2.04)      (2.52)    (2.94)
                                            Value weight
             Losers       Q1      1.53      1.25    1.06       1.19      1.18       -0.34
                                 (3.52)    (2.47) (1.88)      (2.26)    (2.23)     (0.85)
                          Q2      1.15      1.18    0.96       0.89      1.12       -0.03
                                 (3.20)    (3.46) (2.53)      (2.39)    (2.85)     (0.10)
                          Q3      0.99      1.15    1.14       0.68      0.74       -0.26
                                 (3.22)    (4.04) (3.55)      (2.20)    (2.22)     (1.30)
                          Q4      0.85      0.76    0.83       0.71      0.59       -0.26
                                 (2.78)    (2.83) (2.99)      (2.59)    (1.79)     (1.33)
            Winners       Q5      0.81      0.80    0.66       0.53      0.23       -0.58
                                 (2.26)    (2.39) (1.97)      (1.42)    (0.52)     (2.27)

          Losers minus L/S       -0.66     -0.41    -0.36     -0.61     -0.88
            Winners              (2.26)    (1.04)   (0.74)    (1.54)    (2.36)

                                        Dumb money – Page 53
                                        Table IX: Mutual fund returns

 This table shows calendar time portfolio returns. At the beginning of every calendar month mutual funds are ranked
 in ascending order based on the last available difference between then actual x and counterfactual weight x̂ in the
 aggregate mutual fund sector. x is the fund’s actual percent of dollar value of the total mutual fund universe in the
 sample. x̂ is counterfactual percent, using a horizon between three months and five years. Funds are assigned to one
 of five portfolios. Portfolios are rebalanced monthly to maintain equal or value weights. Value weights are compute
 using net asset values. When sorting funds on raw flows, we use the total dollar flow over different horizons divided
 by the net asset value of the fund at the beginning of the period. This table includes all available equity funds in the
 CRSP mutual fund database over the period 1980 – 2003. We report average returns in excess of the Treasury bill
 rate and Fama and French (1993) alphas. Alphas are defined as the intercept in a regression of the monthly excess
 return of the Treasury bill rate on the monthly returns from Fama and French (1993) mimicking portfolio. Returns
 and alphas are in monthly percent, t-statistics are shown below the coefficient estimates.

                                                    Sorted on x − xˆ                                         Sorted
                                                                                                         On raw flows
                                  Excess returns                     Fama-French                       Excess 3 factor
                                                                      3 factor                         returns
                           Q1           Q5           L/S          Q1      Q5     L/S                     L/S        L/S
                                                     Equal weight
Three month flow          0.49         0.62         0.13      -0.16           0.03         0.19         0.13         0.19
                         (1.52)       (2.32)       (1.68)   (-2.54)          (0.65)       (2.74)       (1.69)       (2.85)
 Six month flow           0.46         0.55         0.09      -0.17           -0.01        0.16         0.08         0.16
                         (1.71)       (1.97)       (1.18)   (-2.71)          (-0.16)      (2.37)       (1.14)       (2.41)
 One year flow            0.48         0.52         0.03      -0.15           -0.03        0.11         0.04         0.11
                         (1.79)       (1.82)       (0.46)   (-2.48)          (-0.69)      (1.68)       (0.49)       (1.75)
Three year flow           0.55         0.40         -0.15     -0.09           -0.19        -0.10        -0.15        -0.10
                         (1.94)       (1.39)       (-2.14) (-1.67)           (-3.69)      (-1.43)      (-2.35)      (-1.62)
 Five year flow           0.57         0.51         -0.06     -0.11           -0.14        -0.03        -0.07        -0.03
                         (1.91)       (1.68)       (-1.16) (-2.02)           (-2.81)      (-0.53)      (-1.31)      (-0.54)
                                                     Value weight
Three month flow          0.41         0.71         0.25      -0.20           0.15         0.35         0.24         0.35
                         (1.52)       (2.32)       (1.68)   (-2.76)          (1.79)       (2.93)       (1.69)       (3.00)
 Six month flow           0.43         0.59         0.12      -0.18           0.09         0.26         0.13         0.27
                         (1.62)       (1.93)       (0.87)   (-2.66)          (1.01)       (2.34)       (0.93)       (2.49)
 One year flow            0.54         0.43         -0.11     -0.10           -0.02        0.05         -0.17        0.00
                         (2.01)       (1.42)       (-0.78) (-1.37)           (-0.28)      (0.44)       (-1.19)      (0.02)
Three year flow           0.68         0.37         -0.32     0.05            -0.21        -0.30        -0.29        -0.24
                         (2.35)       (1.20)       (-2.93)   (0.63)          (-3.26)      (-2.78)      (-2.70)      (-2.39)
 Five year flow           0.74         0.49         -0.19     0.02            -0.12        -0.14        -0.18        -0.11
                         (2.47)       (1.57)       (-2.51)   (0.28)          (-2.42)      (-1.91)      (-2.22)      (-1.55)



                                               Dumb money – Page 54
Table X: Economic significance of three year flows for the aggregate mutual fund investor

This table shows the property of monthly calendar time portfolio returns. It uses three year flows.
RACTUAL is returns on a mimicking portfolio for the entire mutual fund sector, with portfolio
weights the same as the actual weights of the aggregate mutual fund sector. RNOFLOW is returns on
a mimicking portfolio for the counterfactual mutual fund sector, with portfolio weights the same
as the counterfactual weights of the aggregate mutual fund sector. R M is the CRSP value
weighted market return.


                                                                      Mean t-stat      SR
                                    Using stock returns
Actual excess return on mutual fund holdings RACTUAL – RF              0.68   2.16    0.137

Counterfactual excess return                    RNOFLOW – RF           0.73   2.35    0.149
   on mutual fund holdings
Market excess returns                           RM – RF                0.65   2.26    0.143

Net benefit of mutual funds                     RACTUAL – RM           0.03   0.68    0.043

Dumb money effect                               RACTUAL – RNOFLOW -0.05       2.66   -0.169

Stock picking                                   RNOFLOW – RM           0.08   1.80    0.114

                                Using mutual fund returns
Actual excess return on mutual funds            RACTUAL – RF           0.51   1.83    0.116

Counterfactual excess returns                   RNOFLOW – RF           0.56   2.03    0.129
   on mutual funds

Net benefit of mutual funds                     RACTUAL – RM          -0.12   3.34   -0.213

Dumb money effect                               RACTUAL – RNOFLOW -0.05       2.64   -0.168

Stock picking                                   RNOFLOW – RM          -0.07   2.06   -0.132




                                    Dumb money – Page 55
                Table XI: Robustness tests for economic significance of flows

This table shows the property of monthly calendar time portfolio returns for different horizons,
using stock returns. RACTUAL is returns on a mimicking portfolio for the entire mutual fund
sector, with portfolio weights the same as the actual weights of the aggregate mutual fund sector.
RNOFLOW is returns on a mimicking portfolio for the counterfactual mutual fund sector, with
portfolio weights the same as the counterfactual weights of the aggregate mutual fund sector. RM
is the CRSP value weighted market return.

                                          Dumb money effect    Stock picking

                                          RACTUAL – RNOFLOW RNOFLOW – RM

                    Three month flow            -0.11               0.04
                                               (1.18)              (0.89)

                     Six month flow             -0.12               0.04
                                               (1.21)              (0.96)

                      One year flow             -0.13               0.06
                                               (1.34)              (1.28)

                     Three year flow            -0.05               0.08
                                               (2.66)              (1.80)

                      Five year flow            -0.05               0.10
                                               (2.21)              (2.23)




                                       Dumb money – Page 56
                                      Table XII: Issuance

This table shows issuance activity between January and December of year t + 1 , for portfolios of
firms sorted on 3-year flows as of December in year t. In December stocks are ranked in
ascending order based on the last available 3 year flow. Stocks are assigned to one of five
portfolios. Portfolios are rebalanced every year to maintain equal or value weights. Issuance is
defined as 1 minus the firm’s ratio of the number of shares outstanding one year ago to the
number of shares outstanding today. Issuance is in percent, t-statistics are shown below the
coefficient estimates. Characteristic-adjusted issuance is defined as raw issuance minus the
average issuance on an equally weighted portfolio of all CRSP firms with non-missing flows in
the same size, market-book, and one year momentum quintile.

                                      Low                                   High    High
                                      flow                                  flow    minus
                                                                                     low
                                       Q1       Q2        Q3        Q4       Q5
         Equal weighted               2.66     2.95      3.15      2.83     3.64     0.98
                                    (11.21)   (6.85)    (8.08)    (8.89)   (9.88)   (3.55)

         Value weighted               3.18     1.94      2.11      2.64     4.98     1.80
                                     (6.08)   (4.11)    (3.74)    (8.39)   (9.70)   (2.47)

Equal weighted, trimmed issuance      2.79     3.04      3.40      2.95      3.73   0.94
                                    (12.65)   (7.27)    (8.69)    (9.46)   (10.64) (3.51)

   Equal weighted, 1981-1993          2.38     1.55      1.87      2.07     2.85     0.47
                                     (7.24)   (3.26)    (4.82)    (4.22)   (5.83)   (2.29)

   Equal weighted, 1994-2004          2.93      4.36   4.42    3.59     4.43   1.50
                                     (8.76)   (12.56) (12.26) (14.82) (10.03) (3.17)

Characteristic adjusted issuance,     -0.33    -0.10     0.07      -0.20    0.58     0.90
        equal weighted               (1.97)   (0.53)    (0.55)    (1.80)   (4.30)   (4.69)




                                    Dumb money – Page 57
           Table A.1: Hypothetic example showing counterfactual calculation

                                             Year    1980 1981   1982 1983 1985

ACTUAL DATA FOR INDIVIDUAL FUNDS

 Returns                                    Fund 1 10%     10% 5% 10%         5%
                                            Fund 2 -5%     10% -10%
                                            Fund 3              10% 10%       5%

 NAV                                        Fund 1   100   160   268   395    515
                                            Fund 2    50   105   144    0      0
                                            Fund 3          50    45   100    154

 FLOWS                                      Fund 1         50    100    100   100
                                            Fund 2         50     50   -144     0
                                            Fund 3         50    -10     50    50
ACTUAL DATA FOR AGGREGATES

 NAV                                         Agg.    150   315   457   494    669
 FLOW                                        Agg.     0    150   140    6     150

 NAV, last year, of funds existing this year Agg.          150   315   313    494
 FLOW of non-dying funds                     Agg.          150   140   150    150

COUNTERFACTUAL DATA

 NAV                                        Fund 1   100   210   292   449    591
                                            Fund 2    50   105   141    0       0
                                            Fund 3                22    46     79

 FLOWS                                      Fund 1         100   71     128   120
                                            Fund 2          50   47    -141     0
                                            Fund 3               22      22    30




                                 Dumb money – Page 58
