NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE INTERNATIONAL DYNAMICS OF R&D AND
INNOVATION IN THE SHORT AND IN THE LONG RUN
Laura Bottazzi
Giovanni Peri
Working Paper 11524
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11524
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2005

We thank Mike Wickens and three anonymous referees for extremely helpful suggestions. We also
benefitted from comments by Oscar Jorda, Carlo Favero, Massimiliano Marcellino and Luca Sala. Chad
Sparber provided very competent advice in the editing of the paper. Peri acknowledges the Institute of
Governmental Affairs (IGA) for partially funding this project. Errors are ours. The views expressed herein
are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
©2005 by Laura Bottazzi and Giovanni Peri. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

The International Dynamics of R&D and Innovation in the Short and in the Long Run
Laura Bottazzi and Giovanni Peri
NBER Working Paper No. 11524
July 2005
JEL No. O31, F43, C23
ABSTRACT

In this paper we estimate the dynamic relationship between employment in R&D and generation of
knowledge as measured by patent applications across OECD countries. In several recently developed
models, known as `idea-based' models of growth, the afore mentioned "idea-generating" process is
the engine of productivity growth. Moreover, in real business cycle models technological shocks are
an important source of fluctuations. Our empirical strategy is able to test whether knowledge
spillovers are strong enough to generate sustained endogenous growth and to estimate the
quantitative impact of international knowledge on technological innovation of a country in the short
and in the long run. We find that a country's stock of knowledge, its R&D resources and the stock
of international knowledge move together in the long run. International knowledge has a very
significant impact on innovation. As a consequence, a positive shock to R&D in the US (the largest
world innovator) has a significant positive effect on the innovation of all other countries. Such a
shock produces its largest effect on domestic and international innovation after five to ten years from
its occurrence.

Laura Bottazi
Universita’ L. Bocconi and IGIER
via Salasco, 3
Milano 20136
ITALY

Giovanni Peri
University of California, Davis
Department of Economics
One Shields Avenue
Davis, CA 95616
and NBER
gperi@ucdavis.edu

1

Introduction

The process of creation of scientific/technological knowledge is extremely important from an economic perspective. In the long run it underlies the phenomenon of technological growth (e.g. in
Romer, 1990; Jones, 1995). In the short run randomness in the discovery of new technologies
underlies the occurrence of periods of fast productivity growth and other periods of technological
slowdown. These may be the cause (together with other shocks) of economic fluctuations of the
kind analyzed by the Real Business Cycle literature (e.g. Prescott, 1986; Kydland and Prescott,
1982; Christiano and Eichenbaum, 1992). The process of innovation and what determines it, however, are not very well known and understood. Only during the recent decades have economists
made progress in analyzing it from a theoretical and empirical point of view. Models based on
endogenous technological innovation (such as Aghion and Howitt, 1992; Grossman and Helpman,
1991) have been developed to explain productivity growth in the aggregate economy. These models
helped economists to focus on the central role of innovation as engine of growth for world productivity. At the same time better and more comprehensive data on research and development (R&D)
across countries and on patents and their characteristics (especially for Europe and the US), have
become available and have encouraged a large revival in the microeconomic studies of patenting as
a window on the process of technological change (see, for an overview, the book by Jaﬀe and Trajtenberg, 2002). Our contribution in this article is to propose an aggregate dynamic analysis of the
knowledge-generating sector that uses state of the art econometric techniques, considers the long
and short run behavior of innovation (and its determinants) across countries and uses R&D and
patent data to capture technological innovation. Innovation is treated as the output of a process
that uses R&D resources and existing ideas as inputs. New ideas are measured using international
patents originating from OECD countries and we estimate the production of these ideas for the
period 1973-1999, allowing for international diﬀusion of past ideas across countries.
In this article we take a macro approach by aggregating the idea-generating activities across
sectors at the country level. We focus, however, on the idea-generating sector only, rather than
also looking at the production sector. The importance of the idea-generating sector should grant
it special attention, and we focus this study specifically on the R&D sector for three reasons.
First, very little is known on the origin, timing and delays of technological shocks. Our goal is to

2

begin opening the black box of Total Factor Productivity (TFP) by understanding the underlying
innovation process and its dynamics. The existing empirical studies on R&D and growth are mostly
focussed on the long run analysis and capture a reduced-form relationship between R&D and TFP.
For instance the initial contribution of Coe and Helpman (1995) tested the idea that productivity
of a country depends on the stock of past accumulated R&D of the country as well as on that
of its trading partners. Since these three variables are non stationary, this implies a long run
cointegration relationship between them. As techniques for testing panel cointegration improved in
the late 1990s, several papers, after Coe and Helpman (1995), applied tests of panel cointegration
and re-estimated the cointegration vector between productivity (measured indirectly as the Solow
residual1 ), domestic R&D and international R&D. Keller (1998), Kao et al. (1999), Funk (2000)
and Edmond (2001) all produced estimates of this cointegration relation using OECD countries for
the period 1970-1991. They used recently developed tests of panel unit-root (Im et al., 2003) and
of panel cointegration (Pedroni, 1999) to analyze the long run relation between R&D spending and
productivity. While ultimately the behavior of TFP is crucial, the novelty of this paper is that it
focuses on innovation in order to better understand this one key source of productivity growth.
The second reason to focus on the knowledge-generating sector is that a very important aggregate property of the so called "idea-based" models of growth depends on the dynamic behavior of
this sector. Specifically, a key distinction between the first generation of models (the endogenous
growth models exemplified in Romer 1990 or Aghion and Howitt 1992) and the second generation
of models (the semi-endogenous growth models such as Jones 1995; Kortum 1997 and Segerstrom
1998) is based on the eﬀect of the "scale" of a country’s R&D sector on its creation of technological
knowledge. If the level of total R&D resources in a country is positively related to the growth
rate of its technological knowledge, once we control for the access to international accumulated
knowledge, then such an economy exhibits strong scale eﬀects. Such evidence would be in favor
of the endogenous models of growth. On the other hand, if the level of total R&D resources in
a country is positively related to the level of its technological knowledge, still controlling for the
access to international accumulated knowledge, then we would be in the presence of weak scale
eﬀects. Such relation, in turn, would be corroborating evidence in favor of the semi-endogenous
models of growth. Importantly, this property depends only on the eﬀect of R&D on the creation
1

Using the method pioneered by Solow (1957).

3

of technological knowledge and can, therefore, be tested by looking at the long run dynamic behavior of R&D and accumulated knowledge. As both variables turn out to have a non-stationary
behavior the above proposition has implications on the cointegration between R&D resources and
the stock of accumulated knowledge. While a previous test to distinguish between endogenous
and semi-endogenous models of growth exists (Jones, 1995), it relies on the relationship between
R&D resources and TFP and only uses time-series data for a small number of countries. Our
test is based on the impact of a country’s R&D on ideas generated in that country, accounting
for the international diﬀusion of knowledge. Our test, confirming the previous evidence, does not
support strong scale eﬀects (and endogenous growth) but only weak eﬀects (and semi-endogenous
growth). Even considering, as we do, the production of pure ideas (measured as patents), rather
than their embodiment into TFP, knowledge externalities are not strong enough to feed a process in
which countries with larger R&D resources produce ideas at a faster rate. However, the spillovers
are strong enough to guarantee a net positive eﬀect of the international stock of knowledge on
innovation.
The third reason to focus on the knowledge-generating sector is that in this sector international
knowledge spillovers are likely to be the strongest and most pervasive. While the activity of
production involves several country-specific factors, the activity of generating new ideas is largely
cross-national. Scientists communicate intensely across countries, ideas are diﬀused promptly and
technological innovations cross country borders. While we still allow for the existence of tacit
(country-specific) knowledge, our specific interest is to identify the importance of international
ideas in the development of new ideas. Existing studies on international diﬀusion of ideas based
on patent citations (such as Jaﬀe et al., 1993; Branstetter, 2001; Peri 2005) have found that,
while there is a large component of knowledge that remains localized in the country a significant
portion diﬀuses internationally. Our study confirms that international knowledge is an important
determinant of a country’s innovation and even more so if the country is not a technological leader.
Finally, our paper is a step in a new, hardly explored, direction. Macroconomists have been all
too fast in identifying technological progress with measured changes of total factor productivity. It
is well known that this residual measure captures (together with technological progress) changes
in eﬃciency in the use of factors, reallocation of factors across sectors, changes in (unmeasured)
capacity utilization and so on. It is important to complement the TFP approach and consider
4

seriously alternative measures of technological progress. Patented innovation is one of the most
promising and measurable indices. Total factor productivity is an important construct, but economists should make an eﬀort to understand the determinants of technological progress and measure
directly its components.
The first part of our article explores the long run relationship between R&D resources and
knowledge creation. We show that a panel of data for twenty-eight years and fifteen countries
rejects the implication of strong scale eﬀects of R&D while it does not reject weak scale eﬀects
implying a positive long run relationship between R&D resources and the stock of knowledge. We
apply recent techniques of panel cointegration in order to test the long run relationship between
R&D employment and the stock of national and international scientific/technological knowledge.
Once we have identified this long run relation, we estimate the short run dynamics of the innovation
process by means of an Error Correction Mechanism panel VAR (VECM). The impulse responses
of this model allow us to evaluate the eﬀect of an increase in R&D resources on knowledge created
in the source country and any other country. By including a variable that captures the accessible
international stock of knowledge we analyze the “external” impact of a country’s R&D on other
countries’ innovation both in the long and in the short run. In spite of the success of real business
cycle theories, the short run behavior of innovation has been largely neglected by the dynamic empirical literature. Business cycle analysis has taken shocks to total factor productivity as exogenous
and has analyzed their impact. Our paper, to the contrary, analyzes one important mechanism at
the source of short-term fluctuations of productivity. In order to characterize correctly the short
run behavior of a set of non-stationary variables, however, we need to account properly for their
long run behavior. This is why we estimate an error correction mechanism that allows us to identify
a response of R&D and innovation to shocks in the short and medium run, while accounting for
long-run cointegration. This, to the best of our knowledge, has never been done in the literature2 .
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents a simple "idea-based" model
of growth in which the idea-generating sector plays a key role. Within the context of these models
we can test, using the dynamic properties of the knowledge generating sector, whether the data
2
A partial and interesting exception is Shea (1999). Emphasizing the role of R&D spending and patenting as
sources of technological shocks, that article estimated the eﬀects of those shocks on short run fluctuations for U.S.
sectors. The study did not find a large eﬀect of technological shocks on short run productivity fluctuations. However,
the study did not apply the modern techniques for estimating cointegration and the Error Correction Mechanism
panel VAR.

5

support a model of endogenous or of semi-endogenous growth. We describe the idea-generating
function and how we construct variables to measure R&D resources, new ideas, existing knowledge
and their relationship. Section 3 describes the data for the panel of fifteen countries over the period
1973-1999. We show and test some of the basic time-series properties of the data before pursuing
our estimation strategy. Section 4 studies the long run behavior of R&D and innovation, testing
the stationarity of knowledge growth rates and then estimating the panel cointegration between
R&D employment, domestic knowledge and international knowledge. Section 5 analyzes short run
behavior using the VECM and shows some representative impulse response functions. Section 6
concludes the paper.

2

Idea-Based growth Models and the R&D sector

2.1

A Simple Framework

The mechanism through which resources devoted to research and development (R&D) are transformed into new knowledge is the centerpiece of several recent models of growth. These models,
indeed, are referred to as "idea-based" models of growth3 . More specifically, in these models the
R&D sector is the ultimate engine of economic growth. Both the first generation of "idea-based"
models (such as Romer, 1990; Aghion and Howitt, 1992; Grossman and Helpman, 1991) and the
second generation (Jones, 1995, Kortum 1997 and Segerstrom 1998) build on the analysis of the
R&D sector to determine the long run behavior of productivity growth. For a given amount of
resources allocated to R&D, the parameters of the knowledge-producing function are the only ones
responsible for the long run growth of knowledge which, in turn, determines productivity. In this
sense the R&D sector is crucial for long run growth. At the same time, the transitional fluctuations
of the R&D sector together with those of the production sector (and of consumption-investment
decisions) are responsible for transitional fluctuations of productivity due to the adjustments of the
capital stock and knowledge stock (per worker) around their long run trajectories. Using a simple
framework (similar to Jones, 2004) to illustrate this point let us consider an economy for which the
production of output per worker, yt , is given by:
3

See Jones (2004) for a survey.

6

yt = (BAσt )ktα

(1)

where we assume a log-linear production function to simplify our discourse. BAσt is total factor
productivity (TFP). It depends on a factor B that captures eﬃciency in production and is mainly
determined by institutions, geography and the legal structure of a country. These characteristics
are slow to change so are assumed to be constant. TFP also depends (with an elasticity σ > 0)
on technological knowledge represented by the stock of total available scientific and technological
ideas At 4 . kt is physical capital per worker and α < 1 is the elasticity of output with respect to
physical capital, so that ktα satisfies the usual assumptions of decreasing marginal returns to capital
and the Inada conditions. Taking derivatives of the logged variables with respect to time on both
sides of equation (1) and denoting with gx the growth rate of variable x, we can write the growth
rate of output per worker in period t as:

gyt = σgAt + αgkt .

(2)

At any given time the growth rate of output per worker (gyt ) is a linear combination of the
growth rate of the stock of ideas (gAt ) and capital per worker (gkt ). In the long run, however, due to
decreasing returns of physical capital, any growth model characterized by an aggregate production
function as in (1) converges to a balanced growth path (BGP) in which gy∗ = gk∗ (the stars denote
BGP values)5 The growth rate of output per worker in BGP is given by:

gy∗ =

σ
g∗
1−α A

(3)

On one hand, according to (2), the dynamics of knowledge growth, gAt , aﬀect the dynamics
of income per capita as an important source of fluctuations and transitional dynamics. On the
∗ ), is the only determinant of
other hand, according to (3), the long run growth rate of ideas (gA

long run GDP per capita growth for given parameters of the production function. The analysis of
4

See Weil (2005), chapter 10, for a similar decomposition of total factor productivity.
This result can easily be derived in a model with exogenous saving rate (as in Solow, 1956) or in a model with
optimizing agents (as in Ramsey, 1928). See Barro and Sala i Martin (2004), Chapter 1 and 2, for details.
5

7

the dynamics of At in the short and long run is therefore an extremely informative and interesting
empirical question for macroeconomists. Moreover, the distinction between models that deliver
endogenous growth and models that deliver semi-endogenous growth depends exclusively on the
dynamics of the idea-generating sector. We will return on this issue in section 2.4 below. From
this point onwards we concentrate our attention on the knowledge-generating (R&D) sector and
its dynamics .

2.2

The Knowledge-Generating (R&D) Sector

For its crucial role in determining the growth rate of productivity, the knowledge-generating sector
is the focus of this paper. New ideas are produced by people working in R&D who use their
creativity and the existing stock of knowledge (made of non-obsolete ideas produced in the past).
In the aggregate, the uncertainty in the rate of arrival of ideas can be reduced to a random noise
so that new ideas, existing knowledge, and R&D resources can be represented as linked by a stable
relationship (up to an error term) which can be viewed as a production function of new ideas.
Omitting the error term (that we will re-introduce in the empirical section) the function can be
expressed as:

Ii,t = F (R&Di,t , Ai,t , AROW i,t )

(4)

Ii,t (for "Ideas") is the measure of new knowledge generated in country i during year t. We
assume that resources devoted to research during year t aﬀect the generation of ideas during that
year6 . R&Di,t is the employment in the private R&D sector for country i during year t. Ai,t is
the stock of usable domestic knowledge measured as accumulated past ideas that were generated
in country i up to year t − 1 and available at the beginning of year t. Similarly AROW i,t is the
stock of international knowledge measured as accumulated past ideas generated by countries in the
rest of the world (ROW ) up to year t − 1 and hence available at the beginning of year t. Existing
ideas are a very important input in the creation of new ideas, this is why we include Ai,t and
AROW i,t in the function F . The quantitative impact of existing knowledge on the generation of
new ideas, however, can be positive, negative or zero due to the existence of two opposite eﬀects.
6

Early empirical studies, such as Hall et al. (1986) show the strong eﬀect of R&D on innovation within the same
year. Past R&D is captured, in this specification, by the accumulated stock of idea Ai,t and AROW i,t .

8

As illustrated by Caballero and Jaﬀe (1993) or Jones (2002), existing ideas widen the basis of
knowledge usable to generate further innovation and may therefore have a positive impact on it
(such eﬀect has been named "standing on shoulders"). In particular, this eﬀect could be so strong
as to increase the rate of innovation as more knowledge becomes available. Alternatively, as ideas
are discovered it may become harder to find new ones so that the eﬀect of existing knowledge on
innovation may be negative (this eﬀect has been christened "fishing-out"). Our approach allows us
to use the data to test whether the impact of existing knowledge on innovation is positive and large
enough to generate accelerating innovation, positive but incompatible with accelerating innovation,
or negative. Finally, in a world of closed economies with no exchange of knowledge across countries
only Ai,t would be available to researchers of country i. In contrast, in a world of exchange of
knowledge across countries, each country benefits from ideas discovered in the rest of the world.
Several studies (Branstetter, 2001; Jaﬀe et al., 1993; Peri, 2005) show that the international diﬀusion
of ideas is less than perfect and, in particular, less eﬃcient than their diﬀusion within a country.
For this reason we include knowledge created outside of a country as a separate input so that we
are able to estimate the (external) impact of this factor on the generation of new ideas.

2.3

Construction of Variables and Measurement Issues

In the equations sketched above we have been rather vague in defining our variables. In particular
we have not specified how to measure new knowledge (Ii,t ) and existing knowledge (Ai,t ) generated
in country i or the international stock of knowledge AROW i,t . In this section we describe in detail
how to make equation (4) operational for the empirical analysis by constructing variables using
the available data. Our main identifying assumption is that the number of new ideas produced in
country i during year t, Ii,t , is proportional to the number of inventions for which an international
patent application is filed during year t by an inventor residing in that country. Following an
established tradition we utilize patent statistics to proxy the generation of innovative ideas. While
not perfect, the correspondence between patents and new ideas has been extensively employed in
economic analysis, and does seem reasonable both from a theoretical and an empirical point of
view. According to the standards of patentability defined by the U.S. patent oﬃce, a patentable
idea should be original, non-obvious and exploitable for economic profit. Moreover, many applied

9

economists have drawn from the large pool of patent data, and used it to measure new ideas7 .
Similarly, theoretical economists (such as Romer, 1990 and Grossman and Helpman, 1991) have
equated one idea to one patent in their models. In practice, however, there are two main sources
of “noise" which prevent a perfect correspondence between patents and ideas. The first is that
the propensity to patent a new idea may vary across countries. This is easily accounted for by
introducing a country fixed eﬀect. The second is that patents may have dissimilar “contents of
ideas”, with some patents containing many (or big) ideas and other relatively few (or less relevant)
ideas8 . Since in our case, each unit of observation (country-year) includes the sum of a large number
of patents, diﬀerences in the content of ideas for individual patents are likely to be averaged out.
Moreover, we include a correction for the importance of a patent by weighting each of them by the
number of citations received during the first 3 years. This correction, however, does not change
much the results relative to the use of a simple patent count.
Our choices of selecting only international patents (filed in the U.S.) and of adopting the
residence of the inventor as country of origin of the idea, have several advantages that make our
dataset particularly appealing. First, by selecting patents taken in the United States we are likely
to select only the most important (and potentially profitable) innovations originating from each
country. As the U.S. is the most important world market any relevant innovation will be patented
there. Only if an innovation is marginal or of very limited use will it not be worth the patenting
cost in the U.S. Such choice, therefore, would tend to select "high-quality" ideas, which should be
the most important for their eﬀects on productivity. These ideas are also the ones that are most
likely to benefit from international diﬀusion of knowledge. Second, the U.S. patent data allow us to
locate the residence of the inventor and use it as the idea’s country of origin. Aggregate statistics
from the world industrial property oﬃce (WIPO) identify only the location of the headquarters of
the applying company. The literature agrees that the first is a better way of identifying where the
idea was developed as the location of the headquarters of a company is often diﬀerent from that
where R&D was performed 9 . Third, the NBER patents and citations data report the citations
between patents and allows us to construct a measure of the importance of a patent (based on the
received citations) that in turn can be used to weight each of them in a more accurate measure of
7

See Griliches (1990) for a survey.
See, for instance, Jaﬀe and Trajtenberg (2002), Chapter 2.
9
See Jaﬀe et al.(1992) and Jaﬀe and Trajtenberg (2002) for an accurate discussions of this issue.
8

10

innovation.
We can summarize the relationship between patents and ideas, allowing for country-specific
propensity to patent, as: P ati,t = κi Iit where P ati,t is the number of patent applications filed with
the US patent oﬃce by inventors living in country i during year t and κi is the country-specific
propensity to patent. The choice of the application year to capture the generation of an idea is
appropriate because the process of obtaining a patent is slow. While an application is filed very
early after the discovery took place, the patent may be granted several years later (see Jaﬀe and
Trajtenberg, 2002, Chapter 13).
In order to study the relationship defined by (4) we assume that the mapping F (., ., .) can be
approximated by a log-linear function as follows:

ln(P ati,t ) = ln(κi ) + λ ln(R&Di,t ) + φ ln(Ai,t ) + ξ ln(AROW i,t )

(5)

Equation (5) states that the (log) number of patent applications originating in country i during
year t is a function of a country fixed eﬀect (ln(κi )), the (log) level of R&D (personnel employed
in R&D in full time equivalents) of country i during year t (R&Di,t ), the stock of knowledge
generated in country i (Ai,t ), as well as in the rest of the world (AROW i,t ) and available at the
beginning of year t10 . The coeﬃcient λ captures the impact of R&D resources on patenting, while
φ and ξ capture, respectively, the eﬀects of domestically-generated and internationally-generated
knowledge on patenting . The stock variable Ai,t captures the accumulated, non-obsolete knowledge
originating from country i. We assume that the stock of knowledge is continually increased by the
addition of new ideas and, at the same time, it is continually decreased by a constant depreciation
(obsolescence) rate δ that captures the fact that new ideas may displace (or improve on) old
ideas11 . Therefore, using the correspondence between patents and ideas and omitting the country
fixed factors (that could be factored out and bundled with the country fixed eﬀects κi ) the variable
10

To understand how patents (measured as a flow) are produced using R&D (also a flow of resources) and knowledge
(measured as a stock), it is useful to think of a standard aggregate production function. GDP at the aggregate level
(measured as a yearly flow) is produced using labor inputs (a flow of worked hours) and Capital stock. Knowledge
plays the role of a stock variable in (5) and we would like to measure its services but we can only measure its total
amount.
11
We choose a depreciation rate to be within the range estimated using data on patent-citations (Caballero and
Jaﬀe, 1992) and close to what is chosen as depreciation for the R&D stock (Keller, 2002 ). Such rate is set to δ = 0.1.
We conduct robustness checks for the case of δ = 0.15, and δ = 0.08 and we do not find any significant variation in
the results.

11

Ai,t is defined by the following recursive formula:

Ai,t+1 = P ati,t + (1 − δ)Ai,t

(6)

Assuming that the accumulation of knowledge in the past has been compatible with a balanced
growth path, we construct the initial value Ait0 , (following the perpetual inventory method12 ) as:

Ait0 =

∞
X

t=0

=

P ati,t0
P atit0
(1 − δ)t =
t+1
(1 + gi )
(gi + δ)

(7)

where gi , is the growth rate of patenting in country i in the five years between t0 and t0 + 5,
and δ is equal to 0.1. The value obtained from (7) is, at best, a rough estimate of the initial stock
of knowledge in country i. However, we use t0 = 1963 as the first year in which patent data are
available while we begin our analysis of cross-country innovation in 1973. This allows us to reduce
the eﬀect of any mistake due to an imprecise estimate of the initial stock of knowledge. The impact
of Ai,1963 on Ai,1973 is, in fact, diluted by the accumulation over ten years and is rather small.
Most of the existing literature on knowledge spillovers (Coe and Helpman, 1995; Funk, 2000) used
the stock of accumulated past R&D, rather than of patents, to measure the international stock
of knowledge. There are several reasons, however, to prefer the choice of accumulated patents in
our context. First, R&D resources (such as scientists and labs) are excludable while the ideas
generated with them (patents) are not. The external eﬀect on innovation comes from knowledge
generated abroad (rather than directly from R&D) and accumulated patents measure it more
accurately. Second, as data on patents are available beginning in 1963, but data on R&D only
since 1973, using the perpetual inventory method and equation (7) to initialize the stock would
imply higher imprecision when using accumulated R&D rather than accumulated patents. Third,
R&D resources take some time (one year according to specification 5), to become available as
domestic and international knowledge so that only Ai,t+1 and AROW i,t+1 contain ideas generated
using R&Di,t .The timing of R&D, therefore, may be leading (one or more periods) its impact on
innovation in a foreign country. Constructing the lagged stock of knowledge would imply that we
lose further initial observations for each country. Ultimately, however, as R&D in a country is the
most important determinant of patenting, the two measures (stock of R&D and of stock of patents)
12

See Young (1995), footnote 16 pp. 652.

12

are highly correlated in the long run. Studies limited to the long run analysis (such as Coe and
Helpman, 1995; Funk, 2000) could use either measure to obtain similar results (see section 4). The
reasons to prefer the stock of patents are more relevant in the short run analysis which is a specific
contribution of this paper.
We construct AROW i,t as the simple sum of the stock of ideas generated in countries other than
X
Aj,t . The choice
i by year t − 1, and available at the beginning of year t. Namely, AROW i,t =
j6=i

of a simple sum is driven by three considerations. First, Keller (1998) showed that an unweighted

sum of external R&D works just as well as a trade-weighted sum when measuring the external
eﬀect of research. Second, Edmond (2001) has shown that the specification with unweighted sum
is more robust to diﬀerent specifications and estimation methods than the weighted one. Finally
Peri (2005) finds that international flows of ideas are much less localized than trade flows and
most of the attrition takes place within a country. Ideas that flow beyond the country border
(internationally) are likely to diﬀuse very broadly. Weighting the contribution of foreign ideas by
trade shares would, therefore, incorrectly reduce their impact so that it is better to take simply
their unweighted sum.

2.4

Long run Implications of Strong and Weak Scale Eﬀects

We divide both sides of equation (6) by Ai,t and take natural logs. Substituting for P ati,t its
expression from (5), and for AROW i,t its definition given above, we obtain the following relation,
which is the basis of our long run econometric analysis:
X
ln(gAi,t + δ) − ln(κi ) = λ ln(R&Di,t ) + (φ − 1) ln(Ai,t ) + ξ ln(
Aj,t )

(8)

j6=i

where gAi,t = (Ai,t+1 −Ai,t )/Ai,t is the growth rate of the stock of ideas generated in country i in
year t. This equation holds in each period and can be used to study the dynamics of the knowledge
stock which, according to (2) and (3), has direct bearings on the dynamics of output per worker. If
the stock of ideas converges to a (stochastic) balanced growth path then the term ln(gAi,t +δ)−ln(κi )
on the left hand side of (8) converges to a country-specific stationary stochastic process. In this
case equation (8) implies a stable (stationary) long run relation between the variables ln(R&Di,t ),
ln(Ai,t ) and ln(AROW i,t ) on the right hand side. In particular, if each of the three variables is
13

non-stationary (as is the case), convergence to a stochastic balanced growth path implies that
there must be a cointegration relation among them, (i.e. a linear combination that is stationary).
The cointegration vector, standardizing by the coeﬃcient of ln(Ai,t ), would be (−1, µ, γ) where
µ = λ/(1 − φ) and γ = ξ/(1 − φ). It can be estimated using the following regression
X
ln(Ai,t ) = µ ln(R&Di,t ) + γ ln(
Aj,t ) + si,t ,

(9)

j6=i

where we have collected all the stationary variables (deterministic and stochastic) in the term
si,t . From the estimates of this cointegration vector we are also able to establish whether ξ is larger,
smaller, or equal to 0 (as its sign will be the same as the sign of γ). Alternatively, if the stock of
ideas does not converge to a balanced growth path so that gAi,t is not stationary in the long run
but increases with the levels of ln(R&Di,t ), ln(Ai,t ) and ln(AROW i,t ) then no cointegration exists
between those variables and the system would experience stocks of ideas diverging across countries
and experiencing explosive growth over time.
The tests of stationarity of gAi,t and of cointegration between the variables ln(R&Di,t ), ln(Ai,t )
and ln(AROW i,t ) allow us to discriminate between the two alternative idea-based models of growth
(endogenous vs. semi-endogenous). If gAi,t is stationary then, in the long run, the levels of R&D
resources and world knowledge determine (are cointegrated with) the level of knowledge of a country
(and therefore the level of its productivity). This is a typical property of the semi-endogenous
models of growth such as Jones (1995) and Segerstrom (1998) in which the size of the R&D sector
aﬀects the level of domestic knowledge through a weak scale eﬀect. Moreover, within this case a
positive sign of the coeﬃcient γ, would be evidence of a net "standing on shoulders" eﬀect, while
a negative sign of γ would imply that the "fishing-out" eﬀect prevails. Alternatively, if gAi,t is
non-stationary then levels of R&D resources and stocks of knowledge (on the right hand side of 8)
determine the growth rate of knowledge of a country (gAi,t ) and, as a consequence, the growth rate of
its total factor productivity. In turn, this is a typical property of the endogenous models of growth
such as Romer (1990), Aghion and Howitt (1992) and Grossman and Helpman (1991). In this case
R&D would have a strong scale eﬀect, implying that its level aﬀects the growth rate of the stock of
ideas. The novelty of our approach, relative to a previous test performed by Jones (1995), is our
cross-country specification and our direct measure of scientific/technological knowledge, based on

14

patents, rather than its indirect measure, based on total factor productivity. Testing the scale eﬀect
of R&D on knowledge generation (rather than on TFP) gives endogenous growth models the best
chance at succeeding over semi-endogenous models. In fact the non-rival nature of knowledge should
be strongest when it is used by international researchers to generate new knowledge (rather than
goods). The rejection of endogenous growth models in favor of semi-endogenous ones, even using
this empirical setting, is very strong evidence for preferring the second type of models as empirical
tools. At the same time we find strong evidence of a net "standing on shoulders" eﬀect (γ > 0), i.e.
that existing international knowledge increases the innovation of countries. We then use equation
(5) in order to identify and estimate the eﬀect of R&D and innovation shocks on creation of ideas
in the short run. Equation (5) implies that patent applications in period t (P ati,t ) are aﬀected by
R&D resources employed in the same year, and by knowledge generated within the country, Ai,t ,
or outside of it, AROW i,t , up to the beginning of the year. In turn, innovation generated during
year t (P ati,t ) only becomes available as national and international knowledge beginning with the
following year (Ai,t+1 , AROW i,t+1 ). These assumptions on the timing of innovation relative to R&D
provide the identifying restrictions needed to order equations and to estimate our Error Correction
Mechanism (see section 5.2).

3
3.1

Data: Description and Time-Series Properties
Data Description

Our empirical analysis is performed on data from fifteen OECD Countries during the period 19731999. These fifteen countries, taken together, account for about 90% of the world R&D and for
97-98% of the total U.S. granted patents. R&D resources are measured by personnel working in
the R&D sector in full-time equivalents. The data on R&D are from the ANBERD, OECD-STAN
data set. The patent data, grouped by country of residence of the first inventor and by year of
application are obtained by aggregating individual patents from the NBER Patent and Citations
Data set described in detail in the book by Jaﬀe and Trajtenberg (2002) and publicly available at
http://www.nber.org/patents/. The dataset includes over 3 million patents granted by the United
States patent oﬃce between the years 1963 and 1999. We measure of P ati,t by the total number
of patent applications by residents of country i during year t, and we weight each patent by the
15

factor (1 + µ3 ) where µ3 is the average number of yearly citations received by the patent during
the first three years after it has been granted. This accounts for the importance of the innovation
embedded in the patent. As argued in several articles13 citations are, on average, an indicator of
the importance of a patent and of its market value. For robustness we also conduct our analysis
using simple patent counts and the results are very similar.
Table 1 shows the average values of the variables of interest, by country, for the whole period
1973-1999. The first column shows the average full-time equivalent units of personnel in R&D, the
second shows the average number of patent applications per year, the third and fourth report the
average values of the constructed stocks of knowledge ln(Ai,t ) and ln(AROW i,t ). Large variations in
total R&D resources and total patenting exist across these countries. The US is the technological
leader by a large margin employing and average of almost 1.7 million full-time equivalent persons
in its R&D sector and filing more than 70,000 patent applications every year. Japan, Germany and
the United Kingdom are distant second, third and fourth in terms of R&D and patents. Ireland is
the smallest innovator in our sample, filing an average of merely 57 patent applications each year.
The averages over the whole time-period mask the interesting time-evolution of the variables in
each country. Before performing formal tests on the time-series properties of these variables, we
illustrate their behavior for a subset of G7 countries in Figure 1 to 3. Figure 1 shows the behavior
of the variable ln(R&Di,t ) for the seven largest economies over the 1973-1999 period. In spite of
diﬀerent average growth rates (from 0% of the UK to a positive 6% per year for Canada) the picture
confirms a common upward trend (except for the UK) as well as high persistence of year to year
movements. Also, some countries exhibit detectable diﬀerences over diﬀerent periods. Japan, for
instance, increased its R&D employment largely up to year 1990, and later experienced very slow
growth or possible stagnation. Similarly, Italy experienced growth in R&D resources only up to the
early nineties. The countries with fastest growing R&D employment for our sample were Spain and
Finland (not among the G7) with annual growth of 10 and 11% respectively. Figure 2 illustrates
the time behavior of (log) patent applications per year for the G7 countries in the 1993-1999 period.
This variable, which measures new knowledge generated in the seven countries, also shows a general
upward trend. Some fluctuations especially during the 1990’s are also visible. When we consider the
whole sample, the country that experienced the fastest growth in patent application was Ireland
13

See for instance Jaﬀe and Trajtenberg (2002), Chapter 2 and Hall et al. (2005).

16

with 12% annual increase, while Great Britain was the one with slowest growth (annual 0.1%).
Finally, Figure 3 shows the behavior of the constructed variable ln(Ai,t ) for each one of the G7
countries during the usual period. The variables are trending up and Japan exhibits a particularly
fast-growing stock of knowledge. The persistent upward movements in the variables ln(R&Di,t ) and
ln(Ai,t ) suggest that they could be non-stationary and have a stable relationship (cointegration)
over time. We move, therefore, to perform formal tests of non-stationarity and cointegration of the
variables of interest.

3.2

Test of Unit Root of R&D and Stocks of Knowledge

The process of knowledge accumulation, captured by the increase over time of the variable ln(Ai,t ),
suggests the variable is non-stationary. Previous studies (e.g. Jones 1995) found that employment
in R&D was steadily and persistently growing in technologically leading countries during the last
decades. Therefore, we have reasons to believe that the variable ln(R&Di,t ) is non-stationary as
well. In a short time series of yearly data (26 observations), it is particularly hard to discern nonstationarity. To formally test this property we rely on panel unit roots tests that exploit both the
cross section and the time series dimension of the data.
There are several statistics that can be used to test for a unit root in panel data. Specifically,
we want to test for non stationarity against the alternative of trend stationarity, allowing for a
diﬀerent intercept for each country. We employ the test proposed by Im et al. (2003) as it allows
each panel member to have diﬀerent autoregressive parameters and short time dynamics under the
alternative hypothesis of trend stationarity. As the test procedure requires that the observations
are not correlated across countries in each period, we first remove a time specific common eﬀect
by diﬀerencing out the common period average. We then perform a test based on the average of
the adjusted Dickey-Fuller (ADF) test statistics calculated independently for each member of the
panel, with one lag to adjust for auto-correlation. The test statistics, (adjusted using the tables
in Im et al.,2003) are distributed as N(0,1) under the null of a unit root. Large negative values
lead to rejection of a unit root in favor of stationarity. We do not require all the series for all
countries to be non-stationary since the value of the test is the average of the ADF for individual
countries. Table 2, Columns one to three, report the Im et al. (2003) test statistics for the
variables ln(Ai,t ), ln(AROW i,t ) and ln(R&Di,t ). In no case can we reject the null of non-stationarity
17

at standard levels of significance. Furthermore, no country exhibits ADF statistics relative to
ln(R&Di,t ), ln(Ai,t ) and ln(AROW i,t ) that are larger (in absolute value) than the threshold for
rejecting the unit-root hypothesis.
The test proposed by Im et al. (2003), however, is not robust to mispecification of time trends
or short run dynamics if the eﬀect of the common component varies across countries. Therefore we
also perform a panel unit-root test which is robust to the presence of cross-sectional dependence.
This test follows Pesaran (2003) and is reported, for each variable and country, in the fourth through
sixth column of Table 2. Instead of basing the unit root tests on deviations from the estimated
factors, we augment the standard DF (or ADF) regressions with the cross section averages of lagged
levels. Standard panel unit root tests can now be based on the simple averages of the individual
cross sectionally augmented ADF statistics (denoted by CADF in Table 2). The individual CADF
statistics facilitate a modified version of the t-bar test proposed by Im et al. (2003). Even in this
case the test never rejects the null of non-stationarity for any of the three variables. Overall, the
formal tests do not reject our priors, which were also supported by the direct visual inspection of the
data: shocks to R&D and to the domestic or international stock of knowledge are very persistent
and these variables can be represented by non-stationary processes.

3.3

Stationarity of Growth Rates: Test of Strong Scale Eﬀects

Next, we test for a unit root in the first time-diﬀerences of the variable ln(Ai,t ), gAi,t , the growth
rate of locally generated knowledge. In this case the alternative hypothesis is stationarity without
a trend, since any time trend in levels is removed by diﬀerencing. We use the same tests that we
used in section 3.2 above. A rejection of the null of non-stationarity would be evidence in favor of
convergence of the stock of knowledge to a balance growth path. Table 3 reports the unit-root tests
(Im et al., 2003; and Pesaran, 2003) applied to the variables gAi,t as well as to the growth rates of
R&Di,t (∆ ln(R&Di,t )) and of the international stock of knowledge AROW i,t (∆ ln(AROW i,t )). The
test statistic is negative and large in each case. For every one of these growth rates we are able to
reject the null hypothesis of non-stationarity at the 1% significance level. Hence, this test provides
a clear rejection of the existence of a strong scale eﬀect in the production of knowledge. As gAi,t is
stationary, the variable ln(Ai,t ) converges to a stochastic balanced growth path. This implies that
there is a long run relationship between the variables ln(Ai,t ), ln(AROW i,t ) and ln(R&Di,t ), (which
18

are all integrated processes of order one, I(1)) so that their linear combination expressed by (8)
is stationary. In the long run the three variables move together so that the level of R&Di,t of a
country and the international stock of knowledge AROW i,t determine the stock of knowledge created
in country i, ln(Ai,t ). The remainder of our analysis proceeds on the assumption, supported by the
tests performed above, that all log level variables follow non-stationary, I(1), processes while all
log diﬀerenced variables follow stationary, I(0), processes.

4

The long run Dynamics: Estimating the Cointegration Relation

Thus far the results point to the possible existence of a cointegration relation between the variables ln(Ai,t ), ln(AROW i,t ) and ln(R&Di,t ).We estimate this relationship by dynamic ordinary least
squares (DOLS) using the whole panel of 15 countries and 26 years. The environment that we study
imposes homogeneity on the cointegration vector across countries but allows for country-specific
eﬀects and time trends as well as a common time eﬀect. As in Phillips and Moon (1999), Kao
(1999) and Pedroni (1999) , the errors are assumed to be independent across countries. Therefore,
as in the single-equation environment, this estimator sacrifices asymptotic eﬃciency because it does
not take into account the cross-equation dependence in the equilibrium errors14 .
This method of exploiting the cross-sectional dimension of the data while respecting the time
series properties, without aggregating or pooling, allows us to address the problem of inconsistent
estimates in dynamic heterogeneous panels identified by Pesaran et al. (1999). Finally, the use of
DOLS as opposed to other cointegration estimators is justified by recent work by Kao et al. (1999),
which shows that it performs better than other single-equation cointegration estimators in panels
of up to size N=20. In practical terms, the estimation of the equation by DOLS involves adding
leads and lags of the first diﬀerences of the I(1) regressors in equation (9). Thus, all nuisance
parameters, which represent short run dynamics, are I(0) and uncorrelated with the error term (by
construction). This procedure corrects for the possible endogeneity of the non-stationary regressors
and gives estimates of the cointegration vector which are asymptotically eﬃcient when the error
14

In contrast to previous analyses of panel cointegration vector estimators, the asymptotic distribution of panel
DOLS under cross-sectional dependence is easy to obtain. Mark et al. (2003) and Kao et al. (1999 ) studied the
properties of panel dynamic OLS under the assumption of independence across cross-sectional units. Pedroni (1999)
and Phillips and Moon (1999) study a panel fully modified OLS estimator also under cross-sectional independence.
Moreover, the asymptotic theory employed in these papers allows both T and N to go to infinity.

19

terms are independent across countries. All variables and nuisance parameters corresponding to
the dynamic terms are allowed to vary across countries.
In order to estimate the cointegration relation between R&D and stock of ideas we re-write
expression (9) adding two lags of the diﬀerenced variables as follows15 :

ln(Ait ) =

ci + λi t + µ log(R&Di,t ) +

2
P

j=1

+γ log(AROW i,t ) +

2
P

j=1

µi ∆ ln(R&Di,t−j ) +

γ i ∆ ln(AROW i,t−j ) +

(10)

i,t

The first two rows of Table 4 report the estimates of µ and γ which capture the long run elasticity
of knowledge generated in a country to R&D employment and to knowledge created in the rest of
the world. The variance-covariance matrix of the coeﬃcients is consistently estimated by applying
the dynamic panel variance estimator proposed by Mark et al. (2003)16 . As diﬀerent countries
may exhibit permanent diﬀerences in their innovation generating (or patenting) process we allow
for country-specific fixed eﬀects, ci , in each specification. We include a country specific time-trend
in most of the specifications (Specification II, III, V and VI) to control for time-eﬀects. Finally
specification IV includes a common time fixed eﬀect as a way of capturing common movements
over time.
The regression identifies the long run relationship between the variables in a way that is robust
to the presence of short run dynamics. Transitional dynamics have a second order eﬀect on the
estimated long run relationship and they can be treated as a nuisance parameter in the estimation
and testing procedure. We can relax the exogeneity assumptions that have been required in earlier
approaches without the need for external instruments due to the superconsistency properties of the
panel cointegration regression, which identifies the long run relationship even in the presence of
endogeneity.
Column I of Table 4 reports the estimates when we only control for country fixed eﬀects.
15

The lag length can be determined by Campbell and Perron (1991) top-down t-test approach.
To control for potential serial correlation in i,t we have computed the Newey-West estimates of the long run
variance.
16

20

Both coeﬃcients are estimated very precisely. A 1% increase of a country’s R&D employment is
associated with a 0.79% increase in the domestically generated stock of scientific and technological
knowledge (the standard error is 0.06%). At the same time a 1% increase of the international
stock of knowledge is associated, in the long run, with a 0.56% increase in domestically generated
knowledge (with a standard error of 0.06%). These point estimates are very reasonable. First,
micro studies of the eﬀect of R&D on innovation find similar elasticities. For instance Branstetter
(2001) uses firm-level data and finds an elasticity of 0.72. Pakes and Griliches (1980) found a value
of 0.61. Peri (2005), using data on sub-national regions, found values between 0.6 and 0.8. At the
same time, the existing estimates of the elasticity of domestic innovation to international accessible
knowledge are between 50% and 80% of the elasticities to own R&D (see Griliches, 1992). Moreover
these estimates are qualitatively consistent with the macroeconomic finding of a positive long run
relation between R&D and Total Factor Productivity (e.g. Coe and Helpman, 1995; Kao et al.,
1999)17 .
Introducing a country-specific time trend (Specification II, III and V) cuts the point-estimates
of the two elasticities in half. However, both coeﬃcients remain positive and very significant. The
elasticity of R&D employment is close to 0.30 in specification II, and the eﬀect of international
knowledge reduces to 0.168. Specification III shows that using the simple count of patents (rather
than their count weighted by average number of citations within 3 years) as measure of innovation
does not entail any major change in results. The impact of international knowledge on domestic
knowledge increases somewhat (to 0.385), while the impact of R&D on domestic knowledge is
unchanged. Specification IV introduces year fixed eﬀects in place of (country specific) trends.
As much of the variation of the international stock of knowledge is from year to year we are
worried that common fluctuations may be mistaken for the eﬀect of international knowledge. The
most demanding specification (IV) of Table 4 requires that the eﬀects of international knowledge
on domestic knowledge be identified only by variations specific to each country over time. The
estimates reveal that the eﬀect of international knowledge remains very strong and significantly
positive at 0.276. The eﬀect of R&D is 0.74, close to the estimate in the basic specification. The
estimate of the series of time eﬀects t in specification IV (not reported) reveals the common cyclical
17

If we use the sum of the contemporaneous flow of R&D resources in the rest of the world as measure of international knowledge the coeﬃcient on this variable equals 0.76 (s.e. 0.077). However, the coeﬃcient on own R&D
spending would be estimated more imprecisely due to strong collinearity.

21

behavior of knowledge variables in the panel. However that series also demonstrate stationary
behavior

18 .

Altogether, the consistently positive and significant estimates of the coeﬃcient γ

reported in Table 4 contribute strong evidence in favor of the existence of a "standing on shoulders"
eﬀect that implies a positive eﬀect of knowledge on innovation. However, they also prove decreasing
returns to innovation as there is no evidence of a strong scale eﬀect in the R&D sector.
Finally, specifications V and VI inquire into the relative impact of international knowledge on
innovation in countries at the technological frontier vis-a-vis other countries. Due to concentration
of R&D activity, the United States, which is the largest innovator, generates more than half of the
world innovation. The seven largest economies combined (G7 countries) perform the large part of
R&D and produce the vast majority of innovation in the OECD group. Moreover, we can think
that the ideas generated in countries at the technological frontier have higher quality and more visibility than those generated in other countries. This would imply that the impact of international
knowledge on innovation of a country will be asymmetric. While the technological leaders benefit
mostly from their own R&D the technological followers heavily depend on the international flow of
knowledge to "feed" their innovative activity. Coe and Helpman (1995) and Peri (2005) show that
the stock of knowledge generated among the technological leaders has a particularly strong eﬀect
on productivity growth and innovation of the followers, but not vice-versa. In specification V we
simply consider the U.S. as the world technological leader and omit it from the sample. An early
paper by Eaton and Kortum (1996) estimated that the U.S. is the only country in the world in
which more than half of the technological progress stems from domestically generated ideas (rather
then from international knowledge). By estimating the cointegration relation among technological
followers (non-US) we expect to find that the relevance of international knowledge for innovation is
larger than for the whole sample (including the U.S.). The estimates confirm that this is true. The
eﬀect of international knowledge in specification V is almost twice as large as the estimate in the
corresponding specification II (that includes the US). Similarly, specification VI splits the sample
between G7 countries and the rest and estimates the cointegration relation separately for each sample. We construct the stock of international knowledge for each country (within or outside the G7)
adding knowledge generated in the "complementary" country group only. That is, in specification
VI(a) the coeﬃcient on the variable ln(AROW i,t ) estimates the importance of ideas generated in
18

The series of estimated θt is available from the authors upon request.

22

the G7 on knowledge created in non-G7 countries, while the coeﬃcient on the same variable in
specification VI(b) represents the importance of knowledge generated outside the G7 on knowledge
created in G7 countries. Consistently with previous findings the stock of international knowledge is
extremely relevant in aﬀecting domestic creation of knowledge for technological followers, with an
elasticity close to 0.75 (recall that the average elasticity of innovation to international knowledge
was 0.168, while for non-US was 0.366). We also find that for non-G7 countries the eﬀect of own
R&D does not seem particularly significant. In contrast, G7 countries rely mostly upon their own
R&D to generate knowledge while international knowledge has no positive impact (in fact we estimate a somewhat puzzling negative eﬀect). The existence of international knowledge flows seem,
therefore, more relevant for the innovative activity of countries behind the technological frontier.

4.1

Panel Cointegration Test

Under the assumption of cointegration between ln(Ai,t ), ln(AROW i,t ) and ln(R&Di,t ), the estimated
residual from regression (10), should be stationary. As a final test of the hypothesis of weak scale
eﬀects (against strong scale eﬀects), we employ an Augmented Dickey Fuller panel cointegration
test. This test is analogous to the Im et al. (2003) ADF test that we used in Section 3. These panel
cointegration tests are essentially univariate extensions of the original panel unit root tests based
on the residuals from a first-step cointegration regression in the spirit of the two-step cointegration
test approach by Engle and Granger (1987)19 .
Table 5 reports several tests of cointegration based on diﬀerent statistics20 . The first two test
statistics, PC1 and PC2, apply to the case in which the cointegration vector is assumed to be the
same across all countries (Pedroni,1995). The other seven tests are developed in Pedroni (1999)
and do not impose this homogeneity restriction. Using the cross-section dimension of the data set
while respecting the time series properties of the data (without aggregating or pooling) addresses
the problem of inconsistent estimates in dynamic heterogeneous panels identified by Pesaran et al.
(1999). Pedroni (1999) derives seven diﬀerent statistics for testing the null of no cointegration; four
are based on pooling along the within-dimension and the remaining three are obtained by pooling
along the between-dimension. The null hypothesis is that the first autoregressive coeﬃcient of the
19
20

For an overview and further references to recent literature on the subject, see Banerjee (1999).
The lag lengths for the ADF tests are chosen to ensure that the error terms are white noise.

23

residual series is equal to unity (i.e. no cointegration between variables). Under the alternative hypothesis, in the case of the within-dimension tests the same coeﬃcient is strictly less than one and
equal for all members of the panel. In the case of the between dimension test, the autoregressive
coeﬃcient is less than unity but may diﬀer across countries. The within-dimension based statistics
is referred to as panel cointegration tests, while the between-dimension one as group mean panel
statistics. All tests, after an appropriate standardization, follow a normal distribution. In particular, Pedroni (1999) shows that under the alternative hypothesis (cointegration) the panel variance
statistics diverge to positive infinity and the right tail of the normal distribution is used to reject
the null hypothesis (no cointegration). For the other six test statistics, which diverge to negative
infinity under the alternative hypothesis (of cointegration) , large negative values reject the null
of no cointegration21 . Seven of the nine tests presented in Table 5 reject the null hypothesis of no
cointegration at the 1% significance level. The two statistics that fail to reject the no cointegration
hypothesis are the group-rho statistic and the variance test statistic. As shown in Pedroni (2004),
the group-rho statistic is undersized in small panel and it is the most conservative test. The panel-v
statistics tend to have the best power relative to the other statistics when the panel is fairly large,
which is not our case.
Table 6 presents an alternative approach to testing for cointegration and the number of cointegration relations in heterogeneous panel data based on the likelihood ratio inference for vector
autoregressive models developed in Johansen (1988, 1991, 1995). The LR-bar test statistics proposed by Larsson et al. (2001) is given by the average of the individual likelihood ratio cointegration
rank trace test statistics over the panel individuals. As for the individual likelihood-ratio rank test,
used to determine the number of cointegration relations “r”, we can proceed sequentially from r = 0
to r = 3 until we fail to reject the null hypothesis. The trace statistic tests the null hypothesis of
r cointegration relations against the alternative of j cointegration relations, where j is the number
of endogenous variables (j = 3 in our case) , for r = 0, 1, 2. The alternative of j cointegration
relations corresponds to the case where none of the series has a unit root and a stationary VAR
may be specified in terms of the levels of all of the series. Table 6 presents the individual countryby-country and panel test results. Due to the short time dimension of our panel only one lag
(k = 1) is considered. The results show that the most commonly selected rank is one. The panel
21

For a more technical and detailed description of how to construct the tests we refer to Pedroni (1999)

24

test results, presented at the bottom of Table 6, suggest that r = 1 is the largest order. Hence this
test supports the assumption that there is one cointegration relation in the panel.

5

The short run Impulse Response Function

5.1

The Error Correction Mechanism Panel VAR

While departures from the cointegration relation between R&D resources and stock of knowledge
cannot last in the long run, the innovation process is subject to shocks in the short run. There could
be shocks to the amount of resources allocated to research or to the productivity of researchers in
generating new ideas. In order to analyze the propagation and impulse response to such shocks
in the short run, we adopt an error correction representation of our dynamic relationship between
ln(R&Di,t ) and ln(Ai,t ). In particular, we consider the change of each variable as depending on
the past changes of the other variables (a VAR in diﬀerences) but we include a term that captures
the deviation from the estimated long run relationship. This disequilibrium term ensures that we
account properly for the convergence to the estimated long run stochastic balanced growth path
when tracking the short-run dynamics. We represent the dynamic behavior of ∆ ln(Ai,t ) and
∆ ln(R&Di,t ) as follows:

∆ ln(Ai,t ) =
= d1bit−1 +

∆ ln(R&Di,t ) =

= d2bit−1 +

(11)
2
P

z=1

2
P

η 1z ∆ ln(R&Di,t−z ) +

υ 1z ∆ ln(R&Di,t−z ) +

z=1

2
P

z=1

1
P

z=0

η 2z ∆ ln(Ai,t−z ) +

υ 2z ∆ ln(Ai,t−z ) +

2
P

z=1

1
P

η 3z ∆ ln(AROW i,t−z ) + eAit
(12)
υ3z ∆ ln(AROW i,t−z ) + eRDit

z=0

Equations (11) and (12) are suﬃcient to characterize the dynamics of the idea-generating system
in the world, as the international stock of knowledge, AROW i,t , is simply given by the sum of Aj,t
for all countries other than i. The term

∧
i,t

is the disequilibrium term and is equal to ln(Ait ) − b
ci −

λc
µ ln(R&Dit )−b
γ ln(AROW i,t ). We construct it using the cointegration relation estimated in the
i t−b

previous section. It represents the deviation from the equilibrium relationship and the coeﬃcients

25

d1 and d2 measure how the disequilibrium generates adjustment in order to preserve the long run
equilibrium. The Granger representation theorem implies that at least one of the di coeﬃcients
must be non-zero if a long run relationship between the variables is to hold. The estimates of d1
and d2 in our system are equal to -0.070 (s.e 0.020 ) and 0.022 (s.e.0.08 ) respectively. The first
coeﬃcient estimate is negative, significant and it guarantees that the system does actually converge
to its stochastic long run relation. The second coeﬃcient is positive but not statistically significant,
implying that in the long run the variable R&D is weakly exogenous. Rather than presenting the
estimates of the other dynamic coeﬃcients, we show the impulse responses (IR) of knowledge and
R&D resources to eAit and eRDit respectively. These responses provide a description of the short
and medium run eﬀects of shocks.

5.2

Impulse Response and Discussion

Given our flexible specification that allows for country specific eﬀects and spillover eﬀects through
the term AROW i,t the impulse response of country i to an innovation of one of the two equations
in country j could be diﬀerent for each i and j. However, due to the short dimensions of our panel
we impose that the sets of coeﬃcients η 1z , η 2z , η3z and υ 1z , υ2z , υ 3z are equal across countries. The
VECM identification (as one can see from equations 12 and 11) is Choleski-type with ∆ ln(Ai,t )
ordered first and ∆ ln(R&Dit ) ordered last. A shock to a country that provides a relevant contribution to the international stock of knowledge, AROW i,t , has, through this channel, a relevant
impact on innovation and on the choice of R&D resources for all other countries. To the contrary
an innovation shock to a country that contributes only minimally to AROW i,t mainly aﬀects its
own innovation and R&D only. In order to illustrate this comparison in its most extreme form, we
choose to report the impulse response of ln(R&Di,t ), and ln(Ai,t ) for a representative country22 ,
to shocks eAjt and eRDjt originating in the U.S. (the largest country in the sample) and in Ireland
(the smallest country in the sample)23 . Panels 1 through 4 present the complete set of estimated
impulse response functions (along with the 99% confidence intervals) for each variable in the orig22
Since we impose that the coeﬃcients in the VAR are all equal among countries the IR functions are all similar.
The representative country is obtained by averageing the impulse responses in all countries other than the one where
the shock originates.
23
Impulse response functions for single countries to the same shocks are available from the authors.

26

inating country and the representative foreign country24 . Panel 1 tracks the 23 year response in
the US and in the representative foreign country to a shock to US innovation, eA,U St . Panel 2 does
the same for a shock to US R&D employment, eRD,US,t . Panel 3 tracks the eﬀect of a shock to
Ireland’s innovation, eA,IEt , and Panel 4 shows the eﬀect of a shock to Ireland’s R&D employment,
eRD,IE,t .The remainder of this section describes each panel, in turn.
Figures 1.1 and 1.2 of Panel 1 represent the dynamic response of the US and representative
country’s stock of knowledge (denoted with an r) to a 1% (0.13) unexpected increase in US innovation at the beginning of the period. Both the US and country r stocks of knowledge increase
significantly during the first ten to thirteen years after the shock, and then revert to a smaller,
still positive eﬀect exhibiting an overall hump-shape. The impact of the US shock on the stock
of knowledge of the representative foreign country (r) reaches +0.02 at the end of the period
considered, which corresponds to an increase of 0.17-0.30% of the average stock of its knowledge.
This eﬀect is due to two components. First, higher US knowledge increases the stock of world
knowledge and this benefits innovation in all countries. Second, in the medium-long run, higher
world knowledge drives higher investment in R&D resources of both the US (figure 1.3) and of the
representative country (figure 1.4), which in turn contributes to innovation. The eﬀect of this shock
on US innovation itself (fig.1.1) and on US R&D employment (fig. 1.3) is large and builds up in
the short run, reaching a peak after 5-10 years and declining afterwards. After twenty years the
impact on the US stock of knowledge is roughly equal to 0.13, which is a value close to the initial
shock. Interestingly, these impulse responses reveal that both US and foreign R&D employment
react positively to an innovation shock in the US, and that such a reaction takes a long time to
reach its peak (5-10 years). This implies that the strongest eﬀect of the positive shock to innovation
is felt in the US and international scientific community with a significant delay.
Panel 2 reports the dynamic eﬀects of a shock to US R&D employment on its stock of knowledge
and subsequent R&D employment, as well as on those of the representative country. As expected, it
takes few periods for the R&D shock (represented in figure 2.3 as the initial jump of the variable) to
build its full eﬀect on the stock of knowledge generated in the US (figure 2.1). Moreover, the positive
feedback of R&D employment to increases in knowledge (illustrated in panel 1) is also at work so
24

The confidence intervals are calculated using the Monte Carlo method and the updating algorithm due to Jain
and Chlamtac (1985) provided by Eviews 5.1. The algorithm provides a reasonable estimate of the tails of the
underlying distribution when the number of repetitions is not too small.

27

that R&D employment further increases after the initial positive shock. After 23 years, the increase
in ln(AUS,t ) reaches a level equal to 0.6% (+0.08) of the average stock of US knowledge. The
increase in ln(R&DUS ) resources stabilizes earlier (after 10-12 years) at +0.25, which represents
a 1.9% increase over the average stock of knowledge in the sample. Consistent with the behavior
shown in Panel 1, the impact of eRD,U S,t on the stock of knowledge of the representative foreign
country is positive (an average increase of 0.18-0.35% ) and is somewhat delayed (as shown in figure
2.3). Finally, the R&D of the representative country responds positively and with a delay to the
increased US R&D employment (figure 2.4). Overall, the strongest eﬀect of an increase in R&D
employment on innovation takes place with a five to ten year lag. In the long run, an increase in
the stock of world knowledge is consistent (due to the cointegration relation) with higher R&D and
higher stock of national knowledge for all countries.
Panels 3-4 show the impulse response of knowledge and R&D resources to shocks taking place in
Ireland, the smallest country in our sample (in terms of number of patents and R&D employment).
The general shape and timing of these impulse responses are similar to those of Panels 1 and
2. A notable diﬀerence exists, however. Given that the US is the major contributor to world
knowledge, while Ireland is a marginal one, shocks to the Irish R&D sector have quantitatively
smaller eﬀects on the innovation sector of the representative foreign country. The impulse response
of Irish knowledge and R&D to its own shocks (eA,IEt , eRD,IE,t ), reported in Panels 3 and 4, are
similar to the own responses found for US variables to US shocks. The response of ln(Ait ) to eA,IEt
(figure 3.1) is hump shaped with maximum eﬀect after five years: the initial 1% increase in the
stock of Irish knowledge is almost unchanged after twenty years. The increase in R&D resources
after the shock (portrayed in figure 3.3) is smaller (in absolute value) for the simple reason that
the spillover eﬀect generated by other countries’ increased stock of knowledge and R&D (reported
respectively in figure 3.2 and 3.4) is now much smaller (notice the scale). Similar patterns emerge
when we look at a response to the shock eR&D,IEt (figures 4.1 and 4.3). IR’s functions show a
progressive increase and by the twentieth year they have reached a plateau. To the contrary, the
responses of other countries to these shocks are very small and, even in the long run, typically
less than a hundredth of a percentage point of the initial shock (as seen in figures 4.2 and 4.4).
As the impact is so small, some nuisances (such as country eﬀects or lagged eﬀects) cause the
IR’s to have somewhat diﬀerent shapes from those generated by US shocks on the representative
28

foreign economy. Altogether, however, the external eﬀect of a small country such as Ireland on the
dynamics of other country’s innovation and R&D is negligible both in the short and in the long
run.

6

Conclusions

Positive shocks to the innovative activity of a country are the source of booms in the short run
and of sustained productivity growth in the long run. Analyzing them in a coherent framework
that tracks their consequences at diﬀerent time horizons is a way of reconciling the short and the
long run. Recent economic analysis has largely neglected such research. This paper takes a first
step to fill the gap by analyzing one phase of the innovation process: namely, the interaction of
R&D resources and technological knowledge in the generation of new ideas. We apply some recent
methods to estimate the cointegration (long run) relationship between these variables. Moreover we
use an error correction mechanism to estimate short and medium run responses. We find that, in
the long run, internationally generated knowledge is an important contributor to the innovation of
a country. The stock of knowledge of a country responds to international knowledge with elasticity
between 0.2 and 0.5. We then estimate the impulse dynamic response to an innovation shock in
the short and medium run. A large country as the US would have a non-negligible impact on other
countries’ knowledge creation even in the short run. A 1% positive shock to the log of R&D in
US increases the knowledge creation in other countries by an average of 0.35% within ten years.
The same shock generates a maximum 6% eﬀect on the US stock of knowledge after five to ten
years and then declines slightly. By analyzing the impact of a similar shock originating in a small
country, however, we see that while the qualitative features of the impulse responses to innovation
shocks are similar, the quantitative eﬀects on knowledge creation of other countries are negligible.

29

References
Aghion, P. and Howitt, P. (1992). ‘A Model of Growth Through Creative Destruction,’ Econometrica Vol. 60, pp. 323-51.
Banerjee, A. (1999). ‘Panel Data Unit Roots and Cointegration: An Overview,’ Oxford Bulletin of
Economics and Statistics, Vol. 61, pp.607-629.
Barro, R. and Sala i Martin X. (2004). ‘Economic Growth’ MIT Press, Cambridge, Ma.
Branstetter, L. (2001). ‘Are Knowledge Spillovers International or Intranational in Scope? Microeconometric Evidence from the U.S. and Japan,’ Journal of International Economics, Vol. 53(1),
pp. 53-79.
Caballero, R. and Jaﬀe, A. (1993). ‘How High are the Giants’ Shoulders: An Empirical Assessments of Knowledge Spillovers and Creative Destruction in a Model of Economic Growth,’ NBER
Macroeconomic Annuals, Vol. 8 pp.15-72, MIT Press, Cambridge MA.
Campbell, J. and Perron, P. (1991). ‘Pitfalls and Opportunities: What Macroeconomists Should
Know about Unit Roots,’ in Olivier Jean Blanchard and Stanley Fischer, eds,. NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1991. Cambridge and London: MIT Press, pp. 141-201.
Coe, D. and Helpman, E. (1995). ‘International R&D Spillovers,’ European Economic Review, Vol.
39, pp. 859-887.
Christiano, L. and Eichenbaum, M. (1992). ‘Current Real Business Cycle Theories and Aggregate
Labor Market Fluctuations,’ American Economic Review, Vol. 82, pp. 430-450.
Eaton, J. and Kortum, S. (1996). ‘Trade in Ideas: Patenting and Productivity in the OECD,’
Journal of International Economics, Vol. 40, pp. 251-278.
Engle, R. and Granger, C. (1987). ‘Co-integration and Error-Correction: Representation, Estimation, and Testing,’ Econometrica, Vol. 55, pp. 251-76.
Edmond, C. (2001). ‘Some Panel Cointegration Models of International R&D Spillovers,’ Journal
of Macroeconomics, Vol. 23(2), pp. 241-60.

30

Funk, M. (2000). ‘Trade and International R&D Spillovers among OECD Countries,’ Southern
Economic Journal, Vol. 67(3), pp. 725-36.
Griliches, Z. (1990). ‘Patent Statistics as Economic Indicators: A Survey,’ Journal of Economic
Literature Vol. 28, pp. 1661-1707.
Griliches, Z. (1992). ‘The Search for R&D Spillovers,’ Scandinavian Journal of Economics. Vol.
94(0), pp. 29-47.
Grossman, G. and Helpman, E.(1991). ‘Innovation and Growth in the Global Economy,’ The MIT
Press, Cambridge, Ma.
Hall, B., Griliches, Z. and Hausman, J.A. (1986). ’Patents and R&D: Is There a Lag?,’ International
Economic Review Vol. 27, pp. 265-283.
Hall, B., Jaﬀe, A. and Trajtenberg, M. (2005). ‘Market Value and Patent Citations,’ Rand Journal
of Economics, Vol.36, pp.16-38.
Im, K.Y. Pesaran, H. and Shin, Y. (2003) ‘Testing for Unit Roots in Heterogenous Panels,’ Journal
of Econometrics, Vol. 115, pp.53-74.
Jain, R. and Chlamtac, I. (1985). ‘Dynamic Computation of Median and Percentiles’, Communications of the ACM, Vol. 28, No. 10.
Jaﬀe, A. and Trajtenberg, M. (2002). ‘Patents, Citations and Inovations, a Window on the Knowledge Economy’ MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Jaﬀe, A., Trajtenberg, M. and Henderson, R. (1993) ‘Geographic Localization of Knowledge
Spillovers as Evidenced by Patent Citations’ Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 108, pp.57798.
Johansen, S. (1988). ‘Statistical Analysis of Cointegrateing Vectors’, Journal of Economic Dynamics
and Control, Vol. 12, pp. 231-54.
Johansen, S. (1991). ‘Estimation and Hypotehsis testing of Cointegration Vectors in Gaussian
Vector Autoregressive Models’, Econometrica, Vol. 6, pp. 1551-80

31

Johansen, S. (1995).‘Likelihood-Based Inference in Cointegrated Vector Autoregressive Models,’
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Jones, C. (1995). ‘Time Series tests of Endogenous Growth Models” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol.110. pp.495-525.
Jones, C. (2002). ‘Introduction to Economic Growth’, New York, W.W. Northon and Company.
Jones, C. (2004) "Growth and Ideas" NBER Working Paper #10767
Kao, C. (1999). ‘Spurious Regression and Residual-Based tests for Cointegration in Panel Data’
Journal of Econometrics, Vol. 90, pp. 1-44.
Kao, C. Chiang, M.H. and Chen, B. (1999). ‘International R&D Spillovers: and Application of
Estimation and Inference in Panel Cointegration,’ Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics,
Vol. 61, pp. 691-709.
Keller, W. (1998). ‘Are International R&D Spillovers Trade-Related? Analyzing Spillovers among
randomly Matched Trade Partners,’ European Economic Review, Vol. 42, pp. 1469-81.
Keller, W. (2002). ‘Geographic Localization of International Technology Diﬀusion,’ American Economic Review, Vol. 92, pp.120-142.
Kortum ,S. (1997). ‘Research Patenting and Technological Change,’ Econometrica, Vol. 65(6),
pp.1389-1419.
Kydland, F. and Prescott, E. (1982). ‘Time to Build and Aggregate Fluctuations,’ Econometrica,
Vol. 50, pp. 1345-1370.
Larsson, R., Lyhagen, V. and Othgren, M. L . (2001). ‘Likelihood-based Cointegration Tests in
Heterogeneous Panels,’ Econometrics Journal, Vol. 4, pp. 109—142.
Mark, C.N., Ogaki, M. and Sul, D. (2003). ‘Dynamic Seemingly Unrelated Cointegrating Regression,’ NBER Working Paper # t0292.
Pakes, A. and Griliches, Z. ‘Patents and R&D at the Firm Level: a First Report,’ Economic Letters
Vol. 5, pp. 377-81.
32

Pedroni, P. (1995). ‘Panel Cointegration; Asymptotic and Finite Sample Properties of Pooled Time
Series Tests, With an Application to the PPP Hypothesis’, Indiana University Working Papers In
Economics No. 95-013.
Pedroni, P. (1999). ‘Critical Values for Cointegration Tests in Heterogeneous Panels with Multiple
Regressors,’ Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 61, pp. 653-70.
Pedroni, P. (2004). ‘Panel Cointegration; Asymptotic and Finite Sample Properties of Pooled Time
Series Tests with an Application to the Purchasing Power Parity Hypothesis,’ Econometric Theory,
Vol. 20, pp. 597-325.
Peri, G. (2005). ‘Determinants of Knowledge Flows and their Eﬀects on Innovation,’ Review of
Economics and Statistics, Vol. 87(2), pp. 308-322.
Pesaran, H. (2003) ‘ASimple Panel Unit Root Test in the presence of Cross-Section dependence,’
September 2003 (Revised January 2005), Cambridge University DAE Working Paper, No. 0346
Pesaran, M.H., Shin, Y. and Smith, R. (1999). ’“Pooled Mean Group Estimation of Dynamic
Heterogeneous Panels”, Journal of the American Statistical Association, Vol.94, pp.621-634
Phillips, P. and Moon, H. (1999). ‘Linear Regression Limit Theory for non-Stationary Panel Data,’
Econometrica, Vol. 67, pp. 1057-1112.
Prescott, E. (1986) ‘Theory Ahead of Business Cycle Measurement,’ Carnegie-Rochester Conference
Series on Public Policy Vol. 25, pp.11-44.
Ramsey, F.P. (1928). ‘A Mathematical Theory of Saving’ Economic Journal, Vol. 38, 543-559.
Romer, P.M., (1990). ‘Endogenous Technological Change,’ Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 98(5),
pp.71-102.
Segerstrom, P.(1998). ‘Endogenous Growth without Scale Eﬀects,’ American Economic Review,
Vol. 80(5), pp.1077-1091.
Shea, J. (1999) ‘What do Technology Shocks Do?’ in Bernanke, B. and Rotemberg J., eds. NBER
Macroeconomics Annual 1998. Vol. 13. Cambridge and London: MIT Press; pp. 275-310.

33

Solow, R. (1956). ‘A Contribution to the Theory of Economic Growth,’ Quarterly Journal of Economics Vol. 70, pp. 65-94.
Solow, R. (1957). ‘Technical Change and the Aggregate Production Function,’ Review of Economics
and Statistics, Vol. 39, pp. 312-20.
Weil, P. (2005). Economic Growth Pearson, Addison-Wesley, Boston, San Francisco, New York.
Young, A. (1995). ‘The Tyranny of Numbers: Confronting the Statistical Realities of East Asian
Growth Experiences’ Quarterly Journal of Economics Vol. 110 (3), pp. 641-680.

34

Tables and Figures

Table 1
Summary Statistics for R&D, Patents and the constructed Stocks of Knowledge

Country

Australia
Canada
Germany
Denmark
Spain
Finland
France
Great Britain
Ireland
Italy
Japan
The Netherlands
Norway
Sweden
USA

Average R&D
Personnel, Fulltime Equivalents

63390
103418
401850
21871
53537
25369
271446
289102
6774
120927
764375
65264
18510
49587
1687929

Average
Number of
Patent
Applications
per year
551
2245
8738
253
148
326
3559
3491
57
1339
23215
1094
140
1073
70600

Average value
of ln(A), Stock
of domestically
generated
knowledge

Average value of
ln(AROW), Stock of
International
knowledge

8.18
9.64
11.11
7.49
6.85
7.39
10.16
10.33
5.69
9.13
11.66
9.01
6.90
9.06
13.23

13.66
13.65
13.59
13.66
13.67
13.67
13.64
13.63
13.67
13.66
13.50
13.66
13.67
13.66
12.59

Notes: The averages are taken for each country over the years 1973-1999.
The variables ln(A) and ln(AROW) are constructed as described in the main text, by accumulating
patents using the perpetual inventory method.

35

Table 2
Tests of Unit Roots for R&D and Stocks of Knowledge
Test

Im, Pesaran and Shin (2003)

Pesaran (2003)

Variable:

ln(A)

ln(AROW)

ln(R&D)

ln(A)

ln(AROW)

ln(R&D)

Australia
Canada
Germany
Denmark
Spain
Finland
France
UK
Ireland
Italy
Japan
Nether.
Norway
Sweden
USA
Average
ADF
Test
Statistic
Average
CADF

-2.709
-0.096
-1.531
-0.527
-0.309
-2.480
-0.873
-1.355
-1.512
-1.983
-1.403
-1.858
-1.711
-0.897
0.293

-0.768
-0.792
-0.590
-0.780
-0.781
-0.778
-0.777
-0.773
-0.779
-0.755
-0.125
-0.767
-0.778
-0.773
-1.546

-0.338
-1.370
-1.314
0.015
-0.252
0.760
-1.577
-0.711
0.481
-1.919
-1.098
0.813
-1.035
-0.611
-1.655

-0.294
0.816
-0.199
-1.787
0.502
-0.871
-1.915
0.009
-2.775
-1.760
1.902
0.408
-3.942
-2.115
-0.332

-0.200
-0.108
-1.098
-0.268
-0.214
-0.151
-0.761
-1.084
-0.182
-0.188
6.396
-0.242
-0.258
-0.629
1.856

-4.060
-1.661
-2.604
-1.572
-2.004
-0.502
-0.379
-2.101
0.441
-2.083
-0.349
-2.268
-1.885
-1.580
-0.521

-1.269
4.117

-0,770
6.404

-0,654
6.939
-0.823

0.191

-1.550

Notes: The test statistics are distributed as N(0, 1) under the null hypothesis of non-stationarity.
The statistics in the first three columns are constructed using small sample adjustment factors
from Im, Pesaran, and Shin (2003). Test statistics in column three to six follow the method
described in Pesaran (2003).
The symbols *, **, *** denote rejection of the null hypothesis of non-stationariety (against the
alternative of stationarity) at the 10%, 5%, 1% significance levels.

36

Table 3
Tests of Unit Roots for the Growth Rates of R&D and Stocks of Knowledge
Test
Variable
Australia
Canada
Germany
Denmark
Spain
Finland
France
UK
Ireland
Italy
Japan
Nether.
Norway
Sweden
USA
Average
ADF
Test
Statistic
Average
CADF

Im, Pesaran and Shin (2003)
∆ln(A)

∆ln (AROW)

-2.647
-2.008
-2.284
-3.783
-2.702
-2.611
-3.032
-2.777
-2.042
-2.354
-1.860
-2.016
-2.910
-3.119
-3.425

-3.623
-3.651
-3.595
-3.625
-3.627
-3.628
-3.608
-3.611
-3.624
-3.642
-4.128
-3.626
-3.624
-3.579
-1.433

-2,638
-2,160***

-3,508
-6,152***

∆ln(R&D)

-2.824
-3.222
-3.411
-3.723
-3.050
-1.150
-2.702
-2.933
-2.626
-2.986
-2.191
-4.440
-3.563
-3.677
-1.968

Pesaran (2003)
∆ln(A)

-5.016
-2.744
-1.213
-6.824
-5.227
-3.643
-1.020
-1.240
-6.637
-2.367
-1.607
-1.427
-3.646
-2.528
-3.368

∆ln (AROW)

-2.522
-4.257
-2.634
-3.449
-2.714
-2.714
-4.422
-4.325
-2.538
-3.167
0.635
-2.514
-3.035
-6.524
-1.281

∆ln(R&D)

-2.640
-4.586
-4.864
-4.482
-4.191
-2.376
-3.684
-6.359
-3.527
-5.318
-3.367
-5.452
-3.790
-2.614
-5.729

-2,964
-3,657***
-3.234***

-3.044***

-4.198***

Notes: The test statistics are distributed as N(0, 1) under the null hypothesis of non-stationarity.
The statistics in the first three columns are constructed using small sample adjustment factors
from Im, Pesaran, and Shin (2003). Test statistics in column three to six follow the method
described in Pesaran (2003).
The symbols *, **, *** denote rejection of the null hypothesis of non-stationariety (against the
alternative of stationarity) at the 10%, 5%, 1% significance levels.

37

Table 4
Estimates of the Long-Run Cointegration Relation

Dependent
Variable:
Ln(A)

Ln(R&D)
Ln(AROW)
Country Fixed
Effects
CountrySpecific
Time Trends
Time Fixed
Effects
N.Obs

IV:
Allowing
Year
Effects

V:
Omitting
the U.S.

VI:
Splitting the Sample
Non-G7
G7

0.746***
(11.162)
0.276***
(3.004)
Yes

0.401***
(5.98)
0.366***
(3.388)
Yes

0.030
(0.379)
0.749***
(4.989)
Yes

0.699***
(6.498)
-0.300***
(-2.280)
Yes

0.786***
(12.075)
0.557***
( 9.319)
Yes

0.304***
(4.671)
0.168**
(1.719)
Yes

III:
Using Unweighted
Patents to
Construct A
0.317***
(6.46)
0.385***
(6.525)
Yes

No

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

No

No

Yes

No

No

No

390

390

390

390

364

208

182

I:
Basic

II:
Allowing
Heterogeneous
Time Trends

(a)

(b)

Note: Panel Data using 15 countries for the period 1972-1999.
Method of Estimation: Dynamic Ordinary Least Squares (DOLS)
Variance-covariance matrix of the coefficients is estimated using the dynamic panel variance estimator
proposed by Mark et al. (2003).
t- statistics in parenthesis. *, **, *** = significant at the 10, 5 and 1% level.
Dependent variable: log of A, the stock of accumulated patents invented by residents of the country. The
patents considered are those registered at the U.S. patent office. Each patent is weighted by the average number
of yearly citations during the first three years (except in specification III). The construction of A is described in
detail in the main text.

38

Table 5
Tests of Cointegration

Pedroni (1995) Test
PC2
PC1

-5.76***
-5.03***

Pedroni (1999) Test
Panel v-statistic
Panel Ro-statistic
Panel t-statistic
Group Ro-statistics
Group t-statistics
Panel t-statistic (parametric)
Group t-statistic (parametric)

2.687
-1.926**
-4.051***
0.487
-2.628***
-3.056***
-4.221***

***: reject the null hypothesis of no effect or no cointegration
at 1% significance level, ** at 5% significance level, * at 10%
significance level

39

Table 6
Rank-Test on the Number of Cointegration Relationships
Country
Australia
Canada
Germany
Denmark
Spain
Finland
France
Great Britain
Ireland
Italy
Japan
Netherlands
Norway
Sweden
Usa
Panel Tests
γLR (H(r ) /H(3))

Lag (Ki)

r=0

r=1

r=2

Rank (ri)

1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1

80.90
12.32
78.66
22.56
24.91
37.01
60.62
42.95
51.63
64.23
92.21
70.79
42.64
40.33
75.39

27.00
6.06
14.39
5.15
7.30
4.05
14.42
11.71
17.72
18.22
10.18
16.01
6.27
4.60
5.33

9.53
2.74
1.79
0.00
0.17
1.53
3.97
2.77
2.23
3.34
1.78
2.39
0.33
0.30
1.39

3
0
1
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1

r=0
30.19

r=1
1.40

r=2
0.68

Empirical results of the trace test . All tests are performed at the 1% level. For the country-by country tests
the critical values are 24.08, 12.21, and 4.14 for testing r = 0, 1, and 2 respectively. The panel rank test has a
critical value 1.645.
The test follows Larsson et al. (2001).

40

Figure 1
R&D personnel in the G7 countries, ln(R&D)
15

14.5

14

ln(R&D Personnel)

13.5

13

12.5

12

11.5

11

10.5

CANADA

GERMANY

FRANCE

GREAT BRITAIN

ITALY

JAPAN

USA

98

99
19

19

96

95

97
19

19

19

93

94
19

92

19

90

89

88

87

91

19

19

19

19

19

19

85

84

83

86
19

19

19

19

82

81
19

19

79

78

77

76

75

74

80
19

19

19

19

19

19

19

19

73

10

Years

Figure 2
Annual Patent Applications in the G7 countries, ln(Pat)
12

11

9

8

7

6

CANADA

GERMANY

FRANCE

GREAT BRITAIN

ITALY

JAPAN

USA

5
19
73
19
74
19
75
19
76
19
77
19
78
19
79
19
80
19
81
19
82
19
83
19
84
19
85
19
86
19
87
19
88
19
89
19
90
19
91
19
92
19
93
19
94
19
95
19
96
19
97
19
98

Ln(Patents)

10

Year

41

Figure 3
Stock of Knowledge generated in the G7 countries
as measured by Accumulated Patents, ln(A)

14

13

11

10

9

CANADA

GERMANY

FRANCE

GREAT BRITAIN

ITALY

JAPAN

USA

Year

42

98

97

96

95

94

93

99
19

19

19

19

19

19

19

91

92
19

19

89

90
19

19

87

88
19

19

85

86
19

19

83

84
19

19

81

82
19

19

79

80
19

19

77

78
19

19

75

73

76
19

19

19

74

8

19

ln(A)

12

Panel 1: IR to εA,US,t (Shock to Innovation in the US)
1.1: ln(AUS)

1.2: ln(Ar)

.08

.5

.07
.4

.06
.05

.3

.04
.2

.03
.02

.1

.01
.00

.0
5

10

15

5

20

10

15

20

a_r

a_us

1.3: ln(R&DUS)

1.4: ln(R&Dr)

.7

.024

.6

.020

.5

.016

.4

.012
.3

.008
.2

.004

.1

.000

.0
5

10

15

5

20

10

15

20

a_r

l_us

Panel 2: IR to εR&D,US,t (Shock to R&D Employment in the US)
2.1: : ln(AUS)

2.2: ln(Ar)

.12

.024

.10

.020

.08

.016

.06

.012

.04

.008

.02

.004

.00

.000
5

10

15

20

5

10

a_us

15

20

a_r

2.3:ln(R&DUS)

2.4: ln(R&Dr)

.32

.024
.020

.28

.016
.24
.012
.20
.008
.16

.004

.12

.000
5

10

15

20

5

l_us

10

15
l_r

43

20

Panel 3: IR to εA,IE,t (Shock to Innovation in Ireland)
3.1: ln(AIE)

3.2: ln(Ar)

.24

.000016

.20
.000012

.16
.12

.000008

.08
.000004

.04
.000000

.00
5

10

15

5

20

10

15

20

a_r

a_ie

3.3: ln(R&DIE)

3.4: ln(R&Dr)
.000016

.5

.4

.000012

.3

.000008
.2

.000004
.1

.000000

.0
5

10

15

5

20

10

15

20

l_r

l_ie

Panel 4: IR to εR&D,IE,t (Shock to R&D Employment in Ireland)
4.1: ln(AIE)

4.2: ln(Ar)

.08

.000010

.07
.000008

.06
.05

.000006

.04
.000004

.03
.02

.000002

.01
.000000

.00
5

10

15

5

20

10

15

20

a_r

a_ie

4.3: : ln(R&DIE)

4.4: ln(R&Dr)

.20

.000010

.18
.000008

.16
.14

.000006

.12

.000004

.10
.000002

.08
.000000

.06
5

10

15

5

20

10

15
l_r

l_ie

44

20

