                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            SAVINGS GLUTS AND INTEREST RATES:
                               THE MISSING LINK TO EUROPE

                                          Michael P. Dooley
                                         David Folkerts-Landau
                                           Peter M. Garber

                                          Working Paper 11520
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w11520


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       July 2005




The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by Michael P. Dooley, David Folkerts-Landau and Peter M. Garber. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Savings Gluts and Interest Rates: The Missing Link to Europe
Michael P. Dooley, David Folkerts-Landau and Peter M. Garber
NBER Working Paper No. 11520
July 2005
JEL No. F2, F32, F33

                                           ABSTRACT



Data for world savings rates do not suggest that an aggregate glut of world savings has depressed US

and international interest rates in recent years. Unusual but offsetting changes in savings rates have

been limited to three regions: sharp declines in the US have been matched by sharp increases for

developing Asia and the Middle East. The world saving rate has increased very little. There are two

important features of this change in regional savings behavior. First, three-quarters of the increase

in Asian and Middle Eastern savings has been placed in international reserves. Second, all these

additional savings have been absorbed by the United States. Even if reserves are mostly placed

initially in the US, we would not expect all the savings exported from these high savings regions to

remain in the United States. A collapse of expected profits outside the US seems to us a compelling

explanation for the US current account deficit and depressed international interest rates.



Michael P. Dooley
Department of Economics
Engineering II
University of California, Santa Cruz
Santa Cruz, CA 95064
and NBER
mpd@ucsc.edu

Peter M. Garber
Deutsche Bank
60 Wall Street
New York, NY 10005
and NBER
vic2eroy@aol.com
Real Interest Rates

Why is the real interest rate so low and falling in the growth phase of the US and global
business cycles, even as the current account deficit reaches record levels? At end-June
2002, about when the euro appreciation began, 10-year Treasury real rates were at a
realized 3.7% on nominal notes and 3.07 on TIPS. As we write they are 1.80% and 1.69%,
respectively. US rates have fallen in a period when the media swirled daily with stories about
foreigners losing confidence, foreign exchange reserve managers diversifying portfolios, and
imminent collapse as everyone was seeking to be the first out the door. If all this is true, the
bond and credit markets have not noticed.1


    Chart 1. US Real Interest Rate and Current Account Imbalances

           10-year TIPS Yield                                                              US Current Account

%
                                                                  % of GDP, saar
4.5                                                               0.0

4.0                                                               -1.0

3.5                                                               -2.0


3.0                                                               -3.0


2.5                                                               -4.0


2.0                                                               -5.0


1.5                                                               -6.0


                                                                  -7.0
1.0
                                                                         Q1-99     Q1-00      Q1-01   Q1-02     Q1-03   Q1-04
 Jan-99     Jan-00   Jan-01   Jan-02   Jan-03   Jan-04   Jan-05



    Source: Bloomberg, Haver.


Underpinning our view of this global reality are two basic phenomena that we expect to
continue into the foreseeable future. First, about fifteen years ago, hundreds of millions of
underemployed workers joined the world’s market economies. They had no capital to speak
of. But they had a desire to work in industry and to get rich. We might expect that an
increase in the supply of labor would drive real interest rates up, but this labor came with an
enormous savings rate and a dead financial system that had served them in the past as a
capital destroyer, as it does to this day.

This created a profound global disequilibrium for the industrial world, equal in magnitude to
the global unemployment problem of the Great Depression although quite geographically
concentrated. The industrial world'  s economic system has to resolve this economic
fundamental over the course of time by absorbing these workers. To focus today on trade
imbalances when there is an enormous labor market imbalance is the same mistake that
economists and policymakers made in the 1930s.

Second, the successful development strategy in developing Asia designed to absorb this
stock of labor has generated rapid growth in GDP and savings in that region. As shown in
Chart 2, the aggregate savings rate for the world is nearly unchanged; but regional savings
rates have changed dramatically in recent years. The combination of rapid growth of
countries with high savings rates, particularly China, has increased the savings rates in what


1
    Savings Gluts, Deficits and Interest Rates: The Missing Link to Europe,” Deutsche Bank Global Research July 5, 2005.
the IMF calls developing Asia. Rapid growth in Asia has contributed to high oil prices and
savings rates in oil producing developing countries have also increased dramatically.


 Chart 2. Saving Rate as Percentage of GDP

 50

 45        World        US          Emerging Asia          Middle East
 40

 35

 30

 25

 20

 15

 10

 5

 0
      1983-90 1991-98   1999        2000   2001     2002      2003        2004

 Source: IMF




 Chart 3. Saving Rate as Percentage of GDP

 50
               Japan                         Newly Industrialized Asian
 45
               Western Hemisphere            Euro Area
 40

 35

 30

 25

 20

 15

 10
 5

 0
      1983-90 1991-98   1999        2000   2001     2002      2003        2004



 Source: IMF
 Chart 4. Changes in Savings and Reserves                         (Billions of
 U.S. dollars)

 220.00                                                                 220.00
                 Emerging Asia-Change in Reserves
                 Middle East-Change in Reserves
                 Emerging Asia-Change in Saving, USD
 170.00                                                                 170.00
                 Middle East-Change in Saving, USD



 120.00                                                                 120.00




  70.00                                                                 70.00




  20.00                                                                 20.00




 -30.00                                                                 -30.00
           1999         2000       2001           2002   2003   2004


 Source: IMF




There are two remarkable aspects of this increase in regional savings rates. First, almost all
the increase in savings in these regions has been matched by a fall in savings rates in one
country, the United States (Chart 2). Other regions including newly industrialized Asian
countries, Japan, the Euro area and emerging Western Hemisphere shown in Chart 3 show
no trend in savings behavior. Second, as shown in Chart 4 most of the increase in the dollar
value of savings (relative to the level of savings in 1999) for the past five years in emerging
Asia and the Middle-East has been placed in international reserves. There is no generalized
glut of world savings. But there is a very unusual distribution of world savings across
regions, and an unusual share of increased savings has been placed by governments in
international markets.


International Savings and US Interest Rates
We would not normally expect all of an increase in savings in one region to end up in the US
even if incremental savings were all invested in international reserves and all the reserves
were initially invested in the United States. As we point out below, this would tend to
depress US interest rates; and these added capital inflows should then be reallocated via the
global financial system across other higher return industrial and emerging markets.

For now, to explain what has happened to US interest rates, we assume this does not
happen. In the next section, we try to understand why it has not happened.

We like to think about this US-centric problem in a simple loanable funds flow framework.
After netting US public and private investment demand from US savings, the US has a
demand for savings from the rest of the world that is downward sloping vs. the real interest
rate, as in Chart 5. The lower the real interest rate that it faces, the less the US wants to
save and the more it wants to invest. If there are many profitable investment projects at the
margin a change in the interest rate generates a large change in the demand for international
savings. Given a real interest rate, we can read off the US current account deficit. Absent a
provision of savings from the foreign official sector, there is an upward sloping supply of
foreign savings coming from the private sector, perhaps from asset managers looking only at
Sharp ratios and benchmarks or perhaps from foreign corporates interested in return on
capital. The higher the real interest rate available in the US, the more foreign savings flow
in.

 Chart 5. Equilibrium current account and real
 rate, private supply only
 Real Interest
 Rate                             US Demand




        r




                             Private Sector
                             Supply

                                                               US Demand f or
                                          CA                   Foreign Savings




The cross of these two curves determines the US real interest rate, the US current account
deficit, and the rest of the world'
                                  s surplus.

A looser fiscal policy might shift the demand for foreign savings upward as in Chart 6. This
would bring in more foreign savings or, equivalently, increase the current account deficit. And
it would cause the real interest rate to rise, as in the Reagan era deficits of the early 1980s.

 Chart 6. Looser fiscal policy raises real rate
 and CA deficit
                                               Wit h Looser
 Real Interest
                                               Fiscal Policy
 Rate



                 US Demand
        r




                             Private Sector
                             Supply

                                                               US Demand f or
                                          CA                   Foreign Savings




Maybe some of this is going on, but it is clearly not dominant. Since 2002, marketable
Treasury debt has increased by about one third while nominal and real interest rates have
declined. Moreover, relative to other industrial countries the US budget deficit is not
unusually large; and it is hard to see that this factor alone would increase the US current
account deficit relative to other industrial countries, especially given the much more rapid
real and nominal GDP growth rate in the US.

 Performance Comparisons: Euroland, US, Japan, 2004

Instead, consider Chart 7 where we add a vertical foreign official sector supply curve
positioned by statesmen who have objectives different from a narrow risk-return calculus
localized to this small portion of their national savings. Their development goals require the
export of home country savings, and they will accept whatever interest rate the market
determines. Adding this new public sector supply of foreign savings to the private sector
supply horizontally shifts overall supply rightward and brings down the interest rate that
clears this global market for savings.


 Chart 7. Push in from official sector lowers
 real rate, raises CA deficit
 Real Interest
 Rate                       US Demand

                 Official           Pre-int ervention
                 Sect or            Equilibrium
                 Supply

                                                         Off icial plus
                                                         Private Sect or
                                                         Supply




                                                        US Demand f or
                                                        Foreign Savings




So, if we see that the real interest rate falls with a rising current account deficit, it can only
mean official capital is being pushed into the US and private capital is being pushed out, but
by smaller amounts than the official capital coming in. Overall, capital is not being pulled in
by US demand shifts. This is the combination of facts that shows us that the US is passive,
and the foreign official sector is the active player in global imbalances.

The typical denunciation of US "profligacy" is rhetoric that is worse than useless: it is
misleading. Usually, this rhetoric includes a reference to the role of the US fiscal deficit in
reducing net US savings, but that should increase the interest rate. Whatever the size of this
effect, it has clearly been more than overcome by the effects of official capital pushing in.

We often hear that private saving flows to the US are falling because of increased risks,
stemming perhaps from the worsening international investment position. This would show
up as a shifting upward and to the left of the private supply curve in Charts 5, 6, and 7, and
put further upward pressure on real interest rates, exactly the opposite of what we observe.
Rather, the evidence is far more consistent with a downward slide along a given private
supply curve after it is added to the public sector supply. For sure, private savings are
financing far less of the US current account deficit than, say, five years ago. But this is
because they are being driven out by official sector flows willing to replace them at much
lower rates.
One should beware of making too much of rising or falling fractions of official sector finance
in any given quarter or year. A steadily growing official sector inflow year-in and year-out to
the US is not necessary to maintain the system. Official inflows are necessary only when
interventions are required to keep the exchange rate undervalued. As in a target zone
exchange rate regime, when the private sector is confident that the regime is durable and will
be sustained by future interventions as the need arises, private inflows can alone provide the
deficit financing.

So far so good. But a low real rate is a momentary flow effect that will evaporate with official
sector lending to the US. If official lending were suddenly to dry up, then the picture would
snap back from Chart 7 to Chart 5, and interest rates would jump. If this is what is expected,
we should see low short term real interest rates and much higher long term rates. But we do
not see this. Long term real rates are low, the conundrum that we are studying now. Implicit
in the real yield curve is that the equilibrium of Chart 7 should last a long time.

It follows that even a hint that Asian governments might reduce their flow demand for dollar
assets will generate an immediate jump in the ten-year rate in the US. Indeed, many
observers doubt that foreign official interests in funding the US current account deficit are
sustainable.


Why Does the US Get It All?

Why doesn’t the fall in US rates described above drive Asian and oil producers savings
initially placed in the US right back out of the US via the global financial system to most of
the rest of the world where domestic savings rates have not changed? Put another way, we
cannot explain depressed real interest rates in Europe, for example, by inflows of
international savings because there have been no net savings flows to Europe. The failure
of international credit markets to recycle international savings from the US is even more
puzzling because falling US real interest rates are associated with large current account
deficits and an increase in the US net international debt position. This is generally believed
to generate a decline in risk adjusted return on dollar assets that is even larger than
the decline in real US interest rates.

An expected appreciation of the dollar can make this add up because it increases the
expected rate of return on dollar assets relative to assets denominated in euros and other
floating currencies. We predicted a sharp decline of the dollar against the euro for this
reason (the dollar has to fall now so that it is expected to rise over time) and this does
provide a consistent story about why investors are now willing to stay in US dollar
investments.

But there is an important piece that has not yet been fit into the puzzle: to explain these flows
the expected rate of return on investment in Europe and the rest of the world must be very
low. The intuition is straight forward. Capital formation in Europe and the rest of the world
could be financed at low real interest rates and in currencies that relative to the dollar
command a risk premium and are expected to depreciate. This is a rare triple play for firms
wanting to finance any reasonable investment opportunity, yet there is no effective demand
for international savings outside the United States even on these very attractive terms. The
only explanation that fits the facts is that expectations for profitability of new investment
outside the United States must be remarkably poor.
In terms of our simple demand and supply for loanable funds framework some of the
increase in Asian and oil producers’ savings must have been offered to Europe, Latin
America and other regions. So far there has been no demand for these savings and asset
prices have adjusted accordingly.

Can This Last?
Investment

We will turn to the outlook for Asian savings in the next section. Here we focus on the
effects of an improvement in the investment climate outside the United States. Our
framework suggests that this would tend to reduce the US current account deficit and raise
US and international interest rates. An increase in global demand reduces the US current
account deficit relative to Europe and other regions with floating exchange rates and the
need for dollar depreciation against their currencies in the long term. Moreover, expectations
of smaller current account deficits in the future for the US and larger deficits for Europe and
elsewhere would reduce the risk premium investors would demand for dollar assets and
generate an immediate appreciation of the dollar. In a sense this would reestablish a normal
response to elevated savings in Asia and the Middle East. That is, excess savings in one
region would be spread around the world and relative current account imbalances and
exchange rates in the rest of the world would be little changed.

If the improved investment climate was associated with a relaxation of monetary policy
outside the US this would also tend to support dollar exchange rates as favorable changes in
expected current account positions are reinforced by initial declines in interest rates outside
the US.

Savings
Will Asian developing countries and oil producers continue to experience high savings rates
and to make these savings internationally mobile through reserve accumulation? For oil
producers it seems very likely that reserve accumulations will be reversed if oil prices
stabilize or fall. In the past these countries have increased investment and decreased
domestic savings reasonable quickly following episodes of high oil prices and reserve
accumulation. But for developing Asia, particularly China, we have to better understand the
strategy chosen to solve development and unemployment problems.

The problem for China is to mobilize its existing enormous domestic savings to create a
growing, internationally competitive capital stock that can rapidly employ hundreds of millions
of workers in productive activity. A serious constraint is the lack of a domestic financial
system capable of channeling these savings into productive capital, of proper technology,
and management skills.

The solution, perhaps stumbled upon inadvertently, has been to engage in export led growth,
thereby providing an immediate global quality check on goods produced. This avoids falling
off the cliff of another “Great Leap Forward.” To get export markets open, a part of the policy
has been to offer a large incentive to potential foreign and domestic industrial exporters in
the form of low dollar wages and the expectation that wages will rise only slowly toward
world levels. Slowly rising dollar wages could be associated with gradual revaluation of the
nominal exchange rate or a slightly higher rate of inflation as compared to trading partners.
For example, a 3-5 percent revaluation of the renmimbi later this year and the adoption of a
carefully controlled float would not signal the end or even a material change in the
development strategy we have described.2 Nominal price and wage levels would then rise
less rapidly, leaving the path of real wages essentially unchanged.

An initially low but rising currency also helps control the rate of migration from the
countryside to urban areas by keeping the relative price of domestic agricultural output high.
The typical problem in emerging markets is to avoid offering too an high industrial wage
while still inducing resource transfers to industry and restraining migration out of the
countryside to a rate consistent with capital formation in the industrial sector.

But why does the need for international financial intermediation (two way trade in financial
assets) create savings-investment imbalances and the flood of net capital exports? An
export-based development policy need not imply a net export of capital. All that is needed is
export growth, and this can just as well be balanced by import growth.

In general, the successful emerging market economies have not needed net foreign savings
inflows; such inflows are generally small and unreliable relative to domestic savings. In fact,
recent academic research suggests that developing countries that do no borrow net from
abroad have grown more rapidly than those that do borrow.3 Nevertheless, we would have
to agree that other things equal even a small addition of net foreign savings should
contribute to investment and growth in poor countries. A positive argument in favor of net
exports of savings requires that some other important ingredient to growth is not equal.

Our view is that net exports of domestic savings are necessary for efficient international
intermediation of domestic savings. Asian emerging markets do not need net foreign
savings but they do need efficient financial intermediation. We have emphasized foreign
direct investment and other types of international financial intermediation because we are not
optimistic about rapid development of domestic credit markets. That is, residents of these
countries can avoid domestic markets by placing some of their assets off shore. These
savings will return if international investors are protected from political risk, especially when
private capital is flowing to and from a geopolitically problematic country in large amounts.
The government can effect a relaxation of this constraint by keeping its balance sheet very
strong versus the rest of the world, that is, by building net reserves.

The government' s net reserves then provide protection to private international financial
intermediation against various geopolitical risks.     In effect, the emerging country’s
government promises to stay on the sidelines by becoming a net creditor to the rest of the
world. Note that a government cannot borrow this credibility; it has to earn it by placing
goods and services in the rest of the world on net. Placing goods on net in the rest of the
world means a current account surplus.

It seems to us unlikely that China will abandon the strategy that has worked so well in recent
years. Moreover, other emerging markets have noticed that export led growth and reserve
accumulation has worked while borrowing to grow has not. The recent accumulation of
reserves in Latin America in resisting exchange rate appreciation can be understood as an
attempt to imitate Asia’s success. The very open capital markets in Latin America will make
it difficult to control the real exchange rate but there is nothing to stop governments in
emerging markets from strengthening their own balance sheets.
2
  In “A Map to the Revived Bretton Woods End Game,” Deutsche Bank Global Research, June 2004.
we treat the initial stock of labor as an exhaustible resource. In that context it is optimal for the government to absorb
labor more rapidly at the beginning of the regime. It follows that dollar wages are initially set at a low level but rise over
time to the world wage when the last worker is absorbed.
3

            !      " # $                  !                     %& ' (        )            *+,-.       /-++.0
Other Asia and Japan
A reasonable objection to the argument set out above is that it does not fit the more
developed countries in Asia, especially Japan, that have been among the most eager buyers
of US assets. In fact, it is useful to consider China and Japan as spanning the problems
facing Asia. Both Japan and China have an employment problem, in Japan it is the result of
a very long cyclical downturn. In China it is a long term development problem. Both
governments look to export growth as a solution to this problem and both have a long history
of managing the exchange rate.

For quite different reasons both have been able to sterilize very large reserve accumulations.
In deflationary Asian countries, notably Japan, it is difficult to understand why there is some
limit on the ability or motivation of the authorities to create yen in stemming an attack on the
currency. With interest rates at zero, it is costless to create as much yen cash as is
demanded, while dollar reserves produce a positive yield. Normally, a limit on foreign
exchange acquisition is reached when the resulting monetary expansion causes excessive
overheating and inflation. But this is still not in sight for Japan, and would not, in any case, be
the appropriate monetary policy.

The lessons of attacks on fixed exchange, weak currency countries seem to be the ones
being applied by the global private financial sector here. For such countries, there is a limit
on reserves or credit or the amount of pain they are willing to put the economy through, so
more attacks against such currencies are simultaneously a ratcheting up of the probability
that the currency will indeed collapse. Some observers seem to be holding a case study of a
typical speculative attack against a mirror and thinking that private capital inflows ratchet up
the pain in Japan. Yet quite the opposite is true in deflationary Japan. Japan has ceased its
massive intervention since Q1 2004, and the yen has depreciated somewhat against the
dollar. Our expectation is that the authorities will return to the market if private flows to the
US again decline and the yen again appreciates, all the more so if it is tested in another
attack.

In China, financial repression has allowed authorities to place domestic assets generated by
sterilization without much increasing domestic interest rates and has been very successful in
containing inflation. The PBOC currently places domestic currency 3-year debt in the banks
at a rate of about 3% and is experiencing positive carry on its foreign exchange. Other
emerging markets in Asia with relatively open capital markets have followed a middle course
of trying to stay competitive with China but allowing some appreciation of their currencies
against the dollar, although still with heavy currency management and accumulation of
reserves.

The success and durability of these efforts are a matter of intense debate, but we doubt
there is much to be gained from continuing the debate at the theoretical level. We have
looked at the experiences of countries that have had persistent current account deficits and
reserve accumulation since 1970 and our preliminary assessment is that such countries
have not lost control of their domestic price level or been forced to revalue by speculative
attacks.

Conclusions
We see today’s structure of current account balances and real interest rates as an
equilibrium generated by unusual supply of international mobile savings from Asia and some
oil exporters, strong investment opportunities in the United States and very weak investment
opportunities elsewhere. The supply of mobile savings will probably shrink over time as oil
producers adjust to their new wealth But Asian and other emerging markets are very likely to
continue to save and to place their savings in international markets. Substantial increases in
international interest rates and a more even distribution of current account deficits across
industrial countries will require a strong recovery of investment demand outside the US. At
the moment we see little evidence that this is in the cards.
