                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                   LAW ASYMMETRIES
        THE DYNAMIC EFFECTS OF TAX




                      Alan J. AuerbaCh




                   Working Paper No. 1152




             NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEABCH
                  1050 MassachUsetts Avenue
                       Caridge MA   02138

                           June 1983




                                          NBER's research program
                      here is part of the
The research reported
                        in Govern1nt Budget. Any opinions
in Taxation and project               not those of the National
expressed are those of the author and
Bureau of EconomiC Research.
                                                  NBER Working Paper 1/1152
                                                       June 1983



                                       Abstract

                     THE DYNAMIC EFFECTS OF TAX LAW ASYMTRIES


     Under current   U.S. tax law, a distinction is made between gains and losses

by businesses. Losses that must be "carried forward" are subject to two

penalties: a loss of interest, and expiration after fifteen years. Previous

examinations have focused on the higher expected tax payments such a tax system

without "full loss offset" imposes on risky projects.

     This   paper presents a dynamic   analysis of the impact of taxation on

investment   when gains and losses are treated asymmetrically. The results
provide   a basis for analyzing recent tax changes, particularly the controversial

"safe—harbor leasing" provisions of the 1981 tax legislation.


                                               Alan J. Auerbach
                                               National Bureau of Economic Research
                                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                               Cambridge, MA 02138

                                               (617) 868—3900
                                               Extension   3i4
I. Introduction

       Under current U.S. tax law, a distinction is made between gains and

losses by businesses. For corporations, gains are taxed at what is

essentially a flat rate of 46   percent,   while losses do not necessarily

qualify for a refund at the same rate. To obtain an immediate refund, the

taxpayer must have had taxable income during the three previous years in

excess of the current loss. ny losses that cannot be "carried back't in this

fashion must be "carried forward," subject to two implicit penalties: such

loss   "carryforwards" earn no interest, and they expire after fifteen years.
Hence, businesses investing in risky projects for which the probability of
having to carry losses forward is nonzero can expect to pay higher taxes than
they would under a system with full "loss offset," i.e. the immediate refund
of taxes for losses incurred.
     Previous examinations of the effects of     the   lack of   a   full loss offset
have   focused on risk—taking in a static model. Doinar and Musgrave (1944)

first pointed out the disincentive imposed when the government does not share

in "downside" risks. Similar analysis was done by Stiglitz (1969) for a

state preference model. Compared to a model with full loss offset, a tax

system which refunds losses at a lower rate than the one at which gains are

taxed causes risky assets to have both a lower expected return and a higher

variance, while having no effect on the return to safe assets. Hence, risk

taking   is discouraged.
       Many U.S. corporations experience the need to carry losses forward.1
This problem became more acute with the acceleration of depreciation

allowances under the Economic Recovery Tax Act of 1981, for two
                                     —2—



reasons. First, the acceleration resulted in a reduction in effective rates,

to the point where,even for safe assets with positive returns, certain

equity—financed investments faced negative effective taxes rates.2 That is,

under a hypothetical tax system with full loss offset, the present value of

taxes associated with such investments would be negative. Moreover, the

timing of depreciation allowances meant that, even for assets with positive

expected tax payments in present value, the pattern over time would be tax

refunds in the early years, caused by large depreciation allowances, followed

by tax payments in later years. Firms with a high ratio of new assets to old

could not expect actually to get such refunds, and by having to carry them

forward would face higher total tax payments, in present value. Again, this

result is for safe assets with positive annual income. Such problems would

necessarily carry over and, indeed, probably be worse if one considered risky

investments.

     As a response to these problems, the 1981 legislation also included a

liberalization of equipment leasing provisions. Under the new "safe harbor"

leasing, transactions very similar to the outright sale of depreciation

allowances and investment credits on new investments were legalized.3 Aside

from residual legal differences from a system permitting direct transactions

in all such tax benefits, which would have been equivalent to one with a full

loss offset, safe—harbor leasing also had the limitation of being permitted

only with respect to new capital goods. While this iy have been intended as

a way of targeting the incentives toward new investment, some of the results
                                        —3—




were   arguably perverse. Companies with tax loss carriyforwards so large as to

make them essentially tax exempt were provided with an opportunity to sell

depreciation deductions and investment credits. While such treatment might

actually have been appropriate under a system which, including interest

deductibility, provides taxable investors with net refunds from investments

in fixed assets, it was not necessarily what was intended by the

legislation, which appeared instead to be aimed at helping those firms that

expected to be taxable in the near future and would otherwise have had to

carry losses forward until such time.

       The fact that safe—harbor leasing was scaled back by the 1982 tax

legislation5 demonstrates the ambivalence of legislators toward attempts at

introducing elements of a loss offset into the tax system. Indeed, it is the

perceived heterogeneity of firms incurring losses that helps explain this

ambivalence. Are firms with tax losses "risk takers" with unfavorable

current   draws, or are they "losers," inefficiently managed companies with low
expected earnings? There appears to be a perception that   the   tax law should
penalize the latter type, perhaps to encourage a change of management, but
not   the former. One may interpret the current system of allowing losses to

be carried forward as a compromise between these two objectives. Firms

anticipating a high expected return, but with the prospect of occasional

losses, may lose a year's interest on such losses by having to carry them

forward, or perhaps (through carrying them back) none at all, while those

anticipating runs of losses will suffer substantially more, in the limit
                                          _14—




recouping none of the losses carried forward. Hence, one would imagine the

latter type of firm facing a greater discouragement to invest than the

former.

      Aside from the fact that penalizing losses is not necessarily the

optimal 'way to    distinguish between high—risk, high—return firms and
low—return firms,     this analysis becomes even less appropriate under the

current   tax system, where the tax base of a firm differs substantially from
measures of its economic income. Even more fundamentally wrong with this
approach   is that it applies to initial decisions firms make. While the high

probability of a tax loss may discourage the low—return firm from investing

initially, once the investment is sunk and, with some probability, the tax

loss occurs, further investment decisions will be made taking account of the

loss carryforward.      Since   such accumulated tax losses decay in value over

time,    firms   may increase their investment to use them up. Thus, in analyzing

the effect of such a tax system on a firm's behavior, we must account not

only for the firm's decisions, given its current tax position, but we must

also ascertain what this position is likely to be. A "loser" may suffer more

from the absence of a loss offset, but may also be more likely in a position

to   accelerate investment to use up loss carryforwards.
        The purpose of this paper is to present a dynamic   analysis   of the impact
of taxation      on investment when gains and losses are treated asymmetrically in

the manner described above. For simplicity, our main focus is on two tax

systems that, with a full loss offset, would both be completely neutral in
                                         -.5-.




the sense of not distorting investment decisions: an income tax with

interest deductibility, and one without an interest deduction but with the

immediate expensing of investment.6 These tax systems both result in the

taxation of pure economic rent, and differ only in the timing of tax

parments. This distinction turns out to be very important in the current

context. These tax systems are also of interest because the current U.S. tax

system has elements of each: acceleration of depreciation allowances, and

the partial deductibility (only to the extent that debt finance is used) of

the opportunity cost of funds.

       After introducing the model and its notation, we analyze the effects of

these tax systems on the behavior of firms with different characteristics,

first in a static, two—period context, and then in an infinite horizon

model. We also sixmilate the stochastic steady states generated by    the
behavior   of firms with an infinite horizon. Our results indicate that, for
an   income tax with interest   deductibility or, more simply, an income tax, the
intuition   presented above is correct: firms with a greater probability of

loss are less likely to invest, given a small loss carryforward, but also

more   likely to have a large loss carryforward. In the simulated stochastic
steady states, the ultimate iact is perverse in the sense that, on      average,

such   firms invest more than others. This result suggests that a potential

improvement is available through the introduction of an option to "cash in"

losses at a discount, for this encourages self—selection on the part of firms

most likely to over invest. Simulations of such a tax system confirm this.
                                           —6—



Finally, the behavior of firms     under   a system of income taxation with

expensing or, more simply, a cash flow tax, is complicated by the timing of

deductions, and it is less clear what the ultimate impact of the tax system

is on the relative behavior of different types of firms.


II. The Model

      We   use the simplest type of model that   allows us to study the problems

of   interest.    Firms make investment decisions in each period, and these

investments deliver a stochastic return in the following period only. Hence,

depreciation is complete after one period. We also assume that each firm

faces the same investment choices every period, and that the uncertainty is

summarized by a multiplicative random variable that is independently and

identically distributed over time, with unit mean. Thus, we have ruled out

the possibility of previous investment decisions or return realizations

affecting current behavior, except through any tax loss carried forward. If

     is the investment at the beginning of period t, then the return at the end

of period t, after depreciation, is


           =             — B
               x(I.)e.                                                   Ci)



where x(.) is concave, O is the realized value of the random variable (not

known to the firm when         is chosen) and B may be thought of as the firm's

fixed operating costs. We assume x(.) is constant over firms and over time,

and let B vary across firms to represent differences in overall operating

efficiency. In the absence of taxation, B will not influence investment
                                          —7—



decisions. This is a very simple way of capturing differences among firms;

one could imagine a model with differences being multiplicative, rather than

additive, or a combination of the two.

      We ignore limited liability, and assume that the firm's opportunity cost

is the safe interest rate, r, and that the firm's objective is to maximize

the present value of expected profits. This objective function is in

contrast to the normal use of a concave utility function to study taxation

and risk—taking. However, our interest here is not in the impact of

risk—taking on the bearing of undiversifiable social risk, but rather on the

effects of tax law asymmetries on the behavior of particular firms. One may

imagine much of the current problem going away if           all firms merged    and pooled
their risks; increased merger activity has, in fact, been cited as a
potential   response to the current tax law. For arr individual firm in the

present nxdel, the asymmetric treatment of gains and losses imparts a

concavity to the objective function in terms of before—tax returns, since a

greater fraction of losses than gains is received after taxes.

      In the absence of taxes, the representative firm's objective at time 1

is to maximize over {I, I2 ...       } the    expected value of total profits:



      V =
            El{(l+r)_t[x(It)8t   —
                                     rI   —
                                              B1}
                                                    =
                                                        E1(1+r)1[W1
                                                                      +
                                                                          v21   (2)


where W. =      — rI   is economic profit at the end of year t. Since

I >   0, is not a function of     this leads to the decision to nximize

current profits. Since E(e) 1, this yields the decision rule:
                                         —8—




        x=r                                                                   (3)

i.e., that the marginal product should equal the interest rate.


III. Systems of Taxation

       As stated above, either an income tax(with interest deductibility) or a

cash flow tax would, with a full loss offset, result in a tax on economic

rent. This is quite easy to see in the current model. Under an income tax,

the tax base at the end of period t would be W., which equals economic

profit. Under a cash flow    tax,   the firm would deduct its initial investment,

       at the end of period t—l, for an equivalent deduction of (l+r)It at the

end of period t, from the tax base of gross rents, before depreciation and

interest,      + I' again leading to W.

       Once losses are not usable to obtain a tax refund, these results break

down. To preserve sinlicity, we ignore the possibility of carrying losses

back, and assume that losses may be carried forward indefinitely. Neither of

these assumptions should affect the qualitative nature of the results

derived. To separate the indirect impact of lump—sum rent taxation from the

effects of the tax law asymmetry    itself,    we assume that the tax system is one

in which positive taxable income is taxed at a zero rate, while negative

taxable income is taxed at a negative rate, —r. This is equivalent to

combining a symmetric, nondistortionary subsidy at rate T with a tax without

loss   offset at the same rate.
       We first consider the problem facing a. firm in some arbitrary period t,
                                               —9—




under an income       tax, letting Lt be the accumulated loss carried forward from
period t—l. The firm's decision at t affects the value of the loss carried
forward into period t+l, and hence the present value of expected future
after—tax       returns, so one can no longer separate the problem into a series of

independent one—period decisions. The firm seeks, at time t, to maximize:



      V(L) (l+r)Et[Wt + Vt+1(Lt1)]                                                 ()



subject       to the choice of      where       is the current after—tax return. The

expressions for W1 and L+1 depend on whether current period profits are

sufficient to use up the entire tax           loss   carryforward. If they are, income

is positive and hence taxable (at rate zero, in this case) at the margin, and

the loss carried forward is not influenced by marginal changes in I• This

will occur if         is sufficiently large so that taxable profits, W., exceed

Lt. Defining


      At=(Lt+B+rlt)Ixt
we have
      -             W(l+T)
                     t                        ife t<A t
          t         W. +                      otherwise
                                                                                   (6)
                           ILt
and
                    L —wt                     ife t<A t
      t
      L1=              0                      otherwise
                                                                                   ()


Using (5)      — (7), and   letting f(s) be   8's probability density function, we may

rewrite (Ii) as:
                                                   -.10—




       V(L) =        (l+r){        I   t[w(l) + V+i(L — W)]f(e)do
                 +             +        +
                     f°t [W.       TL       v+1(oflf(e)de}                               (8)



       The cash flow tax is more complicated to analyze because current

decisions affect not only taxable income at the end of the period, at time t,

but also at the beginning of the period, at time t—l. It is useful,

therefore, to define the variable Lt as the tax loss carried forward from

period t—l, before account is taken of period t's investment and potential

expensing deductions. Moreover, period t investment can be expensed at t—l

only to the extent that the tax base is positive at t—l. Hence, we must

include the period t—l taxable profit as a state variable at time t, also.

Fortunately, we can do this without introducing a new variable, since there

cannot be both a loss carryforward from period t—1 and a taxable profit in

period t—l. We simply let L take on a negative value equal to the firm's

taxable   profit at t—l, before period t decisions are accounted for, when this
profit is nonnegative. Complications remain in that any positive excess
profit, after deduction of investment costs at the beginning of period t, is

not carried forward, while losses are. This will require certain additional
notation.
       There are three possible             situations in which the firm may    find itself
with   respect   to its ability         to expense period t investment. Letting I be

the   amount of investment immediately deductible (with

forward), we have:
                                                                       —
                                                                           I   carried
                                               —11—



                    0
                                               ifLt>0
     I_ L+I                                    ifLt+It>0Lt
                    It                         ifO) Lt+It

Letting       = 1 if L < 0 and 0 otherwise, and             1 if Lt +       > 0 and

0 if Lt +       < 0,      we may rewrite (9)   as:

     i• =           — (i + •Lt)                                                       (10)


     Since losses incurred in period t—1, after accounting for additional

deductions of investment expense, denoted L, are carried forward only if

positive, we have, using the definition of ,


     L=6(L+It)                                                                         (ii)



     If we let Pt be taxable cash flow at time t, before accounting for

decisions at period t+1, we have

          =   x(I)       O +    I   — B                                                (12)



which equals total investment returns, gross of depreciation, interest and

taxes. As before, there are two possibilities concerning the state of the

loss carried forward into period t+1, Lt+i. Either cash flow, p, exceeds

the loss L, and a profit is carried forward (L+1 <           0),   or   <
                                                                            L and a
loss is carried forward. Defining

                    B —
     at =
              L +          It                                                          (13)
                x(It)
we have as the objective function in period t:
                                                    —12—




       V(L) = _T(It           —
                                  I) + (l+r)_l{ft [w + TptIf(O)dO
                +   f
                    t
                        [wt
                               +
                                   tL}f(6)dO
                                                +   f vi(L
                                                    -
                                                              —
                                                                  p)f(e)de}              (iii)



which accounts for the inmdiate tax on additional losses if not all
investment can be expensed, plus the after—tax receipts under the two regimes

f or net profits at the end of period t, plus the value of losses or profits

carried forward. The important distinctions from the previous case of the

income tax are that there is a direct effect of the firm's decision on taxes

in two periods, and the value function is evaluated for negative as well as

positive values of Lt, which here stands for the loss carried forward into

period t before new       investment.
       The impact on firm          behavior    of these two tax systems, particularly the

latter, is quite complicated. However, much                that   applies to the general case

may   be   learned by considering a two—period model, in which investment occurs

only   in   the first period, so that the next period's value function V+1(.) is

uniformly zero.



III. Two—Period Analysis

       Dropping subscripts for period t, and assuming V1 0, we obtain the

following condition for investment under the incon tax from (8):
                                                            —13—




                   1 +          XF(e)de
                            j                          1 +   iF(A)
          =    r                             =
                                                                                                    (15)
                   1 +
                          -
                         f' OF(o)de              1 +   TF(A)E(G/6 <

where F(.) is the cumulative density function corresponding to f(. ).                             Since
E(e/e <   x)        E(e) =      1, with strict inequality holding as long as F(A) < 1,
expression (15) indicates that                   investment        will be lower than would be true

under symmetric taxation, or no taxation, with x' approaching r as A, and

hence L1 become quite large. When this happens, the firm is essentially tax

exempt, because the probability is small that it will use up its loss

carryforw-ard in the near future. What is, perhaps, somewhat surprising is

that the relationship between I and L need not be monotonic. Total

differentiation of (15) with respect to L yields:



     dl                     (x'A —        r)tF(A)/x                                                      6
                   x"(l +   TF(A)) — (x'X          —   r)    tF(A)/x

The denomination of (16) is equal to 2V/I2 and, as required for an optimum,

is negative. Thus,                   >    0 if and only       if   x'A >   r.   A sufficient condition

for this is that A =            1,       since x' >    r.    By the definition of A in (5), x ) 1

if (L + B) exceeds x —               Ir    (the maximum value of which occurs when x'             r).

Thus, a sufficient condition for investmert to increase with the size of the

tax loss carry-forward is that the loss exceed the expected value of'                          profits,
before tax. For the general case, an increase in L increases the vaLue of 8

at which profits from current investment become taxable, A. Since marginal
 profits at this value, x'A —     r,   may be negative if L is small and there is a

 substantial amount of pure rent being collected, an increase in A may

 actually subject more expected losses to taxation, rather than shielding

 profits, at the margin. This suggests that if only a small amount of risk is

present, the observed range of L may be sufficiently small that I is non—

 increasing over a large part of it. As risk increases, the effect of L in

shielding profits dominates the investment decision.

       These two possibilities are illustrated in panels (a) and (b) of

Figure 1, which graph f(e)      versus   0, with a dotted line at 0 =   ( ,), the
point at which the firm earns a profit at the margin, expost. This value of

0 nnist lie to the left of the mean of the distribution at 0 =      1.    In panel

(a), rents are sufficiently large, and L sufficiently small, that the firm is

in a net loss position only when it loses money at the margin. Hence an

increase in L, holding I fixed, means that more of its marginal losses are

subject to the discriminating treatment of the tax system. Once A >          ( -,),
however, all marginal losses are taxed, and some marginal gains are
subsidized. Increases in L, holding I fixed, increase the amount of gains

receiving the subsidy.

      To understand how firms with different values of B will behave under the

income tax, we simply    note   that B and L enter symmetrically into (15) through

)..   Hence, (16) may also be interpreted as the value of dI/dB, given L. For

values of L satisfying A > 1, increases in B will increase investment. With

small losses carried forward, increases in B may decrease investment, by the
                             —15—


                    Figure 1

The Effect of an Increased Loss Carryforward on
  the Incentive to Invest Under an Income Tax




                                                   f(B)




     l 2           (---)
                             1                     0

     low X: increase in nondeductible losses




                           (b)




                                                  f(e)




                   (L...)1       x1x2
                                                  S


     high X: increase in shielded gains
                                                     —16.-




same argument given above for small values of L. It is in this range that we

are correct in viewing the tax law as discouraging investment by inefficient

firms.

        Behavior under a cash flow tax depends on whether current investment is

deductible at the margin, against period t-1 income. The first—order

condition derived from the objective function (i1) is:



                r(l+tt5) —   (l—ô)r   f   cif(8)dê
            — ________________________ —
            —                          —                  r(l+tS)     —   (l—S)tF(a)
                                                          1 + tF(cz)E(O/O < ci)
                    ]. + Tf aef(e)de

where, as defined above, 6 =              1   if L + I > 0, and           0 otherwise. Aside from this

first—order       condition, the value of investment mist satisfy the inequality
consistent      with the value of 6. An intermediate solution for I is also

possible, at neither margin, with L +                 I   =   0.    Here, 6 will lie between zero

and   one and may be interpreted as the Lagrange irultiplier of the constraint
that L + I      =   0.   We review these three cases in turn.

Casel: 6=0(L+I<0)
Here,    firms expense at the margin. The first order condition becomes



        x   —
            —
                      r — TF(a)                                                                  (17 1)
                  +   ¶F(ci)E(8/O <
                ;
where       = B           Since a is not a function of L, this solution is invariant

with respect to L, for all values of L <                    L,     where I + L =   0.    In addition,

investment here will likely exceed the value at which x' =                          r.    From (17.1),

it follows that x' <         r if and only if
                                                  —17—



        1 +     x'E(B/O < a) > 0                                                            (18)


which says that expected gross marginal returns in the state where a loss is

carried into period t+l are positive. A sufficient condition for this is the

requirement that £ross returns be nonnegative, a rather weak requirement.

       This result says that firms able to expense current investment do better

under the asymmetric tax system. They receive their expensing deduction,

but since gross rents may            be   negative, some of   the   firms' marginal gross

rents      (which by assumption are always positive) will be sheltered.
       It   is straightforward to show that          the right—hand side of (17.1) must
stay   the same or increase with B, holding I fixed, provided that 0 cannot be

lower than —hr. Hence, provided the second—order conditions 'or I are met,

I will increase with B. The situation always corresponds to that for an

income tax with sufficiently high losses. This is because marginal gross

rents cannot be negative.


Case 2:         $ = 1       (L ÷ I > 0)

       Here, firms must carry forward marginal expensing deductions. At best,

they can deduct them one period later, as they could under an income tax

without interest deductibility. Hence, in this regime they are even worse

off than under the income tax with a deduction for interest. The first—order

condition (17) becomes:



       x    —           r(l+T)
                        / '
                1   + TFct)E(0/0 <   cx

                B +
where ci =            L•   Not only does the right—hand side of (17.2) exceed         r, but
it equals or exceeds the right—hand side of (15) for all values of L and I.
This follows directly from the fact that cx > A.               Moreover, the effect of
                                                —18—



increases in B or L on I are clear, since the right—hand side of (17.2)

increases (decreases) with either if cx <              C>) 0.   The intuition is similar to

that applying under the income tax. An increase in the value of cx brings

marginal profits at 9 =          cx   into the loss category. These profits (with the

expensing deduction carried forward and subtracted) are x'cx (rather than

x'cx —   r,   since interest is not deductible). Hence, if cx >          0,   more profits

are shielded from taxation. If a <             0,   more tax losses are suffered.


Oase3:                          (L+I=o)
       The derivative of the right—hand side of (ii) with respect to 5, holding

L and I fixed, is strictly positive. Thus, for the appropriate second—order

condition on I satisfied,7 I will decrease with                 and there will be a unique

solution for I, given L. One of three outcomes will occur:

       (1) I+L<Oat=1                        (Caselabove)

       (2) I+L>Oat=O                        (Case2above)

       (3) I+L=OatO c5 1(Case3)
We may view        as the Lagrange multiplier on the constraint that I +           L = 0.
It has the interpretation of the fraction of their losses that firms cannot

deduct      immediately but must carryforward.
       Over the intermediate range of L (for which L must be negative as long
as   x' +      as I +   0),   investment drops quite sharply, as firms go from a

regime of expensing to one with an income tax.


Summary

      The effects of taxation on investment are summarized graphically in
                                          —19—



Figure 2. The dotted lines show the effects of increases in B. The

different segments of the cash flow tax may be surnmerized by the values of 6

and 4.     When 6 = 0 (Case 1) the firm invests more than in a no—tax world, and

expenses at the margin. As L increases, a transition during with investment

is    just entirely expensed and 6 >   0 occurs, with I decreasing (Regime 3).

Then,    a loss is carried forward into period t, as I +   L   >   0 and   6 = 1,   with

investment continuing to decrease with the increase in L until L =            0,    i.e.,

as    long as   = 1 (Regime 2a) and then increases with L (Regime 2b).

When L is positive, investment is always higher under an income tax although

it may decrease with L initially. Ultimately, as L +       , investment
approaches an asyintote at the no—tax value.

       In both tax systems, a higher value of B leads to generally higher

levels of investment, for a given value of L. The one exception is for small

values of L under an income tax. Thus, the logic suggesting that inefficient

firms will be discriminated against by tax systems with a loss offset is only

correct under limited circumstances. Moreover, we have yet to determine the

effects of such tax systems when more than one period of investment is

possible. Here, further differences among firms may arise, since tax losses

carried forward from the current period are not simply lost, and the extent

to which they are recouped depends on future decisions.


IV. Response to Taxation in a Multi—Period Model

       Once there is a future beyond the present period t, changes in

       influence the current investment decision. The first—order condition

for   the income tax based on (8)   becomes:
                                       —20—


                                  Figure 2

                  mv estnient versus Tax Loss Carryforward
                              Two—Period Model




                                             Investment




6=0
                                                             Income Tax

                                         x


      Cashf low
      Tax         0<6<1




                                       0                       Loss
                                                               Carryforward
                                                            —21—




                       1 + T        f(e)de    —
                                                  f
       x' =   r   •

                      1 +   T ft   of(o)de —      ft  ;oo

                                                             OV.+i(Lt+Ir+B_xO)f(O)dO

                                                                                                      (19)

                                        1 +                    —             <
                                              F(At)(T                            xi))
                  • 1 +
                            F(x)E(e/e    <   A)(T — E(V1/O              <   A))    —
                                                                                       F(A)C(V+1e/e
                                                                                                      <
                                                                                                          x)
When              0, (19) reduces to (15). More                    generally,     there are two new

effects on the choice of                caused by the presence of future decisions:

       (1) Since the losses carried forward may                       be    used to offset future

              profits, they are not totally lost. The average value of such

              losses is E(V.+1/O <                      the average marginal increase in the
                                             At):
              value function at t+1 with an increase of a dollar in loss carried

              forward. The value is bounded above by j--—,                         since,   at best, the

              loss carried forward can be used up entirely in the next period.

              It is the difference between t                   and E(V1/O < At)          that represents

              the penalty for average losses carried forward. We would expect

              this value to be larger for firms with lesser prospects for future

              profits, since they must wait longer, on average, to use up their

              loss carryforwards.

       (2) An additional effect relates to the shape of V+1(.). As shown in

              the Appendix, V+1(.) is strictly concave for arbitrary t. Thus,

              the covariance between                        and 0 is positive: when 8 is larger, a

              smaller loss is carried forward, with a greater prospect of early

              recoupment. The impact of this term is to raise the right—hand
                                            —22—



            side of (19), serving as a correction for the use of the simple

            average of V1 in the denominator. Average recoupment of losses

            is less than recoupment of average losses.

    Taken together, these two effects still do not change the outcome that

x. exceeds r, and that in the limit as L +          ,x   =   r.
    For the cash flow tax, the first—order condition based on (114)        is:

            r(l+ô)   —   (1-ô)[t                   f°°vi(L*÷BIxe)f(e)de]

                         f
                                   ft f(e)de -
        =
                   1 +       ef(e)dO + fe+1(+B_It_xte)f(O)dO
                                                                                 (20)

             r(l+t5) —                  —
        =
                          (1_6)[TF(at) E(V1)1
             1 +
                   rF(at)E(9/O
                                <     — E(OV)

which, when V1 0, collapses to (iT).
     To analyze the impact of this tax system on investment, we must know the

characteristics of the value function,                   In the Appendix, we derive the

following characteristics for arbitrary t:


     (1) For Lt+i > 0,       0 < V1 t/(1+r)
     (2) For Lt+i < 0,       —r V1 0
     (3) There exists some value of Lt+i,                such that if Lt+i <

            then V1 = 0.
An example of what v1(.) might look like is given in Figure 3. The possible

discontinuity at L = 0 is not surprising, in light of the fact that L is

really a combination of two separate variables, the loss carried forward, if

positive, and minus the current taxable profit, if negative.          Values of L below
                           —23—



                Figure 3
    Derivatives of the Value Function
           Under a Cash Flow Tax




                                Vt




                       I
                  1.   +r




L                           0           L




                       —T
L correspond to those for which all new investment will be expensed with

profits to spare. Since a small change in profits has no effect on this
outcome, nor on the loss carried forward to the end of the next period,

V' = 0.     The range of L for which V'                   0 cprresponds to cases where increases

in L decrease the amount of expensing done, either when I + L = 0 and I

declines until for unit with increases in L (Case 3 above) or when I + L > 0

but L <   0,     so that some inframarginal investment is expensed (Case 2a above).

Once L >    0,       increases in the loss carried forward increase the value of the

firm. This is not entirely clear from intuition alone. Although the losses

carried forward provide a shield against future taxes, they also increase the

possibility that firms won't be able to expense future investment. However,

the first effect always dominates the second.

     Little more of a qualitative nature can be said about V. However, these

results do allow us to draw certain inferences about investment behavior

under a cash flow tax. For Case 1, in which L + 1 < 0                     ( = 0),       investment

still exceeds the no—tax level if gross returns must be nonnegative. We now

demonstrate this.


                       r —   TF(t + E(V't+l
                                  )                )

     xt —       i + ¶F(at)E(O/O       <          — E(8V1)
                                                                                              (20




Thus, x     <    r   if and only if:


     TF(at)El + x'E(G/O <                     >            +
                                      at)]        E(V1)        x'E(V1)                          (21)


Equation (21) may         be   written:

                                             <         > (1_F(at))E[V,+i(1+x'e)/e   >
                                                                                        at]     (22)
                                                            -.25—




Assuming,      as   before, that 1+xO > 0 for all 0, we know that the left-hand

side of (22) is positive since V1                                   for e <
                                                                                 (L+1
                                                                                          >   0),   and that the

right—hand side is less than or equal to zero, since V1 0 for 0 >

         < 0).
      None of the terms on the right—hand side of (20.1) depend on                                   Lt. Thus,
again,    the solution for            given that 6                  0 is constant, and is an

equilibrium as long as the constraint that Lt +                                (0     is satisfied. Above

the value of Lt, Lt, for which this constraint is just satisfied, the only

equilibrium        can be with        +                0.    As before, we can find the equilibrium

by   letting     6 increase until either Lt +                        = 0,   or 6 = 1 with L +             still
greater than zero. This procedure requires that the right—hand side of

(20.1) increases with 6, so that, if the second—order condition for                                        is

met, I will decrease as 6 increases. Letting x equal the right—1and side of

(20.1), we obtain:

               r                                   r        F() N                         afl
                                              )
           =       +            —              =       +                —             <
                       TF(at)       E(V1)                                   E(V.,18
          +                               >                                                                     (23)
               (1_F(at))E(v+i/e

Since               t/(1+r) for 0 <           ' arid V.1            0 for 0 >     at,'fr is positive,
as required.

      Thus, we again have a range over which                                declines, starting from a

value exceeding the no—tax level. When 6 = 1, (20) becomes:

      X    —
           —
                               r(1+T)                                                                     (20 2)
               1 +
                       TF(at)E(0/0    <) — E(ev1)
It is difficult to characterize the behavior of investment in this regime,

except to say that, as L +            , investment                  stil. converges to the no—tax level,
                                          —26--




as F(s) + 1   and V1 + 0.       We cannot, for example, rule out values of

investment in excess of this level. To gain further insights, simulation

analysis   will be   helpful.

V.   Simulation Results
     In this section, we present simulation results for firms subjec,t to each
of the   tax systems analyzed above. We also study a variant of the income tax

that permits self—selection by firms. Our focus is on the behavior of firms

with an infinite horizon, and we consider the properties of the stochastic

steady states these firms converge to in their behavior. In particular,

after we have solved for the level of investment a firm will choose in

response to each level of the loss carryforward, we use this decision rule to

generate a steady state probability distribution for the firm's loss

carryforward. This, in turn, allows us to calculate the expected value of

the firm's investment level in the steady state, a measure of the long—run

1nact of taxation on the firm. In the absence of the asymmetric treatment

of gains and losses, both the income tax and the cash flow tax would have no

effect   on investment, which would be the same across firms and across states
of nature.
      The method of solution for a firm's infinite horizon behavior comes from
the fact that we can interpret the expressions for firm value in (1) and (i4)

as functional equations napping one element of the space of value functions

defined on L into another. For example, for the income tax equation          (14)



defines    the mapping:
                                         —27—




     TV(L) = max (1+r)E[W(L,e,I) + V(max(O,L—W(e,I)))]                                   (2I)
               I          0

from the space S =   {V(. )}   into itself. The class of functions T is bounded,

since the firm cannot have value greater than it would with sufficient

carryforwards to offset all future profits, and cannot be worth less than its

value if it simply chose not to invest. Further, they satisfy Blackwell's

sufficient conditions for a contraction mapping, namely8

    Monotonicity: For V, V' c 5, V(L)           V*(L)    L     + TV(L)        TV*(L)

    This follows from the fact that we may fix the investment function 1(L)

    at the value defined by the mapping T of V(L), 1(L), and consider the

    mapping T from S into itself holding 1(L) =          1(L).       Clearly, TV(L) = TV(L)

    Moreover, since W(L,o,I(L)) is the same, given any L and 0, and

    V*(max(O,L_W(O,I(L)))) ' V(xnax(O,L—W(0,I(L)))) for any L and 0,

    TV(L)     Tv*(L).   Finally, since 1(L) is not fixed under T,

    Tv*(L)    TV*(L).

    Discounting: T(V(L) + a) = TV(L) +       a,    for     <    1.    Here,      =   (l+r).
    Because T is a contraction mapping, of modulus (l+rY, it has a unique

    fixed point T: V + V, that can be solved for recursively using the fact

    that, for the norm            defined as the maximum difference among

    elements of two vectors,


            IITV—VH = IITV—TVII                 lIV—VH                                  (25)


    That is, the greatest distance from the equilibrium decreases at

    least by a factor of (1+r) with each iteration. We may solve for

    v(.) by beginning with the value function obtained from the two—period
                                     -.28—




     model above, and working backward. The economic interpretation of

    this is that we are solving for the value function of a problem with

    a T period horizon, and letting T +    . (A similar analysis holds for
    the cash flor tax.)

    For our actual simulations, we solved in each period for the function

V(.) over a grid of size 200 for L, with I also taking one of 200 possible

values. The parameters for each grid were based on different upper and lower

bounds for each, depending on the problem. In practice, we assumed a fixed

point had been reached when the entire investment function 1(L) remained

constant over an iteration, since very small changes in 'i(.) continued to

occur for many more iterations.9

     The values for r and r in all simulations were .5 and .3, respectively,

the former chosen as a realistic value, the latter because by our assumption

of imndiate capital decay after one period, a period should be thought of as

lasting longer than one year. In addition, of course, larger values of r

lead to faster convergence of the algorithm.



     The payoff function used was x(I) =     5I   while the distribution of e was

assumed to be uniform, ranging from (2—C) to C, with f(e) = 2(1—CY     For all

results reported in the paper, a value of C = 5 was used. Finally, to

represent firm differences, we performed simulations for B = 5 and B = 15.

Obviously, these values are arbitrary, and are intended simply to illustrate

the patterns possible for the infinite horizon model.

     The results of these simulations for both income and cash flow taxes are
                                        —29—



graphed in Figure 4.   Qualitatively,   they are exactly like those shown in

Figure 2 for the two—period model. For positive values of L, the income tax

always leads to more investment, with a higher value of B leading to more

investment under each system, except where I decreases with L, for small

positive values of L. For the cash—flow tax, with L negative, investment is

initially substantially above the no—tax investment level of 69.14, dropping

sharply once the constraint on expensing becomes binding, and eventually

rising but lower than under the income tax. It is reassuring how similar

those findings are to those predicted by the static model.

     With the results of these simulations, we can also solve for the

probability distribution of L in the stochastic steady state. The method

used is to solve recursively for the probability distribution over the grid

defined for L by taking an initial guess for some period and solving for the

resulting distribution in the next period, doing so until a stationary

probability distribution is reached, i.e., where the probability distribution

for L is the same from one period to the next. This, along with the decision

rule for investment, defines the stochastic steady state.

     These steady state probability distributions for L under each of the

four simulations graphed in Figure 14 are shown in Figure 5•lO For the income

tax simulations, L cannot be negative and there is a probability mass at

L = 0.   Not surprisingly, the means of the distributions for the inefficient

firm (B = 15) lie to the right of those for the efficient firm (B =   5).   From

a comparison of Figures 14 and 5, we may   draw a number of conclusions. First,
                              —30--

                            Figure 4
       Investment versus Loss Carryforward:    Simulation Results
          Investment

         1
                  90




                                                           Income Tax

                                                          B=5

                                                                              —




                                                                            Cash Flow Tax

                                                                     B= 5


                                                                     B=15




                 20




                 10




—200   —100            0       100            200       300           400
                                                                Loss Carrvforward
                                                   —31—

                                           Figure 5

                          Steady State Probability Distributions
                                        30,0 .     - Probability   (percent)
                                                   B=5



                                                                    mass points (Income Tax)
                                        20. 0


                                                   B=15


                                        10.0




                                         2.0




                                                                     Income Tax


                                                                        B= 5

                                    /
    Cash Flow Tax
                                /                                       B=15
                            /
         B= 5
                                         0.8


                     //
                ,/
                                         0.4                                         ——
                                                                                                —




—300         —200          —100 i(5,c)         0   LQ5,C)100 L(5,I)       200 t(15,I) 300        400
                                                                                      Loss Carryforward
                                          —32—



 under each tax system, the probability is concentrated where investment is

lowest. For the income tax, the shift in the distribution as B increases

seems clearly to favor investment by the inefficient firm.      The decline in I
for    small values of L is very small conxpard to increases thereafter.
Indeed,     the expected values of investment for the high—B and low—B firms are

52.7 and b6.3, respectively, compared to a no—tax investment level of 69.)4.

Under the cash flow tax, on the other hand, the effect of the distribution

shift as B changes is much less clear, since the investment function is much

more nonnonotonic in the relevant range. The firm with high B is more likely

to have a big loss carryforward, which encourages investment. This is

comparable to the effect of the income tax. In addition, however, such a

firm   is   much less likely to be able to expense all or part of its investment,

which discourages investment. In the end, these two effects nearly cancel,

as investment averages 56.1 when B = 15 and 56.0 when B = 5.

       The rather perverse result that inefficient firms contract less than

efficient ones in response to income taxation is due to the fact that they

are more likely to have big loss carryforwards, and hence the incentive to

increase investment to use these losses up before they decay. A revision of

the tax system (suggested in Auerbach, 1982b) that might change this outcome

without having to rely on information about the firm's characteristics

would be the introduction of an option for firms to cash in their loss

carryforward at any    time,   for a discount. The logic is that,   once   losses are

cashed in, firms lose the incentive to increase investment. Moreover, one
                                             —33—



would expect inefficient firms       to   cash in at lower values of L, since they

would expect to have to wait longer to use their accumulated losses up.

Thus, we would expect the system to have a greater impact on the firms with

high   B. A further inact on all firms would be the increase, at low values
of L, in the amount of investment, since losses incurred would           now   have a
lower    bound on the extent to which they could be recouped. Thus, we would

expected a flattening of the investment schedules shown in Figure 14•

       All of these predictions are satisfied in our simulations. Letting p

equal the value at which all losses can immediately be taken (p '              (l+r)),
we simulate optimal behavior for infinite horizon firms and the resulting

probability distributions for L. This involves calculating the value of L at

which cashing in becomes worthwhile. Since cashing in involves a reduction

in the loss carried forward from L to zero, the value of L at which cashing

in becomes worthwhile is defined by the equality:


       prL     V(L) — V(O)                                                          (26)



where,                 differs from earlier simulations in reflection of the
         of course, v(.)

change in the tax system. We have assumed uniqueness for the values of L so

defined, in our simulations. ble 1 shows the effect of changes in p for

B = 5 and B = 15.

       As p   increases,   each type of firm   chooses   to cash in its loss

carryforward at a lower value of L. This is because the cost of doing so

becomes sufficiently small that only relatively small tax losses, which the
                                         —34—




                                           Table 1
                                    Income Tax with Option


                         B   =5                                      B=].5

p       1(0)                  Pr (L0)     Lmax       1(0)        T       Pr    (L0)   Lmax



    0   38.9     I6.3             .28                36.1      52.1           .16

.25     38.9     13.6              35      133       36.1      11.2           .31      361

.0                                •1I                                                  200

•       39.6     12.9                      229       38.2      113.1          .113

                                  .61      108       1411.14   115.3          .69       88
        41I.1&   115.6
                                             —35—



firm can expect to work off quickly, are carried forward. The high—B firm

always chooses a lower cash—in value for L, denoted Lrnax, than the low—B

firm, and the probability of its having no loss to carry forward increases

more    rapidly   with p, until it is more likelr to have a zero carryforward    for
p = .55. As p increases, there are offsetting effects on the average value
of    I for each firm,   denoted   . distribution of L shifts toward zero,
                                       The                                        but

the   amount of investment for low values of L, such as the value at L = 0
shown in the table, increases. The net effect is not monotonic, as !          first
falls then, as the tax system approaches one with full loss offset, rises.

As suggested, the difference between average investment for low—B and high—B

firms declines until, at p =       .55, the efficient firms invest more, on
average.



VI. Conclusions

       The results in this paper, both analytical and from simulation,

demonstrate the importance of the asymmetric treatment of gains and losses

under otherwise neutral tax systems, and enhasize how tax systems that are

similar in the presence of a loss offset become quite dissimilar in the

absence of one. Under an income tax with interest deductibility, the lack of

loss offset discourages investment, with the problem most severe for small

positive values of a tax loss carryforward. As the tax loss carryforward

increases, the problem disappears, as firms become, essentially, tax exempt.

The presence of high fixed costs, by king firms more likely to have large
                                          —36--




tax    losses carried forward, leads to greater expected investment in the

simulated steady states.

        Under a system of expensing, similar analysis applies to situations in

which firms must carry losses forward. However, when they have sufficient

profits to offset the deduction for current investment, firms actually invest

more than they would in the absence of taxation or with a perfect loss

offset. This is because while current costs are deductible, future gross

rents, in expected value, are not necessarily taxable, at the margin. The

firms most likely to be in this position are those with low fixed costs.

Hence, there is an offset to the encouragement of high fixed cost firms to

invest relatively more, and in our simulation results these two effects are

essentially offsetting.

       The pattern of investment under a system of expensing is helpful in

explaining some of the ambivalence and confusion surrounding the recent

debate over safe—harbor leasing. In terms of the current analysis, the

problem lay in giving firms the ability to expense current investment, while

still   carrying pre—existing losses forward. For companies with losses caused
only   by the   investment deductions, this would lead to their being like
companies   for which, in our model, 6 = 0 (L +    I   <   0).   However, for companies

already essentially "tax—exempt," this would permit more investment than

in the absence of taxation. In our model, this would lead to a marginal

product x' =    r(l—t)   in the limit and, for the payoff function used in our

simulations, to a level of investment four times as big as in the no—tax
                                        -.37—




situation.   Hence, transferability of investment incentives for such firms

would   cause them to invest xre than profitable firms. It must be   noted,

however, that the coexistence of interest deductibility and the expensing
deduction makes this less clear, since profitable firms get further potential
tax benefits, while those with large losses do not.11
     The fact that firms with high fixed costs will generally invest more

under an income tax relates, in part, to their lower probability of using up

loss carryforwards in the near future. These losses have lower value to the

firm, presenting a lower opportunity cost to trying to use them up. This

intuition suggests that giving all firms a choice to exchange their

accumulated losses for a discounted payment will encourage the less efficient

firms to "cash in" at lower values of   accumulated loss carryforwards, and our
simulations support   this conjecture. Roughly speaking, the choice nchanism

serves to separate firms by type, with those who would increase investment

more in response to losses being more likely to cash the losses in, instead.

The outcome in the simulations is that, for a sufficiently generous exchange

offer, firms with low fixed costs will actually be expected to invest more

than high fixed cost firms in the steady state. If the ultimate aim of the

tax law's asymmetry is to drive inefficient firms out of business or, in the

current context, reduce their scale of operations (and, perhaps, encourage a

takeover by the management of the sore efficient firm), this type of

provision seems helpful, although the problem is less apparent when the tax

law provides for expensing.
                                       —38-.




     If it is not the intention of those who make the tax laws to penalize
inefficient firms, then it is not clear why    the   current system is to be

preferred   to one with a loss offset or, equivalently, one with a provision
allowing losses to be carried forward indefinitely with interest.
                                                             —39—




                                                       Appendix

        In this appendix, we demonstrate results about the shape of the value

function      v(.)   under both income and cash flow taxes that are asserted in the

text.


Income Tax
        The value function              under an income tax is concave. This is proved by

backwards induction.

        By the envelope theorem, we obtain from (8):l2



        V =           (l+r)[tff(e
Differentiation of (Al) yields:
                                                 )do +       f     V1f(e )de]                           (Al)




                              A                              dl                                    dx
        V . (l+r)     =
                          f       tvn(l —
                                                (x9_r)a)f(9)dO                +
                                                                                  (y?1(o)r)f(x).t.      (A2)


where       is as defined in equation (5). After a few steps, (A2) may be
rewritten     as:
                                             r(x )                            x
    V . (l+r)         =
                          {(xtXt_r)                  (T_\T
                                                              (O))    —




                              A                        f(A
                      +   f       tvn f(O)dO —
                                                                  (t—V1(O))                               (A3)



or V"(l+r) = [ab              —
                                   f                                      +   f       f(6)d8 — b


where
                                       f(A
    a       (x'xt_r); b =                     (T —
                                                     v1(o))                                             (An)
                                                                       —40—



Total differentiation of the first—order condition (19) with                                              respect   to

Lt leads, after a few steps, to:

                                                                 A




                                   f                         f
                                                         —
     dlt   —
           —   —
                                                   [ab               t(xe_r)V1f(O)de]                                    (A5)
     dL                                A
                   x(l +                       (   V'        )ef(O)de) — 'a2b +             ft(iO)2Vf(e)dO
The denominator of (A5) equals 92V/aI2. Under the assumption that                                                          <    0,

it too must be negative, since t                                     V.41,
                                                                              b >     0,    and since the term multiplied

by x equals the denominator of the right—hand side of (19) (the numerator of

which is positive), which must be positive since x. ' 0.

     Combining (A3) and (A5), we obtain, after a few steps:
                                           A                                     A
           • D =       x(1         +   f    t( ,             )of(e)de)(ft             v1r(e)do — b)


                               A
                   —
                       bf tVn( — (x'e—r))2f(e)dO

                           A                                 A                                       A
                                                                             2
                   +   I    tV1f(O)de .                  f(x.e—r)                v1f(e)d8 —         (ft(x.B_r)V1f(O)d8)2

where D < 0 is the denominator of (A5). Hence, V. < 0 if the right—hand side

of (A6) is positive. The first two terms clearLy are. Dividing the third
                                   A            2
term through by the positive term (I tV1f(9)de) yields a term that may be

Interpreted as the variance of the variable (x'e —
                                              t
                                                                                               r)   with probability
                                       V1f(O)
density function A                                               defined over the interval (—ci',
                                                                                                            At).    Hence,
                I tfl F(e)de
                    t+l
it too must be positive, and                                         < 0 +           < 0.
                                                                  _14 ]




      To show that                  <   0,   where                    0, it is sufficient to note that the

foregoing arguments hold for V1 0, and hence for                                                        =    0.
Cash Flaw Tax

       Here, we desire to, show that

       (i) For Lt >              0, 0 V i/(1+r)
       (2) For Lt< 0, —T <                       V 0
       (3) For some value of Lt, £ < 0,                                                      = 0
                                                                       L <           V
We again proceed by induction. The general formula for V. is, by the

envelope theorem, from (114):


       V =                   + (l+rY(ff(e)de                      +
                                                                      fv'1       f(O)dO)}


               =             + (l+r)1(               -                               +
                                                                                         fV1                              (AT)
                                                         tdT_÷1e)de                                     f(e)de)}


Clearly,           if Lt is less than that value at which the solution for

given 6 = 0, satisfies                           +
                                                     L < 0,   then 6 = 0 and                   =   0.        If 6 * 0, the

maximum value of the term multiplied by (l+r)' in (AT) occurs when                                                        = 0

for 8 >                (since           <    0 and V÷1 0) and                            =     — for 8 < a.         The

minimum value occurs if V÷1 —r, for 8 >                                   a,   and                 0 for 8 < cx.      Thus,
for Lt < 0             (   = 1, 0       6 < 1), the maximum value of                                    is


                   +   (1+r)            - ft(1 - —)f(e)de)] <0                                                            (A8)


while the minimum               value       is

                   +   (i+rY(t - f           tf(O )de         -   fTf(e )de )} > -                                           (A9)

For        >   0,      the maximum value of                   is (since                  1):
      Lt
      (l+r)(t —              f(i     —
                                          —)f(e)de)                                (Alo)



while the xnininuiin         value   is


      (1+r)(i -          f   rf(e)de —
                                            1)d0)
                                                      = 0                          (All)



For the final period, V =                     + (l+r) fif(e)dO].     This is clearly

zero if        =   0,   negative but greater than —t    if   is less than or equal to 1

and 4 =   1,   and positive but less than j—          if     0 and    =   0.
                                       —' 3—




                                  Footnotes


 1. See Cordes and Sheffrin (1981).

2. This resulted from a combination of depreciation allowances and

     investmer3t tax credits that were nre generous than immediate expensing.

     See Auerbach (1982a).

3. See the descriptions in Auerbach (1982a) and Warren arid Auerbach (1982?.

1. See footnote 11 and the related text.

5. See Warren and Auerbach (1983).
6.   These results are well—knpwn for the certainty case (see King (1975),

     for exanple) and are easily extended to the case of uncertainty. By

     interest deductibility, we mean a deduction for the opportunity cost of



     funds, regardless of the form of finance.

7. This condition is that       is   negative in the relevant range, not just

     locally at the optimum. We assume this condition holds throughout the

     following analysis.

8. See the discussion in Lucas, Prescott and Stokey (1983).

9. Further details available from the author on request.

10. The graphs in Figure 5 are smoothed versions of the actual solutions,

     which, because of the discrete grid, have small wiggles in them. The

     means shown are based on the actual solutions.

11. Calculations in Warren and Auerbach (1982) suggest that in the absence

     of uncertainty, the transfer of incentives through safe—harbor leasing
    fell short of providing "tax exempt" firms with the same incentive to
    invest   as fully profitable one, assuming complete debt finance, i.e. the



    deductibility of interest.

12. Note that it is imudiately clear by induction on (Al) that        0.
                                         _.14 5




                                    Re ferencs



Auerbach, Alan J , 1982a, "The New Economics of Accelerated Depreciation,"

     Boston College Law Rev.ew 23, September, pp 1327—1355.

__________     1982b, "Whither the Corporate Tax? Reform after ACRS," National

     Tax Journal 35, September, pp. 275—286.

Cordes, Joseph J. and Steven M. Sheffrin, 1981, "Taxation and the Sectoral

     Allocation of Capital in the U.S.," National Tax Journal 314, December,

     pp. 419_2432.

Domar, Evsey D. and Richard A. Musgrave, 191414, "Proportional Income Taxation

     and Risk—Taking," Quarterly Journal of Economics 58, pp. 388—1422.

King, Mervyn A., 1975, "Taxation, Corporation Financial Policy and the Cost

     of Capital —— A Comment," Journal of Public Economics , pp. 271—279.

Lucas, Robert E., Edward C. Prescott and Nancy L. Stokey, 1983, Dynamic

     Competitive Analysis, unpublished manuscript.

Stiglitz, Joseph E., 1969, "The Effects of Income, Wealth and Capital Gains

     Taxation on Risk—Taking," Quarterly Journal of Economics 82, pp. 262—283.

Warren, Alvin C. and Alan J. Auerbach, 1982, "Transferability of Tax Incentives

     and the Fiction of Safe—Harbor Leasing," Harvard Law Review 95, June,

     pp. 1752—1786.

__________ and __________, 1983, "Tax Policy and Equipment Leasing After

     TEFRA,"   Harvard Law Review 96,   May,      forthcoming.
