                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      MEXICAN ENTREPRENEURSHIP: A COMPARISON
                         OF SELF-EMPLOYMENT IN MEXICO AND
                                  THE UNITED STATES

                                             Robert Fairlie
                                         Christopher Woodruff

                                         Working Paper 11527
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w11527


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       July 2005




We would like to thank Lori Kletzer, David Neumark and seminar participants at UC Davis and the NBER
conference on Mexican immigration from helpful comments and suggestions. Daniel Beltran, Kuntal Das,
and Jose Martinez provided excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by Robert Fairlie and Christopher Woodruff. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
Mexican Entrepreneurship: A Comparison of Self-Employment in Mexico and the United States
Robert Fairlie and Christopher Woodruff
NBER Working Paper No. 11527
July 2005
JEL No. F2, J2

                                          ABSTRACT




Nearly a quarter of Mexico's workforce is self employed. But in the U.S. rates of self employment

among Mexican Americans are only 6 percent, about half the rate among non-Latino whites. Using

data from the Mexican and U.S. population census, we show that neither industrial composition nor

differences in the age and education of Mexican born populations residing in Mexico and the U.S.

accounts for the differences in the self employment rates in the two countries. Within the U.S.,

however, the data show self employment rates are much higher in ethnic enclaves. In PUMAS with

a high percentage of residents of Latino origin, rates of self employment are comparable to rates

among non-Latino whites. The data also indicate that the lack of English language ability and the

lack of legal status among Mexican American immigrants helps account for their lower rates of self

employment.



Robert W. Fairlie
Department of Economics
University of California, Santa Cruz
Santa Cruz, CA 95064
rfairlie@ucsc.edu

Christopher Woodruff
Graduate School of International Relations
 and Pacific Studies
University of California, San Diego
La Jolla, CA 92093-0519
cwoodruff@ucsd.edu
1. Introduction

         Mexico is one of the most entrepreneurial countries in the world. Self-

employment or entrepreneurship rate estimates from the OECD (2000) rank Mexico at

the top of the list of 28 member countries, the Global Entrepreneurship Monitor (2003)

rank Mexico 4th in its listing of 41 countries, and the ILO rank Mexico in the 70th

percentile of its list of 74 countries. Estimates from these sources and from the Mexico

Census indicate that roughly one fourth of Mexico's workforce is a self-employed

business owner. Roughly 10% of individuals born in Mexico currently reside in the

United States. In the U. S., however, rates of self employment among Mexican

immigrants are low. The U.S. Mexican immigrant rate of self-employment is only 6

percent -- a rate substantially lower than the national average of 11 percent. This

difference between the U.S. and home country self-employment rates for Mexican

immigrants appears to be an extreme outlier when examining the relationship across

immigrant groups in the United States (see Figure 1).1

         The difference between the total self employment rate in Mexico of

approximately 25% and the total rate in the United States of approximately 11% is

consistent with worldwide, cross country evidence that shows a strong inverse

relationship between income levels and self employment (Gollin 2002). State level data

from the population census in Mexico are consistent with this pattern as well, showing an

inverse relationship between average wage levels and self employment rates. Gollin

(2000) provides a theoretical motivation for this pattern with a version of the Lucas

(1978) model showing that self employment rates in an economy are decreasing with the

1
 Previous research indicates that home country self employment rates are either positively associated with
self employment rates in the U.S. (Yuengert 1995) or that the two are not significantly associated (Fairlie
and Meyer 1996).
average productivity of the workforce. Given the higher income levels in the U.S., the

higher rate of self employment in Mexico is consistent with this theory.

        But, why are self employment rates among Mexican immigrants in the U.S. so

much lower than those of non-Latino whites? This comparison creates somewhat of a

puzzle because the likelihood of having previous experience in self-employment and the

finding of a strong intergenerational link in business ownership suggest that Mexican

immigrants should have high rates of self-employment, all else equal. In fact, individuals

who had a self-employed parent are found to be roughly two to three times as likely to be

self-employed as someone who did not have a self-employed parent (see Lentz and

Laband 1990, Fairlie 1999, Dunn and Holtz-Eakin 2000, and Hout and Rosen 2000).2

Immigrants are also generally more likely to be self employed than are natives in the

United States (Borjas 1986, Yuengert 1995, and Fairlie and Meyer 2003). Estimates

from the 2000 U.S. Census indicate that the total immigrant self-employment rate is 11

percent higher than the native self-employment rate.

        In this chapter, we explore several possible explanations of the lower rates of self

employment among Mexican immigrants in the U.S.. Self employment rates of Mexican

immigrants in the U.S. may be lower because the characteristics of migrants to the U.S.

differ from those of Mexicans remaining in Mexico. Mexican immigrants, at least as

measured using U.S. census data, differ in age and education from the population resident

in Mexico (Chiquiar and Hanson 2005). This may be important because age and

education have been found to be important determinants of self employment rates in the


2
  Additional evidence indicates that business inheritances play only a minor role in contributing to the
intergenerational link in business ownership and previous work experience in a family member's business
has a large positive effect on small business outcomes (Fairlie and Robb 2003).



                                                    2
United States. Our estimates, however, indicate that age and education explain little of

the gap between rates in Mexico and rates among Mexicans in the United States. We

also examine the sectoral distribution of the workforce in the two countries. Although the

distribution of workers across industries differs among Mexican immigrants in the U.S.,

all workers in the U.S., and the workforce in Mexico, these differences also do not

account for much of the gap in self employment.

           Finally, we consider differences between rates of self employment for Mexican

immigrants and the total U.S. rate. In contrast, we find that the standard measurable

characteristics of Mexican immigrants account for roughly half of the difference in self

employment rates for men and the entire difference for women. We then examine

possible constraints on entry into self employment among Mexicans working in the

United States. We find that Mexican immigrant self-employment rates may be higher for

those who reside in the United States legally and are fluent in English, and for men, those

who live in ethnic enclaves. Data limitations require that we use different data sets to

examine these various factors, so a precise estimate of what self employment rates among

Mexican immigrants would be in the absence of the constraints of language ability and

legal status is difficult. However, the data suggest that these factors contribute to the low

rate of self-employment among Mexican immigrants in the United States.

           Why should we be interested in self employment rates in Mexico and among

Mexican immigrants in the U.S.? There are several possible answers to this question.

Some have argued that entrepreneurship provides a route out of poverty and an

alternative to unemployment.3 Proponents also note that many disadvantaged groups

facing discrimination or blocked opportunities in the wage/salary sector have used
3
    See Glazer and Moynihan (1970), Light (1972, 1979), Sowell (1981), and Moore (1983).


                                                    3
business ownership as a source of economic advancement. Self-employed business

owners may also gain political influence comes with success in small business (Brown,

Hamilton, and Medoff 1990).

       Whether or not self employment represents a path to economic progress for

Mexicans in the U.S., the data suggest that a substantial part of the gap in self

employment rates in the U.S. is caused by constraints on entry into a given worker’s

sector of choice. This implies some efficiency loss, though we cannot estimate to size of

that loss using our data. Low wages in Mexico, on the other hand, not only increase the

percentage of the workforce working in self employment, but also increase the flow of

workers to the U.S. (Hanson and Spillemburgo 1999).



2. Data

       Our data for the United States come from the 2000 Public Use Microdata 5-

Percent Sample (PUMS), and our data for Mexico are a 50 percent random draw from the

10 percent extended survey sample of the 2000 Mexico Census. There are some

differences in the two census surveys, which should be taken into account when

interpreting the results. The U.S. census asks individuals about average hours worked

over the preceding year and annual income. The Mexican census asks individuals if they

worked in the week prior to the survey, and what their earnings were that week.

Additionally, categories of responses for questions sometimes differ, For example, the

categories for marital status in Mexico include “live with partner without being married,”

whereas the U.S. census does not include this possibility. However, overall the

differences appear to be modest, and the data are roughly comparable.




                                              4
           In the U.S. Census, self-employed workers are defined as those individuals who

identify themselves as mainly self-employed in their own not incorporated or

incorporated business on the class of worker question.4 Self-employed workers in the

Mexico Census are those who report themselves as employers or workers for their own

account in the week preceding the survey.

           In our main sample, we include only individuals ages 16-64 who usually worked

at least 35 hours per week during the year and are employed in the survey week in the

U.S. Census. For Mexico, we include individuals ages 16-64 who worked at least 35

hours in the survey week. In some tables, we include non-workers to address issues of

labor force selection. We also create similar industry and education classifications using

the two Censuses. Both Censuses use the NAICS industry categories.

           The important comparisons in the paper are made between Mexicans resident in

Mexico, Mexican immigrants in the U.S., and the overall population in the U.S. For the

U.S. sample of Mexican immigrants, we include only immigrants who arrived when they

were at least 12 years old, representing 86 percent of all immigrants. This restriction

ensures that our sample of Mexican immigrants was raised in Mexico, and thus

potentially exposed to the higher rates of business ownership in that country. These

Mexican immigrants also participated in the Mexican educational system.



3. Self-Employment Rates and Industry Composition Differences

           Mexican immigrants in the United States have substantially lower rates of self-

employment than Mexico residents. As reported in Table 1, estimates from the Mexican

Census indicate that 25.8 percent of the male, full-time, labor force and 17.0 percent of
4
    Unpaid family workers are not counted as self-employed.


                                                     5
the female labor force are self-employed business owners. In contrast, only 6.0 and 6.1

percent of male and female Mexican immigrants, respectively, are self-employed. The

disparities in business ownership rates between Mexico residents and U.S. Mexican

immigrants are somewhat smaller when we exclude agriculture. However, non-

agricultural self-employment rates still differ by nearly 16 percentage points for men and

slightly more than 10 percentage points for women. These differences are consistent with

broader cross country patterns.

         Self-employment rates are notably higher in Mexico than in the United States.

The U.S. male self-employment rate is 11.1 percent and the U.S. female self-employment

rate is 5.6 percent. The differences in rates raise the possibility that self employment is a

different phenomenon in the two countries. However, an examination of earnings

distributions suggests that this is not the case. Figures 2 and 3 report non-zero log

earnings distributions in the self-employed and wage/salary sectors in the United States

and Mexico.5 Although earnings are considerably lower in Mexico, the approximate

shape and location of distributions are comparable. In both countries, the tails of the

distribution are fatter for the self employed than for wage workers and the self-

employment earnings distribution is slightly to the right of the wage/salary earnings

distribution.6 Although not reported, the comparison of earnings distributions is also

similar for Mexican immigrants in the United States.

         Returning to rates and focusing on the U.S. experience, Mexican immigrants have

rates of business ownership that are notably lower than the national level for men, but are

slightly higher for women. The self-employment rate of Mexican immigrant men is 6.0

5
  The shapes and comparisons of the distributions are similar if we include zero earnings observations.
6
  Separate estimates by gender reveal a self-employment earnings distribution shifted more to the right
relative to the wage/salary earning distribution for men and to the left for women in both countries.


                                                     6
percent compared to a U.S. total rate of 11.1 percent. Interestingly, Mexicans born in the

United States have roughly similar rates of self-employment rates as Mexican immigrants

for men, and native-born Mexicans have lower rates of self-employment than Mexican

immigrants for women. These results are surprising because the native-born Mexican

population in the United States is more educated and wealthier than the Mexican

immigrant population. Overall, these estimates set the stage for the following analysis.

We are interested in answering the question of whether factors other than the level of

development of the economy contribute to the higher rates of self-employment in Mexico

compared with rates for Mexican immigrants in the United States. We will first examine

how much of this difference is explained by differences in the sectoral breakdown of the

two economies, or differences in sectors in which Mexican immigrants are employed.

Next, we consider the impact from differences in measurable characteristics—education,

age, marital status and the number of children—of the Mexican immigrant population

compared to the population resident in Mexico.


Industry comparison

       Table 2A presents the distribution of employment of males across 14 major

sectors of the economy, as well as self employment rates in each sector. The data are

shown for the labor force by sector in Mexico, for Mexican immigrants in the US, for

Mexicans born in the United States, and for the entire U.S. labor force. We use 14 major

sectors based on US census classifications, though we combine armed forces and public

administration and separate transportation from utilities. The top half of the table shows

the employment distribution, and the bottom half the self employment rates. A similar

breakdown for females is shown on Table 2B.



                                             7
         Comparing first the structure of the male labor force in Mexico and in the United

States (columns 1 and 4), it is apparent that agriculture occupies a much larger part of the

Mexican labor force (17.1 percent vs. 2.6 percent in the US) while finance, information,

professional and education/health services occupy a larger part of the US workforce (10.6

percent in Mexico vs. 27.0 percent in the United States). But aside from these shifts, the

most striking aspect of the data is the similarity of the structure of employment in Mexico

and the US. In construction, manufacturing, trade (retail and wholesale combined) and

transportation, the percentage of the workforce employed in the two countries is quite

similar.

         The bottom half of Table 2A shows rates of self employment at the sectoral level

for the same four groups of workers. On the whole, rates of self employment are much

higher in Mexico than in the US—25.8 percent vs. 11.1 percent. The most important

differences in self employment rates between the two countries are in manufacturing,

trade, other services and the arts, entertainment and recreation sector. The latter includes

employment in hotels and restaurants, while other services includes domestic household

workers. Rates of self employment in the two countries are much more similar in

construction, and the higher end service sectors (finance, professional, education/health).7

         The data for females on Table 2B show that the differences between the

distribution of employment in Mexico and the U.S. (columns 1 and 4) are much greater

for females than for males. A much larger share of the female workforce in Mexico is

found in manufacturing, trade and other services, and much less employment is found in

7
 In the United States, the detailed industries with the largest concentrations of self-employed men are
construction (31.4 percent), landscaping services (14.9 percent), auto repair (6.4 percent), restaurants (5.3
percent), truck transportation (4.3 percent), and crop production (4.2 percent). In Mexico, the most
common detailed industries are crop production (37.5 percent), building construction (7.7 percent), retail
sales of food products (6.7 percent), repair services (5.8 percent), and ground transportation (3.2 percent).


                                                      8
education/health services as well as finance and professional services. As with males, the

data on the lower part of Table 2B show that differences self employment rates are

notably higher in manufacturing, trade and the art, entertainment and recreation sectors.

Notably, self employment rates in other services are actually lower in Mexico than in the

United States.8

        How much of the difference between self employment rates in Mexico and the US

is explained by sectors in which workers are employed? For example, does the relatively

larger share of Mexican employment in agriculture, where self employment rates are high

even in the US, explain a substantial part of the difference in self employment rates

between the two countries? The answer is that the sectoral composition explains only a

small part of the overall difference in self employment rates. Taking the rates of self

employment at the industry level in the US and applying them to the sectoral distribution

of the labor force in Mexico, we obtain a rate of self employment of 14.4 percent for

men. That is, if self employment rates within each sector in Mexico were identical to the

rates in the U.S., we would expect a rate of self employment in Mexico roughly 3

percentage points higher than that found in the U.S. because more employment is

concentrated in high self employment sectors.

        Hence, only roughly 3 percentage points of the almost 15 percentage point

difference in male self-employment rates is explained by differences in the allocation of

labor across sectors. And indeed, all of this is attributable to the larger share of

employment in agriculture in Mexico. For non-agricultural employment, the rate of self

8
  The most common detailed industries for self-employed women in the United States are private
households (24.0 percent), child day care services (16.9 percent), services to buildings (7.3 percent),
restaurants (7.1 percent), and beauty salons (5.3 percent). In Mexico, the most common detailed industries
are retail sales of food products (21.5 percent), food preparation (12.0 percent), crop production (9.9
percent), domestic service (7.8 percent), and retail sales of clothing (5.8 percent).


                                                     9
employment in the US is 10.6 percent, while the projected rate of self employment in the

US given the distribution of the labor force in Mexico is 10.7 percent. Thus, taking the

US rates of self employment as a standard, we find that sectoral differences do little to

explain the higher rates of self employment in Mexico. Rather, the higher overall rate is

driven by higher rates within given sectors, consistent with the models that focus on

differences in the levels of workforce productivity.

       The results for women are similar. Using the U.S. self-employment rates at the

industry level and the sectoral distribution of the labor force in Mexico, we obtain a rate

of self employment of 7.6 percent for women. Thus, only 2 percentage points of the 9.4

percentage point gap in female self-employment rates is explained by differences in the

allocation of labor across sectors.

       The data on Tables 2A and 2B also allow us to say something about the process of

assimilation of Mexican immigrants in to the US economy. Column 2 of Tables 2A and

2B shows the male and female sectoral division of labor and the rates of self employment

of first generation Mexican immigrants in the US, those born outside of the U.S. and

arriving after reaching age 12. Columns 3 of the same two tables show the data for US

natives of Mexican descent. Among first generation immigrants, the distribution of

employment across sectors differs from both the distribution in Mexico and the

distribution in the US. Recent male migrants are much more likely to be employed in

construction and arts, entertainment and recreation (restaurants and hotels) than are either

those residing in Mexico or the US population as a whole. First generation females are

more likely to be employed in manufacturing and arts, entertainment and recreation than

are either females in Mexico or the entire female labor force in the US. Compared with




                                             10
the US labor force as a whole, males and especially females are much less likely to be

found in education/health services. Somewhat surprisingly, the percentage of

employment in professional services is as high among first generation Mexicans as it is

among the labor force as a whole.

       Self employment rates among first generation Mexicans are far below those in

Mexico and, for males at least, far below those for the population as a whole in the U.S.

The sectoral distribution of employment does not explain the gap between migrants and

the population as a whole for males. Indeed, first generation male migrants from Mexico

tend to be concentrated in industries with high rates of self employment overall in the

U.S. Given the industries in which they work, Mexican males would have an overall self

employment rate of 14.4 percent (12.8 percent if agriculture is excluded), compared to an

overall rate in the U.S. of 11.1 percent (10.6 percent without agriculture). Recent female

immigrants have rates of self employment very similar to the females in the U.S. as a

whole, though the data on Table 2B suggest that this is due in part to their being

overrepresented in the other services category, where rates of self employment are high.

       Among those of Mexican descent born in the US, the sectoral distribution of

employment is very similar to the US as a whole for both males and females. Among this

group, however, rates of self employment are lower in every sector for both males and for

females, compared to the U.S. labor force as a whole. Hence, while first generation

females have self employment rates comparable to the overall U.S. population, females

of Mexican descent born in the U.S. have markedly lower rates of self employment.



4. Are Mexican Immigrants Different than Mexico Residents?




                                            11
       We next turn to an examination of the characteristics of Mexicans resident in

Mexico and Mexican immigrants in the US. Previous research using the 1990 and earlier

Censuses (Feliciano 2001; Chiquiar and Hanson, 2003) indicates that recent Mexican

immigrants to the U.S. are more educated than residents of Mexico. The 2000 census data

reported in Table 3 indicate a similar picture. We continue to report estimates for U.S.

natives of Mexican descent and the entire US population 16-64 years old for comparison

purposes, and we include the full sample of all individuals ages 16-64 instead of

conditioning on full-time employment. Despite the fact that a larger portion of Mexican

immigrants have no schooling (10.0 percent vs. 6.0 percent for males), Mexican

immigrants are less likely to have nine years or less of schooling, and more likely to have

10-15 years of schooling, than are Mexicans resident in Mexico. This pattern holds for

both males and females (see columns 1 and 2 of Table 3). Male immigrants are less likely

to have 1-4 years of schooling (6.5 percent vs. 14.8 percent of the population of similar

age in Mexico) and less likely to have 7-9 years of schooling (19.3 percent vs. 26.3

percent). Among males, 38.9 percent of immigrants have 10-15 years of schooling while

only 22.4 percent of the population resident in Mexico has 10-15 years of schooling.

However, Mexicans resident in Mexico are more likely to have a college or graduate

degree (9.3 percent for males and 6.5 percent for females) than are Mexican immigrants

in the United States (3.3 percent for males and 3.6 percent for females). Qualitatively, the

same general patterns hold when the sample is limited to those in the labor force.

       There are some differences in age distribution of Mexican residents and Mexican

immigrants as well, with Mexican immigrants to the US being somewhat older on

average than Mexicans remaining in Mexico. Table 4 reports estimates for a comparison




                                            12
of age distributions in the two countries. The most notable difference between the age

distribution of Mexican resident in Mexico and Mexican immigrants in the U.S. is that

the latter are much less likely to be 16-19 years of age. After accounting for the

difference in the mass in this age range, there are essentially no differences in the

proportion of the population in any of the 5-year age ranges above age 45 for either males

or females. For both males and females, a larger part of the immigrant population is

between the age of 25 and 45. On the whole, then, immigrants are slightly older than

residents of Mexico, but this is driven entirely by under representation of the 16-19 year

old age group.

       When the sample is limited to those participating full time in the labor force, the

age differences among males are slightly smaller, while those for females are slightly

larger. For example, 23.5 percent of males in the labor force in Mexico are 16-24 years of

age, while 19.5 percent of Mexican immigrants are in that age range. For females, 30.5

percent of those in Mexican labor force and only 13.4 percent of immigrants in the labor

force are 16-24 years old.

       The available data suggest there are no significant differences between migrant

sending households and other households in Mexico with respect to the self employment

of household members. Data from the 2000 Mexican Population Census indicate that

sending households are slightly more likely to have any member self employed (34% vs.

32%), but no more likely to be headed by someone who is self employed (29% in either

case). The census data do not contain information on households who moved in their

entirety before the census was conducted.




                                             13
5. The Determinants of Self-Employment in Mexico and the United States

        Do the differences in the education and age patterns of migrants explain part of

the higher self employment rates in Mexico? We explore this question in two steps. First,

we estimate regressions of the worker characteristics on self employment status in

Mexico and the US. We then combine the Mexican regressions with the characteristics of

migrants in the US to estimate what the self employment rates of migrants would be were

they working in Mexico. Tables 5A and 5B show regressions for self employment status

in Mexico and the US for males and females from a linear probability model. The right

hand side variables measure age (nine dummy variables with 16-19 years old being the

base group), education (nine dummy variables with no schooling being the base group),

the number of children under 18 in the person’s household and a dummy variable

indicating whether the individual is married.9 The first two columns for each gender

show results from the Mexico and the third and fourth columns show results from the US.

For both countries, we first report results for the entire sample and then for the sample

restricted to non-agricultural activities.

        The industry breakdown on Table 2 showed that for men agriculture absorbs a

much larger share of the labor force in Mexico than in the US. The differences between

the determinants of self employment status in agriculture and other activities are evident

from comparing the two regressions for males. Education, defined as described in Table

3, is negatively associated with self employment beyond 4 years of schooling in the full

sample. Males with high school complete are 6 percentage points less likely to be self


9
  The reported U.S. coefficients do not include ethnic, race and immigrant dummies for comparability with
the Mexico estimates. Estimates for the age, education, marriage, and children coefficients are fairly
similar after including these controls.


                                                   14
employed than males with no schooling. This relationship reflects the high rates of self

employment and low levels of schooling among the agricultural labor force. In the non-

agricultural sector, the association between education and self employment is very small

and positive at least over some ranges. Those with a high school education are 1.4

percentage points more likely to be self employed than those without any schooling. For

females, there is a very strong negative association between self employment and

education even in non-agricultural activities. Females with high school complete are 19.5

percentage points more likely to be self employed in the full sample and 18 percent more

likely to be self employed in the non-agricultural sector.

       The effect of education on self employment is markedly different in the US,

especially for females (see columns 3 and 4 for each gender). In the US, the probability

of being self employed is increasing in education for males, and decreasing very slowly

for females through the high school education level. While the effects of education in the

U.S. appear very small in absolute terms, for males at least they are not so trivial relative

to the overall self employment rate of 11.1 percent. A male with a college degree is 3.5

percentage points more likely to be self employed than is a male without schooling; a

female with a college degree is 1.3 percentage points less likely to be self employed. The

effect of education changes only very slightly when agriculture is excluded from the U.S.

sample.

       In all reported regressions, self employment increases steadily in the age of the

individual for males. For females, the rates are flat over the first two age ranges, and then

increasing beyond age 24. The effect of age on self employment is larger in Mexico than

in the United States in absolute terms. Relative to the overall levels of self employment,




                                             15
age also has a much larger effect in Mexico among females, and a slightly larger effect in

Mexico among males. The strong positive relationship between age and self-

employment, especially in Mexico, is evident in Figures 1A and 1B.

       Being married and having more children make self employment more likely for

both genders in both countries. The effects are generally not large. Among females, the

effect of being married is much larger in Mexico (about 10 percent points), while among

males the marriage effect is twice as large in the U.S. Each additional child increases the

likelihood of self employment by a fifth to a half of a percent in Mexico, and by a third to

a half of a percent in the U.S. Recall, however, that Table 5 is measuring self

employment conditional on being in the labor force, and hence indicates only a part of the

effect being married with children has on self employment. In Mexico, both being

married and having children are associated with higher levels of labor force participation

among males and lower levels of labor force participation among females.

       The Mexican data allow us to separate self employed workers working by

themselves from employers. The majority of Mexican self employed (88 percent of males

and 89 percent of females) work by themselves. The percentage of the labor force which

is an employer in Mexico (3.1 percent for males and 1.9 percent for females) is close to

the percentage of the Mexican labor force which is self employed in the U.S. (4.6 percent

for males and 4.2 percent for females). In Table 6, we explore differences in the

association between education, age, marital status and children on status as an own

account worker and an employer.

       In the case of education, the regressions indicate very significant differences in

these effects. While education is strongly negatively associated with being an own




                                            16
account worker for both males and females, education is positively associated with being

an employer for both genders. Relative to the proportion of the labor force which is an

employer, the positive effect of education on being an employer is large. Males (females)

with some college are almost 6 percent (3 percent) more likely to be an employer than

males (females) without schooling. The U.S. census data do not allow us to separate own

account workers from employers. But the Mexican employer regressions are similar to

the U.S. self employment status regressions, especially for males. Own account status in

Mexico appears to be driven by a different dynamic than either employer status in

Mexico or self employment in the U.S.

       Overall, we find both similarities and dissimilarities between the processes

generating self-employment in Mexico and the United States. The differences are

clearest among the own account workers. Across regions within Mexico, income levels

measured by wage rates are negatively correlated with own account workers as a

percetage of the workforce, but positively associated with employers as a percentage of

the workforce. The regressions on the determinants of self employment status, then, are

consistent with the differences in income levels being the primary driver of differences in

self employment rates between the U.S. and Mexico.



6. Predicted Self-Employment Rates in Mexico and the United States

Decomposition of the Mexico/U.S. gap in self-employment

       We now ask whether differences in the measured characteristics of workers in

various groups explain differences in self employment rates. We examine this question

from three different perspectives. First, we ask whether characteristics of the workforce




                                            17
have any impact on the overall self employment rates in the U.S. and Mexico. We next

ask whether the characteristics of Mexican immigrants relative to those remaining in

Mexico explain differences in self employment rats of Mexican immigrants in the U.S.

and Mexican remaining in Mexico. Finally, we ask whether difference in characteristics

of Mexican immigrants in the U.S. and other workers in the U.S. explain any part of the

gap between Mexican and overall self employment rate in the U.S.

       Tables 7A and 7B report estimates of predicted self-employment rates using

coefficient estimates for Mexico and the United States reported in Table 5 and average

characteristics of workers in the U.S. and Mexico. For both men and women, predicted

self-employment rates using the U.S. coefficients are substantially lower than those using

the coefficients from Mexico. In fact, in every case, the difference between predicted

self-employment rates in Mexico and the United States after switching characteristics of

the working population is larger than the actual difference between Mexico and U.S. self-

employment rates. This finding suggests that the large gaps between levels of self-

employment in Mexico and the United States are entirely due to differences in the

structures of the economy and would be even larger if not for the favorable characteristics

of the U.S. population -- mainly being older and more educated on average.



Predicted self-employment rates in Mexico

       What next ask what the self employment rate of Mexican immigrants would be if

they had remained in Mexico. Using the regression coefficients for self employment

status in Mexico, we calculate the predicted probability of self employment for each

immigrant, and then take a weighted average of those predicted values. We use the




                                            18
regressions reported on Table 5 to estimate the probability of self employment given

some set of characteristics x. The level of self employment in Mexico can then be written

as a function of the determinants of self employment and the distribution of those

determinants:

g Mex ( se) = ∫ f ( se | x)h( x | i = Mex)dx

where x represents the characteristics determining entry into self employment and

h( x | i = Mex) the distribution of those characteristics over the population 16-64 years of

age resident in Mexico. Ignoring changes in the determinants of selection into self

employment that might be caused by the returning population, we can then substitute the

characteristics of Mexican immigrants in the U.S. for those in Mexico:

 Mex
gUS  ( se) = ∫ f ( se | x)h( x | i = US )dx

         This calculation presumes that individuals participating in the labor force in the

U.S. would also participate in Mexico, and similarly for those not participating. Labor

force participation rates appear to differ somewhat between the two countries, being

higher in the U.S. for females born in Mexico and higher in Mexico for males born in

Mexico.10 For example, the female labor force participation rate among Mexican

immigrants in the 2000 U.S. census is 39.2 percent, compared with a rate of 33.0 percent

among females in the Mexican census. The full time participation rate, defined as being

in the labor force and working 35 hours or more per week, is 28.1 percent in the US and

23.6 percent in Mexico for females. For males, the overall (full time) rates for males are




10
  Chiquiar and Hanson (2003) show much higher rates of labor force participation among Mexican
immigrants in the U.S. using 1990 census data. It appears from their discussion that they do not condition
on working in the week prior to the survey, as we do here.


                                                    19
70.4 percent (61.5 percent) in the US and 77.8 percent (67.7 percent) in Mexico.11 The

lower rates in the U.S for males may result from our defining participation as working in

the week prior to the survey, and their concentration in industries such as construction,

where employment is more variable across time.

        We can take into account differences in labor force participation rates by simply

modeling entry into self employment over the entire population, regardless of whether

they participate in the labor force or not. Alternatively, given linear models, we can

equivalently first model labor force participation and then model entry into self

employment conditional on being in the labor force. That is:

g Mex ( se) = ∫∫ r (lfp | y ) s ( y | i = Mex)dy   f ( se | x)h( x | i = Mex)dx ,

where y represents the characteristics determining labor force participation and

s ( y | i = Mex) the distribution of those characteristics over the population 16-64 years of

age resident in Mexico. As above, we can project the self employment rates of Mexican

immigrants residing in the US were they to return to Mexico by using the distribution of

characteristics of immigrants in the US:

 Mex
gUS  ( se) = ∫∫ r (lfp | y ) s ( y | i = US )dy    f ( se | x)h( x | i = US )dx .

        In reporting the results of this exercise, we normalize the probabilities of entry

into the labor force to 1 when estimating the expected self employment rates, so that the

reported self employment rates are comparable to those reported in Table 1. That is, we

estimate self employment as a percentage of the labor force, using the projected labor

force participation as a weight.

11
  Some of the difference between US and Mexican labor force participation rates may be due to
differences in the survey questions. The Mexican census asks about employment during the week before
the survey. The US census asks about normal hours over the prior year and activity in the current week.


                                                      20
        For males, the overall punch line is that the U.S. immigrants would be expected to

have self employment rates very similar to those in the Mexican labor force. Given the

measured characteristics, Mexican immigrants residing in the U.S. would be expected to

have slightly higher full time labor force participation rates (71.1 percent vs. 67.7

percent), but a slightly lower expected self employment rate conditional on being in the

labor force (24.9 percent vs. 25.2 percent). Combining labor force participation and self

employment, we find that if immigrants in the U.S. were returned to Mexico, their self

employment rates would be almost identical to those of males actually in the labor force

in Mexico, 25.7 percent.

        The differences for females are slightly larger. Without conditioning on labor

force participation, the immigrant population would be expected to have self employment

rates of 24.6 percent, higher than a projected rate of 22.1 percent for the entire female

population resident in Mexico. Labor force participation rates would be expected to be

lower given the characteristics of the immigrant population, however—21.7 percent

compared with 23.6 percent among females resident in Mexico. Accounting for expected

labor force participation, the projected self employment rate for females with measured

characteristics of immigrants resident in the US would be 20.3 percent, significantly

higher than the 17.0 percent rate among females resident in Mexico.12

        Thus, for females, neither the lower labor force participation rates nor the higher

self employment rates are the result of differences in characteristics of the immigrant



12
  A part of the higher projected self employment rate is due to the higher marriage rate among immigrant
females (69 percent) compared with females in Mexico (50 percent). The Mexican census includes a
category of “live with spouse in free union.” About 10 percent of females in Mexico give this response,
which we have counted as unmarried. When we categorize these females as being married, the predicted
self employment rate of the immigrant population is 19.5% rather the 20.3% when this response is
categorized as unmarried.


                                                   21
population. For males, the characteristics of immigrants suggest they would have even

higher labor force participation rate in Mexico than the Mexican residents do.13



Predicted self-employment rates of Mexican immigrants in the United States

         In the previous section, we compared the characteristics of Mexican immigrants

with residents of Mexico, using the structure of labor markets in Mexico. To understand

how self employment rates among Mexican immigrants compare to what would be

expected given the characteristics of the U.S. labor market, we now turn to a comparison

of Mexican immigrants with other participants in the U.S labor market. Mexican

immigrants may possess characteristics that are associated with even lower levels of self-

employment in the United States than those possessed by the U.S. populations as a

whole. A younger and less-educated Mexican immigrant working population may

explain why self-employment rates for this group, at least for men, are lower than the

U.S. total.

         To investigate this issue further, we calculate predicted self-employment rates for

Mexican immigrants using the U.S. coefficients reported in Table 5. Estimates are

reported in Table 8. Mexican immigrants are predicted to have self-employment rates of

roughly 8 percent for men and 6 percent for women. The estimates do not differ much

when agriculture is excluded.


13
  We also examined self employment in the non-agricultural sector, conditional on working in the non-
agricultural sector. We do this by defining labor force participation as participation in the non-agricultural
workforce, and taking this sample as the sample for the self employment regression as well. The results are
quite similar to those reported above. For males, the immigrants in the U.S. have characteristics which
would result in higher levels of labor force participation (60.4 percent vs. 56.2 percent) and quite similar
expected self employment rates (22.7 percent vs. 22.9 percent). For females, the differences are equally
modest, with the projected non-agricultural self employment rate for females 19.8 percent compared with
16.4 percent among females employed in Mexico.



                                                     22
        The findings have contrasting implications for men and women. For men,

Mexican immigrants are predicted to have lower self-employment rates than the U.S.

total suggesting that low levels of education and youth contribute to the lower rates of

self-employment. The comparison of predicted self-employment rates indicates that from

2.6 to 2.8 percentage points (or 55.4 to 58.3 percent) of the gaps in self-employment rates

are due to differences in measurable characteristics between Mexican immigrants and the

U.S. total.14 The self-employment rate gaps in the United States are 4.4 and 5.1

percentage points for the non-agriculture and total workforce, respectively.

        Among the individual characteristics, roughly 40 percent of the gap is explained

by the relatively young Mexican immigrant workforce. As expected, education

differences are also important. Low levels of education among Mexican immigrants

explain 23.2 to 24.1 percent of the gap in self-employment rates. Finally, Mexican

immigrants have more children on average than the U.S. total, which is associated with

higher levels of self-employment suggesting that the self-employment rate gap would be

0.4 percentage points larger.

        The predicted self-employment rates are higher for Mexican immigrant women

than for the U.S. total. This finding suggests that Mexican immigrant women have

favorable characteristics, in terms of predicting self-employment, compared to the total

U.S. workforce. The similarities between the predicted rates and the actual rates for

women also indicate that differences in measurable characteristics are responsible for

roughly the entire Mexican immigrant/U.S. total gap in levels of self-employment. The

negative relationship between self-employment and education for U.S. women and


  The estimate is equal to βˆ                 − X M . I . ) , which is the familiar explained component of the gap
14                         U .S .    U .S .
                               (X
in a Blinder-Oaxaca decomposition.


                                                          23
relatively low levels of education among Mexican immigrant women contribute to self-

employment rates that are higher for this group than the national average. The relative

youth of Mexican immigrant women contributes to the gap, but this is roughly offset by

having more children and a slightly higher probability of being married than the U.S.

population as a whole.

       Returning to our comparison of self-employment rates in Mexico and among

Mexican immigrants in the United States, we can use these estimates to calculate a rough

estimate of the contribution from Mexico/U.S. differences. The difference in predicted

self-employment rates in Mexico and the United States for this group approximates the

effect of leaving a country that supports relatively high levels of self-employment to one

that does not. Using estimates for all industries we find that the predicted self-

employment for male Mexican immigrants drops from 25.7 percent in Mexico to 8.3

percent in the United States. Female Mexican immigrants are predicted to have a self-

employment rate of 20.3 percent in Mexico and 6.1 percent in the United States. These

findings confirm that the large difference in self-employment rates between Mexico and

Mexican immigrants in the United States are primarily due to country-level differences in

self-employment. A large part of the difference appears to be due to fact that the U.S.

economy supports a lower level of self-employment than does the Mexican economy.

       In sum, the evidence suggests that the difference in the rates of self employment

in the U.S. and Mexico overall are not explained by the characteristics of the work forces

in the two countries. The analysis suggests that the differences are consistent with the

Lucas / Gollin thesis that self employment rates are decreasing in the per capita income

of a country. In contrast to these results, the standard measured characteristics of




                                             24
workers, such as age, education and family status explain roughly half of the gap between

the self employment rate of Mexican immigrants and others in the U.S. economy for men

and the entire gap for women. We turn now to an analysis of additional factors that

might contribute to differences between Mexican immigrant and U.S. total self

employment rates.



7: Some additional evidence on low self employment rates in the U.S.

       In this section, we provide evidence on several factors that might constrain entry

into self employment among Mexican immigrants in the United States. We address three

issues closely related to migration: enclave effects, English language ability and legal

status. We measure enclave effects as the percentage of individuals residing in a Public

Use Microsample Area (PUMA) who were born in Mexico. English language ability is

self reported in the census. To examine legal status, we use data from the Legalized

Population Survey (LPS).

       Using a measure of enclave at the SMSA level, Borjas (1986) finds that self

employment among Mexican, Cubans, and “other Hispanics” is increasing in the

percentage of Hispanics in an SMSA. The effect is larger among the immigrant

population than among the population born in the U.S. English language ability has been

found to affect earnings in wage labor markets (McManus, Gould and Welch 1983;

Dustman and van Soest 2002; Bleakley and Chin 2003). Fairlie and Meyer (1996) find

that better command of the English language associated with more self employment

among males, while the opposite holds among females.




                                             25
       The raw data suggest that enclave effects are important. Self employment rates

among Mexican-born males and females are higher in PUMAs where a larger percentage

of the population is of Latino descent. To see this, we rank the PUMAs according to the

percentage of their population which is of Latino origin. The lower quartile of PUMAs

have an less than 1.8% Latino-origin population. The cutoffs for the second and third

quartiles are 4.5% and 15%, respectively. The PUMA at the 90th percentile has almost

34% population of Latino descent. For males, the self employment rate among the

Mexican-born population living in the PUMAS in the three lower quartiles is around

4.4%. There is no clear trend in the rate within the three lower quartiles. The rate among

those in the top quartile of PUMAs according to Latino population is 6.6%. Moreover,

the self employment rates are clearly increasing even within the last quartile. Among the

Mexican-born residing in PUMAs in the top decile, the rate is 7.3%; among those in the

top percentile (more than 79% Latino population), the rate is 10.8%. Females have a

pattern whish is similar in the direction of the trend, but less pronounced. Those living in

PUMAs in the lower three quartiles of Latino-origin population have self employment

rates of around 4.4%. Those in the top quartile of PUMAs have self employment rates of

5.8%. Within the top decile (percentile) of PUMAs by Latino-origin population, the

female self employment rate is 5.8% (6.2%).

       English language ability is also associated with self employment rates among

males but not among females. The Census asks member of households where a language

other than English is spoken whether they speak English “very well,” “well,” “not well,”

or “not al all.” We group the last two categories together as indicating difficulty with

English language, and compare people in this group to those who either report that they




                                             26
speak only English, or report that they speak English very well or well. Among those

with lower English language ability, male self employment rates are 4.7%; the

comparable number among those who speak English well or fluently are 7.3%. The raw

differences among females are much smaller. Females with lower language ability have

self employment rates of 5.4%; those with fluency or near fluency have self employment

rates of 5.7%.

         To see if these raw differences hold up to controlling for other factors such as age

and education, we ran probits on self employment status. The regressions include the

same basic controls as those reported earlier: education and age categories, marital status

and number of children. Table 9 reports results for the English language and enclave

variables. The sample for the regression is limited to Mexican immigrants.15 For males

(Column 1), the data from the 2000 census are consistent with the earlier findings of

Borjas and Fairlie and Meyer. For females (Column 3), we find that neither enclave nor

command of the English language are associated with higher rates of self employment,

results consistent with those reported by Fairlie and Meyer. Relative to the gap between

actual and expected self employment rates, the language and enclave effects are large for

males. A one standard deviation increase in the percentage of the Latino-origin

population in the PUMA (16 percentage points) is associated with an increase in the self

employment rate by 0.9 percentage points; fluency or near fluency in English is

associated with an increase in self employment rates of 2.0 percentage points.




15
   We also looked at English language ability in the sample of all foreign born. For males, the coefficient on
English language ability is of a very similar magnitude. Among females, the language coefficient in the
larger sample of all immigrants is actually negative and marginally significant, indicating that better
English language ability is associated with a 0.7% lower probability of self employment.


                                                     27
         Language ability and enclave effects are likely to interact with one another. In

particular, we might expect language ability to be less important for individuals residing

in enclaves. Indeed, we find this is the case. The interaction term for the enclave measure

and language ability is negative when included in the regressions (Columns 2 and 4). For

males, inclusion of the interaction term increases the effect of English language fluency

to 2.5 percentage points for males evaluated at the median Latino population (4.4

percent), and the effect of a standard deviation increase in the Latino population in the

PUMA to 1.4 percentage points. Among those fluent in English, the enclave effect is cut

by two-thirds. For females, including the interaction effects makes the language effect

marginally significant. English fluency is associated with a 0.65 percentage point

increase in self employment rates at the median Latino density. The effect is smaller in

PUMAs with more Latino-origin population, and disappears in the upper quartile of those

PUMAs. While these results suggest a correlation between English language ability and

self employment, the direction of causation and whether the relationship is driven by an

unobserved factor, such as entrepreneurial ability, are difficult to ascertain.16

         The final explanation we explore here is the legal status of Mexican immigrants.

The Bureau of the Census estimates that 3.9 million of the 7.8 million Mexican-born

residents of the U.S. are not registered with immigration authorities (Costanzo et al,

2001). Included in this number are many residents who are in the United States legally,




16
  One instrument for language ability that has been suggested in the literature is the age of arrival in the
United States (Bleakley and Chin, 2003). Because migration to the U.S. might also be seen as a decision
endogenous to entrepreneurial ability, this instrument is valid only among a sample of those arriving in the
U.S. at a young age—that is, as dependents. Among the sample of those arriving at age 14 or younger, the
language and enclave effects are not significant in both linear probability and IV regressions. Hence, we
report the language and enclave results as associations rather than causal factors.


                                                     28
but not yet reported in official immigration statistics.17 The INS places the number of

undocumented Mexican born in 2000 at 4.8 million, and Passel, et al. at 5.3 million.

These estimates suggest that half or more of the Mexican born population resides in the

U.S. without legal documentation. Legal status may affect the self employment decision

through its affect on the ability to access institutions important to entrepreneurs. For

example, legal status helps ensure that immigrants have access to the court system,

should disputes arise with employees or customers. Legal migrants are more likely to

own property which might be used as collateral, and hence have access to credit. On the

other hand, legal status may increase employment opportunities and earnings in the wage

and salary sector (Kossoudji and Cobb-Clark, 2002).

         To see whether legal status affects self employment rates, we use data from the

1990 Census and the Legalized Population Survey (LPS). The LPS interviewed

immigrants applying for legal status through IRCA in 1988 and again in 1992. The LPS

asked about employment the week before applying for legal status, generally in 1987 or

1988, and again in 1992.The sample includes 892 males and 500 females born in Mexico.

The LPS data indicate that the self employment rate of immigrants increased markedly

after they were legalized through IRCA. For the full sample of male (female) immigrants,

the rate of self employment increased from 4.6% (3.6%) in 1989 to 8.3% (5.1%) in 1992.

Among the Mexican born males, self employment increased over the same period from

3.0% to 5.6%; among females, self employment increased from 2.2% to 3.2%. Thus, if

half of the resident Mexican-born population lacks legal status, and legal status is

associated with a 2.3 percentage point increase in self employment, then rates of self


17
  The 3.9 million estimate is part of the “residual foreign-born population.” See Costanzo at al (2001) for
details on the estimation.


                                                     29
employment among the Mexican born population might be expected to increase by 1.2

percentage points with legalization of the resident population. The data suggest, then, that

legal status may be an important factor in explaining the lower self employment rates

among the Mexican born population.



8. Conclusions

       We have started with the large difference between self-employment rates in

Mexico and among Mexican immigrants in the United States and have examined the

separate components of this difference. The male and female self-employment rates in

Mexico are 25.8 and 17.0 percent, respectively. In comparison, male and female

Mexican immigrants in the United States have self-employment rates of only 6.0 and 6.1

percent, respectively. The composition of industries in Mexico and the US explains very

little of the difference in self employment rates. Agriculture, a sector with high rates of

self employment, occupies a much larger share of the male labor force in Mexico. But

large differences in self employment rates remain in the non-agricultural sector. For

males, 22.1 percent of the labor force in Mexico is self employed, compared with only

6.2 percent of the immigrant labor force in the US. We find that none of this difference is

explained by the sectoral composition of the non-agricultural labor force. Rather, the

difference is explained by higher rates of self employment within sectors in Mexico

compared to the US.

       We also compared the determinants of self-employment in the two countries and

found some interesting differences. One example is that the positive relationship

between self-employment and age is stronger in Mexico than in the United States.




                                             30
Calculating predicted self-employment rates, we also find that the large gaps between

levels of self-employment in Mexico and the United States are entirely due to differences

in the structures of the economy and would be even larger if not for the favorable

characteristics of the U.S. population -- mainly being older and more educated on

average. These differences may be due to country-level differences in institutions,

production technologies, tax rates, and other economic factors between the two countries.

       We next turn to differences in the characteristics of Mexican immigrants in the

US compared with the population remaining in Mexico. Consistent with previous

research, we show that Mexican immigrants are more likely to have 10-15 years of

schooling, and less likely to have levels of schooling lower or higher than this range. We

also show that immigrants are older than residents of Mexico. Using a linear model to

estimate self employment status in Mexico, however, we find that these differences

explain very little of the difference in self employment rates for males and actually

increase the differences for females. That is, based on measured characteristics, female

immigrants would be expected to have higher rates of self employment than females

resident in Mexico, were they to return.

       We also calculate predicted self-employment rates for Mexican immigrants using

U.S. coefficients and find contrasting results for men and women. For men, Mexican

immigrants are predicted to have lower self-employment rates than the U.S. total

suggesting that low levels of education and youth contribute to why self-employment is

relatively low among Mexican immigrants. We find that more than 50 percent of the

U.S. total/Mexican immigrant gap is due to differences in measurable characteristics. In

contrast, predicted self-employment rates are higher for Mexican immigrant women than




                                            31
for the U.S. total. This finding suggests that Mexican immigrant women have favorable

characteristics, in terms of predicting self-employment, compared to the total U.S.

workforce and that roughly the entire Mexican immigrant/U.S. total gap in levels of self-

employment is explained by differences in measurable characteristics. We also find

some evidence suggesting that for both men and women, Mexican immigrant self-

employment rates may be higher for those who reside in the United States legally and are

fluent in English, and for men, those who live in ethnic enclaves.




                                            32
                                    Bibliography

Bleakley, Hoyt and Aimee Chin, 2003, “Language Skills and Earnings: Evidence from
Childhood Immigrants,” working paper UCSD.

Borjas, George. 1986. "The Self-Employment Experience of Immigrants." Journal of
Human Resources 21(4):487-506.

Chiquiar, Daniel and Hanson, Gordon, 2003, “International Migration, Self-Selection,
and the Distribution of Wages: Evidence from Mexico and the United States,” working
paper, UCSD.

Costanzo, Joe, Cynthia Davis, Caribert Irazi, Daniel Goodkind, Roberto Ramirez, 2001,
“Evaluating Components of International Migration: The Residual Foreign Born,” U.S.
Census Bureau. (Available at:
www.census.gov/population/documentation/twps0061.html .)

Dunn, Thomas A. and Douglas J. Holtz-Eakin. 2000. "Financial Capital, Human Capital,
and the Transition to Self-Employment: Evidence from Intergenerational Links," Journal
of Labor Economics 18 (2): 282-305.

Dustmann, Christian and Arthur van Soest, 2002, “Language and the Earnings of
Immigrants,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review 55:3, pp. 473-492.

Fairlie, Robert W. 1999. "The Absence of the African-American Owned Business: An
Analysis of the Dynamics of Self-Employment." Journal of Labor Economics, 17(1): 80-
108.

Fairlie, Robert W., and Bruce D. Meyer. 1996. "Ethnic and Racial Self-Employment
Differences and Possible Explanations," Journal of Human Resources, 31, Fall 1996, pp.
757-793.

Fairlie, Robert W., and Bruce D. Meyer. 2003. "The Effect of Immigration on Native
Self-Employment," Journal of Labor Economics. 21(3): 619-650.

Fairlie, Robert W., and Alicia Robb. 2003. "Families, Human Capital, and Small
Businesses: Evidence from the Characteristics of Business Owners Survey," Economic
Growth Center, Yale University, Center Discussion Paper No. 871.

Feliciano, Zadia, 2001, “The Skill and Economic Performance of Mexican Immigrants
from 1910 to 1990,” Explorations in Economic History, Vol. 38, pp. 386-409.

Gollin, Douglas, 2000, “Nobody’s Business but My Own: Self Employment and Small
Enterpirse in Economic Development,” working paper, Williams College.




                                          33
_________, 2002, “Getting Income Shares Right”, Journal of Political Economy, Vol.
100(2), pp. 458-474.

Hanson, Gordon and Antonio Spilimbergo, 1999, “Illegal Immigration, Border
Enforcement, and Relative Wages: Evidence rfrom Apprehansions at the U.S. 0 Mexico
Border,” American Economic Review, Vol. 89, pp. 1337-1357.

Hout, Michael and Harvey S. Rosen. 2000. "Self-Employment, Family Background, and
Race," Journal of Human Resources., 35 (4): 670-692.

Kossoudji, Sherrie A. and Deborah A. Cobb-Clark, 2002, “Coming out of the Shadows:
Learning about Legal Status and Wages from the Legalized Population,” Journal of
Labor Economics, July 20(3): 598-628.

Lentz, Bernard, and David Laband. 1990. "Entrepreneurial Success and Occupational
Inheritance among Proprietors," Canadian Journal of Economics, 23, No. 3, pp. 563-579.

Passel, Jeffrey, Randy Capps, and Michael Fix, 2004, “Undocumented Immigrants: Facts
and Figures,” working paper, Urban Institute.

Yuengert, Andrew M. 1995. "Testing Hypotheses of Immigrant Self-Employment."
Journal of Human Resources 30(1):194-204.




                                          34
                                       Home Country vs. U.S. Self Employment Rate

                            35%

                                                                               Greece
                            30%                 Korea
U.S. Self Employment Rate




                            25%
                                                                  Italy

                            20%


                                                 Canada
                            15%
                                                                           Brazil
                                                                                              Regression line


                            10%
                                       India


                            5%
                                                                          Mexico
                                                        Philippines
                            0%
                                  0%      10%       20%                    30%          40%      50%            60%
                                                           Home Country SE Rate
                                 Figure 2

                     US Earnings Distribution
      .6
      .4
Density
      .2
      0




               0        5                      10                 15
                               Ln(earnings)
                    Not self-employed            Self-employed




                   Mexico Earnings Distribution
          .8
          .6
 Density
   .4     .2
          0




               0        5                      10                 15
                               Ln(earnings)

                    Self-employed             Not Self-employed
                                                                                           Figure 3A
                                                                            Educational Regression Coefficients - Men
                                                                                      Includes Agriculture

                                0.08



                                0.06



                                0.04
Relative Coefficient Estimate




                                0.02


                                                                                                                                                           Mexico
                                   0
                                                                                                                                                           United States
                                         0 years    1-4 years   5-6 years   7-8 years    9 years      10-11       High      Some      College   Graduate
                                        schooling   schooling   schooling   schooling   schooling     years      school    college   complete    school
                                                                                                    schooling   complete
                                -0.02



                                -0.04



                                -0.06



                                -0.08
                                                                                         Figure 3B
                                                                        Educational Regression Coefficients - Women
                                                                                    Includes Agriculture

                                0.05




                                   0
                                         0 years    1-4 years   5-6 years   7-8 years    9 years      10-11       High      Some      College   Graduate
                                        schooling   schooling   schooling   schooling   schooling     years      school    college   complete    school
                                                                                                    schooling   complete
Relative Coefficient Estimate




                                -0.05




                                                                                                                                                           Mexico
                                 -0.1
                                                                                                                                                           United States




                                -0.15




                                 -0.2




                                -0.25
                                                                  Figure 4A
                                       Male Self-Employment Rates by Age in Mexico and the United States

                       60%




                       50%


                                                                                                  Mexico

                       40%
Self-Employment Rate




                       30%




                       20%



                                                                                                                United States
                       10%




                       0%
                             15   20       25        30        35        40        45        50            55         60        65
                                                                         Age
                                                                  Figure 4B
                                       Female Self-Employment Rates by Age in Mexico and the United States

                       60%




                       50%




                       40%
Self-Employment Rate




                                                                                                           Mexico

                       30%




                       20%




                       10%



                                                                                                     United States
                       0%
                             15   20        25        30        35        40        45        50         55          60   65
                                                                          Age
                                             Table 1
                       Self-Employment Rates in Mexico and the United States
                      Mexico Census (2000) and U.S. Census 5% PUMS (2000)

                                                                        Mexican        Mexican
                                                                       Immigrants      Natives          U.S.
                                                          Mexico         in U.S.       in U.S.          Total
Men
 Self-employment rate (non-agriculture)                      22.1%           6.2%           6.0%         10.6%
 Sample size                                                601,609         94,532         71,270     2,792,824

 Self-employment rate (all industries)                       25.8%          6.0%            6.0%         11.1%
 Sample size                                                814,729       106,006          73,928     2,893,273

Women
 Self-employment rate (non-agriculture)                      16.4%           6.2%           3.4%          5.5%
 Sample size                                                268,259         33,987         55,095     2,079,656

 Self-employment rate (all industries)                       17.0%           6.1%           3.4%          5.6%
 Sample size                                                285,377         35,980         55,582     2,096,007

Notes: (1) The sample consists of individuals ages 16-64 who work 35 or more hours per week. (2) All estimates are
calculated using sample weights provided by the Census.
                                       Table 2A
    Male Industry Shares and Self-Employment Rates in Mexico and the United States
                Mexico Census (2000) and U.S. Census 5% PUMS (2000)

                                                             Mexican            Mexican
                                                           Immigrants           Natives            U.S.
                                                    Mexico    in U.S.            in U.S.           Total
Industry Shares
  Agriculture/Mining                                17.1%           8.7%           2.9%           2.6%
  Construction                                      12.5%          22.6%          13.0%          11.8%
  Manufacturing                                     22.2%          22.7%          17.5%          19.8%
  Wholesale Trade                                    1.5%           4.9%           5.4%           4.9%
  Retail Trade                                      13.2%           6.1%          11.2%           9.8%
  Trans and Warehousing                              6.6%           3.1%           6.6%           6.1%
  Utilities                                          0.7%           0.3%           1.6%           1.5%
  Information                                        1.0%           0.7%           2.9%           3.2%
  FIRE                                               1.2%           1.5%           4.0%           5.5%
  Prof Services                                      4.1%           9.5%           7.7%           9.5%
  Educ/health Services                               4.3%           2.0%           8.1%           8.8%
  Arts, Ent, Rec                                     4.2%          12.5%           6.1%           5.4%
  Other Services                                     6.9%           4.6%           4.3%           4.3%
  Public Admin/AF                                    4.5%           0.6%           8.7%           6.8%
  Total                                            100.0%         100.0%         100.0%         100.0%

Self-Employment Rates
 Agriculture/Mining                                  43.5%           4.3%          7.0%          32.5%
 Construction                                        24.0%           8.3%         13.3%          22.7%
 Manufacturing                                       13.3%           1.2%          1.6%           2.9%
 Wholesale Trade                                     24.3%           3.7%          3.6%           8.9%
 Retail Trade                                        38.9%           9.1%          4.7%          10.7%
 Trans and Warehousing                               22.7%          11.5%          6.5%           9.2%
 Utilities                                            2.0%           0.0%          0.0%           0.0%
 Information                                          8.5%           3.6%          2.5%           4.9%
 FIRE                                                15.7%           7.4%          8.4%          14.7%
 Prof Services                                       26.1%          12.1%         13.8%          20.7%
 Educ/health Services                                10.0%           3.7%          2.9%           7.2%
 Arts, Ent, Rec                                      26.1%           3.1%          4.7%          10.5%
 Other Services                                      34.7%          13.6%         15.6%          19.9%
 Public Admin/AF                                      1.8%           0.0%          0.0%           0.0%
 Total                                               25.8%           6.0%          6.0%          11.1%
 Sample size                                     814,729         106,006          73,928     2,893,273
Notes: (1) The sample consists of individuals ages 16-64 who work 35 or more hours per week. (2) All
estimates are calculated using sample weights provided by the Census.
                                     Table 2B
  Female Industry Shares and Self-Employment Rates in Mexico and the United States
              Mexico Census (2000) and U.S. Census 5% PUMS (2000)

                                                             Mexican            Mexican
                                                           Immigrants           Natives            U.S.
                                                    Mexico    in U.S.            in U.S.           Total
Industry Shares
  Agriculture/Mining                                 3.6%           4.6%           0.8%           0.6%
  Construction                                       0.9%           1.2%           1.4%           1.5%
  Manufacturing                                     23.4%          29.1%          10.5%          11.7%
  Wholesale Trade                                    1.0%           5.5%           2.8%           2.6%
  Retail Trade                                      20.1%           8.2%          12.1%          10.3%
  Trans and Warehousing                              1.1%           1.5%           2.5%           2.5%
  Utilities                                          0.3%           0.1%           0.7%           0.6%
  Information                                        1.3%           1.0%           3.3%           3.4%
  FIRE                                               2.1%           2.8%           9.6%           9.7%
  Prof Services                                      4.6%           7.1%           7.9%           9.1%
  Educ/health Services                              14.4%          13.4%          30.0%          31.4%
  Arts, Ent, Rec                                     8.2%          16.4%           7.1%           6.3%
  Other Services                                    13.5%           7.8%           4.0%           4.1%
  Public Admin/AF                                    5.6%           1.3%           7.4%           5.9%
  Total                                            100.0%         100.0%         100.0%         100.0%

Self-Employment Rates
 Agriculture/Mining                                  33.1%           2.9%          4.8%          25.0%
 Construction                                        10.7%          10.0%          7.3%          14.0%
 Manufacturing                                        7.9%           1.3%          1.1%           1.8%
 Wholesale Trade                                     11.8%           2.8%          1.5%           4.8%
 Retail Trade                                        39.5%           9.3%          2.7%           6.7%
 Trans and Warehousing                                5.1%           4.4%          1.7%           3.3%
 Utilities                                            1.5%           0.0%          0.0%           0.0%
 Information                                          4.3%           0.9%          1.7%           2.7%
 FIRE                                                 5.4%           4.0%          3.1%           4.8%
 Prof Services                                       11.9%           9.3%          6.2%          11.4%
 Educ/health Services                                 4.2%           9.2%          3.2%           3.8%
 Arts, Ent, Rec                                      28.5%           2.9%          3.7%           6.8%
 Other Services                                      15.1%          25.4%         17.4%          22.1%
 Public Admin/AF                                      0.8%           0.0%          0.0%           0.0%
 Total                                               17.0%           6.1%          3.4%           5.6%
 Sample size                                     285,377           35,980         55,582     2,096,007
Notes: (1) The sample consists of individuals ages 16-64 who work 35 or more hours per week. (2) All
estimates are calculated using sample weights provided by the Census.
                                                Table 3
                       Educational Distributions in Mexico and the United States
                       Mexico Census (2000) and U.S. Census 5% PUMS (2000)

                                                                       Mexican             Mexican
                                                                     Immigrants            Natives             U.S.
                                                              Mexico    in U.S.             in U.S.            Total
Men
 No schooling                                                   6.0%           10.0%           1.7%           1.2%
 1-4 Years of school                                           14.8%            6.5%           0.8%           0.6%
 5-6 Years of school                                           21.3%           22.0%           2.0%           1.7%
 7-8 Years of school                                            5.8%            9.0%           3.4%           2.3%
 9 Years of school                                             20.5%           10.3%           5.3%           3.3%
 10-11 Years of school                                          7.4%           15.3%          23.6%          13.4%
 High school graduate                                          10.2%           15.8%          28.1%          26.9%
 Some College                                                   4.8%            7.8%          26.4%          27.8%
 College Graduate                                               4.3%            2.0%           6.2%          14.6%
 Graduate School                                                5.0%            1.3%           2.5%           8.2%
 High school graduate or more                                  24.3%           26.8%          63.2%          77.5%
 College graduate or more                                       9.3%            3.3%           8.7%          22.8%
 Sample size                                               1,255,337        171,858         137,141      4,444,392

Women
 No schooling                                                   8.2%           10.5%           1.4%           1.0%
 1-4 Years of school                                           15.8%            6.9%           0.7%           0.5%
 5-6 Years of school                                           23.5%           22.0%           1.8%           1.3%
 7-8 Years of school                                            4.4%            8.9%           3.2%           1.8%
 9 Years of school                                             19.0%            9.9%           4.9%           2.8%
 10-11 Years of school                                          6.8%           13.9%          20.9%          11.9%
 High school graduate                                          11.2%           16.0%          27.5%          26.9%
 Some College                                                   4.6%            8.3%          29.9%          31.4%
 College Graduate                                               3.6%            2.2%           7.1%          15.2%
 Graduate School                                                2.9%            1.4%           2.6%           7.2%
 High school graduate or more                                  22.3%           28.0%          67.1%          80.7%
 College graduate or more                                       6.5%            3.6%           9.7%          22.4%
 Sample size                                               1,399,495        128,059         137,218      4,541,637
Notes: (1) The sample consists of all individuals ages 16-64. (2) All estimates are calculated using sample weights
provided by the Census.
                                                Table 4
                          Age Distributions in Mexico and the United States
                       Mexico Census (2000) and U.S. Census 5% PUMS (2000)

                                                                       Mexican             Mexican
                                                                     Immigrants            Natives             U.S.
                                                              Mexico    in U.S.             in U.S.            Total
Men
 Ages 16-19                                                    14.9%            6.0%          17.6%           9.0%
 Ages 20-24                                                    16.1%           15.5%          18.2%          10.7%
 Ages 25-29                                                    14.4%           18.0%          14.2%          10.7%
 Ages 30-34                                                    12.6%           16.7%          11.3%          11.3%
 Ages 35-39                                                    11.2%           14.6%          10.8%          12.7%
 Ages 40-44                                                     9.3%           10.9%           9.1%          12.5%
 Ages 45-49                                                     7.2%            7.7%           7.0%          11.0%
 Ages 50-54                                                     6.0%            5.1%           5.5%           9.4%
 Ages 55-59                                                     4.5%            3.4%           3.6%           7.1%
 Ages 60-64                                                     3.9%            2.3%           2.8%           5.7%
 Age (Mean)                                                       33.5           34.2           32.2            37.9
 Sample size                                               1,255,337        171,858         137,141      4,444,392

Women
 Ages 16-19                                                    14.1%            4.2%          17.2%           8.5%
 Ages 20-24                                                    16.5%           12.6%          17.2%          10.2%
 Ages 25-29                                                    14.8%           16.9%          13.6%          10.4%
 Ages 30-34                                                    12.8%           16.5%          11.2%          11.0%
 Ages 35-39                                                    11.4%           15.0%          11.1%          12.7%
 Ages 40-44                                                     9.2%           11.8%           9.5%          12.5%
 Ages 45-49                                                     7.1%            8.7%           7.5%          11.2%
 Ages 50-54                                                     5.9%            6.4%           5.8%           9.7%
 Ages 55-59                                                     4.5%            4.5%           3.8%           7.6%
 Ages 60-64                                                     3.8%            3.5%           3.2%           6.2%
 Age (Mean)                                                       33.5           35.9           32.7            38.5
 Sample size                                               1,399,495        128,059         137,218      4,541,637
Notes: (1) The sample consists of all individuals ages 16-64. (2) All estimates are calculated using sample weights
provided by the Census.
                                                   Table 5A
                              Probability of Self-Employment Regressions (Men)
                                 Mexico                           United States
                          With         Without                  With       Without
                        Agriculture Agriculture              Agriculture Agriculture
Intercept                    0.1362        0.0523              -0.01506     -0.01087
                            (0.0009)     (0.0011)               (0.0026)     (0.0027)
Age 20-24                   0.0376       0.0405                0.00602      0.00635
                            (0.0005)     (0.0005)               (0.0016)     (0.0016)
Age 25-29                   0.0889        0.099                0.02168      0.02173
                            (0.0005)     (0.0005)               (0.0015)     (0.0015)
Age 30-34                   0.1372       0.1552                0.04239      0.04215
                            (0.0006)     (0.0006)               (0.0015)     (0.0015)
Age 35-39                   0.1649       0.1873                0.06925      0.06773
                            (0.0006)     (0.0006)               (0.0015)     (0.0015)
Age 40-44                   0.2026       0.2284                0.08796       0.0858
                            (0.0007)     (0.0007)               (0.0015)     (0.0015)
Age 45-49                   0.2366       0.2575                0.10429      0.10072
                            (0.0008)     (0.0008)               (0.0015)     (0.0015)
Age 50-54                    0.273       0.2897                0.11035      0.10629
                            (0.0008)     (0.0009)               (0.0016)     (0.0016)
Age 55-59                   0.3112       0.3211                0.13432      0.12749
                            (0.0010)     (0.0011)               (0.0016)     (0.0016)
Age 60-64                   0.3639       0.3632                0.16375      0.15197
                            (0.0012)     (0.0014)               (0.0018)     (0.0018)
1-4 years schooling         0.0031       0.0167               -0.00578     -0.00241
                            (0.0008)     (0.0011)               (0.0035)     (0.0037)
5-6 years schooling        -0.0233        0.016                0.00395      0.00451
                            (0.0008)     (0.0010)               (0.0027)     (0.0028)
7-8 years schooling        -0.0521       0.0175                0.04576      0.03453
                            (0.0009)     (0.0011)               (0.0027)     (0.0027)
9 years schooling          -0.0683      -0.0023                0.03328      0.02771
                            (0.0008)     (0.0010)               (0.0026)     (0.0027)
10-11 years schooling      -0.0599       0.0174                0.03518      0.03104
                            (0.0009)     (0.0011)               (0.0023)     (0.0024)
High school complete       -0.0602       0.0138                0.03231      0.02318
                            (0.0009)     (0.0011)               (0.0022)     (0.0023)
Some college               -0.0679       0.0068                0.03098      0.02498
                            (0.0010)     (0.0012)               (0.0022)     (0.0023)
College complete           -0.0659        0.009                0.03562      0.03073
                            (0.0010)     (0.0012)               (0.0022)     (0.0023)
Graduate school            -0.0381       0.0379                0.06213      0.06225
                            (0.0010)     (0.0012)               (0.0023)     (0.0023)
Married                     0.0092       0.0014                 0.0195       0.0175
                            (0.0003)     (0.0004)               (0.0004)     (0.0004)
Number of children          0.0063       0.0009                0.00548      0.00501
                            (0.0001)     (0.0001)               (0.0002)     (0.0002)


R-Square                    0.058        0.055                  0.024        0.023
Weighted observations     8497574      7045089                2893273      2792842
Dependent mean             0.2576       0.2209                  0.111        0.106
                                                   Table 5B
                            Probability of Self-Employment Regressions (Women)
                                 Mexico                           United States
                          With          Without                With        Without
                        Agriculture Agriculture              Agriculture Agriculture
Intercept                    0.1806        0.1654               0.02462      0.02499
                            (0.0014)     (0.0016)                (0.0027)     (0.0027)
Age 20-24                   0.0313       0.0323                -0.0011 -0.0004866
                            (0.0005)     (0.0005)                (0.0014)     (0.0014)
Age 25-29                   0.0723       0.0738                0.00623      0.00691
                            (0.0006)     (0.0006)                (0.0014)     (0.0014)
Age 30-34                    0.103        0.107                0.01977       0.0203
                            (0.0007)     (0.0007)                (0.0014)     (0.0014)
Age 35-39                   0.1273       0.1316                0.02853      0.02871
                            (0.0008)     (0.0008)                (0.0014)     (0.0014)
Age 40-44                   0.1567       0.1623                0.03469      0.03458
                            (0.0009)     (0.0009)                (0.0014)     (0.0014)
Age 45-49                   0.2042       0.2091                0.03967      0.03942
                            (0.0011)     (0.0011)                (0.0014)     (0.0014)
Age 50-54                   0.2537       0.2577                0.04605      0.04567
                            (0.0013)     (0.0013)                (0.0014)     (0.0014)
Age 55-59                   0.3183       0.3249                 0.0574       0.0563
                            (0.0018)     (0.0018)                (0.0015)     (0.0014)
Age 60-64                   0.4077       0.4171                0.06858      0.06667
                            (0.0023)     (0.0024)                (0.0016)     (0.0016)
1-4 years schooling        -0.0579      -0.0532                0.00309      0.00771
                            (0.0015)     (0.0017)                (0.0039)     (0.0040)
5-6 years schooling        -0.1099      -0.1023               -0.00217 -0.0005397
                            (0.0014)     (0.0015)                (0.0030)     (0.0031)
7-8 years schooling        -0.1388      -0.1266                0.00313 0.00062506
                            (0.0016)     (0.0017)                (0.0029)     (0.0029)
9 years schooling          -0.1604      -0.1479               -0.00491      -0.00586
                            (0.0014)     (0.0015)                (0.0028)     (0.0028)
10-11 years schooling      -0.1707      -0.1566               -0.00683      -0.00762
                            (0.0015)     (0.0016)                (0.0025)     (0.0025)
High school complete       -0.1946      -0.1808               -0.01191      -0.01326
                            (0.0014)     (0.0015)                (0.0024)     (0.0024)
Some college               -0.2203                            -0.01005      -0.01108
                            (0.0015)     (0.0016)                (0.0024)     (0.0024)
College complete           -0.2251      -0.2124               -0.01262      -0.01348
                            (0.0015)     (0.0016)                (0.0024)     (0.0024)
Graduate school            -0.2012      -0.1883                -0.0076      -0.00754
                            (0.0015)     (0.0016)                (0.0024)     (0.0024)
Married                     0.0956       0.0937                0.01784      0.01677
                            (0.0005)     (0.0005)                (0.0003)     (0.0003)
Number of children          0.0019       0.0015                0.00303      0.00299
                            (0.0001)     (0.0001)                (0.0002)     (0.0002)


R-Square                    0.111        0.108                  0.009         0.009
Weighted observations     3307417      3189182                2096007       2076656
Dependent mean             0.1698        0.164                  0.056         0.055
                                             Table 6
                           Self-Employment Status Regressions in Mexico

                                      MALES                 FEMALES

                        With ag  With ag              With ag  With ag
                        Own acct Employer             Own acct Employer
Intercept               0.1546*  -0.0184*             0.1978*  -0.0172*
                          (0.0009)     (0.0002)          (0.0014)     (0.0003)

Age 20-24               0.0403*      -0.0027*         0.0326*       -0.0013*
                          (0.0005)     (0.0001)          (0.0005)     (0.0001)

Age 25-29               0.0860*      0.0029*          0.0698*       0.0025*
                          (0.0005)     (0.0002)          (0.0006)     (0.0002)

Age 30-34               0.1244*      0.0128*          0.0956*       0.0073*
                          (0.0006)     (0.0002)          (0.0007)     (0.0002)

Age 35-39               0.1460*      0.0189*          0.1116*       0.0157*
                          (0.0006)     (0.0002)          (0.0007)     (0.0003)

Age 40-44               0.1760*      0.0265*          0.1359*       0.0208*
                          (0.0007)     (0.0002)          (0.0008)     (0.0003)

Age 45-49               0.2042*      0.0325*          0.1765*       0.0276*
                          (0.0007)     (0.0003)          (0.0010)     (0.0004)

Age 50-54               0.2310*      0.0420*          0.2172*       0.0364*
                          (0.0008)     (0.0003)          (0.0013)     (0.0005)

Age 55-59               0.2624*      0.0487*          0.2760*       0.0424*
                          (0.0010)     (0.0004)          (0.0017)     (0.0007)

Age 60-64               0.3105*      0.0534*          0.3613*       0.0464*
                          (0.0012)     (0.0005)          (0.0023)     (0.0010)

1-4 years schooling     -0.0038*     0.0068*          -0.0662*      0.0084*
                          (0.0008)     (0.0002)          (0.0015)     (0.0003)

5-6 years schooling     -0.0410*     0.0176*          -0.1257*      0.0157*
                          (0.0008)     (0.0002)          (0.0014)     (0.0003)

7-8 years schooling     -0.0743*     0.0222*          -0.1582*      0.0194*
                          (0.0009)     (0.0003)          (0.0016)     (0.0004)

9 years schooling       -0.0925*     0.0242*          -0.1809*      0.0205*
                          (0.0008)     (0.0002)          (0.0014)     (0.0003)

10-11 years schooling   -0.0934*     0.0335*          -0.1931*      0.0224*
                          (0.0009)     (0.0003)          (0.0015)     (0.0004)
High school complete     -0.1042*      0.0440*               -0.2204*      0.0258*
                            (0.0008)     (0.0003)               (0.0014)     (0.0004)

Some college             -0.1254*      0.0576*               -0.2509*      0.0306*
                            (0.0010)     (0.0005)               (0.0015)     (0.0005)

College complete         -0.1472*      0.0813*               -0.2586*      0.0335*
                            (0.0009)     (0.0005)               (0.0014)     (0.0005)

Graduate school          -0.1295*      0.0914*               -0.2389*      0.0377*
                            (0.0009)     (0.0005)               (0.0015)     (0.0005)

Married                  0.0000*       0.0092*               0.0814*       0.0142*
                            (0.0003)     (0.0001)               (0.0005)     (0.0002)

Number of children       0.0068*       -0.0005*              0.0020*       -0.0001~
                            (0.0001)     (0.0000)               (0.0001)      0.0000

R-square                     0.053        0.029                  0.106        0.015
Weighted observations      8497574      8497574                3307417      3307417
Dependent mean              0.2263       0.0313                  0.151       0.0188

Notes: Sample restricted to 16-64 year olds working 35 or more hours per week.
Standard errors in parentheses. * indicates significant at .01 level. ~ indicates signifciant at .05 level
                                  Table 7A
     Predicted Male Self-Employment Rates for Mexico and the United States

All Industries
                                   Mean Characteristics from:
                                    Mexico        U.S. Total        Difference

Coefficients      Mexico                  25.8%           27.1%            -1.3%
from:
                  U.S. Total               8.4%           11.1%            -2.7%

                  Difference              17.3%           16.0%           14.6%


Non-Agriculture
                                   Mean Characteristics from:
                                    Mexico        U.S. Total        Difference

Coefficients      Mexico                  22.1%           26.7%            -4.6%
from:
                  U.S. Total               8.2%           10.6%            -2.3%

                Difference                 13.9%            16.1%          11.5%
Notes: (1) The sample consists of individuals ages 16-64 who work 35 or more
hours per week. (2) All estimates are calculated using sample weights provided by
the Census. (3) Coefficient estimates are reported in Table 5.
                                 Table 7B
   Predicted Female Self-Employment Rates for Mexico and the United States

All Industries
                                  Mean Characteristics from:
                                   Mexico        U.S. Total        Difference

Coefficients      Mexico                 17.0%           18.9%            -1.9%
from:
                  U.S. Total              4.9%            5.6%            -0.8%

                  Difference             12.1%           13.3%           11.3%


Non-Agriculture
                                  Mean Characteristics from:
                                   Mexico        U.S. Total        Difference

Coefficients      Mexico                 16.4%           19.0%            -2.6%
from:
                  U.S. Total              4.9%            5.5%            -0.7%

                Difference                11.5%            13.5%           10.9%
Notes: (1) The sample consists of individuals ages 16-64 who work 35 or more
hours per week. (2) All estimates are calculated using sample weights provided
by the Census. (3) Coefficient estimates are reported in Table 5.
                                       Table 8
                 Predicted Self-Employment Rates in the United Sates
                                 U.S. Census (2000)

                                                     Specification
Explanatory Variables                (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)
Sample                               Men          Men          Women         Women
Industries                            All       Non-Agric.        All       Non-Agric.

U.S. Self-Employment Rate               11.1%         10.6%          5.6%          5.5%

Mexican Immigrants
 Actual self-employment rate             6.0%          6.2%          6.1%          6.2%

 Predicted self-employment rate          8.3%          8.0%          6.1%          6.1%
Notes: (1) The sample consists of individuals ages 16-64 who work 35 or more hours per
week. (2) All estimates are calculated using sample weights provided by the Census. (3)
Coefficient estimates are reported in Table 5.
                               Table 9
            Language and Enclave Effects (U.S. Census 2000)

                                Males                       Females
                          (1)           (2)           (3)             (4)
English Language
ability                  0.0196         0.0278       0.00083     0.00877
                         (0.0017)       (0.0026)      (0.0027)        (0.0041)
Percentage Latino-
origin population,
PUMA                    0.00058     0.00087         -0.00011     0.00016
                         (0.0001)       (0.0002)      (0.0001)        (0.0002)
Language * % Latino
population                          -0.00053                     -0.00053
                                        (0.0001)                      (0.0002)


Psudo-R-square             0.036       0.036           0.016        0.017
Weighted observations   2644810     2644810          991715       991715
Dependent mean             0.061        0.06           0.055        0.055
