                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           ANTITRUST IN INNOVATIVE INDUSTRIES

                                               Ilya Segal
                                            Michael Whinston

                                          Working Paper 11525
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w11525


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       July 2005




We thank Shane Greenstein, Ken Hendricks, Volker Nocke, Richard Schmalensee, Scott Stern, and
participants in seminars at the FTC, Harvard, Northwestern, Penn, UT-Austin, the 2003 NBER Summer
Institute meeting on Innovation Policy, the 2003 International Industrial Organization Conference, and the
2004 Duke-Northwestern-Texas IO Theory Conference for helpful discussions and comments. We also thank
the NSF (SES-0318438) and the Searle Foundation for financial support. The views expressed herein are
those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by Ilya Segal and Michael Whinston. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Antitrust in Innovative Industries
Ilya Segal and Michael Whinston
NBER Working Paper No. 11525
July 2005
JEL No. L40, O31

                                           ABSTRACT




We study the effects of antitrust policy in industries with continual innovation. A more protective

antitrust policy may have conflicting effects on innovation incentives, raising the profits of new

entrants, but lowering those of continuing incumbents. We show that the direction of the net effect

can be determined by analyzing shifts in innovation benefit and supply holding the innovation rate

fixed. We apply this framework to analyze several specific antitrust policies. We show that in some

cases, holding the innovation rate fixed, as suggested by our comparative statics results, the tension

does not arise and a more protective policy necessarily raises the rate of innovation.



Ilya Segal
Department of Economics
Stanford University
Landau Economics Building Room 242
579 Serra Mall
Stanford, CA 94305-6072
ilya.segal@stanford.edu

Michael D. Whinston
Department of Economics
Northwestern University
2003 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60202
and NBER
mwhinston@northwestern.edu
1. Introduction

This paper is concerned with the eﬀects of antitrust policy in markets in which innovation
is important. Traditionally, antitrust analyses have largely ignored issues of innovation,
focusing instead on the price/output eﬀects of contested practices.1 Yet, over the last
two decades, intellectual property and innovation have become central to competition
in a large share of the economy. In the wake of these changes, and sparked by the
recent Microsoft case, a number of commentators have expressed concerns that traditional
antitrust analysis might be poorly suited to maximizing welfare in such industries. As
Evans and Schmalensee [2002] put it, in these industries


       “...firms engage in dynamic competition for the market – usually through
       research-and development (R&D) to develop the ‘killer’ product, service, or
       feature that will confer market leadership and thus diminish or eliminate
       actual or potential rivals. Static price/output competition on the margin in
       the market is less important.”

    The eﬀects of antitrust policy on innovation are poorly understood. In the Microsoft
case, for example, the most significant issue arising from Microsoft’s allegedly exclusion-
ary practices was almost surely their eﬀect on innovation. Microsoft argued that while a
technological leader like Microsoft may possess a good deal of static market power, this
is merely the fuel for stimulating dynamic R&D competition, a process that it argued
works well in the software industry. Antitrust intervention in this process would run the
risk of reducing the rate of innovation and welfare. The government, in contrast, argued
that Microsoft’s practices prevented entry of new firms and products, and therefore would
both raise prices and retard innovation.2 How to reconcile these two views, however, was
never clear in the discussion surrounding the case.
    On closer inspection, these two conflicting views reveal a fundamental tension in the
eﬀects of antitrust policy on innovation. Policies that protect new entrants from incum-
bents raise a successful innovator’s initial profits and may thereby encourage innovation,
as the government argued. But new entants hope to become the next Microsoft, and will

   1
     Issues of innovation have been considered when discussing “innovation markets” in some horizontal
merger cases in which there was a concern that a merger might reduce R&D competition. See, e.g.,
Gilbert and Sunshine [1995].
   2
     For further discussion, see e.g., Evans and Schmalensee [2002], Fisher and Rubinfeld [2000], Gilbert
and Katz [2001], and Whinston [2001].


                                                   1
want to engage in the same sorts of entry-disadvantaging behaviors should they succeed.
Thus, by lowering the profits of incumbency, protective policies may actually retard in-
novation, as Microsoft alleged. Disentangling these two eﬀects is the central focus of this
paper.
    We study the eﬀects of antitrust policy in innovative industries using models in which
innovation is a continual process, with new innovators replacing current incumbents, and
holding dominant market positions until they are themselves replaced. Although a great
deal of formal modeling of R&D races has occurred in the industrial organization litera-
ture (beginning with the work of Loury [1979] and Lee and Wilde [1980]; see Reinganum
[1989] for a survey), this work has typically analyzed a single, or at most a finite sequence,
of innovative races.3 Instead, our models are closer to those that have received atten-
tion in the recent literature on growth (e.g., Grossman and Helpman [1991], Aghion and
Howitt [1992], Aghion et. al [2001]). The primary distinction between our analysis and
the analysis in this growth literature lies in our explicit focus on how antitrust policies
aﬀect equilibrium in such industries.4
    The paper is organized as follows. In Sections 2 and 3, we introduce and analyze
a simple stylized model of antitrust in an innovative industry. Our aim is to develop a
model that yields some general insights into the eﬀect of antitrust policies on the rate
of innovation, and that we can apply to a number of diﬀerent antitrust policies in the
remainder of the paper. In Section 2, we study the simplest version of this stylized
model, in which in each period a single potential entrant conducts R&D. The model
captures antitrust policy in a reduced form way, by assuming that it alters the profit
flows that an incumbent and a new entrant can earn in competition with each other,
as well as the profits of an uncontested incumbent. In the model, a more protective
antitrust policy – one that protects entrants at the expense of incumbents – increases
a new entrant’s profits, but also aﬀects the profitability of continuing incumbents. Since

   3
      Three exceptions are O’Donohue et al. [1998] and Hunt [2004], who use continuing innovation models
to examine optimal patent, and Fudenberg and Tirole [2000] who study dynamic limit pricing in markets
with network externalities using a model of continuing innovation.
    4
      The growth literature often considers how changes in various parameters will aﬀect the rate of
innovation, sometimes even calling such parameters measures of the degree of “antitrust policy” (e.g.,
Aghion et al. [2001] refer to the elasticity of substitution as such a measure). Here we are much more
explicit than is the growth literature about what antitrust policies toward specific practices do. This
is not a minor diﬀerence, as our results diﬀer substantially from those that might be inferred from the
parameter changes considered in the growth literature. As one example, one would get exactly the
wrong conclusion if one extrapolated results showing that more inelastic demand functions lead to more
R&D (e.g., Aghion and Howitt [1992]) to mean that allowing an incumbent to enhance its market power
through long-term contracts leads to more R&D.

                                                   2
successful entrants become continuing incumbents, both of these eﬀects matter for the
incentive to innovate.
    Using this simple stylized model, we develop some general insights into the eﬀect of
antitrust policies on the rate of innovation. We do so by characterizing equilibrium in
terms of “innovation benefit” and “innovation supply” functions, which provides a very
simple approach to comparative statics. This approach to comparative statics tells us
that a policy change will increase innovation when a certain weighted sum of the profit
changes for a new entrant and a continuing incumbent increase, holding fixed the level
of innovation. This weighted sum corresponds to the change in the present discounted
value of successful entry, which we call the “innovation prize,” holding fixed the rate of
innovation. Using this condition, we show that a more protective antitrust policy “front-
loads” an innovative new entrant’s profit stream, and that this feature tends to increase
the level of innovative activity. We also note here how the degree of market growth can
alter the eﬀects of antitrust policy.
    In Section 3, we extend our comparative statics approach to substantially more general
innovation benefit and supply settings. The extension to innovation supply, for example,
allows us to consider supply settings with constant returns to scale R&D technologies,
with N potential entrants, with free entry, or with “free entry with a limited idea” as
in work by Fudenberg and Tirole [2000] and O’Donohue et al. [1998]. We show using
our innovation benefit and supply approach that in each case, or in any other setting
satisfying several basic properties, the condition characterizing comparative statics is the
same.
    With the comparative statics results of Section 3 in hand, in Sections 4 and 5 we
develop applications to specific antitrust policies. In Section 4, we focus on incumbent
behaviors designed to reduce the level of entrant R&D. We begin with a surprising obser-
vation: in many circumstances involving R&D-deterring activities, the apparent tension
between eﬀects on entrant and continuing incumbent profits does not arise at all. In these
cases, holding the rate of innovation fixed, limits on R&D deterring activities raise the
profits of both new entrants and incumbents, and so our characterization result tells us
that the rate of innovation necessarily increases. We then analyze two models of antitrust
policies toward specific R&D deterring activities. First, we study a model of long-term
(exclusive) contracts and show that a more protective antitrust policy necessarily stimu-
lates innovation, and also raises both aggregate and consumer welfare. This model falls
into the class of cases in which the tension indeed does not arise. Then, we consider a
model of compatibility choice in an industry characterized by network externalities. Here

                                             3
we identify cases in which innovation necessarily increases when incumbents are forced
to make their products more compatible with those of future entrants (which, again,
are cases in which the tension does not arise), as well as cases in which innovation may
decline. (Appendix C also contains an extension of our long-term contracting model to
the case of uncertain innovation size when there is a cost of rapidly implementing new
innovations. The key new feature in this model is that antitrust policy has a “selec-
tion eﬀect,” altering the set of innovations that enter the market. We show that in this
situation, limitations on long-term contracting may retard innovation.)
    The framework that we develop is not limited to exclusionary behaviors. In Sec-
tion 5, we consider the eﬀects of voluntary deals, looking specifically at (nonexclusive)
licensing by incumbents of entrants’ innovations and at price collusion. We show using
our comparative statics results that restrictions on these behaviors necessarily lower the
rate of innovation. Moreover, restrictions on licensing necessarily lower welfare, while
restrictions on collusion may either raise or lower welfare depending on whether innova-
tion is initially socially excessive or insuﬃcient (standard deadweight loss distortions are
assumed away in this model).
    The analysis of Sections 2-5 makes the strong assumption that only potential entrants
do R&D. While useful for gaining understanding, this assumption is rarely descriptive
of reality. In Section 6, we turn our attention to models in which both incumbents and
potential entrants conduct R&D. Introducing incumbent investment has the potential to
substantially complicate our analysis by making equilibrium behavior depend on the level
of the incumbent’s lead over other firms. We study two models in which we can avoid this
state dependence. In one model, we assume that the previous leading technology enters
the public domain whenever the incumbent innovates. In this model, the incumbent
does R&D solely to avoid displacement by a rival. In our second model, we assume
that the profit improvement from a larger lead is linear in the size of the lead and that
potential entrants win all “ties,” which again leads the incumbent’s optimal R&D level
to be stationary. In this model, the incumbent does R&D to improve its profit flows until
the time that it is displaced by a rival. Interestingly, in both models there are a wide
range of circumstances in which a more protective policy can increase the innovation
incentives of both the incumbent and potential entrants.
    In the policies considered in Sections 2-6 antitrust policy aﬀects entrant and incum-
bent profit flows, which shift only the innovation benefit. In Section 7, we consider
antitrust policies that have other eﬀects. We first consider predatory activities, which
alter an entrant’s probability of survival. As when policy aﬀects profit flows, limitations

                                             4
on predatory activities aﬀect only innovation benefit. We then consider policies that
instead involve shifts in innovation supply. These include limitations on behaviors that
raise rivals’ R&D costs, such as buying up needed R&D inputs or engaging in costly
litigation to challenge entrants’ patents.
     Section 8 concludes and briefly discusses the relation of our analysis to issues in
intellectual property protection, where some similar issues arise.



2. A Stylized Model of Antitrust in Innovative Industries

We begin by developing a stylized model of continuing innovation. Our aim is to develop
a model that yields some general insights into the eﬀect of antitrust policies on the rate
of innovation, and that we can apply to a number of diﬀerent antitrust policies in the
remainder of the paper. In this section, we develop the simplest possible version of this
model, which we substantially generalize in the next section.
    The model has discrete time and an infinite horizon. There are two firms who discount
future profits at rate δ ∈ (0, 1). In each period, one of the firms is the “incumbent” I
and the other is the “potential entrant” E. In the beginning of each period, the potential
entrant chooses its R&D rate, φ ∈ [0, 1]; the cost of R&D is given by a strictly convex
function c(φ).5 The R&D of the potential entrant yields an innovation – which we inter-
pret to be a particular improvement in the quality of the product – with probability φ.
If the potential entrant innovates, it receives a patent, enters, competes with the incum-
bent in the present period, and then becomes the incumbent in the next period, while
the previous incumbent then becomes the potential entrant. In this sense, this is a model
of “winner-take-all” competition. While the patent provides perfect protection (forever)
to the innovation itself, the other firm may overtake the patent holder by developing
subsequent innovations.
    Antitrust policies can impact incentives for innovation in various ways. Through
most of the paper we will be interested in the eﬀects of an antitrust policy α that aﬀects
the incumbent’s competition with an entrant who has just received a patent. Many
antitrust policies are of this type and we will analyze some of these in detail in Sections 4
and 5. (In Section 7 we discuss policies that have other eﬀects.) To this end, we denote
the incumbent’s profit in competition with a new entrant by π I (α), and the profit of the

   5
    Note that c(·) must be convex if the entrant can randomize over its R&D strategy. We assume strict
convexity to simplify exposition in the simplest version of the model.


                                                  5
entrant by πE (α), which we assume are diﬀerentiable functions of α. We let π 0E (α) > 0,
so that a higher α represents a policy that is more “protective” of the entrant in the
sense that it raises the profit of the entrant in the period of entry. Less clear, however,
is the overall eﬀect of an increase in α on the incentive to innovate, since an increase in
α will alter as well the value of becoming a continuing incumbent. We also denote by the
diﬀerentiable function π m (α) the profit of an incumbent who faces no competition in a
period. (In Sections 4 and 5, when we consider specific applications, we show how these
values can be derived from an underlying model of the product market.)
    We examine stationary Markov perfect equilibria of the infinite-horizon game using
the dynamic programming approach. Let VI denote the expected present discounted
profits of an incumbent, and VE those of a potential entrant (both evaluated at the
beginning of a period). Then, since innovation occurs with probability φ, these values
should satisfy


                VI = π m (α) + δVI + φ [π I (α) − π m (α) + δ (VE − VI )] ,            (2.1)
               VE = δVE + φ [π E (α) + δ (VI − VE )] − c (φ) .                         (2.2)


Also, a potential entrant’s choice of φ should maximize its expected discounted value.
Letting w ≡ πE (α) + δ (VI − VE ) denote the expected discounted benefit from becoming
a successful innovator–what we shall call the innovation prize–the optimal innovation
level is
                             Φ (w) = arg max {φw − c (φ)} .
                                          φ∈[0,1]


Note that the maximizer is unique since the objective function is strictly concave. Note
also that Φ (·) is continuous (by Berge’s Theorem of the Maximum) and nondecreasing
(by the Monotone Selection Theorem of Milgrom and Shannon [1994]). Function Φ (·)
gives the innovation decision of the entrant as a function of the innovation prize w, and
its graph gives us an “innovation supply curve”, which we label IS in Figure 2.1.




    Consider now the determinants of the innovation prize w. Subtracting (2.2) from
(2.1), solving for (VI − VE ), and substituting its value into w ≡ πE + δ (VI − VE ), allows




                                              6
Figure 2.1: The Innovation Supply Curve

w


                           IS




    0                               1
                     ø



           Figure 2.1:




                 7
                  Figure 2.2: Equilibrium and Comparative Statics

                     w

                                IB´                         IS


                      _
                     w


                      _
                      w


                                                       IB

                                                                 _
                                     ø_            ø             ø




                                          Figure 2.2:

us to express the innovation prize as w = W (φ, α), where

                                 ∙                                          ¸
                               φπ I (α) + (1 − φ)πm (α) − φπ E (α) + c (φ)
       W (φ, α) = πE (α) + δ
                                               1 − δ + 2δφ
                  [1 − δ (1 − φ)] πE (α) + δ [φπ I (α) + (1 − φ) πm (α) + c (φ)]
                =                                                                .    (IB)
                                           1 − δ + 2δφ

This equation defines an “innovation benefit curve” – the value of the innovation prize
as a function of the innovation rate φ. In Figure 2.2 we graph it (labeled IB) along with
the IS curve. Points where the two curves intersect represent equilibrium values of (φ, w).



   Note that the IS curve does not depend on α at all. As seen in Figure 2.2, if α shifts
the IB curve up (down) at all values of φ, then it increases (decreases) the equilibrium

                                               8
innovation rate in the “largest” and “smallest” equilibria (denoted by φ and φ respectively
in Figure 2.2). This can be established formally using comparative statics results of
Milgrom and Roberts [1994], which we do in the next section. When there is a unique
equilibrium, this result implies determinate comparative statics. Also, as evident in
Figure 2.2, the same local comparative statics must hold (using the Implicit Function
Theorem) at any “stable” equilibrium (at which the IB curve must cut the IS curve from
above) if the IB function is shifted up or down in a neighborhood of the equilibrium.
In what follows, we will say that a change in policy “increases (decreases) innovation”
whenever these comparative statics properties hold. Diﬀerentiating W (φ, α) with respect
to α, we see that the protectiveness of antitrust policy increases (decreases) innovation if

                                      ∙                         ¸
                                    (1 − φ)π 0m (α) + φπ 0I (α)
                      π0E   (α) + δ                               ≥ (≤) 0               (2.3)
                                          1 − δ(1 − φ)


for all φ ∈ [0, 1].
    Condition (2.3) indicates how to sort through the potentially conflicting eﬀects of
antitrust policy on innovation incentives that arise from the policy’s dual eﬀects on
a successful entrant’s initial profits and on its returns from achieving incumbency. It
shows that a change in policy encourages (discourages) innovation precisely when it raises
(reduces) the incremental expected discounted profits over an innovation’s lifetime: The
first term on the left side of (2.3) is the change in an entrant’s profit in the period of
entry due to the policy change, while the second term is equal to the change in the value
of a continuing incumbent (the numerator is the derivative of the flow of expected profits
in each period of incumbency conditional on still being an incumbent; the denominator
captures the “eﬀective” discount rate, which includes the probability of displacement),
and thus of the entrant’s value once it is itself established as the incumbent.
    In interpreting condition (2.3), it is helpful to think about the case in which the
monopoly profit πm is independent of the antitrust policy α, so that π0m (α) = 0. In this
case, condition (2.3) tells us that innovation increases (decreases) if

                                          ∙         ¸
                                             δφ
                            π0E   (α) +               π0 (α) ≥ (≤) 0.                   (2.4)
                                        1 − δ(1 − φ) I


Thus, innovation increases if a weighted sum of π 0E (α) and π0I (α) increases, where the
weight on π0E (α) exceeds the weight on π 0I (α) due to discounting (δ < 1). As illustrated in

                                                 9
                     Figure 2.3: Effects of Increased Protection of
                     Entrants on Innovation

                                 πI´

                                                                   πE´




                                          Innovation ↑



                                Innovation ↓
                                                             45º

                                                    δ↑, φ↑




                                       Figure 2.3:

Figure 2.3, this implies that a more protective antitrust policy raises innovation whenever
π0I (α) + π0E (α) ≥ 0; that is, provided that an increase in α does not lower the joint profit
of the entrant and the incumbent in the period of entry. Intuitively, observe that a
successful innovator earns πE (α) when he enters, and earns πI (α) when he is displaced.
A more protective antitrust policy that raises πE and lowers πI has a front loading eﬀect,
eﬀectively shifting profits forward in time. Since the later profits π I are discounted, this
front loading of profits necessarily increases the innovation prize provided that the joint
profit π I + πE does not decrease.



   Observe also that the weight on π 0I (α) is increasing in φ and in δ. Thus, as depicted
in Figure 2.3, the larger is δ or φ, the more likely is a more protective policy to reduce
innovation. For φ, this is so because larger φ moves forward the expected date when the
entrant will itself be displaced. For δ, this is so because with larger δ the discounted

                                               10
value of the profits in the period in which the entrant is displaced are greater. In the
limit, as δ → 1, the amount by which the joint profit πE + π I can be dissipated while still
encouraging innovation converges to zero: in this limiting case, the cost of a one dollar
reduction in the value π I that the entrant will receive when he is ultimately displaced is
exactly equal to the gain from receiving a dollar more in the period in which he enters.
    Up to this point (and in the remainder of the paper) we have focused on a stationary
setting. However, the front-loading feature of protective antitrust policies suggests that
the rate of market growth may alter the impact of antitrust policy on innovation. As an
illustration, imagine that profits in period 1 are instead βπI (α) , βπE (α) , and βπm (α) for
β ≤ 1, and are π I (α) , π E (α) , and π m (α) from period 2 on. Following a similar derivation
to that above, a change in α will now increase (decrease) the period 1 innovation rate φ1
if                                   ∙                            ¸
                         0             (1 − φ)π0m (α) + φπ 0I (α)
                     βπE (α) + δ                                    ≥ (≤) 0.
                                             1 − δ(1 − φ)

Thus, the greater is market growth (the lower is β), the less likely is it that period 1
innovation will increase. For example, when β < 1 and π0m (α) = 0, an increase in α may
reduce innovation even when joint profits upon entry increase (π0I (α) + π 0E (α) ≥ 0).



3. Comparative Statics for More General Innovation Supply and

   Benefit

The fact that the comparative statics argument above did not depend on the particular
shapes of the innovation supply and innovation benefit curves suggests that we can sub-
stantially generalize it. For one thing, we can generalize the innovation benefit curve by
allowing all three of the profits πI , πE , and πm to be aﬀected by the rate of innovation
φ. (This may happen because the price at which consumers purchase a durable good
or accept a long-term contract may depend on their expectation of the innovation rate,
as in the examples studied in Section 4.1 and Appendix C.) Denoting these profits by
πI (α, φ), πE (α, φ), and πm (α, φ), we see that the argument of Section 3 continues to hold
if we reinterpret the derivatives in (2.3) as being partial derivatives with respect to α
holding φ fixed.
    We can also allow for alternative models of innovation supply, such as having more
than one potential entrant engage in R&D, or even allowing free entry (i.e., infinitely


                                              11
many potential entrants). (We still do not allow the incumbent to do R&D; we discuss
relaxing this assumption in Section 6.) To do so, we define the industry’s “innovation
rate” φ as the probability that the incumbent technology is displaced with an innovation.
For a symmetric industry, φ also determines the potential entrants’ individual R&D
investments [and, hence, their R&D cost c (φ)] and the probability u (φ) that a given
potential entrant becomes a new incumbent (i.e., moves “up”). The expected present
discounted profits of an incumbent (VI ) a potential entrant (VE ) can then be described
by


                VI = π m (α) + δVI + φ [π I (α) − π m (α) + δ (VE − VI )] ,                (VI∗ )
                VE = δVE + u(φ) [π E (α) + δ (VI − VE )] − c (φ) .                         (VE∗ )


Subtracting, we can express the innovation prize w = π E + δ (VI − VE ) with the following
function:

               [1 − δ (1 − φ)] πE (α, φ) + δ [φπ I (α, φ) + (1 − φ) πm (α, φ) + c (φ)]
  W (φ, α) =                                                                           .   (IB∗ )
                                       1 − δ + δ(φ + u (φ))


   As for the innovation supply curve, which describes the entrants’ R&D response to
a given innovation prize, our comparative statics results hold as long as the curve is
described by a correspondence Φ (w) satisfying the following three properties:

 (IS1): Φ (·) is nonempty- and convex-valued;

 (IS2) Φ (·) has a closed graph;

 (IS3) Any selection from Φ (·) is nondecreasing (i.e., if w0 > w, φ0 ∈ Φ(w0 ), and φ ∈ Φ(w),
     then φ0 ≥ φ).

     For example, if Φ (·) is a function (i.e., single-valued), (IS1) is vacuous, (IS2) means
that the function is continuous, and (IS3) means that it is nondecreasing. Other corre-
spondences satisfying (IS1)-(IS3) are obtained by taking a nondecreasing function and
“filling in” its jumps, as illustrated in Figure 3.1.




                                              12
Figure 3.1: An IS Curve Satisfying (IS1) - (IS3)


w




                             IS




    0                                    1
                         ø



              Figure 3.1:




                    13
   Properties (IS1)-(IS3) ensure that antitrust policy aﬀects the largest and smallest
equilibrium innovation rates in the same direction in which it shifts the innovation benefit
curve, which we can determine by partially diﬀerentiating W (φ, α):

Proposition 3.1. If the innovation supply correspondence Φ (·) satisfies (IS1)-(IS3) and
the innovation benefit function W (φ, α) is continuous in φ, then the largest and smallest
equilibrium innovation rates exist, and both these rates are nondecreasing (nonincreasing)
in α, the protectiveness of antitrust policy, if

                                      ∙                                 ¸
                                       (1 − φ)π0m (α, φ) + φπ 0I (α, φ)
                      π0E   (α, φ) + δ                                    ≥ (≤) 0                (3.1)
                                               1 − δ(1 − φ)


for all φ ∈ [0, 1].

Proof. The equilibrium innovation rates are the fixed points of the composite corre-
spondence γ (α, ·) ≡ Φ (W (α, ·)). (IS1)-(IS3) and the continuity of W (α, ·) imply that
γ (α, φ) = [γ L (α, φ) , γ H (α, φ)] 6= ∅, and that the correspondence γ (α, ·) is continuous
but for upward jumps (Milgrom and Roberts [1994]). Furthermore, if W (φ, α) is nonde-
creasing (nonincreasing) in α, then so are γ L (α, φ) and γ H (α, φ). Corollary 2 of Milgrom
and Roberts [1994] then establishes that the largest and smallest fixed points of γ (α, ·)
exist and are nondecreasing (nonincreasing) in α.
    If there are multiple equilibria, this result does allow some equilibria to move in the
direction opposite to that predicted by Proposition 3.1. However, the same local com-
parative statics holds for any locally unique equilibrium φ (α) at which we have crossing
                                      £     ¤                                 £      ¤
from above, i.e., for some interval φ, φ , Φ (W (α, φ)) ⊂ [φ, 1] for φ ∈ φ, φ (α) and
                                £        ¤
Φ (W (α, φ)) ⊂ [0, φ] for φ ∈ φ (α) , φ (which is a necessary condition for (Lyapunov)
stability.6 )

Proposition 3.2. Suppose that the innovation supply correspondence Φ (·) satisfies
(IS1)-(IS3) and the innovation benefit function W (φ, α) is continuous in φ. Suppose,
in addition, that for any α ∈ [α, α] there is a unique equilibrium innovation rate φ (α) on
            £    ¤
an interval φ, φ and that the IB curve crosses the IS curve from above on this interval.

   6
    Indeed, suppose that the industry in period
                                            ¡ ¡ t adaptively
                                                       ¢¢    expects the future innovation rate to be
φt−1 , and so chooses innovation rate φt ∈ Φ W α, φt−1 . If we have “crossing from below,” then the
                                            £   ¤                       £    ¤
dynamics starting at any disequilibrium φ ∈ φ, φ must leave the interval φ, φ , so that the equilibrium
is not (Lyapunov) stable.

                                                   14
Then φ (α) is nondecreasing (nonincreasing) if condition (3.1) holds for all α ∈ [α, α] and
   £    ¤
φ ∈ φ, φ .

Proof. Let                           ⎧
                                     ⎪
                                     ⎪           £      ¢
                                     ⎪
                                     ⎪ φ for φ ∈   0, φ   ,
                                     ⎪
                                     ⎪
                                     ⎨
                                                 £      ¤
                             χ (φ) =   φ for φ ∈  φ,  φ   ,
                                     ⎪
                                     ⎪
                                     ⎪
                                     ⎪
                                     ⎪
                                     ⎪           ¡      ¤
                                     ⎩ φ for φ ∈ φ, 1 .

Crossing from above implies that φ (α) is also the unique fixed point of the composite cor-
                                                         £    ¤
respondence γ (α, ·) ≡ χ (Φ (W (α, ·))) on the interval φ, φ . Since this correspondence
satisfies (IS1)-(IS3), the proof of Proposition 3.1 implies the result.

    We now provide three examples in which (IS1)-(IS3) hold and so Propositions 3.1 and
3.2 determine the comparative statics eﬀect of antitrust policy on the rate of innovation.


3.1. Example: One entrant with constant returns R&D technology

Suppose that we still have one entrant but the R&D cost function is c(φ) = c· φ for c > 0.
In this case, the innovation supply is no longer a function: Φ(w) = 0 if w < c, [0, ∞] if
w = c, and 1 if w > c. However, since Φ(·) satisfies (IS1)-(IS3), Propositions 3.1 and 3.2
tell us that the same comparative statics apply.


3.2. Example: More than one potential entrant

Suppose that there are N > 1 potential entrants in any period (in addition to the single
incumbent). In the beginning of each period, each potential entrant i independently
chooses its R&D rate ψ i ∈ [0, 1]; the cost of R&D is given by a convex function γ(ψ i ).
The R&D of a given potential entrant i yields a discovery with probability ψ i (we assume
that the discoveries are independently realized). We shall focus on symmetric equilibria,
in which all potential entrants choose the same equilibrium level of R&D, denoted by
ψ. In this case, the likelihood that at least one of the N potential entrants makes
                               £             ¤
a discovery is given by φ = 1 − (1 − ψ)N . Thus, in a symmetric equilibrium with
aggregate innovation rate φ, the potential entrants’ individual R&D choices are ψN (φ) =
1 − (1 − φ)1/N .



                                            15
    Among the potential entrants who make a discovery, only one may receive the patent
for the discovery. Denote by rN (ψ) the probability that a given potential entrant receives
a patent, conditional on it making a discovery, when all other potential entrants are doing
R&D at level ψ. We assume that rN (·) is a strictly decreasing function.7 A potential
entrant who is successful at receiving a patent enters and competes with the incumbent
in the present period, and then becomes the incumbent in the next period, while the
previous incumbent then becomes a potential entrant.
    Note that in the symmetric equilibrium, the probability that a given entrant becomes
the incumbent is u (φ) = ψN (φ) rN (ψN (φ)), and the entrant’s R&D cost is c (φ) =
γ (ψN (φ)). The innovation benefit curve is then given by substituting these expressions
in (IB∗ ) above.
    As for the innovation supply, the equilibrium individual innovation rate solves the
following equilibrium condition for a given value of w


                                  ψ = arg max {ψ 0 rN (ψ) w − γ (ψ 0 )} .                        (3.2)
                                          0
                                            ψ ∈[0,1]



As shown in Lemma A.1 in Appendix A, this describes a unique equilibrium level of ψ,
which is a continuous and nondecreasing function of w. These properties are preserved
for the aggregate equilibrium innovation rate φ, and so the aggregate innovation supply
Φ(·) satisfies (IS1)-(IS3). Therefore, Propositions 3.1 and 3.2 apply to this model.


3.3. Example: Free entry

In some circumstances it may be more appropriate to assume that there is free entry into
R&D competition.8 This assumption can be interpreted as a limiting case of a very large
number N of potential entrants each of whom engages in an infinitesimal amount of R&D

  7
      When the patent is awarded randomly to one of the successful innovators,
                            N −1 µ         ¶µ          ¶
                            X         1         N −1                            1 − (1 − ψ)N
                   r(ψ) =                                  ψk (1 − ψ)N −1−k =                .
                                     k+1        k                                    ψN
                            k=0



  8
    The fixed N model is the appropriate model when there are a limited number of firms with the
capability of doing R&D in an industry (perhaps because of complementary assets they possess due to
participation in related industries).



                                                       16
while the aggregate innovation rate is positive. An innovator’s conditional probability of
getting a patent can then be written using the expression in footnote 7 as

                                                      φ                    φ
          r̄ (φ) = lim rN (ψN (φ)) = lim ³                  ´    =−              ,
                  N →∞                N →∞
                                              1 − (1 − φ)1/N N        ln (1 − φ)

which is a continuous decreasing function of φ ∈ [0, 1]. >From (3.2), the first-order
condition for each potential entrant to choose a positive infinitesimal R&D is wr̄ (φ) =
γ 0 (0), which determines the innovation supply function Φ (w) = r̄−1 (γ 0 (0) /w) for w >
γ 0 (0), and Φ (w) = 0 for w ≤ γ 0 (0). Since this is a continuous and nondecreasing
function, the comparative statics is again described by Propositions 3.1 and 3.2.


3.4. Example: Free entry with a limited idea

In the models of Fudenberg and Tirole [2000] and O’Donohue et al. [1998], there are
infinitely many potential entrants, but in each period only one of them is randomly
drawn to receive an “idea” that enables him to invest in R&D. This potential entrant
then observes a randomly drawn implementation cost γ and chooses whether to invest in
implementing the innovation. If he does, he is certain to become the next incumbent.
    Observe first that the optimal strategy of potential entrants takes the form of choosing
a cost threshold γ̄ below which to implement their idea. This is equivalent to choosing
the probability of innovation φ = Pr {γ ≤ γ̄} ≡ F (γ̄), and the associated expected
                 Rγ
innovation cost 0 γdF (γ). In other words, the innovation supply is equivalent to having
a single potential entrant who chooses an innovation probability φ at an expected cost
   R F −1 (φ)
of 0          γdF (γ), which is a convex function of φ. Thus, the innovation supply curve is
determined just as in the single-firm model, and satisfies (IS1)-(IS3). For the innovation
benefit curve, on the other hand, in (IB∗ ) we take c (φ) = u (φ) = 0 since each potential
entrant in expectation does not incur any cost and has zero chance of innovating. Once
again, the comparative statics are described by Propositions 3.1 and 3.2.



4. Applications: R&D-Deterring Activities

In this section, we use the results of Section 3 to analyze two models in which an incum-
bent engages in activities designed to deter the R&D of potential entrants. The models
we consider are all versions of the “quality ladder” models introduced in the recent lit-

                                             17
erature on economic growth (e.g., Aghion and Howitt [1992]; Grossman and Helpman
[1991]). Our results in this section will apply for any continuous nondecreasing innovation
supply function.
     Before turning to these applications, we first make a surprising observation: In many
circumstances, the tension between a more protective policy’s eﬀect on a new entrant
and its eﬀect on an incumbent will not arise, at least once we hold the rate of innovation
fixed, as Proposition 3.1 suggests we do.
     To see why, consider the following stylized model: Imagine that at the end of each
period the firm with the leading technology can commit to some behavior d ∈ R that
aﬀects both its profits and an entrant’s profits in the following period. Let these profits
be given by functions π  bm (d), π bI (d), and πbE (d), where π b0E (d) < 0 (for simplicity we
assume that these functions do not depend on φ, although this is inessential). Consider
a stationary Markov perfect equilibrium in which potential entrant R&D is a decreasing
function of the state variable d (chosen in the previous period) given by the function
φ∗ (d) with φ∗0 (d) < 0. Then, the equilibrium level of d absent any antitrust constraint,
d∗ , maximizes
                      φ∗ (d)[b
                             π I (d) + δVE ] + (1 − φ∗ (d))[b
                                                            πm (d) + δVI ],               (4.1)

and satisfies the first-order condition


            π0I (d∗ ) + (1 − φ)b
          [φb                  π0m (d∗ )] + φ∗0 (d∗ ){[b
                                                       π I (d∗ ) + δVE ] − [b
                                                                            πm (d∗ ) + δVI ]} = 0.


       π I (d∗ ) + δVE ] − [b
Thus, [b                    π m (d∗ ) + δVI ] ≤ 0 (which says that it is valuable to the incumbent
to prevent entry) implies that [φb       π0I (d∗ ) + (1 − φ)b
                                                            π 0m (d∗ )] ≥ 0: a small reduction in d,
holding φ fixed, actually raises the profit of a continuing incumbent. This tells us that if
the antitrust policy α requires that d ≤ d∗ − α, then for small α no tension arises: both
terms in condition (3.1) are nonnegative, and so innovation necessarily increases when a
slightly protective antitrust policy is introduced.9
    More generally, suppose that the function φb  π I (d) + (1 − φ)b
                                                                   πm (d) is a diﬀerentiable
pseudo-concave function of d, so that there is a peak at some d∗∗ , with the function
increasing at d ≤ d∗∗ and decreasing at d ≥ d∗∗ . (d∗∗ is the level of d that an incumbent
unconcerned with preventing entry would choose.) Then, for equilibria in which the
antitrust constraint binds, and antitrust constraints that are not so severe as to force

  9
                                                                      π0I (α) + (1 − φ)b
                                bE (d∗ − α) for j = m, I, E, we have φb
      Formally, taking πj (α) ≡ π                                                      π0m (α) ≥ 0


                                                     18
d below d∗∗ , both incumbent and entrant profits increase with an increase in α holding φ
fixed, and hence so does the rate of innovation.
    The key insight here comes because of Proposition 3.1’s characterization, which in-
structs us to think about profit eﬀects holding the rate of innovation φ fixed. This
frequently eliminates the apparent tension between the eﬀects of policy changes on en-
trant and incumbent profits: If (on the margin) an R&D-deterring activity involves a
sacrifice in incumbent profit in return for a reduction in the probability of entry then,
holding φ fixed, both entrant and incumbent profits are increased by a more protective
policy, and so innovation increases.
    We now turn to two more specific applications in which we derive the relevant profit
functions from fundamentals, and in which there is a fully specified consumer side, so
that welfare analysis is possible.


4.1. Long-term (exclusive) contracts

We first consider a model in which the incumbent can sign consumers to long-term
contracts. There are at least 2 firms and a continuum of infinitely-lived consumers of
measure 1 who may consume a nonstorable and nondurable good with production cost
k ≥ 0. R&D may improve the quality of this good and consumers value “generation j”
of the good at vj = v + j · ∆. At any time t, one firm – the current “incumbent” –
possesses a perfectly eﬀective and infinitely-lived patent on the latest generation product
jt . Likewise, at time t there is a patentholder for each of the previous generations of
the product (jt − 1, jt − 2, ...). We assume, as in Sections 2 and 3, that at time t only
firms other than the incumbent in the leading technology – the potential entrants – can
invest in developing the generation jt + 1 product. One implication of this assumption
is that in each period t the holder of the patent on generation jt − 1 is a firm other than
the current incumbent, who holds the patent on the current leading generation jt .
     Suppose that in each period t, the incumbent can oﬀer long-term contracts to a share
β t+1 of period t+1 consumers. The contracts specify a sale in period t+1 at a price qt+1 to
be paid upon delivery. (In our simple model, this is equivalent to an exclusive contract
that prevents the consumer from buying from the entrant, subject to some irrelevant
issues with the timing of payments.) The antitrust policy restricts the proportion of
consumers that can be oﬀered long-term contracts: β t+1 ≤ 1 − α. We assume that the
production cost k exceeds the quality increment ∆, so that an entrant cannot profitably
make a sale to a consumer who is bound to a long-term contract.


                                            19
       The timing in period t is:

       • Stage t.1: Each potential entrant i observes the share of captured consumers β t
         and chooses its innovation rate ψit . Then innovation success is realized.

       • Stage t.2: Firms name prices pit to free period t consumers.

       • Stage t.3: Free period t consumers accept/reject these oﬀers.

       • Stage t.4: The firm with the leading technology chooses to oﬀer to a share β t+1 ≤
         1 − α of period t + 1 consumers a period t + 1 sales contract at price qt+1 to be paid
         upon delivery.

       • Stage t.5: Period t + 1 consumers accept/reject these contract oﬀers (they assume
         that they have no eﬀect on the likelihood of future entry).10

    Observe that when α = 0 so that no long-term contracts can be written, we have a
simple model in which in each period there is Bertrand competition between the leading
firm and firms further down the ladder occurs each period. In Appendix B, we discuss this
benchmark quality ladder model, and the distortions in the rate of innovation relative to
the first-best level that arise. In general, innovation may be either insuﬃcient or excessive
because of “Schumpeterian” and “business stealing” eﬀects.
    Here we focus on Markov perfect equilibria. In particular, we study equilibria in which
potential entrants in stage t.1 condition their innovation choices only on the current share
of captive customers β t , and in which the choices at all other stages are stationary. (Note
that since period t contracts expire at the end of that period, there is no relevant state
variable aﬀecting the contracting choice of the leading firm at stage t.4.)
    It is immediate that in any such equilibrium, the prices oﬀered to free customers
in any period t are k + ∆ by the firm with the leading technology jt , who wins the
sale, and k by the firm with technology jt − 1. Now consider a consumer’s decision of
whether to accept a long-term contract. If in period t the expected probability of entry
in period t + 1 is φt+1 , a period t + 1 consumer who rejects the leading firm’s long-term
contract oﬀer anticipates getting the period t surplus level v + (jt − 1) ∆ − k plus an
expected gain in surplus of φt+1 ∆ due to the possibility of technological advancement

  10
    We assume throughout that consumers all accept if accepting is a continuation equilibrium (we do
not allow consumers to coordinate). The leading firm could achieve this by, for example, committing to
auction oﬀ the desired number of long-term contracts.


                                                 20
in period t + 1. Thus, he will accept the contract if and only if the price qt+1 satisfies
                        ¡             ¢
v + jt ∆ − qt+1 ≥ v + jt − 1 + φt+1 ∆ − k. Hence, the maximum price the incumbent
can receive in a long-term contract is qt+1 = k + (1 − φt+1 )∆, which leaves the consumer
indiﬀerent about signing.
    How many consumers will the leading firm sign up in period t? Observe first that
if the probability of entry φt+1 were independent of β t+1 , then the leading firm would
be indiﬀerent about signing up an extra consumer: its period t expectation of the profit
from a free consumer in period t + 1 is (1 − φt+1 )∆, which exactly equals its maximal
expected profit from a long-term contract. However, φ is nonincreasing in β t+1 , because
an increase in the share of captive customers reduces the profits a successful entrant can
collect in period t + 1.11 Therefore, the incumbent optimally signs up as many long-term
customers as the antitrust constraint allows, i.e., β t+1 = 1 − α in every period. We can
therefore fit this model into our basic model by taking


                              πm (α, φ) = α∆ + (1 − α)(1 − φ)∆                                      (4.2)
                               π I (α, φ) = (1 − α)(1 − φ)∆
                               πE (α, φ) = α∆.


   Observe, first, that in this model an increase in α does indeed raise π E . More signifi-
cantly,


        [φπ I (α, φ) + (1 − φ)π m (α, φ)] = (1 − φ)α∆ + (1 − α)(1 − φ)∆ = (1 − φ)∆.


Thus, holding φ fixed, the expected profit of a continuing incumbent is independent of α.
The reason is that, holding φ fixed, it is a matter of indiﬀerence to both the incumbent
(and consumers) whether consumers accept a long-term contract. This is a case in which
an R&D-deterring activity has no cost to the incumbent. Thus, we see immediately that
condition (3.1) is satisfied, and so we have:


  11
     Formally, the innovation rate of a potential entrant in period t + 1 when a share β t+1 of period
t + 1 consumers have signed long-term contracts is Φ((1 − β t+1 )∆ + δ(VIt+2 − VEt+2 )), where VIt+2 and
VEt+2 are the continuation values at the start of period t + 2, which are independent of β t+1 . By (IS3),
this innovation rate is nonincreasing in β t+1 .



                                                   21
Proposition 4.1. In our basic model of long-term (exclusive) contracts, restricting the
use of long-term (exclusive) contracts encourages innovation.

    Consider now the welfare eﬀects of a once-and-for-all increase in the policy α in some
period τ . We assume that this intervention occurs just after stage τ .1.12 The payoﬀ eﬀects
of such a change begin in period τ + 1. Note, first, that the increase raises consumer
surplus: consumers are indiﬀerent about signing exclusives when the innovation rate is
held fixed, but an increase in the innovation rate delivers to them higher-quality goods
at the same prices. What about the sum of consumer surplus and current incumbent
(i.e., the firm with the leading technology just after stage τ .1) profits? There is no direct
eﬀect of the policy change on either consumers or the current incumbent because, holding
φ fixed, both are indiﬀerent about whether long-term contracts are signed. What about
the indirect eﬀect caused by the increase in φ? Intuitively, an innovation in period τ + 1
reallocates surplus α∆ from the incumbent to period τ + 1 consumers. However, in
subsequent periods the innovation confers an expected benefit ∆ to consumers but at an
expected cost to the incumbent that is less than ∆ as long as the probability of future
displacement is positive (i.e., φ > 0 ).
    Now consider the eﬀects on potential entrants. Observe that in each of the examples
we considered in Sections 3.1-3.4, u(Φ (w))w − c(Φ (w)) is nondecreasing in w, i.e., each
potential entrant is better oﬀ if the innovation prize increases. We refer to this as the
Value Monotonicity Property. Since we are moving upward along the upward-sloping IS
curve when α increases, the increase in φ caused by the increase in α must be associated
with an increase in w. When the Value Monotonicity Property is satisfied, this implies
that each potential entrant becomes (weakly) better oﬀ. Finally, what about the current
incumbent? This turns out to be ambiguous: on one hand, the increase in φ speeds the
incumbent’s displacement. On the other hand, the value VE that the incumbent receives
when he is displaced may increase. This reasoning leads to the following result:

Proposition 4.2. A once-and-for-all restriction on the share of long-term (exclusive)
contracts that raises innovation raises consumer surplus, aggregate welfare, and (when

  12
    We make this assumption to simplify the analysis. By doing so, the equilibrium innovation rate
transitions immediately to its new steady state value and all payoﬀ changes begin in period τ + 1. If,
instead, the intervention occurs at the start of the period, there would be a one period transitory eﬀect
on the innovation rate because in period τ the share of captive customers facing an entrant would be
the level from before the policy change while the continuation values VI and VE starting in period τ + 1
would be the levels in the new steady state.



                                                   22
the Value Monotonicity Property is satisfied) the values of potential entrants. The eﬀect
on the current incumbent’s value is ambiguous.

Proof. In Appendix A.
    It is perhaps surprising that the welfare eﬀect of an increase in α is necessarily positive,
given that the equilibrium innovation rate may be above the first-best level due to business
stealing (see Appendix B). Note, however, that long-term contracts involve an ineﬃciency
since when entry occurs the incumbent makes sales of an old technology to captive
consumers. Thus, even if an increase in the share of captive consumers brings a socially
excessive innovation rate closer to the first-best level, the waste eﬀect dominates and
aggregate welfare is reduced.13
    In the model above, holding φ fixed, incumbent and entrant profits both increased
with a more protective policy, and so innovation necessarily increased. In Appendix C, we
consider an extension of this long-term contracting model in which the innovation sizes
(∆) are uncertain ex ante and there is a cost of rapidly implementing new innovations.
The key new feature in this model is that antitrust policy has a “selection eﬀect”: by
altering the profitability of entry, antitrust policy alters the set of innovations that rapidly
enter the market. We show in Appendix C that in this situation, limitations on long-term
contracting may retard innovation.


4.2. Compatibility in a network industry

We next consider a model of compatibility choices by a leading firm in an industry with
network externalities. The model is patterned after Fudenberg and Tirole [2000] who
studied limit pricing in a dynamic model.14 Overlapping generations of consumers live
for two periods, and make purchases only when young. Each generation is of unit mass.
The value of consumption in a period t is v + jt ∆ + v(N) if the consumer consumes
the leading quality good jt and this good has a “network size” of N. We follow the
convention in the network externalities literature and assume that consumers in each
generation coordinate their purchases, acting as a single agent and purchasing from a
single firm. We also assume that ∆ > v(2) − v(1). This implies that the firm with

  13
      Indeed, observe that potential entrants, who directly suﬀer from the business-stealing eﬀect, are
necessarily better oﬀ when α increases.
   14
      There are several key diﬀerences: we have only one type of consumer (so limit pricing is not possible),
firms make compatibility choices, and patent protection lasts forever.


                                                     23
the leading quality will also have the leading eﬀective quality once we include network
benefits, regardless of the network sizes of the various goods.
    There are many ways in which compatibility is determined in actual markets. Here
we focus on one that leads to a relatively simple model that fits our framework. We
assume that each firm that oﬀers its product to consumers chooses a price p and also
a compatibility level β ∈ [0, 1] of this product with higher quality products. Network
benefits are then determined as follows: the network size enjoyed by generation g of
consumers who have bought good j is 2 if all consumers in a period consume it, is 1 if
the other existing generation of consumers consumes a higher quality good, and is 1 + β l
if the other existing generation of consumers consumes a lower quality product l which
has compatibility level β l with higher quality products. That is, while consumers of high
quality products can benefit from the existence of consumers who consume a lower quality
product (to the extent that this good’s producer allows), the reverse is not true.15,16 The
cost of producing a product with compatibility level β is k(β). We define k ≡ min k(β).
    In each period t the game proceeds as follows:

       • Stage t.1: Each potential entrant i (firms other than the producer of the leading
         quality product) observes the purchase choice and compatibility level β t−1 of the
         current old generation of consumers. Potential entrants then make their R&D
         choices and innovation success is realized.

       • Stage t.2: Firms choose compatibility levels β it and name prices pit to young con-
         sumers.

       • Stage t.3: Young consumers make their purchase decisions.

   Our policy parameter α ∈ [0, 1] will put a lower bound on the compatibility level
that the firm with the leading technology can choose.17 We focus here on Markov perfect
equilibria in which the leading firm (whether a continuing incumbent or a new entrant)

  15
     As an example, consider 386 and 486 chips: software designed for 386 machines also worked on 486
machines, but not the reverse.
  16
     In essence, we assume that the higher quality product can costlessly achieve as much backward
compatibility as the lower quality firm allows. Were we to allow the higher quality firm a choice of
whether it wants backward compatibility (at no cost), it would always choose the maximal possible level.
Regarding the lower quality product, our assumptions allow its producer to commit to a compatibility
level. This may be thought of as a product design choice. For example, a patented interface may prevent
a new entrant from achieving backward compatibility.
  17
     We remark below on the eﬀects of having all firms subject to this constraint.


                                                  24
always wins the sales to young consumers, and in which the probability of entry in
period t + 1 when period t’s leading quality firm sold today’s old consumers a product
with compatibility level β t , φ∗ (β t ), is increasing in β t .18 We let VI (β) denote the value of
an incumbent seller who has the highest quality and yesterday sold products of quality
β to today’s old consumers. It will also be useful to define


                               B(φ) ≡ v(2) + δ[(1 − φ)v(2) + φv(1)].


This is the discounted expected network benefit that a young consumer anticipates if he
buys the product of a continuing incumbent seller (who has previously sold to today’s
old consumers) when the probability of entry tomorrow is φ.
    Consider, first, the period t pricing, compatibility choice, and profit of a continuing
incumbent who has the highest quality in a period without entry. Its relevant competitor
is the firm with the next-highest quality product, the previous incumbent. The previous
incumbent can oﬀer the young consumers a surplus of19


                                 [v + (jt − 1)∆] + (1 + δ)v(1) − k.


The continuing incumbent therefore sets its compatibility level equal to


                                        e − k(β)]
          β ∗ (α) ∈ arg max ∆ + {[B(φ∗ (β))   e − [(1 + δ)v(1) − k]} + δVI (β)
                                                                            e
                         
                         β≥α



and earns {∆ + [B(φ∗ (β ∗ (α))) − k(β ∗ (α))] − [v(1)(1 + δ) − k]} today from sales to current
young consumers and a continuation value of VI (β ∗ (α)).
   Now consider the period t pricing, compatibility choice, and profit of an entrant
against a continuing incumbent that prior to this entry was the highest quality firm and
yesterday sold a product with compatibility level β t to the current old consumers. Its

  18
     Oﬀ the equilibrium path, when a firm other than the leading quality firm has won the sales to
yesterday’s young consumers, the probability of entry will be φ∗ (1) since the leading quality firm will
have no existing network, leaving entrants in the same strategic situation as when a leading quality firm
makes sales but chooses to be fully compatible.
  19
     Recall that, in this equilibrium, if today’s young consumers buy from the previous incumbent, then
tomorrow’s young consumers are certain to buy from a diﬀerent firm.



                                                   25
relevant competitor is the continuing incumbent. The continuing incumbent can oﬀer
the young consumers a surplus of20


                              [v + (jt − 1)∆] + [v(2) + δv(1) − k].


The entrant will therefore set its compatibility level equal to


                              e + v(1 + β t−1 ) − v(2) − k(β)]
β ∗ (α) ∈ arg max ∆ + {[B(φ∗ (β))                          e − [v(2) + δv(1) − k]} + δVI (β)
                                                                                          e
              
              β≥α



and will earn {∆ + [B(φ∗ (β ∗ (α)) +v(1 + β t−1 ) − v(2) − k(β ∗ (α))] − [v(2) +δv(1)− k]} from
current consumers and a continuation value of VI (β ∗ (α)).21 Of course, in equilibrium, we
will have β t = β ∗ (α).
    Now consider equilibria in which the antitrust constraint binds, i.e., in which β ∗ (α) =
α. For these equilibria we have:


                    π m (α, φ) = ∆ + {[B(φ) − k(α)] − [v(1)(1 + δ) − k]}
                    πI (α, φ) = 0                                                               (4.3)
                    π E (α, φ) = ∆ + {[B(φ) + v(1 + α) − v(2) − k(α)] −
                                   [v(2) + δv(1) − k]}.


    To see the eﬀect of a more protective antitrust policy on innovation, consider first
the case in which k(·) is decreasing so that it is costly to block compatibility by a
higher quality entrant. In this case, a firm choosing to be incompatible incurs increased
production costs today to deter R&D and reduce tomorrow’s likelihood of entry. As
is evident from (4.3), in this case π m and π E both increase when α increases, while
πI remains unchanged. Again, no tension arises, and Propositions 3.1 and 3.2 tell us that
with this type of R&D-deterring behavior, innovation increases with a more protective
policy.

  20
     Once again, in this equilibrium, if today’s young consumers buy from the previous incumbent, then
tomorrow’s young consumers are certain to buy from a diﬀerent firm.
  21
     >From this one can verify that the innovation rate will be nonincreasing in β t−1 in any model
satisfying (IS1)-(IS3).


                                                 26
    When k(·) is not everywhere decreasing in β, however, increased protectiveness may
instead lower innovation. For example, suppose that k(·) is convex with its minimum at
β ∈ (0, 1). Examining (4.3), we see that increasing α above β may reduce innovation:
it certainly lowers πm and may even lower πE [if v(1 + α) − k(α) falls].22 In this case,
forcing compatibility above the level that minimizes costs may reduce R&D. At such
compatibility levels, increases in protectiveness no longer have the eﬀects that arise with
standard “R&D-deterring activities” because we are no longer in a region where the
incumbent is trading oﬀ reduced profits today for reduced R&D tomorrow.
    A full investigation of the welfare eﬀects of a more protective policy in this model is
beyond our scope here. Nevertheless, it is worth noting that in this model innovation can
be excessive even with only a single potential entrant (in contrast to our benchmark model
in Appendix B). The reason is that an externality exists between the two generations of
consumers in each period: when the young purchase an entrant’s product they leave old
consumers with lower network benefits. Indeed, while young consumers have a benefit
of [∆ − v(2) + v(1 + β ∗ (α))] in the first period that an entrant is in the market, the old
consumers lose [v(2)−v(1)]. Thus, when 1−δ   ∆
                                                < [2v(2)−v(1)−v(1+β ∗ (α))], an innovation
lowers aggregate welfare, even ignoring R&D costs. Thus, it would not be surprising if a
more protective policy that raises innovation could lower aggregate welfare here.



5. Applications: Voluntary Deals

Although we have motivated our analysis by discussing examples of exclusionary behav-
iors, our framework is not limited to such applications. Another sort of behavior to which
we can apply our model is a voluntary deal between an incumbent and a new entrant.
With the innovation rate held fixed, voluntary deals – by definition – raise both parties’
payoﬀs.23 By Proposition 3.1, such deals should therefore increase innovation. Here we
briefly consider two examples of such deals.

  22
     If the policy instead applied to all firms, then we would have k = k(α); in this case πm and πE
would still be increasing in α, so innovation would increase with α.
  23
     This conclusion depends on the fact that we have only two parties negotiating. With more than two
active firms, profits for some or all parties may fall when voluntary deals are allowed (see Segal [1999]).




                                                    27
5.1. Licensing of the entrant’s technology

Imagine that in our long-term contracting model the incumbent can license a new en-
trant’s technology for serving his captive consumers. Specifically, assume that the in-
cumbent is then able to make a take-it-or-leave-it oﬀer to these captive buyers, oﬀering
to give them instead the entrant’s better product for an additional payment of ∆. The
incumbent and the entrant split the gain from the agreement.We now denote the lower
bound on the share of free consumers by α∗ and let our policy parameter of interest
α ∈ [0, 1] be the probability that such a deal is allowed. Under these assumptions,
πm (α, φ) = α∗ ∆ + (1 − α∗ )(1 − φ)∆, π I (α, φ) = (1 − α∗ )[(1 − φ)∆ + α(∆/2)], and
π E (α, φ) = α∗ ∆ + (1 − α∗ )α(∆/2)], and so both π I and πE will increase, while πm will
be unaﬀected when α increases. As such, Propositions 3.1 and 3.2 tell us that the rate
of innovation will increase if such voluntary licensing deals are allowed. Moreover, using
similar reasoning to that in Proposition 4.2, we can show that allowing such deals also
increases aggregate welfare.24


5.2. Price collusion

As another example of a voluntary deal, set α = 0 in our long-term contracting model (so
we are in the benchmark model of Appendix B). Suppose, however, that an incumbent
and an entrant may be able to collude in their pricing to consumers in the period in
which the entrant enters. We let α = 1 if collusion is allowed, and α = 0 if it is not
allowed. We assume also that a technology enters the public domain in the period after
it is superceded, so that the only opportunity for collusion is in the period of entry.25
Hence, in periods without entry the continuing incumbent earns ∆ as before. In periods
with entry, the entrant will make the sale to consumers at a price of k + (1 + α)∆, and
split equally the joint gain from collusion α∆ with the incumbent by means of a side
payment. Hence, π E (α) = (1 + α/2) ∆, π I (α) = α∆/2, and πm (α) = ∆. The rate
of innovation is therefore increasing in the degree of allowed collusion α. In this case,
however, the welfare eﬀects are not clear. We cannot use the same type of argument as
in Proposition 4.2 to show that welfare increases, because the direct eﬀect of the change

  24
     As in the long-term contracting model, both the direct eﬀect of the policy change and the indirect
eﬀect of the induced increase in innovation on the current incumbent plus consumers is positive. Since
potential entrants are again be better oﬀ if the rate of innovation increases (assuming that the Value
Monotonicity Property holds), this implies that aggregate welfare increases.
  25
     The purpose of this assumption is just to limit the size of the gain from collusion.


                                                  28
on the current incumbent plus consumers is negative. Indeed, observe that there is no
direct eﬃciency eﬀect arising from this collusive arrangement; it is merely a transfer from
consumers to the firms. Thus, the sign of the eﬀect on aggregate welfare is determined
simply by whether we were initially in a situation of over- or under-investment in R&D
relative to the socially optimal symmetric rate of innovation.26



6. Incumbent Innovation

The analysis above imposed the strong restriction that only potential entrants engaged in
R&D. Although useful for gaining insight, this assumption is clearly not respresentative
of most settings of interest. In this section, we explore how our conclusions are aﬀected
when incumbent firms may also engage in R&D.
    Allowing incumbent firms to engage in R&D has the potential to considerably com-
plicate the analysis. In particular, once we allow for incumbent investment, we need in
general to introduce a state space to keep track of the incumbent’s current lead over the
potential entrants. In general, the rates of R&D investment by the incumbent and its
challengers may be state dependent (see, for example, Aghion et. al. [2001]).
    Here we focus on two special cases in which R&D strategies are nonetheless station-
ary. Although clearly restrictive, these two models do have the virtue of capturing two
distinct motives for incumbent R&D: (i) preventing displacement by an entrant, and (ii)
increasing the flow of profits until displacement by increasing the lead over the previous
incumbent.


6.1. R&D to prevent displacement

Suppose the incumbent can do R&D denoted by φI , while the potential entrants’ ag-
gregate R&D is now denoted by φE . Similarly, the incumbent’s and entrants’ respective
cost functions are denoted by cI (φI ) and cE (φE ) (we allow for the fact that the cost of
achieving a discovery may diﬀer between the incumbent and the potential entrants). In
this first model, we assume that if the leading quality level in period t is jt , then quality
level jt − 1 is freely available to all potential producers. That is, it enters the public
domain. Thus, the incumbent never has a lead greater than one step on the ladder.

  26
    In a model with more general demand functions there would be an additional eﬃciency loss from
the collusive deal because of increased pricing distortions.


                                               29
If so, the only reason for an incumbent to do R&D is to try to get the patent on the
next innovation in cases in which at least one potential entrant has made a discovery —
that is, to prevent its displacement.27 With these assumptions, we need not keep track
of any states, and there is a stationary equilibrium. We restrict ourselves here to mak-
ing two simple points: (i) there are some simples cases in which the incumbent chooses
zero innovation in equilibrium and so all our previous results go through, (ii) in some
cases, antitrust policy may have positive direct eﬀects on both the incumbent’s and the
entrants’ innovation rates, although (iii) the strategic interaction among the innovation
rates may preclude signing the comparitive statics eﬀects.
    To proceed, let rI (φE ) denote the probability that the incumbent who innovates
preserves the incumbency, which allows us to express the probability that the incum-
bent is displaced by an entrant as d (φI , φE ) ≡ (1 − φI )φE + φI (1 − rI (φE )). Also, let
u (φI , φE ) denote the probability that a given entrant innovates and then becomes the
next incumbent.
    The values VI and VE of the incumbent and a potential entrant must then satisfy


       VI = π m (α, φ) + δVI + d (φ) {π I (α, φ) − πm (α, φ) − δ(VI − VE )} − cI (φI )           (VI∗∗ )


                     VE = δVE + u (φ) [π E (α, φ) + δ(VI − VE )] − cE (φE ),                    (VE∗∗ )

where φ = (φI , φE ). The incumbent will choose R&D to solve


               φI ∈ arg max ψ I wI − cI (ψ I ), where
                            ψ I ∈[0,1]

               wI ≡ [rI (φE ) − (1 − φE )] {πm (α, φ) − πI (α, φ) + δ(VI − VE )}                   (6.1)

  27
     In the usual sort of (Poisson) continuous-time model considered in the R&D literature (see, e.g.,
Lee and Wilde [1980], Reinganum [1989], and Grossman and Helpman [1991]), the probability of ties
is zero, and so one might worry that our formulation here is dependent on a merely technical feature
of the discrete-time set-up. Indeed, in such a model, the incumbent would do no R&D here. However,
the usual continuous-time model relies on the implicit assumption that following an innovation, all firms
reorient their R&D activity instantaneously to the next technology level. If we were to instead use a
continuous-time model in which there is a fixed time period after a rival’s success before which R&D
for the next technology level cannot be successful, then we would get eﬀects that parallel those in our
discrete-time model (where the discount factor δ reflects how quickly R&D activity can be reoriented to
the next technology level.) Thus, our discrete-time formulation captures an arguably realistic feature of
the economics of R&D.




                                                   30
is the incumbent’s expected incremental gain from making a discovery. As for the po-
tential entrants, they are facing innovation prize


                               wE = π E (α, φ) + δ(VI − VE ),                          (6.2)


and will choose φE ∈ Φ (wE , φI ), where Φ (·, φI ) is the entrants’ innovation supply corre-
spondence.
   The following example shows some some in which the incumbent will do no R&D in
equilibrium, and so our previous results would apply without modification:

Example 6.1. Suppose that we have either a single entrant and that when the en-
trant and incumbent both innovate they each have a 1/2 probability of receiving the
                 ¡ ¢
patent. Then ri φ−i = (1 − φ−i /2) for i = I, E, and the entrant’s R&D level is
φE ∈ arg maxψE ∈[0,1] ψE rE (φI ) wE − cE (ψE ). Suppose also that the entrant and incum-
bent share the same R&D cost function. Comparing with (6.1), we see two countervailing
asymmetries between the entrant and incumbent:

   • When πm ≥ πI + πE , which captures the “eﬃciency eﬀect” (that a monopoly
     maximizes industry profits), the term in curly brackets in (6.1) is larger than the
     entrants’ innovation prize.

   • The incumbent’s innovation prize contains a factor rI (φE ) − (1 − φE ), while the
     entrant’s prize is multiplied by rI (φE ). This captured the “replacement eﬀect”:
     the incumbent’s innovation only results in him in “replacing” himself and so has
     no value if the entrant does not innovate, while an entrant’s innovation is valuable
     when the incumbent did not innovate.
      For a more specific example, consider an extension of our long-term (exclusive)
      contracting model to allow for incumbent investment. We now assume that a long-
      term contract is a commitment by the incumbent to deliver his best current product
      in the next period. In this case, consumers gain ∆ in surplus when the incumbent
      gets a new patent regardless of whether they have signed a long-term contract since
      the previous leading product enters the public domain. The price of a long-term
      contract will therefore be qt+1 = k + (1 − d (φ))∆, and the profit functions can be




                                             31
      written as


                            πm (α, φ) = α∆ + (1 − α)(1 − d (φ))∆
                            πI (α, φ) = (1 − α)(1 − d (φ))∆                             (6.3)
                            π E (α, φ) = α∆.


     Thus, here the eﬃciency eﬀect is zero: πm = πI + πE . Then, due to the replacement
eﬀect, in equilibrium we must have φE ≥ φI . If, in addition, the common R&D cost
function has constant returns to scale so that cE (φ) = cI (φ) = c · φ, then we have φI = 0.
     The same conclusion obtains the free entry case with the same long-term contract-
ing model. Indeed, in this case, rI (φE ) = r̄ (φE ). Also, if the incumbent does not
invest in R&D, then each entrant makes an infinitesimal investment ψE ∈ arg maxψ E ∈[0,1]
e E r̄ (φE ) wE − cE (ψ
ψ                     e E ). Then (6.1) implies that, as long as the incumbent and entrants
share the same cost function, the incumbent will indeed choose a zero investment.

   To examine the eﬀects of antitrust policy in the general case in which both the in-
cumbent and potential entrants do R&D , solve (VI∗∗ ) and (VE∗∗ ) for (VI − VE ) and
substitute it in (6.1, 6.2). This yields (suppressing the arguments of functions)


             rI − (1 − φE )
    wI =                     {πm − (1 − δ)πI + δu (πm − πE − πI ) + δ(cE − cI )} , (6.4)
           1 − δ + δ (d + u)
                   1
    wE   =                   {δπ m + (1 − δ)πE − δd (πm − πE − πI ) + δ(cE − cI )} (. 6.5)
           1 − δ + δ (d + u)


Consider first the direct eﬀects of a change in the policy α. For the incumbent, the
former captures the change in its R&D incentives holding fixed the R&D of potential
entrants φE , and has the same sign as the change in wI caused by the change in α
holding (φI , φE ) fixed. Similarly, the direct eﬀect for the potential entrants has the same
sign as the change in wE caused by the change in α holding (φI , φE ) fixed. The following
proposition summarizes these direct eﬀects:

Proposition 6.2. In the model of incumbent R&D to prevent displacement, the direct
eﬀect of a more protective antitrust policy (an increase in α) on potential entrant R&D




                                             32
is positive (negative) if

                                  ∙                                      ¸
                                   (1 − d (φ))π 0m (α, φ) + dπ 0I (α, φ)
                  π0E   (α, φ) + δ                                         ≥ (≤)0             (6.6)
                                            1 − δ(1 − d (φ))


for all α and all φ ∈ [0, 1]2 . The direct eﬀect on the incumbent R&D is positive (negative)
if


   π 0m (α, φ) − (1 − δ)π 0I (α, φ) + δu (φ) [π0m (α, φ) − π0I (α, φ) − π0E (α, φ)] ≥ (≤) 0   (6.7)


for all α and all φ ∈ [0, 1]2 .

    Observe first that the condition (6.6) describing the direct eﬀect on entrant inno-
vation of the policy change is the same as condition (3.1), but with the probability of
incumbent displacement now being d (φ) instead of φ. Turning to the direct eﬀect on
the incumbent, note that the direct eﬀects of a more protective antitrust policy on in-
cumbent and potential entrant innovation can both be positive. For instance, this is the
case in the exclusive contracts model described in the above example. Indeed, in this
case, hodling innovation fixed, antitrust policy increases the continuing monopoly profit
π m and reduces the incumbent’s profit πI , thus raising the incument’s incentive to avoid
displacement. The direct eﬀects are not determinative, however, of the overall change
in equilibrium innovation rates, because there are interactions between the R&D levels
of the incumbent and potential entrants since the level of φi aﬀects the innovation value
w−i (i = I, E).


6.2. R&D to increase profit flows

We next consider a model in which rivals do not get access to the second best technology
when the incumbent innovates. Thus, the incumbent can increase its flow of profits by
innovating, until the time when it is displaced. Specifically, let s denote the number
of steps that the incumbent is ahead of its nearest rival (this is our state variable).
The variable s aﬀects the incumbent’s profit flow when entry does not occur, which
we now denote by πsm (α, φE ) (it does not aﬀect either πI or πE ). We now make two
assumptions that will imply that there is an equilibrium in which the R&D levels of the
incumbent and potential entrants do not depend upon s. Specifically, we assume that

                                                 33
πsm (α, φ) = µ(α, φ) + sπm (α, φ) and that an entrant gets the patent whenever at least
one entrant has made a discovery.

Example 6.3. Consider again the extension of the long-term (exclusive) contracts model
to incumbent innovation introduced in Example 6.1. A contract again is a promise to
deliver the incumbent’s leading technology product in the next period. To fit into our
framework here, however, we change the timing of the payment in this contract, assuming
instead that the payment is made when the contract is signed. Following similar reasoning
as in Example 6.1 we see that28,29


        πsm (α, φ) = αs∆ + (1 − α)[(s + φI )(1 − φE )∆ − (1 − δ)k]
                     = (1 − α)[φI (1 − φE )∆ − (1 − δ)k] + s∆[α + (1 − α)(1 − φE )]                  (6.8)
         πI (α, φ) = −(1 − α)k
        π E (α, φ) = α∆ + (1 − α)δ[k + (1 + φI )(1 − φE )∆]


   It is clear that there is a solution in which the entrants’ innovation φE and value VE
are stationary. To begin, we allow that the incumbent’s R&D and value functions may
depend on s: φsI and VIs . In this case, we can write the value equations as


 VIs = µ + sπm (φE , φsI ) + δVIs + φE {[πI (φE , φsI ) − (µ + sπ m (φE , φsI ))] + δ[VE − VIs ]}
                                          ¡             ¢
       +φsI (1 − φE ) {π m (φE , φsI ) + δ VIs+1 − VIs } − cI (φsI ),                       (6.9)


for s ≥ 1, and
                                         £      ¡        ¢¤
                       VE = δVE + u (φE ) πE + δ VI1 − VE − cE (φE ) .                             (6.10)

  28
     Observe that the price of a long-term contract, which is paid when signed in period t, is qt =
δ[k + (s + φI )(1 − φE )∆]. A continuing uncontested incumbent in period t sells to free consumers (for
a profit of αs∆), delivers on contracts written in period t − 1, and writes new contracts for period t + 1
delivery. An incumbent who faces new entry in period t only delivers on period t − 1 contracts. An
entrant in period t sells to free consumers (at a profit of α∆), and writes new contracts for period t + 1
deliveries.
  29
     Note that with this change in the timing of payments, an increase in α that leaves more free consumers
can lower πE as defined here.




                                                    34
The incumbent’s equilibrium innovation rate satisfies


            φsI ∈ arg max ψ (1 − φE ) {πm (φE , φsI ) + δ[VIs+1 − VIs ]} − cI (ψ),          (6.11)
                     ψ∈[0,1]



   These equations have a solution in which both the incumbent’s innovation φsI and the
value diﬀerence VIs+1 − VIs are independent of s. Indeed, using (6.9) for s and s + 1 and
assuming that φsI = φI for all s, we obtain


                                               πm (φE , φI ) (1 − φE )
                               VIs+1 − VIs =                           ,
                                                   1 − δ + δφE


which is independent of s, and so (6.11) becomes

                                                      ∙    ¸
                                                 1 − φE
                  φI ∈ arg max ψπ m (φE , φI )               − cI (ψ),                      (6.12)
                          ψ∈[0,1]              1 − δ + δφE


which implies that the incumbent’s innovation can indeed be independent of s. Note
that the direct eﬀect of antitrust policy on the incumbent innovation in this equilibrium
is determined by π0m (α, φ).
    We next solve for the entrants’ innovation benefit function. Subtracting (6.10) from
(6.9) for s = 1 to solve for (VI1 − VE ), we can write the entrants’ innovation benefit
function as



            ¡         ¢
wE = πE + δ VI1 − VE                                                                                  (6.13)
     ⎧                                                         h                     i                     ⎫
                                                                              φI
     ⎨ [1 − δ (1 − φE )]πE + δ(1 − φE )µ + δφE π I + δ(1 − φE ) 1 +        1−δ+δφE
                                                                                         π m − δ(cI − cE ) ⎬
   =
     ⎩                                 1 − δ + δ(φE + u (φE ))                                           ⎭


(suppressing arguments of functions). This parallels the case without incumbent invest-
ment except for the term multiplying πm , which now accounts for the possibility of rising
incumbent profits over time (the diﬀerence vanishes when φI = 0). The direct eﬀect of
α on φE can be seen by diﬀerentiating (6.13) with respect to α. To summarize:

Proposition 6.4. In the model of incumbent R&D to increase profit flows, the direct

                                                 35
eﬀect on incumbent R&D of a more protective antitrust policy (an increase in α) is
positive (negative) if π0m (α, φ) ≥ (≤) 0 for all α and all φ ∈ [0, 1]2 , while the direct eﬀect
on potential entrant R&D is positive (negative) if

                ⎡            h           ³                ´             i                ⎤
                                                   φI
                    (1 − φE ) µ0 (α, φ) + 1 +   1−δ+δφE
                                                              π0m (α, φ) + φE π0I (α, φ)
 π0E (α, φ) + δ ⎣                                                                        ⎦ ≥ (≤) 0
                                            1 − δ + δφE


for all α and all φ ∈ [0, 1]2 .

   For example, using (6.8) we see that in the long-term contracting model the direct
eﬀect on φI of an increase in α is always positive. On the other hand, the direct eﬀect
on φE may now be either positive or negative. When φI is close to zero, the direct eﬀect
is the same as absent incumbent innovation, and so is necessarily positive. However,
when φI is large, this conclusion can be reversed. Considering now the indirect eﬀects in
the long-term contracting model, we see that increases in φE necessarily lower incumbent
innovation, while increases in φI raise entrant innovation. Thus, when both direct eﬀects
are positive, we can be sure that φE increases when α rises; when instead the direct eﬀect
on entrant innovation is negative we can be sure that φI increases when α rises.



7. Other Types of Antitrust Policies

In the analysis up to this point we have considered policies that alter the profits that
incumbents and entrants earn in competition with one another. Some antitrust policies
have other types of eﬀects. In this section, we briefly consider two such examples.


7.1. Predatory activities

In some situations, antitrust may aﬀect not only an entrant’s profits in competition with
the incumbent, but also the entrant’s probability of survival. To focus solely on this
eﬀect, take πI , π E , and π m as fixed and suppose that a new entrant’s probability of
survival following its entry is λ(α), where λ(·) is increasing in α.
    Now the innovation prize is


                                  w = [πE + δλ(α)(VI − VE )].                                 (7.1)

                                                36
If (VI − VE ) were fixed, an increase in α would necessarily increase innovation. Now,



                     VI = πm + δVI + φ [πI − πm + δλ(α) (VE − VI )] ,                         (VI∗∗ )
                     VE = δVE + u(φ) [πE + δλ(α) (VI − VE )] − c (φ) .                        (VE∗∗ )


Subtracting (VE∗∗ ) from (VI∗∗ ), we can express the innovation prize with the following
function:

              ½        µ                        ¶                                     ¾
                                δλ(α)
  W (φ, α) = πE +                                 [φπ I + (1 − φ) π m − u(φ)πE + c(φ)] .
                       1 − δ + δλ(α)(φ + u(φ))
                                                                                     (7.2)
The fraction δλ(α)/[1 − δ + δλ(α)(φ + u(φ))] is increasing in α. Hence, provided that
(VI − VE ) is positive, a more protective antitrust policy that raises the likelihood of
entrant survival necessarily increases the innovation benefit.30 Propositions 3.1 and 3.2
then tell us that innovation increases with this change in α.
   We illustrate these eﬀects with a simple model of predatory pricing:


7.1.1. Predatory Pricing

Consider a setting in which the entrant’s probability of survival after its first production
period is an increasing continuous function λ (πE ) of its first-period profit. (This could
be due to the entrant’s financial constraints in an imperfect credit market, as in Bolton
and Scharfstein [1990].) In this situation, the incumbent will be willing to price below
c in the period following entry to increase the likelihood of forcing the entrant out of
the market. To see this, consider first what the pricing equilibrium would be absent
any antitrust constraint. In any such equilibrium, the entrant still wins, and consumers
are indiﬀerent between the two firms’ products: the incumbent charges price p and the
entrant charges price p + ∆. This is an equilibrium if and only if p satisfies


                      p ≤ c − [λ(p + ∆ − c) − λ(0)] (VI − VE ) ≤ p + ∆.

  30
    For example, this will always be true whenever VE = 0 (say, because of a constant returns to scale
R&D technology) and π m and πI are non-negative.Another suﬃcient condition is φπ I + (1 − φ) πm ≥
u(φ)πE for all φ.


                                                 37
The first inequality ensures that the incumbent prefers to lose at price p [rather than
undercutting the price by ε, losing money on the sale, but increasing his chances of
survival by λ(p + ∆ − c) − λ(0)]. The second inequality ensures that the entrant prefers
to win at price p + ∆. Assuming that VI − VE > 0, the middle expression is decreasing in
p. Note also that the second inequality holds whenever p ≥ c − ∆ and the first inequality
holds strictly at p = c − ∆. Thus, at the highest equilibrium price p∗ the first inequality
binds, i.e.
                        p∗ = c − [λ(p∗ + ∆ − c) − λ(0)] (VI − VE ) .

Note that p∗ ∈ (c − ∆, c). We focus on the equilibrium in which the incumbent charges
p∗ , since this strategy for the incumbent weakly dominates charging any p < p∗ .
     Now consider an antitrust policy that imposes a price floor α < c on the incumbent.
Suppose that the floor is binding, i.e., p∗ < α. In this case, πE (α) = α+∆−c, πI (α) = 0,
and π m (α) = ∆: thus, a higher α raises πE (α) upon entry, does not aﬀect πI (α) or πm (α),
and raises λ (α). If the policy only had an eﬀect on π E but not on λ, then by Propositions
3.1 and 3.2 the policy would stimulate innovation. However, the policy also increases the
entrant’s probability of survival λ, which also increases innovation.31
    As in the model of long-term contracts, an increase in α holding φ fixed eliminates an
ineﬃciency, here the ineﬃcient loss of a new innovation. However, unlike the long-term
contracting model, we cannot conclude that an increase in α necessarily raises aggregate
welfare. To see one example in which welfare falls when α increases, suppose that the
probability of survival λ(·) is constant at λ around α + ∆ − c. Then a small increase
in α will raise the price the entrant receives in his first period in the market (and lower
consumers’ payoﬀs in that period), have no eﬀect on an entrant’s survival probability, and
will raise the level of R&D. Because the first eﬀect is a pure transfer, the overall eﬀect in
welfare will be determined simply by whether we have too much or too little R&D given
the survival rate λ, which can go either way just as in Section 3.1.32 By way of contrast,
if we instead have a perfectly inelastic innovation supply, α aﬀects aggregate welfare only
through an increased probability of the entrant’s survival, which unambiguously raises
welfare whenever λ(·) is strictly increasing.

  31
     In a more general model with diﬀerentiated products, predation would make both the entrant and
incumbent lose money. Thus, increasing α would raise both firms’ profits as well as the entrant’s
probability of survival, and so would again increase innovation.
  32
     The reason we cannot use an argument like that leading to Proposition 4.2 is that the price increase
has a direct negative eﬀect on consumers plus the current incumbent; in contrast, in the long-term
contracting model, all direct eﬀects on the consumers plus the current incumbent were positive.


                                                   38
7.2. Shifting innovation supply

In some cases incumbents may take actions that instead aﬀect innovation supply. For ex-
ample, an incumbent may buy up needed R&D inputs, thereby raising potential entrants’
R&D costs. As another example, incumbents may engage in patent litigation claiming
that an entrant’s innovation infringes its own patent, raising the cost or lowering the
probability of the entrant receiving a patent. Formally, we now denote the innovation
supply correspondence by Φ(·, α). We say that an innovation supply correspondence
satisfying (IS1)-(IS3) is nondecreasing (nonincreasing) in the policy parameter α if for
α00 > α0 we have max Φ(w, α0 ) ≥ (≤) max Φ(w, α) and min Φ(w, α0 ) ≥ (≤) min Φ(w, α)
for all w. As the following propositions establish, increases in innovation supply lead
to increases in innovation in the same senses as before (we omit the proofs, which are
similar to those earlier):

Proposition 7.1. If the innovation supply correspondence Φ (·, α) satisfies (IS1)-(IS3)
and the innovation benefit function W (φ, α) is continuous in φ, then the largest and
smallest equilibrium innovation rates exist, and both these rates are nondecreasing (non-
increasing) in α, the protectiveness of antitrust policy, if Φ (·, α) is nondecreasing (non-
increasing) in α for any φ ∈ [0, 1].

Proposition 7.2. ??Suppose that the innovation supply correspondence Φ (·, α) satisfies
(IS1)-(IS3) and the innovation benefit function W (φ, α) is continuous in φ. Suppose in
addition that for all α ∈ [α, α] there is a unique equilibrium innovation rate φ (α) on an
         £    ¤
interval φ, φ and that the IB curve crosses the IS curve from above on this interval.
Then φ (α) is nondecreasing (nonincreasing) if Φ (·, α) is nondecreasing (nonincreasing)
                                £    ¤
in α for all α ∈ [α, α] and φ ∈ φ, φ .

   Thus, rightward (leftward) shifts of the innovation supply correspondence cause the
rate of innovation to increase (decrease) in every stable equilibrium. Returning to the
two examples mentioned above, these incumbent behaviors shift both innovation benefit
and supply. If an uncontested incumbent over-buys needed R&D inputs at the end of
each period, this will both raise potential entrants’ R&D costs and lower π m . Both eﬀects
cause innovation to decrease. Patent litigation, on the other hand, will not only shift the
IS curve leftward but also lower both πI and πE . Again, both eﬀects lower the rate of
innovation.




                                            39
8. Conclusion

In this paper we have studied the eﬀects of antitrust policies in industries in which
innovation is central to competitive outcomes using models of continuing innovation
that are closely related to recent models in the growth theory literature. By using a
stylized model with reduced form profit functions, and by characterizing the equilibrium
innovation rate in terms of innovation benefit and innovation supply, we are able to
develop comparative static results that apply to a wide range of market settings and
antitrust policies.
    In general, a tension arises in discerning the eﬀects of antitrust policy on innovation
in such settings. On the one hand, limiting incumbent behaviors that reduce the initial
profit of entrants increases the incentives for R&D. But these same limitations will aﬀect
a successful entrant once it in turn becomes the next incumbent, and so could actually
reduce innovation incentives. Our results show how to disentangle these two eﬀects, and
we illustrate their implications for a number of antitrust policies. Interestingly, once one
looks at the eﬀects on entrant and incumbent profits holding the rate of innovation fixed
— as our comparative statics results instruct us to do — limitations on R&D-deterring
activities often involve no tension at all, as both entrant and incumbent profits increase
holding the rate of innovation fixed.
    Finally, the tension between eﬀects on entrant and continuing incumbent profits that
is our focus also arises in other settings, most notably intellectual property protection.
There, greater intellectual property protection has conflicting eﬀects on the incentives to
innovate: it reduces profits for new innovators (who may produce infringing innovations)
but raises profits for previous innovators. This is diﬀerent than the most tension most
usually discussed with regard to patent policy, which focuses instead on the welfare
tension between the (presumed) benefit of creating greater ex ante R&D incentives and
the cost of greater ex post monopoly distortions. Rather, this tension aﬀects whether
greater protection in fact leads to a higher rate of innovation. This tension is at the heart
of recent work by Hunt [2004] and Llobet et al. [2000]. In Appendix C, we provide a brief
discussion of the connection between antitrust policy and leading breadth rules (novelty
requirements) for intellectual property protection in the context of an extension of our
long-term exclusive contracting model. While leading breadth rules are able to control
the ease of entry without some of the ineﬃciencies associated with activities such as long-
term exclsuive contracts, they require courts to determine the degree of improvement
brought by new innovations, which enfrocement of antitrust policy does not. The eﬀect


                                             40
on innovation incentives of the tension we identify for intellectual property protection
(and other policies), and the interactions between various policies that aﬀect the rate of
innovation, seems a fruitful area for further research.



Appendix A: Proofs

Lemma 8.1 (A1). The model with N > 1 entrants has a unique symmetric innovation
equilibrium, and the equilibrium innovation rate is a continuous nondecreasing function
of w.

Proof. The symmetric equilibrium R&D rates are fixed points of correspondence σ (w, ·) ≡
B (wr (·)), where B (a) = arg maxψ0 ∈[0,1] [aψ 0 − γ (ψ 0 )]. Note that B (a) is a nonempty
closed interval for each a (by convexity and continuity of γ (·)), and any selection from
B (·) is nondecreasing (by the Monotone Selection Theorem of Milgrom and Shannon
[1994])). Therefore, σ (w, ψ) = [σ L (w, ψ) , σH (w, ψ)] 6= ∅, with both σL (w, ψ) and
σ H (w, ψ) nondecreasing in w.
     If σ (w, ·) has two fixed points ψ0 , ψ00 with ψ0 < ψ 00 , then r (ψ 0 ) > r (ψ 00 ), and since
any selection from B (·) is nondecreasing we must have ψ0 ≥ ψ 00 —contradiction. Thus,
σ (w, ·) has a unique fixed point, which we denote by Ψ (w).
     Note that correspondence σ (·, ·) has a closed graph, since B (·) has a closed graph
by the Maximum Theorem, and r (·) is a continuous function. This in turn implies that
σ (w, ·) is “continuous but for upward jumps” as defined by Milgrom and Roberts [1994]
(σL can only jump downward and σH can only jump upward, no matter from which
direction we take ψ → ψ). Then Corollary 2 of Milgrom-Roberts applies to show that
Ψ (w) is nondecreasing in w.
     Finally, the graph of Ψ (·) can be obtained by intersecting the graph of σ (·, ·) in the
(ψ , w, ψ) space with the set described by ψ 0 = ψ and projecting the intersection on the
   0

first axis. Since closedness is preserved under intersection and projection, we see that
the graph of Ψ (·) is closed, and so Ψ (·) is a continuous function.

   Proof of Proposition 4.2.We consider in turn the change in the payoﬀs of entrants,
the current incumbent, consumers, and the current incumbent plus consumers.
   Potential Entrants: If φ increases then w must have increased by (IS3). Using
(VE∗ ), we see that
                             (1 − δ) VE = u(φ)w − c(φ),


                                               41
which implies that a potential entrant’s value VE has weakly increased if the Value
Monotonicity Property holds.
    Sum of Current Incumbent and Consumers: We first compute a lower bound
on the value change of the current incumbent (the firm with the leading technology just
after stage τ .1). A policy change just after stage τ .1 changes the current incumbent’s
profits only beginning in the next period. From equation (VI∗ ) we see that we can write


              (1 − δ + δφ)VI = [(1 − φ)πm + φπ I ] + δφVE                          (8.1)
                              = [(1 − α)(1 − φ)∆ + (1 − φ)α∆] + δdVE
                              = (1 − φ)∆ + δφVE .


Again, since VE has weakly increased, a lower bound on the change in the current in-
cumbent’s value VI starting at time τ + 1 is the change in


                                  δ(1 − φ0 )(1 − φ)∆
                                                     .                             (8.2)
                                     (1 − δ + δφ)


    Now consider the consumers. Consumer welfare does not change until period τ + 1
either. Since every consumer is always indiﬀerent between signing an exclusive and being
free, we can derive consumer welfare from period τ +1 on by assuming that all consumers
are free. Thus, consumer welfare starting in period τ + 1 is

                       ∆                            ∆                             ∆
δ[(vjτ +φ0 ∆−k−∆)+φ       ]+δ 2 [(vjτ +φ0 ∆−k−∆)+φ     ]+... = δ[(vjτ −k−∆)+φ          ],
                      1−δ                          1−δ                        (1 − δ)2
                                                                               (8.3)
where vτ is the value of the quality of the leading good at the start of period τ . This
establishes that consumers are better oﬀ, since φ increases. Now adding (8.2) and (8.3),
a lower bound on the change in the sum of consumer plus current incumbent payoﬀs is
given by the change in
                            δ(1 − φ0 )(1 − φ)∆         ∆
                                               + δφ          ,
                               (1 − δ + δφ)         (1 − δ)2

which is increasing in φ.
    Current Incumbent: Finally, consider the current incumbent. Consider the sim-
plest model with two firms (one potential entrant). If VE = 0, which will be true if


                                          42
c(φ) = cφ for some c > 0, then (8.1) implies that the incumbent is worse oﬀ since φ
increases. On the other hand, suppose that φ is fixed at some φ (e.g., c(·) is finite only
at φ), then (8.1) implies that the incumbent is better oﬀ since VE increases.




Appendix B: Welfare Eﬀects in a Benchmark Quality Ladder

Model

Suppose that in each period t firms engage in Bertrand competition to make sales. Thus,
πE = πm = ∆ and πI = 0.33 Specializing (IB∗ ) to this case, the innovation prize is given
by

                                  ∙                                          ¸
                               ∆(1 − δ) + δ[φ∆ + (1 − φ)∆ + c(φ)]
                     W (φ) =
                                       1 − δ + δ(φ + u(φ))
                             ∙                     ¸
                                    ∆ + δc(φ)
                           =                         .                                         (8.4)
                               1 − δ + δ(φ + u(φ))


For now we need not be specific about the nature of innovation supply; we assume only
that it is described by a continuous nondecreasing innovation supply function.
    Since we now have a fully-specified consumer side (unlike in Sections 2 and 3), we can
compare the equilibrium innovation rate to the symmetric innovation rate that maximizes
aggregate welfare.34 Let us begin by considering the social innovation benefit. To this
end, observe that a technological advancement in period t raises gross consumer surplus
in every subsequent period by ∆. The social innovation prize ws is therefore equal to the
                                                ¡ ∆ ¢
present discounted value of this change, ws = 1−δ     . From (VE∗ ) we see that VE ≥ 0
implies u(φ)w − c(φ) ≥ 0. Substituting from this inequality for c(φ) in (8.4) implies that


                                                  ∆
                                         w≤              .
                                              1 − δ + δφ

  33
     We focus here on the undominated equilibrium in which the incumbent (who makes no sales) charges
a price equal to cost and the entrant with technology jt + 1 charges a price of ∆.
  34
     In general, the socially optimal innovation plan may be asymmetric. We focus here on the best
symmetric plan since our aim is to see how changes in the symmetric equilibrium innovation rate aﬀect
welfare.


                                                 43
                 Figure 4.1: Private and Social Innovation Benefit Curves


                     w, ws


                                          Social IB

                       Δ
                      1− δ




                                                 IB



                             0                                     1
                                                 ø



                                      Figure 8.1:

             ∆
Thus, w ≤ 1−δ   = ws , so that the (private) innovation benefit curve always lies weakly
below the social innovation benefit curve, as in Figure B.1. This diﬀerence is due to
the “Schumpeterian eﬀect” that arises because an innovator is eventually replaced even
though its innovation raises surplus forever.




    Given the social benefit ws (which is independent of φ), we can determine the so-
cially optimal symmetric innovation rate by constructing a social innovation supply curve
Φs (·) giving the socially optimal symmetric innovation rate for a given level of the social
innovation prize. Given the relation between the social and private innovation benefit
shown in Figure B.1, it is immediate that if the social innovation supply curve coincides
with the private one then the equilibrium rate of innovation must be below the socially
optimal rate [note that (IS3) and the fact that ws is independent of φ implies a unique


                                            44
socially optimal innovation rate]. This is true, for example, when there is a single poten-
tial entrant (and, hence, a single research lab) and when there is free entry with a limited
idea.
    In contrast, innovation may be excessive when there a fixed number N > 1 of potential
entrants. For example, consider the case where the patent is awarded randomly among
the firms who make a discovery and c(·) is diﬀerentiable. In this case, rN (ψ) takes
the value in footnote 7. Given an innovation prize w, the socially eﬃcient innovation
rate would obtain by letting each firm internalize its contribution to social surplus by
giving it the innovation prize only when it is the only successful innovator, leading to the
equilibrium condition ψ ∈ arg maxψ0 ∈(0,1) (1 − ψ)N −1 ψ 0 − c (ψ 0 ). Comparing with (3.2),
we see that since rN (ψ) > (1 − ψ)N −1 , the private innovation supply exceeds the social:
Φs (w) ≤ Φ(w), with strict inequality for all w > c0 (0). (Formally, the comparison follows
from applying Milgrom and Roberts’ [1994] Corollary 2 to compare the fixed points of
the firms’ private and social best-response correspondences.) This diﬀerence is due to the
“business stealing eﬀect” that arises because a potential entrant is sure to get a patent
when all other firms have failed (in which case the innovation is socially useful), but also
gets the patent in some cases when another firm has succeeded (in which case it is not).35
    As is evident in Figure B.1, these two diﬀerences make the comparison between the
equilibrium and socially optimal rates of innovation ambiguous when there are a fixed
number N > 1 of potential entrants. As δ → 0 the social and private innovation prizes
both converge to ∆, and so only the latter innovation supply diﬀerence is present (pro-
vided that N > 1). As Figure B.1 suggests (and Proposition 7.1 and 3.2 in Section 7
show formally), in this case any equilibrium innovation rate will exceed the socially op-
timal rate. At the other extreme, when δ → 1, we have ws → ∞ while w ≤ ∆/φ. Thus,
as long as limφ→1 γ 0 (φ) = ∞, the equilibrium innovation rate will be bounded below 1,
while the socially optimal innovation rate will converge to 1.

  35
    In Aghion and Howitt [1992], two additional distortions are present: an “appropriability eﬀect” (an
incumbent monopolist captures less than his full incremental contribution to social surplus in a period)
and a “monopoly distortion” eﬀect (an incumbent produces less than the socially optimal quantity in
each period). These two distortions are absent here because of our assumption of homogeneous consumer
valuations and Bertrand competition.




                                                  45
Appendix C: Uncertain Innovation Size and Selection Eﬀects

In this section, we consider an extension of the long-term contracting model in which in-
novations are random and innovators must incur costs to bring them to market quickly.
In such a setting, antitrust policy can aﬀect not only the rate of discovery, but also the
speeds with which diﬀerent types of innovations make it to market. Thus, antitrust policy
also involves “selection eﬀects.” Intuitively, some innovations may bring only small bene-
fits to their innovators, but may create large costs for the incumbents they replace. This
may lead to circumstances in which more protective antitrust polices retard innovation.
    To explore this possibility, we consider an extension of the long-term contracting
model in which a new innovator must pay K > 0 to enter the market immediately. If he
does not incur this cost, he enters in the following period at no cost. We assume that the
distribution of innovation sizes ∆ is given by the cdf F (·) and for convenience we define
G(∆) ≡ 1 − F (∆).
    To begin, observe that in this setting, if α is the share of free consumers, a new
innovator will enter immediately if and only if his innovation size ∆E satisfies α∆E ≥ K,
                         b
or equivalently, ∆E ≥ ∆(K,    α) ≡ Kα
                                      .
    Consider now a consumer’s decision of whether to accept a contract from an incumbent
whose product’s value is vI and whose innovation size was ∆I , when the innovation rate is
φ and the cut-oﬀ type for immediate entry is ∆. b If the consumer accepts he gets vI − qt+1 ,
while if he rejects he gets (vI − ∆I − c) + φG(∆)∆b I . Hence, the incumbent will charge
                     b
qt+1 = c + [1 − φG(∆)]∆    I.

    For given innovation sizes ∆E and ∆I we have the following profits for an entrant and
incumbent respectively:

                                                             K
                 πm (α, φ, ∆I ) = [α∆I + (1 − α)(1 − φG(       ))∆I ]                  (8.5)
                                                             α
                                                          K
                                = [1 − (1 − α)φ(1 − F (     ))]∆I
                                                          α
                                       K                      K
                 π I (α, φ, ∆I ) = [αF ( )∆I + (1 − α)(1 − φG( ))∆I ]
                                       α                      α
                                       K                    K
                                = [αF ( ) + (1 − α)(1 − φG( ))]∆I
                                       α                    α
                π E (α, φ, ∆E ) = Max{α∆E − K, 0}


   It is straightforward to see that condition (3.1) extends to the case of uncertain



                                             46
innovation, where now innovation increases (decreases) if

                                  ∙                                ¸
                                   (1 − φ)π0m (α, φ) + φπ0I (α, φ)
                  π0E   (α, φ) + δ                                   ≥ (≤)0,           (8.6)
                                           1 − δ(1 − φ)


and the π functions are the expected profit functions (the expectation is taken with
respect to the innovation size ∆). Taking expectations of (8.5), we get expected profit
functions of

                                                        K
                         πm (α, φ) = [1 − (1 − α)φ(1 − F ( ))]∆
                                                         α
                                                           K
                         πI (α, φ) = [αF + (1 − α)(1 − φG( ))]∆                        (8.7)
                                      Z ∞                  α
                         π E (α, φ) =     (α∆E − K)f (∆E )d∆E ,
                                         K
                                         α



             R
where ∆ = ∆dF .
    Examining (8.7), it useful to think of a change in α as involving two eﬀects, a direct
eﬀect of the change in α holding the cut-oﬀ type ∆   b fixed, and an indirect eﬀect of the
change in ∆.b
    Consider the direct eﬀect. Just as in the basic long-term (exclusive) contracting
model of Section 4.1, the expected profit of a continuing incumbent, φπ I + (1 − φ)π m =
               b
[1 − φ(1 − F (∆))]∆,   is unaﬀected by a change in α holding ∆  b fixed. On the other hand,
the entrant’s expected profit upon successful innovation, πE , continues to be increasing in
                                                                                    b →1
α, just as in the basic model, although here, this eﬀect also approaches zero as F (∆)
since then nearly all entrants are in any case waiting for existing exclusive contracts to
lapse before entering.
    Now consider the eﬀect of a decrease in the cut-oﬀ type ∆. b By the envelope theorem,
this has no eﬀect on the expected profit of a successful innovator, πE , since the marginal
type ∆b who is entering is earning zero, but it reduces the expected profit of a continuing
                             b
incumbent, [1 − φ(1 − F (∆))]∆,     by speeding his replacement. Thus, in this model,
signing more customers to long-term contracts – an R&D deterring activity – raises an
incumbent’s profit holding φ fixed. So, in this model, the tension between the eﬀects of
antitrust policy on entrant and incumbent profits is resent, even holding φ fixed.
    Whether an increase in α increases or decreases innovation depends on whether the
direct or indirect eﬀect dominates. Formally:

                                               47
Proposition 8.2 (C.1). In the long-term (exclusives) model with random innovation
size and costs of rapid implementation, restricting the use of long-term contracts increases
(decreases) the rate of innovation φ if

                   Ã             ! µR ∞               ¶           µ                ¶
                          α          
                                     ∆
                                          ∆f (∆)φ∆E                       δs
                                                          ≥ (≤)                        .          (8.8)
                          b ∆
                       f (∆) b              ∆                         1 − δ + δs

    For example, restricting the use of long-term contracts increases the rate of innovation
        b ≈ 0. In this case, the indirect eﬀect of a change in the cut-oﬀ type is of
φ if f (∆)
negligible importance since there is almost no change in the likelihood of a successful
innovator entering immediately. On the other hand, it lowers the rate of innovation if
α > 0, the support of ∆ is bounded with f > f > 0 on this support, and F (∆)        b ≈ 1.
When F (∆)b is close to 1, the direct eﬀect on πE approaches 0 and the indirect eﬀect
dominates, and so the innovation rate falls.
   Of course, even when an increase in α causes the rate of innovation φ to fall, successful
innovations are more likely to come into the market quickly, since the cut-oﬀ type ∆      b
decreases. Thus, the welfare eﬀects of this change in innovation appear ambiguous. The
following example illustrates the eﬀect of changes in α on the rate of innovation and
welfare.

Example 8.3 (C.1). Suppose there is only one potential entrant and let c(φ) = cφ.
Then the innovation supply is Φ(w) = 0 if w < c, [0, 1] if w = c, and 1 if w > c. Thus,
for equilibria with interior innovation rates, we must have [using (IB∗ )]

             µ                                                                     ¶
                 π E (α)(1 − δ + δφ) + δ [(1 − φ)πm (α) + φπI (α)] + δcφ
                                                                                           = c,
                                       1 − δ + 2δφ




                                                48
         3.5

            3

         2.5

            2

         1.5

            1


                0.3    0.4         0.5      0.6          0.7      0.8        0.9         1


                                   Figure 8.2: Figure C.1: c = 0.5

Solving for c and substituting for the expected profit functions, we have36

                  µ                ¶
                           δ
c = π E (α) +            [(1 − φ)πm (α) + φπI (α)]
                      1 − δ + δφ
    Z ∞                       µ             ¶
                                     δ                      K
  =      (α∆E − K)f (∆)d∆E +                  [1 − φ(1 − F ( ))]∆
      K                         1 − δ + δφ                  α
    Z α∞                       ½µ         ¶      µ            ¶                         ¾
                                      1                 1                 K       δ
  =      (α∆E − K)f (∆)d∆E + δ              ∆−                  φ[(1 − F ( )) +       ]∆ .
      K
      α
                                   1 −  δ          1 − δ + δφ             α     1 − δ


This equation describes an interior equilibrium innovation rate φ. We now assume that
∆ ∼ U [0, 1] and that α ∈ [K, 1]. We also let δ = .9 (a “period” is two years) and K = 0.3.
Letting φ∗ (α) denote the equilibrium value of φ given α, the solid lines in Figures C.1-C.3
graph the values of φ∗ (α) for c = 0.5, c = 1, and c = 3.

  36
    Observe that the expression in curly brackets in the last line makes sense: the continuation payoﬀ
of an entrant starting in the period after entry is exactly equal to the present discounted social value of
the innovation less the present discounted social value of the first innovation to follow it.


                                                    49
1.4

1.2

  1

0.8

0.6

0.4

      0.3   0.4   0.5    0.6        0.7    0.8    0.9   1


                  Figure 8.3: Figure C.2: c = 1




                               50
0.11

 0.1

0.09

0.08

0.07

0.06


       0.3   0.4   0.5    0.6        0.7    0.8    0.9   1


                   Figure 8.4: Figure C.3: c = 3




                                51
    To consider the welfare eﬀects of these changes, we consider as before an intervention
just after stage τ .1. Once again, all of the payoﬀ eﬀects of this change begin in period τ +1.
Observe, first, that with a constant returns R&D technology, any interior equilibrium has
VE = 0 both before and after the change. So the only eﬀects are those on consumers and
the firm with the leading technology just after stage τ .1 (the relevant current incumbent).
When VE = 0, (2.1) implies that

                                               "                 #
                                              1 − φ(1 − F ( K
                                                            α
                                                              ))
                                         VI =                      ∆I ,
                                                 1 − δ + δφ


where ∆I is the size of this leading firm’s innovation. On the other hand, the continuation
payoﬀ of consumers starting in period τ + 1 is37

                   µ             ¶ ∙                 µ      ¶µ            ¶¸
                     vI − c − ∆I        φ(1 − F )        1         δφ
                                   +               +                         ∆I
                        1−δ            1 − δ + δφ      1−δ     1 − δ + δφ
                     µ       ¶µ             ¶
                         1           δφ                 K       δ
                   +                          φ[(1 − F ( )) +      ]∆,
                       1−δ       1 − δ + δφ             α     1−δ


where vI is the value of the incumbent’s product. Putting these together, discounted
aggregate welfare starting in period τ + 1 is

               µ            ¶       µ         ¶µ              ¶
                   vI − c                1             δφ                 K      δ
                                +                               φ[(1 − F ( )) +     ]∆.
                   1−δ                  1−δ        1 − δ + δφ             α     1−δ


The dashed lines in Figures 4.1-4.3 graph aggregate welfare as a function of α for the
cases c = 0.5, c = 1, and c = 1.5. In each case, the optimal policy is either a ban on
long-term contracts (α = 1) or unrestricted contracting (α = 0.3 = K). The optimum
is unrestricted contracting when c = 0.5, and is no long-term contracting when c = 1
or c = 3. (When c = 1, unrestricted contracting maximizes innovation, but its first-
period innovation-suppressing eﬀect tips the welfare comparison towards no long-term
contracting.)

  37
     This can be calculated by observing that consumers start with a baseline net surplus of (vI − c − ∆I )
in each period, gain ∆I from the first subsequent innovation, and gain ∆ from each innovation thereafter.




                                                        52
8.1. Antitrust Policy and Intellectual Property Protection

The results for this model of random innovation size are related to those of Hunt [1994]’s
study of patent policy in a model of continuing innovation (see also O’Donohue et al
[1998]). In particular, Hunt shows that “leading patent breadth,” the requirement that
an innovation be at least a certain minimal amount better than the current leading
technology to get a patent, can increase the rate of innovation and aggregate welfare.
Here, a greater share of contractually-bound consumers shifts upward the cut-oﬀ level
of innovation that comes into the market rapidly, and so has an eﬀect very much like a
larger leading patent breadth.38
    This similarity between the eﬀects of antitrust policy and patent policy raises the
question of how optimal antitrust policy should be aﬀected by the ability to also optimally
set patent policy. While a full analysis is beyond our scope here, some insight can be
gained by considering the introduction of a simple leading breadth policy into our model.
Imagine, then, that we can also set directly a cut-oﬀ level ∆C such that no innovation
of size less than ∆C can come into the market immediately. Suppose we start with an
                                                                                b It is clear
antitrust policy α that is less than 1 and an equilibrium cut-oﬀ level equal to ∆.
that nothing is changed if we set ∆C = ∆.  b However, once we have done this, we change
the eﬀects of raising α. In particular, now an increase in α no longer has any eﬀect on the
set of innovations being immediately implemented; only the “direct eﬀect” of an increase
in α on profit levels remains, which we have seen causes innovation to increase. Moreover,
this increase in innovation without any change in the set of innovations being immediately
implemented necessarily raises welfare. Hence, the optimal antitrust policy when patent
policy is available sets α = 1. Intuitively, while allowing long-term contracts can be
used to prevent small innovations from coming to market, it does this only at the cost of
introducing an ineﬃciency. A leading breadth requirement in patent policy can achieve

  38
     The structure of Hunt [2004]’s model is very simlar to ours. Greater leading breadth can raise the
rate of innovation because it can block innovations of small size that generate little profit for an entrant
but destroy large profit levels for an incumbent.
   In contrast, O’Donohue et al [1998]’s model is quite diﬀerent. Their innovation process takes the form
of "free entry with a limited idea" but with innovation size varying instead of the cost of implementation.
In their model (where the rate of ideas is exogenous), increasing leading patent breadth necessarily
reduces the number of innovations that can enter the market without infringing an incumbent’s patent.
They assume, however, that infringing innovations can be licensed to the current incumbent, who then
implements them. Since increased breadth increases the length of time until the incumbent is displaced
by a noninfringing innovation, the incumbent is more willing to license infringing innovations the larger
is leading breadth. In the limit, as leading breadth grows infinity large, the incumbent “owns the entire
quality ladder” and implements exactly the first-best set of innovations.



                                                    53
the same objective without this ineﬃciency. Thus, if innovation sizes are verifiable, it is
better to use patent policy. However, antitrust policy does not require that innovation
sizes be observable, and so may sometimes by the best way to achieve this end.39



References

 [1] Aghion, P. and P. Howitt [1992], “A Model of Growth Through Creative Destruc-
     tion,” Econometrica (60), 323-52.

 [2] Aghion, P. et al. [2001], “Competition, Imitation, and Growth with Step-by-Step
     Innovation,” Review of Economic Studies (68), 467-92.

 [3] Bolton, P. and D. Scharfstein [1990], “A Theory of Predation Based on Agency
     Problems in Financial Contracting,” American Economic Review (80), 93-106.

 [4] Evans, D.S. and R. Schmalensee [2002], “Some Economic Aspects of Antitrust
     Analysis in Dynamically Competitive Industries,” Chapter 1 in Jae, A.B., Lerner,
     J., and Stern, S., eds., Innovation Policy and the Economy, Vol. 2, Cambridge, MA:
     NBER and MIT Press.

 [5] Fisher, Franklin M. and Rubinfeld, Daniel L. [2000],“United States v. Microsoft:
     An Economic Analysis” in Did Microsoft Harm Consumers?: Two Opposing Views,
     Washington, DC: AEI-Brookings Joint Center for Regulatory Studies.

 [6] Fudenberg, D. and J. Tirole [2000], “Pricing a Network Good to Deter Entry,”
     Journal of Industrial Economics (48), December, 373-90.

 [7] Gilbert, R.J. and S.C. Sunshine [1995], “Incorporating Dynamic Eﬃciency Concerns
     in Merger Analysis: The Use of Innovation Markets,” Antitrust Law Journal (63),
     569.

 [8] Gilbert, R.J. and M.L.Katz [2001], “An Economist’s Guide to U.S. v. Microsoft,”
     Journal of Economic Perspectives (15), 25-44.

 [9] Grossman, G. and E. Helpman [1991], “Quality Ladders in the Theory of Growth,”
     Review of Economic Studies (58), 43-61.

  39
     A leading breadth policy could in principle also be implemented indirectly, by requiring an innovator
to pay a fee to gain access to the market, as in Llobet et al. [2000].

                                                   54
[10] Hunt, R.M. [2004], "Patentability, Industry Structure, and Innovation," Journal of
     Industrial Economics (52), 401-26.

[11] Lee, T. and L.L. Wilde [1980], “Market Structure and Innovation: A Reformulation,”
     Quarterly Journal of Economics (94), 429-36.

[12] Llobet, G., H. Hopenhayn, and M. Mitchell [2000], “Rewarding Sequential Innova-
     tors: Prizes, Patents and Buyouts,” mimeo.

[13] Loury, G. [1979], “Market Structure and Innnovation,” Quarterly Journal of Eco-
     nomics (93), 395-410.

[14] Milgrom, P., and J. Roberts [1994], “Comparing Equilibria,” American Economic
     Review (84), 441-59.

[15] Milgrom, P., and C. Shannon [1994], “Monotone Comparative Statics,” Economet-
     rica (62), 157-80.

[16] O’Donoghue, T., S. Scotchmer, and J.-F. Thisse [1998], “Patent Breadth, Patent
     Life, and the Pace of Technological Progress,” Journal of Management and Strategy
     (7),1-32.

[17] Reinganum, J. [1989], “The Timing of Innovation: Research, Development, and
     Diﬀusion,” Chap. 14 in R. Willig and R. Schmalensee, eds., Handbook of Industrial
     Organization Vol. I., Amsterdam: North-Holland.

[18] Segal, I. [1999], “Contracting with Externalities,” Quarterly Journal of Economics
     114, 337-388.

[19] Stein, J. [1997], “Waves of Creative Destruction: Firm-Specific Learning-by-Doing
     and the Dynamics of Innovation,” Review of Economic Studies (64), 265-88.

[20] Whinston, M.D. [2001], “Exclusivity and Tying in U.S. v. Microsoft: What We
     Know and Don’t Know,” Journal of Economic Perspectives (15), 63-80.




                                          55
