                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          THE ANATOMY OF START-STOP GROWTH

                                          Benjamin F. Jones
                                          Benjamin A. Olken

                                         Working Paper 11528
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w11528


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       July 2005




The authors thank Daron Acemoglu, Robert Barro, Francesco Caselli, Michael Kremer, Seema Jayachandran,
Simon Johnson, Pete Klenow, Lant Pritchett, Ricardo Reis, and Dani Kodrik for helpful comments. The
views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by Benjamin F. Jones and Benjmain A. Olken. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
The Anatomy of Start-Stop Growth
Benjamin F. Jones and Benjamin A. Olken
NBER Working Paper No. 11528
July 2005
JEL No. O47, O11

                                           ABSTRACT




This paper investigates the remarkable extremes of growth experiences within countries and

examines the changes that occur when growth starts and stops. We find three main results. First, all

but the very richest countries experience both growth miracles and failures over substantial periods.

Second, growth accounting reveals that physical capital accumulation plays a negligible role in

growth take-offs and a larger but still modest role in growth collapses. The implied role of

productivity in these shifts is also directly reflected in employment reallocations and changes in

trade. Third, growth accelerations and collapses are asymmetric phenomena. Collapses typically

feature reduced manufacturing and investment amidst increasing price instability, whereas growth

takeoffs are primarily associated with large and steady expansions in international trade. This

asymmetry suggests that the roads into and out of rapid growth expansions may not be the same. The

results stand in contrast to much growth theory and conventional wisdom: despite much talk of

poverty traps, even very poor countries regularly grow rapidly, and the role of aggregate investment

in growth accelerations is negligible.



Benjamin F. Jones                                     Benjamin A. Olken
Northwestern University                               Harvard Society of Fellows
Kellogg School of Management                          78 Mount Auburn Street
2001 Sheridan Road                                    Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138
Evanston, IL 60208                                    and NBER
and NBER                                              bolken@nber.org
bjones@kellogg.northwestern.edu
1. Introduction
       Since World War II, economic development has witnessed a few distinct
“miracles” and a larger number of “failures”. A few countries, such as Singapore and
Botswana, experienced consistently high rates of growth. Meanwhile, many countries
found themselves only modestly more developed, if not poorer, at the close of the 20th
century then they were several decades before. Explaining the variation across countries
has motivated an enormous range of research that seeks to unlock key mechanisms and
causes of growth and draw lessons that can guide policy.

       This paper explores a different approach to growth that emphasizes the variation
of the growth experience within countries. We first show that growth “miracles” and
“failures” appear to be ubiquitous at ten and fifteen year time scales, with only the very
richest countries immune from these dramatic fluctuations. Despite talk of poverty traps,
almost all countries in the world have experienced periods of growth lasting a decade a
longer during which they appeared to be growing fast enough to converge to the United
States. Conversely, nearly all countries have experienced sustained periods of abysmal
growth.

       Given the ubiquity of these substantial shifts in growth, understanding the
transitions between different growth regimes is a critical question. In this paper, we
employ growth accounting to investigate what actually occurs during the transitions. In
order to systematically identify the events to be studied, we identify structural breaks in
the growth series for individual countries using the methodology of Bai and Perron
(1998, 2003) and data from the Penn World Tables (Heston et al. 2002).

       The analysis suggests that changes in the rate of factor accumulation explain
relatively little of the growth reversals, especially for accelerations. Instead, the growth
reversals are largely due to shifts in the growth rate of productivity. We find very similar
results if we use independent data on electricity consumption to infer total capital
utilization rather than relying on investment data from the national accounts. The
electricity data not only implies that the results are not being driven by changes in the
intensity with which capital is used, but also assuages potential concerns about the quality




                                              1
of investment data. The results survive a host of robustness checks, including alternative
methods of selecting break dates and excluding growth “recoveries” from the analysis.

       The weak role of capital accumulation in these growth transitions suggests an
efficiency story. In fact, further analysis suggests that reallocations across sectors may be
an important mechanism through which these productivity changes take place.
Accelerations, for example, are coincident with major expansions in international trade
(both imports and exports), which suggests that efficiency boosts may be coincident with
sectoral reallocations to exploit a country’s comparative advantage. Both accelerations
and decelerations are coincident with changes in the growth rate in the manufacturing
labor force, suggesting reallocations into and out of higher-productivity manufacturing
sectors.

       We also find that accelerations and decelerations are asymmetric events.
Accelerations are associated with increases substantial increases in trade, and relatively
little change in investment, monetary policy or levels of conflict. Decelerations, on the
other hand, show much sharper changes in investment (though still explaining a modest
portion of the growth transition), increases in monetary instability, and increases in
conflict. This asymmetry suggests that the problem of sustaining growth – i.e., preventing
a deceleration – is a different problem in kind from the problem of engineering a growth
takeoff. The roads into and out of rapid growth expansions are both well-trodden. But
they are different roads.

       Given these results, we reconsider several popular ideas in growth. Three main
themes emerge. First, the classic “poverty trap” is not a first-order description of the
growth process. Simply, most countries, including very poor countries and most Sub-
Saharan African countries, have grown very quickly over some sustained period.
Second, the missing role of investment in growth accelerations is inconsistent with many
views of growth, particularly those that emphasize poverty traps, since most rely on
investment mechanisms. One example is the big push view of development (Rosenstein-
Rodan 1943; Murphy et al. 1989). Institutional stories that emphasize property rights and
credit constraints as essential obstacles to growth also seem inconsistent with these
growth accelerations, if, as typically understood, improvements in property rights and



                                              2
credit markets would accelerate growth by expanding aggregate investment. Third, the
asymmetry in the mechanics of collapses and accelerations poses a challenge to many
unified models of growth. The limited set of existing models that feature medium-run
cycles generally do not possess the types of asymmetries found in the data.

         The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents benchmark
facts that characterize the variation in growth within countries. Section 3 applies the Bai
& Perron (2003) methodology to identify structural breaks in growth. Section 4 employs
growth accounting to investigate the mechanics of growth takeoffs and collapses and also
considers plausible sources of efficiency gains. Section 5 considers the existing
theoretical literature in light of the facts presented here. Section 6 concludes.



2. Growth Extremes within Countries

         Several papers have argued that there is significant volatility in growth within
countries and characterized aspects of this volatility. Easterly et al. (1993), for example,
showed that correlation of growth across decades within countries is very low –
averaging only 0.3 in a worldwide sample. This implies that most of the variation in
growth comes within individual countries, rather than across countries. Pritchett (2000)
has categorized different growth regimes qualitatively, documenting “hills”, “plateaus”,
and “mountains”, and suggested that countries typically feature abrupt and sustained
changes in growth regimes rather than a consistent convergence process. Building on
these insights, the literature has recently begun to further investigate this volatility.1

         In this section we build on the existing literature by demonstrating the magnitude
of the shifts in growth within countries. In the same way that cross-country comparisons


1
 Aguiar and Gopinath (2004) show that the variation in growth rates in a sample of emerging markets is
characterized by shifts in growth trends rather than variations in growth around a single trend. Ben-David
and Pappel (1998) identify a statistically significant single structural break in the growth series for a broad
set of countries. Jerzmanowski (2004) has built on Pritchett’s observations and estimated a Markov
switching model between three different growth states, controlling for convergence effects. Hausmann et
al. (2004) look at the empirical determinants of growth accelerations, and Easterly (2005) argues that these
events are not driven by foreign aid or investment. For the OECD, a vast literature has also noted and
sought to explain the growth slowdowns noted in the 1970s (e.g. Griliches 1980; Wolff 1996), and recent
work has begun to examine medium-term fluctions in output in developed countries more generally (Comin
and Gertler 2004).


                                                      3
do not capture the substantial part of growth variations, long-run averages within
countries mask patterns of extreme success and extreme failure. In particular, we show
that growth “miracles” and “failures” over ten year periods (and longer) appear within the
historical experiences of most countries.

         To begin, Figure 1 presents the best 10-year growth episode and the worst 10-year
growth episode for all 125 countries in the Penn World Tables with at least 20 years of
growth data. Countries are ranked from the poorest to richest based on their income level
in 1960. For comparison, the graph highlights the best 10-year average in the United
States (3.3% per annum) and the worst 10-year average in the United States (1.0% per
annum).

         Figure 1 indicates a remarkable degree of heterogeneity within national growth
experiences, with sustained periods of both high and low growth. Nearly all countries
have experienced a growth episode substantially better than the U.S. best and a different
episode substantially worse than the U.S. worst. Moreover, extreme highs and extreme
lows in growth are common across the income spectrum. Only among the very richest
countries is there a drop in the magnitude of the extremes.

         The capacity of countries across the income spectrum to produce sustained
episodes of high growth suggests that rapid increases in welfare have been within the
reach of most economies. This point is clarified in Figure 2, which compares the income
level at the end of the best 10-year growth episode to the prior peak level of income. We
see that large income expansions are quite common. In fact, 80% of the episodes show
income expansions of at least 25%, with 50% showing expansions of at least 50% and
many examples where per-capita income doubled or more. Meanwhile, in only 6% of the
cases do countries arrive at income levels equal to or below their prior peak. The 10-year
growth booms in Figure 2 are not simply recovery after bad episodes, but rather represent
new growth.2 The medium run variation in growth exposes large shifts in welfare.




2
 Since the growth data is truncated (typically in 1960 for developing countries), it is possible that in some
cases there is recovery from an un-witnessed pre-period. However, when examining the subset of those
growth accelerations in Figure 2 that come later in a country’s data series, we find similar patterns.
Recovery has little to do with these 10-year growth booms.


                                                      4
         A different way to view these growth extremes is through the lens of
convergence. It is well known that income levels of poor countries have typically
diverged from the wealthiest countries, with some notable exceptions (Jones, 1997;
Pritchett, 1997). For example, since 1960, among those countries with initially below
median income, only 24% have grown faster on average than the United States while the
other 76% have grown slower. As indicated in Figure 1, however, the story over the
medium run is considerably richer.

         Table 1 analyzes whether countries have converged to US income levels and
diverged from US income levels over 10-year periods. By convergence and divergence,
we mean that average growth is higher or lower than average US growth over the same
10-year period.3 As before, the analysis includes all 125 countries in the Penn World
Tables with at least 20 years of growth data. The mean number of growth observations
for all countries in this sample is 44, so 10 periods are typically about one-quarter of their
growth history.

         The striking fact is that 90% of all countries have converged on the US over some
10-year period, while 94% have diverged over some 10-year period. Dividing countries
by region or by initial income level, we find that a high propensity for medium-run
convergence and divergence are general phenomena. Among the poorest 1/3rd of
countries in 1960, 92% have experienced a sustained episode of convergence. Even the
majority of countries in Sub-Saharan Africa, most of which are considered long-run
growth “failures”, have converged on the US over sustained periods.4

         These facts suggest that both miracles and failures in the medium run are within
the experience of the same country – growth within countries is a “start-stop” process.
Put another way, average growth over a 40-year period is typically a bad description of
that country’s experience at any particular point in time. Understanding the variation
within countries’ experiences can produce specific insights for theory and policy.


3
  One might be concerned that convergence and divergence are made more likely due to U.S. growth
volatility. However, as seen in Figure 1, similar results still obtain even comparing to the best and worst
U.S. experiences.
4
  In results not reported, we find that convergence and divergence are also common over longer-periods.
For example, 85% of countries experienced convergence and 87% experienced divergence over some 15-
year period.


                                                     5
3. Identifying Regime Shifts in Growth

         Multiple structural breaks in a growth series can be identified using the
econometric methods of Bai and Perron (1998, 2003). This section will identify these
breaks and classify them into “up-breaks”, representing accelerations of growth, and
“down-breaks”, representing growth collapses. The following sections analyze the
mechanics of these accelerations and collapses and relate them to existing growth theory.
Other methods of determining identifying growth transitions will also be considered
below.

         The Bai and Perron method locates and tests for multiple structural breaks within
a time series. In our case, we look at a growth series within a country,

         gt = aR + et

where gt is the annual growth rate in purchasing-power-parity per-capita income, aR is the
mean growth rate during regime R, and et is an error term. Data is taken from the Penn
World Tables v6.1.

         The intuition for the Bai and Perron method is straightforward. First, an
algorithm searches all possible sets of breaks (up to a maximum number of breaks) and
determines for each number of breaks the set that produces the maximum goodness-of-fit
(R2). The statistical tests then determine whether the improved fit produced by allowing
an additional break is sufficiently large given what would be expected by chance (due to
the error process), according to asymptotic distributions the authors derive. Starting with
a null of no breaks, sequential tests of k vs. k+1 breaks allow one to determine the
appropriate number of breaks in a data series. Bai and Perron determine critical values
for tests of various size and employ a “trimming” parameter, expressed as a percentage of
the number of observations, which constrains the minimum distance between consecutive
breaks. For our main results, we focus on a specification with 10% asymptotic size and a




                                              6
10% trimming parameter, although the main conclusions in following sections are robust
to various choices. We will employ a number of robustness checks as we proceed.5

        Since these are asymptotic tests while our time-series typically have between 40
and 50 observations, we undertake a Monte-Carlo exercise to assess how accurately the
Bai and Perron method detects breaks in synthetic data series of similar length. In
particular, we model a growth process with 40 years of data, an autocorrelation parameter
of 0.1 (similar to what is present in actual growth data), and structural mean shifts equal
to 0.5, 1, 1.5, and 2 times the standard deviation in the error term.6 Not surprisingly, the
Bai & Perron method is more successful the larger the break. For example, a single break
2 standard deviations in size will be detected 91% of the time, but a single break 0.5
standard deviation in size will be detected only 24% of the time. The method is therefore
conservative in detecting breaks, capturing only major accelerations and collapses. We
also find that the size of the test is appropriate in small samples, with a test that has 10%
asymptotic size producing false positives in about 11% of the cases.

        When implementing the Bai & Perron method on the real growth data, we detect a
total of 73 structural breaks in 48 of the 125 countries that have at least 20 years of Penn
World Table data. We classify these breaks as either “up-breaks” or “down-breaks”
depending on whether the average growth rate in the regime after the break is above or
below the average growth rate before. Table 2 lists the countries and years with
structural growth breaks. Figure 3 presents four illustrative examples, plotting the log of
PPP per-capita income over time for China, Mozambique, Cote d’Ivoire and Indonesia.
Vertical lines mark the break years determined by the method, and we see that they are
picking up substantial changes in growth rates – and well-known historical episodes. The
acceleration in China in 1978 is coincident with Deng’s ascension and an opening of the
economy. The collapse in 1973 in Mozambique follows the onset of major internal

5
  The smaller the size parameter, the fewer the number of breaks, and the exact dates of the estimated
breaks can shift within countries. We have estimated the set of breaks using various size and various
trimming parameters, and have also considered other estimation methods based on the Schwarz criterion of
Liu et al. (1997) or the Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC) of Yao (1998), as implemented by Bai and
Peron (2003). Bai and Peron argue that their method has superior properties under some circumstances
than these other methods. The behavior of economies in the vicinity of these breaks, examined in Section
4, is robust to the break methodology and parameters (size, trimming) chosen.
6
  Bai & Perron (forthcoming) also present Monte Carlo results for finite samples, but their simulated
samples sizes are larger then we have in our growth series; hence, we run our own simulations.


                                                   7
military conflict, and the turn-around in 1986 marks a sharp move away from Marxist
economic policies and towards peace. Indonesia’s growth begins with the Suharto’s
ascension and defeat of the communists in 1967 and ends with the Asian financial crisis
in 1997. Cote d’Ivoire’s collapse in 1979 marks the end of the “Ivorian Miracle” as
coffee and cocoa prices fall precipitously.

       Table 3 presents summary statistics about these breaks. First, we see that down-
breaks are somewhat more common than up-breaks, accounting for 59% of the cases.
Second, structural breaks are common across regions of the world and widely different
income levels – a fact that should not be surprising given the evidence of Figure 1. If
anything, we detect fewer breaks in very poor countries and in Sub-Saharan Africa.
Third, structural breaks occur in all decades, although there is an unusual propensity for
down-breaks in the 1970s, which is consistent with a large literature on the 1970s
slowdown.



4. The Mechanics of Start-Stop Growth

       In this section we use growth accounting techniques to analyze the mechanical
sources of growth accelerations and collapses. The standard assumption in growth and
development accounting is a neoclassical production function with constant returns to
scale in aggregate physical and quality weighted labor (e.g. Barro 1999a; Caselli
forthcoming). Here, we will generalize the standard production function slightly to
include utilization parameters that account for possible changes in the intensity with
which factors are used. We write,

       Y = F ( A, K , H )                                                   (1)

where K is aggregate physical capital in use, H is aggregate human capital in use – i.e.
quality weighted labor, and A captures Total Factor Productivity (TFP), a measure of how
efficiently the aggregate stocks are employed in the production of national output. We
further decompose capital stocks into two parts,

        K = uK K




                                              8
         H = uH H                                                                          (2)

where K and H are the total aggregate physical and human capital in the economy, and
uK and uH are the intensity with which these factors are employed. Since we are looking
at medium-run changes in growth rates, it will be useful to relax the full employment
assumption in standard growth accounting and attempt to estimate factor utilization as
well. Taking logs in (1) and differentiating with respect to time we find

                         FK K     F H
         g Y = g TFP +        gK + H gH                                                    (3)
                          Y        Y

If factors are paid their marginal products, and output is exhausted in factor payments,
then α ≡ FKK/Y is simply the capital share of income and FHH/Y=1- α is the human
capital (labor) share of income. In the analysis, we will assume α =1/3 as our main
specification, although the implications of variations in this parameter will be
considered.7

         Subtracting the growth rate of population from both sides of equation (3), and
using equation (2) to decompose factor growth rates into growth in the total factor
available and growth in the factor’s utilization, yields,
         g y = g TFP + αg k + (1 − α )g h + αg u K + (1 − α )g u H                         (4)

where lower-case variables are averages per-capita.

         Having identified structural breaks in the growth rate of per-capita income, gy, we
use equation (4) to account for the sources of that structural change in growth. The
accounting exercise tells us whether observable factors, such as the accumulation of
physical capital, human capital, or changes in factor intensity, can account for significant
parts of the structural change, or whether TFP, the unobserved residual, is left to explain
the growth breaks.

         In the simplest specification, the utilization of existing factors can be incorporated
as part of TFP. This approach has been followed in studies that consider growth and


7
 Gollin (2002) estimates income shares across countries and find that the traditional assumption of
approximately 1/3rd for the capital share is not unreasonable on average, although there is some variation.
The implied estimates for the capital share lie mostly in a range between 0.15 and 0.4.


                                                      9
development accounting over large sets of developing countries (Easterly & Levine,
2001; Hall & Jones, 1999). Here we will consider the results of that approach, as well as,
further below, the implications of specific controls for factor intensity using electricity
consumption and labor force data.

         The growth rate in the physical capital stock per-capita is defined as

                 I
         gk =      −δ − n                                                                   (5)
                 K

where I, gross investment, and n, the population growth rate, are taken from the Penn
World Tables. The depreciation rate, δ, is assumed to be 7%. 8 The initial aggregate
capital stock is determined by the perpetual inventory method.9

         Estimating the growth rate in human capital is more challenging because data is
not available on an annual basis and methods for determining the human capital stock
differ across authors. We will focus on education and make the increasingly standard
assumption of Mincerian returns to schooling,

         h = e r (s )

where s is years of schooling. We take r(s) = 0.1s, which implies a 10% return in wages
to an additional year of schooling.10 Then

                        ds
         g h = 0.1
                        dt

Using the Barro-Lee data set (2000), which presents panel data for average schooling
data at 5-year intervals, we calculate the growth rate in human capital over each 5-year



8
  Authors differ in their choices of the depreciation rate for aggregate capital, with 6% (e.g. Hall and Jones,
1999, Caselli forthcoming), 7% (e.g. Easterly and Levine, 2001), and 10% (e.g. Aguiar and Gopinath,
2004) among the typical choices. We take 7% and will comment further on the role of this parameter
below; our conclusions are not sensitive to this choice.
9
  The initial capital stock for each country in the Penn World Tables is determined assuming that
investment grows in the unobserved pre-period at the same average rate as in the first ten years of the
sample. The core results are not sensitive to how the initial capital stock is imputed.
10
   Our conclusions will not be sensitive to any reasonable assumption about r(s) based on existing estimates
of this function. Essentially, human capital growth rates do not move sharply enough to have much
explanatory power for structural breaks in growth; hence, fine tuning assumptions about human capital
parameters and measures (see Psacharopoulos 1994; Bils & Klenow 2000) will not affect our results.


                                                      10
period using the trend in average schooling in the population of those at least 15 years in
age.

4.1 Factor Accumulation

         Tables 4A and 4B present the basic results of growth accounting around the
structural breaks defined in Section 3. The first table considers “up-breaks” where the
trend growth rate increases at the breaks, and the second considers “down-breaks” where
the trend growth rate falls. Each table considers both short-run growth accounting,
comparing the 5-years before the break with the 5-years after the break, and medium-run
growth accounting, where we compare behavior in the entire prior growth regime with
behavior in the entire posterior growth regime.11

         The first panel of each table shows growth rates before and after the break.
Looking first at the up-breaks, we see that the trend growth rate increases by an average
of 7.2% per annum in the short run and 6.8% in the medium run. These up-breaks on
average mark the end of mild contractions (-1.8% per year) and the beginning of rapid
expansions (+5.3% per year).12 These are substantial changes with large implications for
per-capita income.

         The next panel of the table considers the role of physical and human capital
accumulation in explaining these up-breaks. The most striking result is that, while
physical capital accumulation accelerates, this acceleration is very modest, increasing by
only 1.5% in the short-run and 1.4% when looking over the entire regime. Human capital
accumulation is even more modest, seeing essentially no change.13

         The third panel of the table indicates how much of the change in growth is
explained by factor accumulation. Given the modest changes in the growth rates of the

11
   For up-breaks, the mean length of the growth regimes is 13.3 years prior to the break and 16.7 years after
the break. For down-breaks, the mean regime length is 19.7 years (prior) and 18.4 years (after).
12
   One potential concern is that these up-breaks represent recoveries from periods of negative growth, rather
than true growth accelerations. However, as discussed in Section 4.5 below, the results are similar – and in
fact show an even smaller change in capital accumulation – if we restrict attention to cases where growth in
the pre-period was already positive.
13
   Recall that data for human capital is only available at 5-year intervals, leading to a slightly different
approach than that used with the annual data. The “short-run” for human capital compares growth rates in
the last complete 5-year interval prior to the break with the first complete 5-year interval after the break.
The regime averages consider growth rates over the longest period observable within the prior and posterior
regimes.


                                                    11
physical and human capital, the answer is not very much. Assuming the standard factor
share for physical capital of 1/3, physical capital accumulation explains only 6.9% of the
growth change in the short run and 7.1% in the medium run. In other words, increased
rates of capital accumulation – i.e. increased investment – do not play a substantial role in
growth accelerations.

         Table 4B considers “down-breaks” in growth. As with growth accelerations, we
see large changes in income growth rates: a decline of 7.0% in the short run and 6.0% in
the medium run. These down-breaks on average represent the end of rapid expansions of
about 5% per year and the onset of contractions of about -1.5% per year. In this sense,
they are the mirror opposite of the up-breaks. Unlike the up-breaks, however, we now
see a reasonably large decline in the rate of capital accumulation, by 4.0% in the short run
and 4.6% over the regime averages. Human capital, as before, shows only modest
changes.14

         Given the more substantial decline in the rate of capital growth, factor
accumulation can now explain a larger portion of the structural break in the growth trend.
Assuming a capital share of 1/3, the contribution of capital is still somewhat modest –
about 25% or 30%. While modest, this effect is statistically much larger than seen in
growth accelerations.

         Table 5 compares the results from the up-breaks and the down-breaks. For both
up-breaks and down-breaks, we report a p-value from a one-sample t-test of the null
hypothesis that there was no change in the growth rate of each variable across the break.
We also report the p-value from a two-sample t-test of the null hypothesis that the
changes were symmetric. As indicated in Table 5, these t-tests strongly reject the null that
up-breaks and down-breaks are symmetric events.




14
  Interestingly, human capital moves in the opposite direction of growth, with a slight acceleration in the
rate of schooling.


                                                     12
4.2 Factor Utilization

         The intensity of factor utilization, beyond total factor quantities, may be
particularly important when examining short and medium run fluctuations in growth.15
In this section, we employ measures of labor force participation and electricity
consumption to assess factor intensity.

         The second panels of Tables 4A and 4B present changes in labor force
participation (LFP) around structural growth breaks. Labor force participation, the ratio
of total workers to the total national population, can serve as a measure for uH in equation
(4). The data indicates only modest changes; neither up-breaks nor down-breaks appear
to be related to swings in the intensity with which labor is employed, at least on the
margin of the number of individuals.16, 17 While labor force participation is not the ideal
measure of labor intensity, electricity consumption measures can help with concerns
about inadequate employment measures.

         Analyzing electricity consumption data has two primary benefits in analyzing the
mechanics of structural breaks in growth. First, shifts in the intensity with which a given
stock of physical capital is employed will be reflected in electricity consumption per unit
of capital. Second, the total amount of electricity consumption can capture the aggregate
use of capital, incorporating both factor utilization and factor accumulation effects.
Therefore, we can also use electricity consumption data as a substitute measure for the
role of physical capital and reconsider growth accounting without relying on imputations
of physical capital stocks from aggregate investment data.



15
   Even over the longer run, changes in utilization may matter. For example, labor force participation rates
may shift substantially, as suggested in a study of East Asian growth miracles (Young 1995).
16
   Labor force participation is calculated from the Penn World Tables by comparing GDP per worker to
GDP per capita. The Penn World Table data come from the International Labor Organization, which is
also the source of the employment data used in the World Development Indicators.
17
   Labor force measures include those unemployed who are actively seeking work, so changes in
unemployment rates will not be reflected in changes in the labor force measures used here. However, the
impact of shifts in unemployment rates on growth is unlikely to be large enough to explain the changes in
growth we observe. To see this, suppose there was a dramatic reduction in unemployment – say, from 25%
to 10%. This would yield a one-time increase in output of plausibly no more than 15%, which assumes
optimistically that capital is also idle and waiting for these workers, and that these workers find jobs that
are equal to the average productivity of the already employed. By contrast, the mean expansion in output is
5.2% per year for the 16.7 years in the medium-run, or an increase in output of 240% for the entire period.
Thus the contribution of changes in unemployment is likely to be negligible.


                                                     13
         To focus on capital utilization, we define a linear relationship between electricity
use and physical capital as

         e = Bu K k                                                                          (6)

where e is electricity use per-capita. The linear relationship finds support in regression
analysis.18 Then,

          g uK = g e − g k                                                                   (7)

so that the difference between electricity consumption and capital growth defines growth
in the intensity of capital use. Further, growth accounting can now be performed looking
at electricity data in place of the imputed data on the capital stock. With (7), the analog
of equation (4) is:

          g y = g A + αg e + (1 − α )( g h + g u H )                                         (8)

Here the growth rate in electricity use is capturing changes in both the accumulation and
utilization of physical capital.

         The results of this capital utilization analysis are presented in Tables 4A and 4B,
which show little change in capital utilization around either up-breaks or down-breaks.
Note that electricity consumption moves in a similar manner as the imputed capital
growth, for both accelerations and collapses, which helps reaffirm the imputed capital
growth rates. Combining the utilization results for capital and the labor force, we can
recalculate the contribution of accumulation and utilization to the growth change. The
earlier conclusions are not altered by incorporating these utilization measures.19

18
  If we generalize equation (6) as e = B (u K k ) ω , then we can estimate ω by running the following
regression for a cross-section of countries,

         log e = log B + ω log k + ε

This regression assumes that unobserved variations in B and uK across countries are orthogonal to the per-
capita capital stock. Under these assumptions, OLS confirms a linear relationship, estimating ω̂ =1.04
with a standard error of 0.04 and a remarkably high R2 of 0.9 in 1995 data. Results are very similar for
other years.
19
   The electricity consumption data also helps inform labor utilization. If workers are paired with
machines, then the application of more labor should also be reflected in increased electricity consumption.
If there is an unobserved labor effect, then it must be coming largely in industries that do not use electricity
intensively.


                                                       14
       The primary conclusion is that capital accumulation and utilization do not appear
to explain large portions of the change in economic performance. Up-breaks in growth
are little associated with changes in capital accumulation or intensity. Down-breaks are
more closely associated with observable factors and particularly a collapse in physical
capital accumulation and electricity consumption – yet still they explain no more than 1/3
of the total change in growth. Finally, as shown in Table 5, the asymmetry of collapses
and accelerations appears real and statistically significant.

4.3 Sources of Productivity Gains

       Total factor productivity, as the residual in growth accounting, is left as the
primary explanation for structural breaks in growth, particularly accelerations. The
missing role of investment, as a negative result, can help substantially limit theory and
policy, as we will discuss in Section 5 below. As is always the case when dealing with
TFP, however, a natural question is where these changes in productivity come from.

       Generally speaking, changes in TFP would come from the reemployment of
existing factors in more or less productive combinations. A more precise view of the
national production function would acknowledge, in place of (1), that aggregate output is
the summation of the value of various outputs produced using different production
processes. Specifically,

        Y = ∑ p j Fj ( Aj , K j , H j )
              j


where j represents different types of production. Increases in TFP could come from
reallocating human and physical capital to the more productive processes, or
alternatively, by increasing the productivity of a particular process. In this section we
examine two types of effects that suggest that the reallocation of resources across sectors
may be an important reason why TFP changes so dramatically across these growth
breaks. First, we consider international trade. Second, we consider shifts in labor
employment by focusing on the manufacturing sector within countries.




                                              15
4.3.1 International Trade

        A basic source of efficiency gains may be increased trade openness, for classic
Ricardian reasons among others.20 The first panel of Table 7 shows changes in the trade
share across up-breaks and down-breaks. We see several important results. First, the
share of GDP that is traded rises substantially with up-breaks, by about 13% over a 5-
year period and by 25% over the regime average. This large increase in trade is due, in
equal parts, to expanding shares of both exports and imports in GDP, with no shift in the
trade balance.

        Incorporating trade expansions in growth accounting is difficult, since we do not
observe sector-level panel data for these economies. However, the trade literature has
shown broadly that greater trade shares are associated with greater per-capita income.
Taking Frankel and Romer’s (1999) instrumental variables estimates for the causal effect
of the trade share, the 25% expansion in the trade share would imply a 50-75% expansion
in per-capita income. This type of calculation, while highly approximate, suggests that
expanding trade may be a central feature of up-breaks in growth.

        Meanwhile, growth collapses show no systematic changes in the trade share. The
average change is small and not statistically different from zero. The two-sample t-tests
presented in Table 6 confirm the asymmetry in the trade patterns between growth
accelerations and collapses. We reject the hypothesis that trade share changes are of
similar magnitude with well over 99% confidence.

        Given the large trade expansions found with up-breaks, one may then ask whether
these events are associated with terms of trade shocks, as suggested by Easterly et al.
(1993). Table 6 further shows that terms of trade changes are modest. We see a small
and statistically insignificant improvement in the terms of trade by about 6% with up-
breaks and an insignificant decline of about 2% with down-breaks. Results for the
immediate 5-year changes (not reported) are even more modest, showing only a 1.5%

20
  Beyond the cross-sector reallocation of factors toward comparative advantage, openness may increase
productivity through increased scale economies, enhanced technology spillovers, and efficiency
improvements within tradable sectors (see Tybout 2000 for a review). Micro-studies suggest that trade
openness leads to productivity improvements through inter-firm reallocations within tradable industries
(e.g. Bernard and Jensen 1999, Aw, Chung, and Roberts 2000) as well as intra-firm or intra-plant
improvements in productivity (Pavcnik 2002; Fernandes 2003).


                                                   16
improvement with up-breaks a 0.5% decline with down-breaks. The growth
accelerations are not related to sharp changes in the terms of trade, suggesting that trade
policy is a more likely driver of these changes than the luck of international prices.

4.3.2 Manufacturing

        There is a long-standing view that growth, particularly among poor nations, may
come from moves out of agriculture and into manufacturing (e.g., Kuznets 1953; also
Matsuyama 1992, Golin et al. 2002). Manufacturing may be intrinsically more
productive and may also provide learning-by-doing spillovers (e.g., Krugman 1987). We
investigate labor reallocations into or away from the manufacturing sector using UNIDO
panel data. In particular, we focus on changes in the growth rate of the manufacturing
labor share (i.e., manufacturing labor divided by total employment in the economy.)

        As reported in Table 6, structural growth breaks are associated with large shifts in
the accelerations or decelerations in the allocation of labor to manufacturing. For down-
breaks, the growth rate of the share of the population in manufacturing drops by 4.8% per
year. Conversely, for up-breaks, growth in the manufacturing labor share accelerates by
3.6% per year. This suggests that there may be substantial changes in the rate of sectoral
allocations associated with these breaks.21 The changes in the growth rate of
manufacturing output exceed the changes in national output and confirm that these shifts
in labor into and out of manufacturing were also associated with changes in overall
manufacturing output of the same direction.

        We can also look at the 9 2-digit SIC sub-sectors that collectively constitute the
manufacturing sector. In results not reported, we find that up-breaks see increased
manufacturing employment as a fraction of economy-wide employment in 8 of the 9 sub-
sectors, with increased output growth rates in all 9 sub-sectors. For down-breaks, the
employment share and output growth rates fall on average in all 9 sub-sectors. Regime
shifts therefore see broad moves into and out of manufacturing rather than intra-
manufacturing reallocation. Interestingly, as shown in Table 7, there is slightly more


21
  While in theory this could reflect a change in overall unemployment, rather than the share in
manufacturing, as discussed above, these changes are too large to be due to a one-time change in overall
unemployment.


                                                    17
movement in the manufacturing of advanced products than in simple products, which
may suggest particular productivity gains.22, 23

         Overall, the results in this section – showing dramatic changes in trade associated
with up-breaks and substantial moves into and out of manufacturing associated with both
types of breaks – provide additional evidence that changes in the allocation of resources
lie behind the changes in growth. The changes in efficiency we observe may be driven in
large part by reallocations of resources towards and away from higher productivity
sectors.

4.4 Associated Changes

         The previous analysis has demonstrated the presence of structural growth breaks
and documented the primary role of changes in productivity in these events. To improve
our understanding of structural growth breaks, it is also useful to consider how other
important variables behave around these events. We consider three types of variables –
variables that reflect the country’s monetary policy, the level of conflict (either internal or
external), and the country’s institutions. The purpose of this section is not to make
statements about the direction of causality between the events examined here and the
dramatic changes in growth we observe; rather, by examining how other variables change
during these transitions, we will be able to further our understanding of what these events
actually entail.

         To examine price stability, we examine changes in the growth rate of the GDP
deflator (i.e., the inflation rate).as well as changes in the growth rate of the nominal and
real exchange rates. The results are presented in Table 7. The table shows that down-
breaks are associated with substantial increases in inflation. In fact, the point estimates
suggest an average 14 percentage point increase in the inflation rate across down-breaks.


22
   The “simple” sectors include food, clothing, and textiles (what Tybout (2000) calls “light
manufacturing”) as well as wood products, furniture, and paper products (SIC codes 311-342). The
“advanced” sectors include chemicals, rubber and plastic products, metal products, machinery, transport
equipment, and professional and scientific equipment among others (SIC codes 351-385). The split
between simple and advanced manufacturing is about 60%-40% for the labor employment share and 55%-
45% for the output share on average for the countries in the sample.
23
   Given that capital accumulation and electricity consumption rise little with up-breaks, the broad if often
insignificant increases in manufacturing employment shares and output with up-breaks suggests a further
retargeting of investments and electricity use in line with a productivity-based story.


                                                     18
This includes a number of hyperinflation episodes (e.g. Brazil, Zaire, and Nicaragua), as
well as a large number of increases in inflation in the range of 10-30% per year. Overall,
of the 39 down-breaks in the sample, 33 show increases in inflation. The results for
exchange rates show that the nominal exchange rate also adjusts (through devaluation)
during these episodes, so that real exchange rates remain approximately constant. Note
that the typical contraction would present deflationary pressures rather than inflationary
ones, which suggests that the inflationary price instability is more likely to be a cause
than a consequence of the contraction. Up-breaks, by comparison, show very modest
(and statistically insignificant) declines in inflation. In fact, examining the data country-
by-country, only two (Mexico and Indonesia) of the 23 up-breaks are associated with
substantial declines in inflation.

         A second, relevant factor in producing these dramatic shifts in growth may be the
beginning or end of violent conflict. To examine this possibility, we use annual conflict
data from the PRIO / Uppsala Armed Conflict Dataset (Gleditsch et al 2002). The
conflict variable takes a value of 0 if there is no conflict, 1 if there is a minor armed
conflict, 2 if there is a intermediate armed conflict, and 3 if there is a major armed
conflict.24 We examine changes in two variables, one that captures all conflicts and one
restricted to internal conflicts. The results in Table 7 confirm that conflict may play an
important role for down-breaks.25 For 7 of 41 countries, the down-break is almost exactly
coincident with the outbreak of civil war. By contrast, growth takeoffs are not obviously
related to reductions in conflict. The coefficients suggest only mild decreases in conflict
on average, and these decreases are far from statistically significant.

         Finally, we examine data on institutional quality using measures of corruption and
the rule of law from Political Risk Services (see the description in Barro (1999b) for
more detail). These measures range from 0 to 1, where 1 is the best outcome (least
corrupt, strongest rule of law), and 0 is the worst. Although sample sizes on the rule-of-
law and corruption variables are small -- panel data is only available since 1982 -- the

24
   . Minor conflict is defined to be at least 25 deaths per year but no more than 1,000 total deaths;
intermediate is defined to be between 25 and 1,000 deaths per year but no more than 1,000 total deaths;
major is defined to be more than 1,000 deaths per year.
25
    Of course, both directions of causality are possible. Obviously, civil war can cause economic collapse,
but Miguel, Satyanath and Sergenti (2004) demonstrate that economic collapse can cause conflict as well.


                                                     19
results suggest little change. Both up-breaks and down-breaks are associated with mild
increases in the rule-of-law variable, with the up-break result not quite significant. The
corruption measures show no pattern.

4.5 Robustness

       In this section we consider the robustness of the growth accounting results to
various assumptions. We will discuss robustness to the set of break dates, concerns that
accelerations may be “recoveries” rather than new growth, the implications of lagged
investment effects, and assumptions about depreciation rates and return to scale.

       First, we consider the robustness of the results to the way we identify structural
breaks in growth. To do so, we examine an entirely different and transparent method for
defining growth breaks. In Tables 8A and 8B, we reconsider the basic growth accounting
exercise around years that mark the maximum “acceleration” and “deceleration” within
each country. In particular, we calculate the change in growth across consecutive 10-year
periods for every year in a country’s growth series and then define accelerations as the
year in which the growth increase is greatest and decelerations as the year in which the
growth decrease is greatest. Tables 8A and 8B report the basic growth accounting results
for all countries in the sample, as well as, separately, episodes where accelerations and
decelerations were exceptionally large – by more than 5% per annum. As is clear in the
table, the results of this analysis are once again similar to the results using precisely
identified dates of structural breaks. Accelerations are at most weakly associated with
increased investment or electricity use, while decelerations are coincident with more
substantial declines in capital accumulation and electricity consumption.

       The results are further robust to variations in the structural break method. Recall
that the structural breaks in the main analysis were identified using the Bai and Perron
method, with a size of 10% and a trimming parameter of 10%. In results not reported, we
have repeated the analysis using a variety of other size and trimming parameters and find
consistent results. The consistency of the results across different sets of break dates
suggests that the findings of the paper are likely to be quite robust to the particular
methodology chosen.




                                              20
        A second, related concern is that the accelerations may be recoveries after bad
growth episodes, rather than new growth. If this were the case, then the weak investment
results may be less surprising. In fact, however, the growth takeoffs in Table 4A
represent new growth on average, with income 20% higher five years after the break than
it was five years before. In results not reported, we repeat the growth accounting using
only those accelerations where growth in the pre-period was greater than 0%, as well as
using other criteria to rule out recoveries. That analysis show very similar results: capital
accumulation plays a negligible role.26

        Third, a central result of our analysis is that capital accumulation plays little role
in growth breaks, especially accelerations. One possible objection to our method may be
that capital investment may influence GDP with a substantial lag. Then investment rates
might rise prior to the growth break, making investment changes at the break itself an
inappropriate gauge of capital’s impact on the transition. However, such lag effects are
unlikely to be important here for several reasons. First, electricity consumption – a flow
measure of capital use – is determined ex-post of any lag effects in installation and does
not change at the up-breaks. Second, unlike up-breaks, down-breaks are associated with
substantial, simultaneous collapses in investment. If lag effects were important, they
would presumably be felt in both cases. Third, the up-break results are similar whether
we look at 5-year periods or the longer regime-averages, yet the regime averages would
be more immune to lag effects if they were important.

        A fourth issue is the capital depreciation rate. The greater the depreciation rate,
the smaller the estimated capital stock, and smaller capital stock estimates will amplify
the effects of investment changes. Therefore, the greater the depreciation rate, the larger
the change in gk around growth breaks. In the analysis in Tables 4A and 4B, we choose
δ=7%, but larger choices, such as 10% – which is very high – do not alter the basic
results. Moreover, the electricity approach to growth accounting in equation (8) is
independent of any assumptions about capital depreciation, and the conclusions from that
method are substantially the same.

26
  This result is again confirmed when looking at growth in electricity consumption. It is robust to many
ways of defining growth accelerations – whether we use Bai and Peron under various specifications, the
best 10-year growth differential discussed above, or other methods such as the growth expansion criteria in
Hausmann et al (2004).


                                                    21
       Finally, a basic assumption in all growth and development accounting exercises is
the shape of the production function, which is typically taken to have constant returns to
scale. Allowing increasing returns to physical and human capital will amplify their role
and thereby reduce the role of TFP, altering the results. In the analysis above, differing
assumptions about the elasticity of output to human capital will have little effect on the
growth accounting, since the changes seen in gh are modest. The changes seen in gk are
likewise modest for growth up-breaks; even with substantial positive spillovers to capital
accumulation, we would have to reach beyond any standard theory or empirical evidence
before the accumulation of physical capital played an important role in growth
accelerations. For down-breaks, the conclusion may be less clear: the collapse in capital
accumulation explains a modest portion of the down-break assuming a capital elasticity
of 1/3 but virtually all of the down-break with an elasticity of 1.



5. Implications

       A common view of development is that many poor countries stagnate and a
minority experience sustained growth. Broadly speaking, this appears to be a good
description of long-run trends in the data, either when looking at growth averages over
the entire postwar period (e.g. Jones 1997) or over even longer horizons (Pritchett 1997).
This stylized fact has led many to suggest that poor countries are in a poverty trap, where
some intrinsic aspect of poverty itself prevents growth. Unlike the standard neo-classical
growth model, poverty trap models all feature some type of non-convexity in the
aggregate production function, which generates multiple stable equilibria (e.g. Murphy et
al. 1989). This type of argument has been used historically to justify large-scale
government investments to escape from the trap (Nurkse 1953, Gerschenkron 1965), is
the rationale for much modern work in development economics, and has recently been
brought again to the fore of macroeconomic policy debates on how to eliminate global
poverty (Sachs, 2005).

       The evidence presented here, however, conflicts with several aspects of this view.
First, just because countries are diverging on average does not mean that a particular
country is ‘stuck’ in a poverty trap without growth. Instead, most countries, including


                                             22
most countries in Sub-Saharan Africa, are capable of experiencing rapid growth. For
example, in Figure 1 the average growth difference between a country’s best 10 years and
worst 10 years is 7 percentage points for the poorest 90% of countries, which implies an
income shift by a factor of two after only a decade. And, as discussed above, 90% of
countries have experienced sustained growth for 10 years or more at a rate that put them
on a path of convergence towards the United States. Only the very richest countries seem
immune from these dramatic swings in growth. The issue is therefore not that poor
countries are unable to grow at a rapid rate, but rather the probability that these growth
episodes begin and the probability that they are sustained. While this point has been
recognized to some extent in parts of the literature (e.g., Quah (1993, 1996), Kremer et al.
(2001), and others), the view that poverty traps prevent countries from growing at all
does not seem borne out in the data.

        Second, most views of poverty traps – even those that think about poverty traps
probabilistically, rather than deterministically – focus on investment as the key
component in the poverty trap. Models differ as to the source of the non-convexity in
aggregate production, but in the typical model the non-convexity creates a steep region in
the function translating capital in period t to capital in period t+1 (see the survey in
Azariadis and Stachurski 2004).27 Emerging from the poverty trap is therefore coincident
with a burst of capital accumulation. The results presented here, by contrast, find little if
any role for investment in major growth accelerations. Policies that focus on increasing
aggregate investment do not appear to be addressing what has, at least historically, been
critical to growth accelerations – increasingly efficient allocation of resources.

        The implications of this result are not limited to models of poverty traps, but also
apply to growth models more generally. In a neoclassical growth model, growth in the
long-run comes from improvements in TFP, while countries far from their steady state
can grow largely through capital accumulation. The literature on decomposing the




27
  Kraay and Radatz (2005) have taken an alternative approach to examining poverty traps by taking this
non-convexity seriously and calibrating such models to fit the data. Their calibrations suggest
unreasonable parameter values, which they see as evidence against the existence of poverty traps.


                                                   23
relative roles of factor accumulation and TFP has focused primarily on the long run28; the
results in this paper suggest that TFP is much more important for growth than capital
accumulation, even in the short and medium run – where factor accumulation could have,
in theory, played a large role.

         To see the potential role for capital accumulation clearly, consider an economy
initially in steady-state with a neoclassical production function and diminishing returns to
capital, where α < 1 is the elasticity of income to capital, g is the growth rate in TFP, and
δ is the depreciation rate. Then the instantaneous effect of an increased investment rate
(s) on per-capita income growth (gy) is:29

                   ∆s 
         ∆g y = α  (g + δ )                                                              (9)
                   s 

while the long run effect of an increased investment rate is zero, since in the long-run
gy = g for any investment rate s. The instantaneous investment effect could therefore
potentially be enormous if the percentage change in the investment rate, ∆s / s, is large.
Therefore, while it is true a priori that capital accumulation cannot influence long-run
growth rates in this standard model, it is conversely quite plausible that capital could play
a leading role in the types of growth accelerations and collapses we examine here. Yet we
find that, even for these dramatic short and medium run changes in growth, capital
accumulation played only a very small role.

         Third, the asymmetries between accelerations and decelerations found in the data
are not found in most models of growth. While models of poverty traps and growth
volatility more broadly can have asymmetric features, few (if any) would predict
accelerations driven almost entirely by changes in TFP and decelerations that feature at
least some role for investment.30 Moreover, the expansion of trade that occurs with


28
   See, for example, Mankiw, Romer, and Weil (1992) and Young (1995) on the importance of factor
accumulation, and Hsieh (2002), Hall and Jones (1999), and Caselli (forthcoming) on the importance of
TFP.
29
   The change in per-capita income growth due to a change in capital growth is simply ∆gY = α∆gK. The
instantaneous change in the rate of capital accumulation is ∆gK = ∆sY/K, which follows directly from the
capital accumulation equation, dK/dt = sY – δK. Finally, in the initial steady state, I = sY and K = I/(g +
δ), so that Y/K = (g + δ)/s. Hence the result in the text.
30
   For example, a typical poverty trap model would feature two stable equilibria. Asymmetries in the
distance between the state of the economy and each of the two stable equilibria can generate asymmetric


                                                     24
accelerations and the monetary instability that occurs with decelerations suggest the need
for a yet richer and more nuanced theory of the growth process, or, alternatively, that
reaching for a unified model that captures both accelerations and decelerations may be a
misleading exercise, as has been argued by Pritchett (2003).

         The weak role for investment in growth accelerations, and the expansion of trade
that occurs alongside these accelerations, point towards theories (and policies) that
emphasize the reallocation of resources. Vested interests, for example, may implement
protectionist policies that limit trade, inhibit factor reallocation, and prevent the adoption
of new technologies (Krusell and Rios-Rull 1996, Acemoglu and Robinson 2000).
Opening to international trade, by allowing for a reallocation of resources according to
comparative advantage, stimulating international knowledge spillovers and learning-by-
doing, and improving within-industry and within-firm productivity through competition,
can improve efficiency without factor accumulation (see, e.g., Tybout 2000). Similarly,
reducing obstacles to internal trade and labor market rigidities, either through changes in
regulation, avoidance of civil conflict, improved arms-length contracting, or other
mechanisms, can improve efficiency. The results here suggest that focusing on these
obstacles to efficient allocation of resources may be more promising than focusing on
increasing aggregate investment.



6. Conclusion

         This paper has presented a number of stylized facts to describe the mechanics of
start-stop growth. We have shown that dramatic changes in growth are common features
of the growth experience for many countries. As a result, long-run views of growth,
including ideas about convergence and poverty traps, may miss an important part of the
picture. Over substantial periods – ten years or more – the typical poor country has
proven capable of both rapid expansions and rapid collapse. If the long-run is the
summation of a few medium-run experiences, than the difference between a country that


transition dynamics and different probabilities of escaping from each of the two steady states. Models that
emphasize volatility along the growth path, such as Acemoglu and Zilibotti (1997) or Aghion et al (2004),
capture possible key reasoning for starts and stops, and yet do not feature the types of asymmetries found in
the data.


                                                     25
converges and one that stagnates (or worse) over the post-war period may be a single
break in the growth process.

        After systematically identifying the dates of growth transitions, we use growth
accounting to decompose the growth changes into changes in their constituent parts. We
find that most of the growth transition is due to changes in TFP, with relatively little role
for changes in capital accumulation (particularly for accelerations) and virtually no role
for changes in utilization of existing factors. The fact that this exercise can be replicated
using electricity data suggests that the phenomenon is unlikely to be driven by problems
in measuring investment. Growth in TFP may therefore be responsible not only for long-
run differences in growth and incomes, as several other papers have argued, but also for
these shorter run changes in growth, where theory suggests a potentially more prominent
role for capital accumulation. We provide several types of evidence – on manufacturing
employment and trade – that suggest changes in sectoral allocations may be an important
mechanism behind these changes in TFP.

        The results also suggest that growth decelerations and accelerations are
asymmetric events. Accelerations show very little increase in investment, and are
associated with substantial increases in trade. Declines in growth are associated with
declines in investment (although these explain only 30% of the growth decline by
themselves), a reallocation of labor away from manufacturing, increasing inflation,
devaluation and, in several cases, a rise in internal conflict.

        The results in this paper suggest two natural next steps. First, as discussed in
Section 5, focusing on ways to improve the efficient use of resources may be a more
promising avenue than focusing on increasing aggregate investment in pursuit of
triggering growth. Second, the ubiquity of growth extremes suggests that the traditional
empirical approach to growth, which seeks to explain the average level of growth, may be
a poor description of the actual growth process. Instead, empirical approaches that seek to
understand the triggers of these long-lasting accelerations and decelerations may be more
promising.




                                              26
References

Acemoglu, Daron and James A. Robinson, “Political Losers As a Barrier to Economic
     Development,” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 90, pp. 126-
     130, May 2000.

Acemoglu Daron and Fabrizio Zilibotti, “Was Prometheus Unbound by Chance? Risk,
     Diversification, and Growth,” Journal of Political Economy 105, pp. 709-751,
     1997.

Aghion, Philippe, Philippe Bachetta and Abhijit Banerjee, “Financial Development and
      the Instability of Open Economies,” NBER Working Paper #10246, 2004.

Aguiar, Mark and Gita Gopinath, “Emerging Market Business Cycles: The Cycle is The
       Trend,” NBER Working Paper #10734, 2004.

Aw, Bee Yan, Sukkyun Chung and Mark J. Roberts, “Productivity and Turnover in the
      Export Market: Micro-level Evidence from the Republic of Korea and Taiwan
      (China),” World Bank Economic Review 14, pp. 65-90, 2000.

Bai, Jushan and Pierre Perron, “Estimating and Testing Linear Models with Multiple
        Structural Changes,” Econometrica 66 (1), pp. 47-78, January 1998.

________, “Computation and Analysis of Multiple Structural Break Models,” Journal of
      Applied Econometrics 18, pp. 1-22, 2003.

________ , “Multiple Structural Changes Models: a Simulation Analysis,” in
      Econometric Essays in Honors of Peter Phillips, D. Corbea, S. Durlauf and B.E.
      Hansen (eds.), Cambridge University Press, forthcoming.

Barro, Robert J., “Notes on Growth Accounting,” Journal of Economic Growth 4 (2), pp.
       119-137, June 1999 (a).

________, “Determinants of Democracy,” Journal of Political Economy 107 (6), pp.
      S158-S183, 1999 (b).

________, “International Data on Educational Attainment: Updates and Implications,”
      NBER Working Paper #7911, September 2000.

Bils, Mark and Peter J. Klenow, “Does Schooling Cause Growth?” American Economic
       Review 90 (5), pp. 1160-1183, 2000.

Ben-David, Dan and David H. Pappel, “Slowdowns and Meltdowns: Postwar Growth
      Evidence from 74 Countries,” Review of Economics and Statistics 80, pp. 561-
      571, 1998.




                                          27
Bernard, Andrew B. and J. Bradford Jensen, “Exporting and Productivity,” NBER
       Working Paper No. 7135, 1999.

Caselli, Francesco, “The Missing Input: Accounting for Cross-Country Income
        Differences,” in Philippe Aghion and Steven Durlauf (eds), Handbook of
        Economic Growth, Elsevier, forthcoming.

Comin, Diego and Mark Gertler, “Medium Term Business Cycles,” mimeo, New York
      University, 2005.

Easterly, William, “Reliving the 50s: the Big Push, Poverty Traps, and Takeoffs in
       Economic Development,” DRI Working Paper No. 15, June 2005.

Easterly, William, Michael Kremer, Lant Pritchett, and Lawrence H. Summers, “Good
       Policy or Good Luck? Country growth performance and temporary shocks,”
       Journal of Monetary Economics 32, pp. 459 – 483, 1993.

Easterly, William, and Ross Levine, “It's Not Factor Accumulation: Stylized Facts and
       Growth Models,” World Bank Economic Review 15 (2), pp. 177-219, 2001.

Fernandes, Ana, “Trade Policy, Trade Volumes and Plant-level Productivity in
      Colombian Manufacturing Industries,” World Bank Working Paper No. 3064,
      2003.

Frankel, Jeffrey and David Romer, “Does Trade Cause Growth?” American Economic
       Review 89 (3), pp. 379-399, 1999.

Gleditsch, Nils P., Peter Wallensteen, Mikael Eriksson, Margareta Sollenberg, and
       Harvard Strand, “Armed Conflict 1946–2001: A New Dataset,” Journal of Peace
       Research, pp. 615–637, 2002.

Gollin, Douglas, “Getting Income Shares Right,” Journal of Political Economy 110, pp.
        458-474, , 2002.

Gollin, Douglas, Stephen Parente, and Richard Rogerson, “The Role of Agriculture in
        Development,” American Economic Review 92, pp. 160-164, , 2002.

Griliches, Zvi, “R&D and the Productivity Slowdown,” American Economic Review 70
       (2), pp. 343-348, 1980.

Hall, Robert E., and Charles I. Jones, “Why Do Some Countries Produce So Much More
       Output per Worker than Others?” Quarterly Journal of Economics 114, pp. 83-
       116, February 1999.

Hausmann, Ricardo, Lant Pritchett, and Dani Rodrik, “Growth Accelerations,” NBER
     Working Paper No. 10566, 2004.



                                           28
Heston, Alan, Robert Summers, and Betina Aten, Penn World Table Version 6.1, Center
       for International Comparisons at the University of Pennsylvania (CICUP),
       October 2002.

Hsieh, Chang-Tai, “What Explains the Industrial Revolution in East Asia? Evidence from
       the Factor Markets,” American Economic Review 92, pp. 502-526, 2002.

Jerzmanowski, Michal, “Empirics of Hills, Plateaus, Mountains, and Plains (A Markov-
      Switching Approach to Growth),” manuscript, Clemson University, 2004.

Jones, Charles I., “On the Evolution of the World Income Distribution,” Journal of
       Economic Perspectives 11, pp. 19-36, 1997.

Kraay, Aart and Claudio Raddatz, “Poverty Traps, Aid, and Growth,” World Bank Policy
       Research Working Paper #3631, June 2005.

Kremer, Michael, Alexei Onatski, and James Stock, “Searching for Prosperity,”
      Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 55, pp. 275-303, 2001.

Krugman, Paul, “The Narrow Moving Band, the Dutch Disease, and the Competitive
     Consequences of Mrs. Thatcher,” Journal of Development Economics 27, pp. 41-
     55, , 1987.

Kuznets, Simon, “International Differences in Income Levels: Reflections on Their
      Causes,” Economic Development and Cultural Change 2 (1), pp. 3-26, , 1953.

Krusell, Per and Jose Victor Rios-Rull, “Vested Interests in a Positive Theory of
       Stagnation and Growth,” Review of Economic Studies 63, pp. 301-331, 1996.

Liu, Jian, Shiyang Wu, and James V. Zidek, “On Segmented Multivariate Regression,”
        Statistica Sinica 7, pp. 497-525, 1997.

Mankiw, N. Gregory, David Romer and David N. Weil, “A Contribution to the Empirics
      of Economic Growth,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 107(2), pp. 407-437,
      1992.

Matsuyama, Kiminori, “Agricultrual Productivity, Comparative Advantage, and
      Economic Growth”, Journal of Economic Theory 58, pp. 317-322, 1992.

Miguel, Edward, Shanker Satyanath and Ernest Sergenti, “Economic Shocks and Civil
      Conflict: An Instrumental Variables Approach,” Journal of Political Economy
      112 (4), pp. 725 – 753, 2004.

Murphy, Kevin M., Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny, “Industrialization and the
      Big Push,” Journal of Political Economy 97 (5), pp. 1003-1026, 1989.



                                           29
Pavcnik, Nina, “Trade Liberalization, Exit, and Productivity Improvements: Evidence
       form Chilean Plants,” Review of Economic Studies 69, 245-76, 2002.

Pritchett, Lant, “Divergence, Big Time,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 11 (3), pp. 3-
        17, Summer 1997.

________, “Understanding Patterns of Economic Growth: Searching for Hills among
      Plateaus, Mountains, and Plains,” World Bank Economic Review 14(2), pp. 221-
      50, 2000.

________, “A Toy Collection, a Socialist Star, and a Democratic Dud? Growth Theory,
      Vietnam, and the Philippines,” in In Search of Prosperity, Dani Rodrik (ed.),
      Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2003.

Psacharopoulos, George, “Returns to investment in education: A global update,” World
       Development 22(9), pp. 1325-1343, 1994.

Quah, Danny T., “Empirical cross-section dynamics in economic growth,” European
      Economic Review 37, 1993, pp. 426-434, 1993.

________, “Twin Peaks: Growth and Convergence in Models of Distribution Dynamics,”
      Economic Journal 106 (127), pp. 1045-1055, 1996.
Rosenstein-Rodan, Paul N., “Problems of Industrialization of Eastern and South-eastern
      Europe,” Economic Journal 53, pp. 202-211, 1943.

Tybout, James R., “Manufacturing Firms in Developing Countries: How Well Do They
      Do, and Why?” Journal of Economic Literature 38, pp. 11-44, 2000.

Wolff, Edward N., “The Productivity Slowdown: The Culprit at Last? Follow up on
       Hulten and Wolff,” American Economic Review 86, pp. 1239-1252, 1996.

Yao, Yi-Ching, “Estimating the Number of Change-Points via Schwartz’ Criteron,”
      Statistics and Probability Letters 6, pp. 181-189, 1998.

Young, Alwyn, “The Tyranny of Numbers: Confronting the Statistical Realities of the
      East Asian Growth Experience,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 110(3), pp.
      641-680, . August 1995.




                                           30
           Table 1: Everybody’s Doing It: Convergence and Divergence over the Medium Term

                                                            Convergence over 10-year Period
                                                      Region                               Income in 1960
                                   Sub Saharan       Latin America                 Poorest     Middle     Richest
                     All             Africa           & Caribbean     Asia          1/3rd       1/3rd      1/3rd
Percentage of
                     90%                76%               93%             100%            92%           79%          97%
Countries


                                                             Divergence over 10-year Period
                                                      Region                                Income in 1960
                                   Sub Saharan       Latin America    Poorest       Poorest     Middle     Richest
                     All             Africa           & Caribbean      1/3rd         1/3rd       1/3rd      1/3rd
Percentage of
                     94%               100%               89%             81%            100%           92%          97%
Countries



Country
                     125                 42                 28              16             37            38           37
Observations

Notes: Convergence is defined by whether country has average growth rate that is higher than US growth over indicated
number of years. Divergence is defined by having lower average growth rate than US. Growth calculations made from the
Penn World Tables v6.1. Countries with less than 20 years of available GDP data are not included in this table. Observation
counts by income trecile do not sum to 125 because 13 countries have growth series that begin after 1960.




                                                            31
                                 Table 2: Structural Breaks in Growth

                          Year of Break by Type                                        Year of Break by Type
Country                        UP       DOWN               Country                        UP         DOWN
Algeria                                    1981            Jamaica                       1976           1972
Austria                                    1974            Japan                         1959     1970, 1991
Bangladesh                    1973                         South Korea                   1962
Belgium                       1958         1974            Luxembourg                    1983
Botswana                      1966                         Mauritius                     1960
Brazil                                     1980            Mexico                        1995           1981
Burkina Faso                  1966                         Mozambique                    1986           1973
Cameroon                      1993         1987            Nicaragua                                    1977
China                         1978                         Papua New Guinea              1991           1994
Congo, Dem. Rep.                           1974            Philippines                   1986     1956, 1981
Cote d'Ivoire                              1979            Poland                        1981           1977
Ecuador                       1971         1977            Portugal                      1966           1973
Egypt                         1975 1970, 1980              Puerto Rico                                  1972
El Salvador             1983, 1991         1978            Romania                                      1985
Equatorial Guinea             1995         1974            Sierra Leone                                 1990
Finland                                    1973            South Africa                                 1981
France                                     1973            Spain                                        1974
Greece                                     1973            Sweden                                       1970
Guatemala               1955, 1987         1980            Switzerland                                  1973
Hungary                                    1979            Thailand                1955, 1986           1995
Indonesia                     1967         1996            Tunisia                       1967           1972
Iran                          1981         1976            Venezuela                                    1970
Ireland                       1994                         Zambia                                       1964
Italy                                      1974            Zimbabwe                                     1976
Notes: Structural breaks are determined using the Bai and Perron (2003) methodology with a size of 10% and a
trimming parameter of 10%. UP breaks are those where the growth rate in the regime after the break is larger than
in the regime before. DOWN breaks are the opposite cases. The break year marks the final year of the prior growth
regime.




                                                      32
                       Table 3: Summary Statistics for Structural Breaks

                                              Structural Breaks by Initial Income
                                            Poorest        Middle           Richest
                               All           1/3rd          1/3rd             1/3rd             Other
Up-Breaks                       30              7             11                10                 2
Down-Breaks                      43              6               15                18               4
Total Breaks                     73             13               26                28               6
% of Growth-Year
                               1.4%            0.8%             1.6%             1.5%             1.9%
Observations

                                                      Structural Breaks by Region
                                Sub
                              Saharan          Latin                          Western
                               Africa         America           Asia          Europe             Other
Up-Breaks                        6              7                9              4                  4
Down-Breaks                      9                8               7              10                 9
Total Breaks                     15              15              16              14                13
% of Growth-Year
                               0.9%             1.3%            2.2%            1.6%              1.5%
Observations

                                                      Structural Breaks by Decade
                             1950s           1960s            1970s         1980s               1990s
Up-Breaks                       4               7                 5              8                 6
Down-Breaks                      1               1              27                9                 5
Total Breaks                     5               8              32               17                11
% of Growth-Year
                               0.8%            0.7%            2.7%             1.4%              0.9%
Observations

Notes: Structural Breaks are determined by the Bai & Perron (2003) methodology, using tests with 10%
size and a 10% trimming parameter, as explained in the text. Up-breaks are those structural breaks where
growth in the regime after the break is greater than growth before, and down-breaks are defined
conversely. The percentage of growth-year observations is the percentage of growth-year observations in
the designated subgroup (e.g. “Latin America”) where a structural break is detected.




                                                     33
                            Table 4A: Growth Accounting around Structural Accelerations

                                          Short-Run (5 Year) Averages         Long-Run (Regime) Averages
                                                                                                                    Number of
                                          Before      After       Change       Before       After       Change
               Growth Rate in                                                                                       Countries
                                           -1.8        5.3             7.2      -1.7         5.2             6.8
               y (GDP per-capita)                                                                                       30
                                           (0.8)      (0.8)           (0.9)     (0.8)       (0.8)           (0.9)

                                            3.3        4.8             1.5       3.5         4.9             1.4
Accumulation




               k (Capital per capita)                                                                                   30
                                           (0.8)      (1.3)           (0.8)     (0.9)       (1.1)           (1.2)
   Factor




               h (Human Capital per         0.8        0.8             0.1       0.7         0.8             0.2
                                                                                                                        17
               capita)                     (0.1)      (0.1)           (0.2)     (0.1)       (0.1)           (0.2)

                                           -0.2        0.0             0.2      -0.2         0.1             0.3
               LFP                                                                                                      29
                                           (0.1)      (0.1)           (0.1)     (0.1)       (0.1)           (0.1)
Utilization
  Factor




                                            3.3        4.1             0.9       3.2         4.8             1.6
               e (Electricity use)                                                                                      17
                                           (1.2)      (1.4)           (1.5)     (1.3)       (0.8)           (1.0)

                                            2.0        2.1             0.1       1.9         1.9             0.0
               Implied k utilization                                                                                    17
                                           (1.2)      (1.1)           (1.3)     (1.2)       (0.5)           (1.2)

                                                      Percent of Growth                    Percent of Growth
               Contribution to Growth
                                                      Change Explained                     Change Explained

                                                              6.9%                                  7.1%
               Capital Accumulation (k)                                                                                 30
                                                              (3.5)                                 (4.5)

                                                              -2.8%                                 -0.8%
               Factor Utilization                                                                                       17
                                                              (10.0)                                 (9.4)


Notes: Growth accelerations are defined using Bai & Perron methodology, as explained in the text. The size of the Bai & Perron
test was set at 10%, and the trimming parameter set to 10%, so that consecutive breaks must be at least 10% of the series length
in distance from each other. Growth, imputed capital stocks, and labor force participation data come from the Penn World
Tables v6.1. The sub-sample of human capital data comes from Barro & Lee (2000). The Barro & Lee data is only available at
five year intervals and for a sub-sample of countries. The “Short-Run (5 Year) Averages” in this case compare 5-yr growth rates
for the periods that stand closest to the break but entirely before and after the break. Electricity consumption data comes from
the World Development Indicators. The contribution of various factors to growth are computed assuming a physical capital
share of 1/3rd. Capital stocks are imputed assuming a depreciation rate of 7%. Standard errors are in parentheses.




                                                           34
                               Table 4B: Growth Accounting around Structural Collapses

                                           Short-Run (5 Year) Averages        Long-Run (Regime) Averages
                                                                                                                   Number of
                                           Before     After       Change       Before       After       Change
               Growth Rate in                                                                                      Countries
                                             5.1      -1.9         -7.0          4.6        -1.4         -6.0
               y (GDP per-capita)                                                                                       43
                                            (0.5)     (0.7)        (0.8)        (0.3)       (0.6)        (0.6)

                                             5.5       1.6         -4.0          5.3         0.7         -4.6
Accumulation




               k (Capital per capita)                                                                                   43
                                            (0.5)     (0.4)        (0.3)        (0.5)       (0.3)        (0.5)
   Factor




               h (Human Capital per          0.7       0.9          0.2          0.6         0.9          0.3
                                                                                                                        35
               capita)                      (0.1)     (0.1)        (0.2)        (0.1)       (0.1)        (0.1)

                                            -0.1       0.2          0.3         -0.3         0.3          0.5
               LFP                                                                                                      39
                                            (0.1)     (0.1)        (0.1)        (0.1)       (0.1)        (0.1)
Utilization
  Factor




                                             7.3       2.5         -4.8          7.6         1.6         -5.9
               e (Electricity use)                                                                                      34
                                            (0.7)     (0.6)        (0.6)        (0.6)       (0.5)        (0.5)

                                             1.4       0.9         -0.5          1.5         0.9         -0.6
               Implied k utilization                                                                                    34
                                            (0.7)     (0.5)        (0.6)        (0.6)       (0.4)        (0.6)

                                                      Percent of Growth                    Percent of Growth
               Contribution to Growth
                                                      Change Explained                     Change Explained

                                                              24.4%a                                32.3%
               Capital Accumulation (k)                                                                                 43
                                                               (3.4)                                 (3.4)

                                                              -1.8%                                 -4.6%
               Factor Utilization                                                                                       32
                                                               (4.1)                                 (3.6)

a
  Only 42 observations.
Notes: Growth accelerations are defined using Bai & Perron methodology, as explained in the text. The size of the Bai & Perron
test was set at 10%, and the trimming parameter set to 10%, so that consecutive breaks must be at least 10% of the series length
in distance from each other. Growth, imputed capital stocks, and labor force participation data come from the Penn World
Tables v6.1. The sub-sample of human capital data comes from Barro & Lee (2000). The Barro & Lee data is only available at
five year intervals and for a sub-sample of countries. The “Short-Run (5 Year) Averages” in this case compare 5-yr growth rates
for the periods that stand closest to the break but entirely before and after the break. Electricity consumption data comes from
the World Development Indicators. The contribution of various factors to growth are computed assuming a physical capital
share of 1/3rd. Capital stocks are imputed assuming a depreciation rate of 7%. Standard errors are in parentheses.




                                                           35
                                                                 Table 5: Asymmetry Tests
                                                 UP-BREAKS                                        DOWN-BREAKS                              Asymmetry
                                  Change Across Break        One-Sample Test          Change Across Break          One-Sample Test       Two-Sample Test
                                   Mean     Standard                                  Mean        Standard
                                                             P-value      Obs                                       P-value      Obs          P-value
                                  Change      Error                                  Change         Error

Growth in                                                                                                                               H0: UP=-DOWN
k (Capital per capita)            .0144         .0120        .2376        30       -.0464***         .0046           .000         43         .007
e (Electricity consumption        .0163         .0097        .1122        17       -.0594***         .0049           .000         34         .000
per capita)

Contribution to Growth
                                                                                                                                         H0: UP=DOWN
Change
Factor Accumulation               7.08%         4.52%        .1280        30      32.28%***          3.39%           .000         43           .000
Factor Accumulation and           7.33%        13.18%        .5859        17      32.14%***          3.81%           .000         32           .001
Utilization

Notes. Results are for regime averages before and after structural growth breaks. Results for immediate 5-year periods before and after breaks are
qualitatively similar.
                                                            Table 6: Trade and Manufacturing
                                                 UP-BREAKS                                      DOWN-BREAKS                            Asymmetry
                                   Change Across Break       One-Sample Test         Change Across Break      One-Sample Test       Two-Sample Test
                                    Mean     Standard                                 Mean      Standard
                                                             P-value      Obs                                  P-value     Obs           P-value
                                   Change      Error                                 Change       Error

Trade Shares (%GDP)                                                                                                                 H0: UP=-DOWN
Exports                            12.2***         3.4         .001       30           2.0         1.9          .283        43           .002
Imports                             12.8**         5.2         .020       30           0.4         3.0          .886        43           .000
Exports + Imports                  25.1***         8.3         .005       30           2.5         4.3          .572        43           .021
Exports - Imports                    -0.6          2.9         .837       30           1.6         2.5          .524        43           .796

Terms of Trade (% change)            6.48         12.2         .599       30          -2.38        6.96         .735        43             .756

Manufacturing (growth in)                                                                                                           H0: UP=-DOWN
Share of Total Population            .036         .024         .151       18         -.048***      .008         .000        32           .564
 To simple manufacturing             .026         .028         .368       18         -.034***      .008         .000        32           .708
 To advanced manufacturing         .051***        .018         .010       18          -.072**      .011         .000        32           .289
Value Added Output                  .083*         .040         .055       17         -.095***      .017         .000        32           .747

Notes. Results are for regime averages before and after structural growth breaks. Results for immediate 5-year periods before and after breaks are
qualitatively similar. Trade shares show more modest increases in the short-run, so that expanding trade shares occur steadily over time. Terms of
trade are normalized to be 100 in the year prior to a break; the data is imputed form the Penn World Tables. Using terms of trade data from the World
Development Indicators produces similar results. Manufacturing data comes from the UNIDO INDSTAT3 database.




                                                                                37
                                                               Table 7: Associated Events
                                           UP-BREAKS                                       DOWN-BREAKS                                Asymmetry
                              Change Across Break One-Sample Test              Change Across Break  One-Sample Test                 Two-Sample Test
                               Mean      Standard                               Mean      Standard
                                                   P-value    Obs                                   P-value     Obs              UP=DOWN    UP=-DOWN
                              Change       Error                               Change       Error
Prices (growth rates)
GDP Deflator                  -0.038         0.044        0.400        23       0.141        0.041***         0.002         39    0.007       0.109
Nominal Exchange Rate         -0.010         0.042        0.814        29       0.146        0.036***         0.000         42    0.007       0.017
Real Exchange Rate             0.013         0.017        0.445        19      -0.001        0.017            0.955         33    0.582       0.633

War (level)
Any Conflict                  -0.108         0.176        0.547        28      0.185         0.118            0.127         40    0.157       0.708
Internal Conflict             -0.072         0.152        0.641        28      0.275         0.114**          0.021         40    0.067       0.279

Institutions (level)
Rule of Law                    0.083         0.054        0.160        10       0.042        0.057            0.492         7     0.620       0.143
Corruption                     0.018         0.054        0.746        10      -0.008        0.047            0.869         7     0.735       0.899

Notes: Results are for regime averages before and after structural growth breaks. Data sources are described in the text.




                                                                              38
                                        Table 8A: Growth Accounting: Growth Accelerations

                                             All Growth Accelerations                     Growth Accelerations > 5%
                                                                              Num                                                Num
                                             Before    After    Change      Countries     Before       After       Change      Countries
               Growth Rate in
                                              0.05     3.44       3.39         124         -2.65       4.69            7.35       24
               y (GDP per-capita)
                                             (0.26)   (0.23)     (0.24)                    (0.5)      (0.55)           (0.4)
                                              2.9      3.48       0.58         124         2.64        3.46            0.82       24
Accumulation




               k (Capital per capita)
                                             (0.42)   (0.41)     (0.37)                    (1.31)     (1.16)       (1.45)
   Factor




               h (Human Capital per           0.8      0.7        -0.1          71          0.9         0.8            -0.1       13
               capita)                        (0.1)    (0.1)      (0.2)                    (0.2)       (0.2)           (0.2)
                                              -0.07    0.2        0.27         116         -0.26       0.22            0.48       22
               LFP
                                             (0.07)   (0.08)     (0.08)                    (0.13)     (0.23)       (0.21)
Utilization




                                              3.5      4.19       0.68          60         1.41        3.45            2.04       12
  Factor




               e (Electricity use)
                                             (0.56)   (0.49)     (0.58)                    (1.28)     (0.83)       (1.61)
                                              1.33     1.87       0.54          60         0.06        1.52            1.46       12
               Implied k utilization
                                              (0.5)   (0.39)     (0.55)                    (1.3)      (0.81)    (1.19)
                                                                                                         Percent of
               Contribution to Growth                                                                 Growth Change
                                                                                                         Explained
               Capital Accumulation                                                                        2.27%                  24
               (k)                                                                                            (5.33)
                                                                                                           12.35%                 12
               Factor Utilization
                                                                                                               (5.8)

Notes: Growth accelerations are defined as the year in each country’s growth history where the average growth rate over the
ensuing ten years minus the average growth rate in the prior ten years is largest. The second set of results considers the subset of the
first where this growth acceleration averages at least 5% per annum. Growth, imputed capital stocks, and labor force participation
data come from the Penn World Tables v6.1. The sub-sample of human capital data comes from Barro & Lee (2000). Electricity
consumption data comes from the World Development Indicators. The contribution of various factors to growth is computed
assuming a physical capital share of 1/3rd. The contributions to growth are calculated only for large accelerations, since the full set
includes cases where growth changes are essentially zero, resulting in outliers that drive the averages. Capital stocks are imputed
assuming a depreciation rate of 7%. Standard errors are in parentheses.
                                     Table 8B: Growth Accounting; Growth Decelerations

                                              All Growth Decelerations                     Growth Decelerations < -5%
                                                                                Num                                              Num
                                             Before     After    Change       Countries    Before      After       Change      Countries
               Growth Rate in
                                              4.02     -0.46         -4.49      124         4.68       -2.45           -7.14      45
               y (GDP per-capita)
                                             (0.19)    (0.25)        (0.22)                (0.36)     (0.42)       (0.27)
                                              5.04      1.35         -3.69      124         5.1        0.16            -4.94      45
Accumulation




               k (Capital per capita)
                                             (0.35)    (0.28)        (0.34)                (0.65)      (0.5)       (0.67)
   Factor




               h (Human Capital per           1.1       0.7           -0.3       85         1.3         0.5            -0.7       26
               capita)                        (0.1)     (0.1)        (0.2)                 (0.4)       (0.2)           (0.4)
                                              -0.05     0.15          0.2       117        -0.28       0.06            0.34       43
               LFP
                                             (0.06)    (0.07)        (0.07)                (0.09)     (0.12)       (0.13)
Utilization




                                              7.37      2.55         -4.82       74         9.37       1.45            -7.92      24
  Factor




               e (Electricity use)
                                             (0.46)    (0.35)        (0.47)                (1.11)     (0.81)       (1.09)
                                              2.35      1.48         -0.88       74         3.97       1.84            -2.13      24
               Implied k utilization
                                             (0.42)    (0.28)        (0.48)                (1.08)     (0.71)    (1.28)
                                                                                                         Percent of
               Contribution to Growth                                                                 Growth Change
                                                                                                         Explained
               Capital Accumulation                                                                        22.8%                  45
               (k)                                                                                             (3.2)
                                                                                                               6.6%               24
               Factor Utilization
                                                                                                               (5.6)

Notes: Growth decelerations are defined as the year in each country’s growth history where the average growth rate over the
ensuing ten years minus the average growth rate in the prior ten years is smallest. The second set of results considers the subset of
the first where this growth deceleration averages less than -5% per annum. Growth, imputed capital stocks, and labor force
participation data come from the Penn World Tables v6.1. The sub-sample of human capital data comes from Barro & Lee (2000).
Electricity consumption data comes from the World Development Indicators. The contribution of various factors to growth is
computed assuming a physical capital share of 1/3rd. The contributions to growth are calculated only for large decelerations, since
the full set includes cases where growth changes are essentially zero, resulting in outliers that drive the averages. Capital stocks are
imputed assuming a depreciation rate of 7%. Standard errors are in parentheses.




                                                                40
                                                                    Figure 1: Amazing Highs, Amazing Lows
                                                       The Best and Worst 10-Year Average Growth Rates Within Countries

                         .1
Average Growth Rate over 10 Years
                         .05




                                                                                                                                      US Best

                                                                                                                                      US Worst
   -.05        0




                                                                                                                 Best 10 Years
                                                                                                                 Worst 10 Years
                         -.1




                                                        0            .2          .4          .6         .8                        1
                                                                       Rank by Per-Capita Income in 1960


                                                                 Figure 2: Growth Spurts are not Pure Recovery
                                                       Income after Best 10-Yr Growth Episode Relative to Prior GDP Peak
% Change in Per-Capita Income Relative to Prior Peak




                                                                     BWA                                                   JPN
                                                                                              SGP
                                           150




                                                                                   TWN                     GAB
                                                                                                           HKG
                                                           COG               THA    KOR
                                                              CHN                                           SYC PRTGRC
                                                                                                                    TTO
                               100




                                                                                                     IRN               IRL
                                                                             ZWE                  BRA          BRB   ESP
                                                                    IDNCPV                 ECU
                                                                                                                    PRI
                                                                                              JOR           MUS             AUT
                                                                                                                           ITA           LUX
                                                                          MRT MAR
                                                                                SYR        MYS                    CHL
                                                                                                PAN
                                                                                                  PRY                          BEL
                                                                                                                              FIN
                                                                                                                                FRA
                                                              LSO
                                                            PAK                     CIV
                                                                                      DOM
                                                                                     CMR                                               DNK
                                                          BDI     IND                      PHL                                    ISLSWE
                      50




                                                       TZA                                                 CYP    MEX             NOR
                                                                 GHA                               COL                   ISR  VEN     CAN
                                                                                                                                   NLD USACHE
                                                                               LKA                           PER
                                                                             TCD
                                                                                                GTM
                                                                                                     DZANIC NAM
                                                                                                       FJI              ZAF
                                                                                                                                    GBRAUS
                                                                                                                                        NZL
                                                                 NPL
                                                                KEN      BGD
                                                                        ROM      EGY     COM
                                                                   RWA            MOZ
                                                        GNB
                                                        MWI                             GUY
                                                                    GMB               HND
                                                          ETH                                PNG                          URY
                                                               BFA
                                                           UGA        MLI BEN                                                ARG
                                                                                               BOL
            0




                                                                              MDG                      GIN
                                                                                         SEN                    SLV
                                                                                                                  GNQ

                                                                                     NER
 -50




                                                       0               .2              .4            .6                      .8                  1
                                                                              Rank by Per-Capita Income in 1960
                                                  Figure 3: Example of Structural Breaks

Log of PPP per-capita income                    China                                                                     Cote d'Ivoire




                                                                             Log of PPP per-capita income
                    8 8.5




                                                                                             7.8      8
  6.5 7 7.5




                                                                               7.4    7.6
                               1950   1960    1970    1980    1990   2000                                   1960   1970       1980        1990   2000
                                                  Year                                                                        Year


                                              Indonesia                                                                   Mozambique
Log of PPP per-capita income




                                                                             Log of PPP per-capita income
                         8.5




                                                                              6.6 6.8 7 7.2 7.4 7.6
 6.5    7   7.5    8




                               1960    1970      1980        1990    2000                                   1960   1970       1980        1990   2000
                                                 Year                                                                         Year




                                                                        42
