                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     HOW DO HOUSE PRICES AFFECT CONSUMPTION?
                            EVIDENCE FROM MICRO DATA

                                           John Y. Campbell
                                             João F. Cocco

                                         Working Paper 11534
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w11534


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 2005




We would like to thank David Laibson and seminar participants at Harvard, the London School of
Economics, and the 2004 SED meetings for comments. We are particularly grateful to an anonymous referee
for detailed and constructive comments. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by John Y. Campbell and João F. Cocco. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
How Do House Prices Affect Consumption? Evidence From Micro Data
John Y. Campbell and João F. Cocco
NBER Working Paper No. 11534
August 2005
JEL No. D1, G1

                                            ABSTRACT




Housing is a major component of wealth. Since house prices fluctuate considerably over time, it is

important to understand how these fluctuations affect households' consumption decisions. Rising

house prices may stimulate consumption by increasing households' perceived wealth, or by relaxing

borrowing constraints. This paper investigates the response of household consumption to house

prices using UK micro data. We estimate the largest effect of house prices on consumption for older

homeowners, and the smallest effect, insignificantly different from zero, for younger renters. This

finding is consistent with heterogeneity in the wealth effect across these groups. In addition, we find

that regional house prices affect regional consumption growth. Predictable changes in house prices

are correlated with predictable changes in consumption, particularly for households that are more

likely to be borrowing constrained, but this effect is driven by national rather than regional house

prices and is important for renters as well as homeowners, suggesting that UK house prices are

correlated with aggregate financial market conditions.



John Y. Campbell                                       Joao F. Cocco
Department of Economic                                 London Business School
Littauer Center 213                                    Regent’s Park
Harvard University                                     London NW1 4SA
Cambridge, MA 02138                                    UNITED KINGDOM
and NBER                                               jcocco@london.edu
john_campbell@harvard.edu
1    Introduction

Housing is the dominant component of wealth for the typical household in the United
States or the United Kingdom. Bertaut and Starr-McCluer (2002) show that residen-
tial property accounted for about one quarter of aggregate household wealth in the US
in the late 1990’s, while Banks and Tanner (2002) report that real estate accounted
for 35% of aggregate household wealth in the UK in the mid 1990’s. Housing wealth
is particularly important for middle-class households: Tracy and Schneider (2001),
for example, show that it accounts for almost two-thirds of the wealth of the median
US household. The share of housing is likely to be even higher today after several
years of strong house price growth.

    Houses are risky assets with volatile prices. Much of this volatility is local, but
there is a common component to house prices that is visible in regional and even
national house price indexes. National house price volatility is particularly striking
in the UK, a geographically compact country with a nationally integrated housing
market. Figure 1 shows the evolution of house prices in the United Kingdom between
1988 and 2000, a period in which annual changes in nominal house prices ranged from
-10% to 30%.

    The magnitude and volatility of housing wealth have led many to suggest that
house price changes have significant eﬀects on aggregate consumption. Muellbauer
and Murphy (1990), for example, argued that house price increases and financial
liberalization stimulated a consumption boom in the UK in the late 1980’s. More
recently Case, Quigley, and Shiller (2003) find a strong correlation between aggregate
house prices and aggregate consumption in a panel of developed countries from the
late 1970’s through the late 1990’s. (See also Benjamin, Chinloy, and Jud 2004 and
Bhatia 1987.)

     It is tempting to attribute the correlation between house prices and consumption
to a direct housing wealth eﬀect: Increasing house prices increase housing wealth,
which in turn increases consumption. There are, however, several reasons not to
make this attribution without further analysis. First, the theoretical rationale for
a large housing wealth eﬀect is unclear. If we define financial wealth as the sum of
liquid financial assets and the value of real estate minus debt outstanding, it is clear
that an increase in house prices leads to an increase in homeowners’ financial wealth.
But this does not necessarily mean that their real wealth is also higher. Housing is a
consumption good, and for a homeowner who expects to live in his current house for a

                                           1
very long time, a higher house price is simply compensation for a higher implicit rental
cost of living in the house. In other words, as Sinai and Souleles (2005) point out,
homeowners with a long expected tenure are perfectly hedged against fluctuations in
rents and the corresponding fluctuations in house prices. These fluctuations, however
large they may be, have no real wealth eﬀect, and absent any substitution eﬀects,
should not aﬀect consumption choices.

    Second, there are alternative explanations for the correlation between house prices
and consumption. House prices may aﬀect consumption by relaxing or tightening
borrowing constraints. Housing is an asset that can be used as collateral in a loan.
For borrowing constrained homeowners, an increase in house prices relaxes borrowing
constraints, even if there is no wealth eﬀect associated with the house price increase.
In other words, an increase in house prices may lead to an increase in consumption not
because of a wealth eﬀect, but because it allows borrowing constrained homeowners
to smooth consumption over the life cycle (Ortalo-Magné and Rady 2001, Lustig and
van Nieuwerburg 2004).

   It is also possible that the correlation between house prices and consumption may
be driven by an unobserved macroeconomic factor. For example house prices may
respond to future income prospects, to which current consumption also responds pro-
vided that households are not borrowing constrained. In other words, when house-
holds become optimistic about the economy as a whole, the price of housing increases
along with consumption (King 1990). Alternatively, financial liberalization may drive
up house prices and stimulate consumption by relaxing borrowing constraints on all
consumers (Attanasio and Weber 1994, Muellbauer and Murphy 1997).

   The objective of this paper is to use household level data to distinguish among
these alternative explanations for the house price-consumption correlation. Micro
data can be helpful in several ways. First, micro data allow us to identify those
households for which the direct wealth eﬀect of house prices is particularly large or
small. Most young households plan to increase house size later in life, say because of
an expected increase in family size, and for this reason can be thought of as “short”
in housing. On the other hand, many old households plan to move to a smaller
house later in life, so they are “long” in housing. Without instruments that allow
households to insure these short and long positions, there is a redistributive wealth
eﬀect of unexpected shocks to house prices. We expect to see older homeowning
households increasing their consumption when house prices rise, while younger renting
households should cut their consumption.


                                           2
   Second, micro data allow us to distinguish the eﬀects of local and national move-
ments in house prices. National income prospects and financial liberalization operate
through national house prices, while regional income prospects, direct wealth eﬀects,
and collateral eﬀects operate through local house prices.

    In our analysis of household level data, we also distinguish between predictable
and unpredictable movements in house prices and consumption. This approach,
which we borrow from the literature testing the permanent income hypothesis (Hall
1978, Hall and Mishkin 1982, Flavin 1981, Campbell and Mankiw 1989, 1991, Zeldes
1989a, Runkle 1991), enables us to distinguish wealth eﬀects from other eﬀects such
as collateral eﬀects, precautionary savings, or myopic behavior.

    We use household level data from the UK Family Expenditure Survey (FES) to
estimate the response of consumption to house prices. The FES is a continuous survey
of households, in which each household is interviewed only once. Therefore we employ
the methodology introduced in Browning, Deaton, and Irish (1985) and Deaton (1985)
to construct panel data from a time-series of cross-sections, or a pseudo-panel. The
use of household level data are important because we can estimate the response of
consumption to house prices in the region where the household lives, and control
for changes in household income, the degree of household leverage, and household
demographics. We make use of the fact that households are heterogeneous along
several dimensions, including age, homeownership status, and region of residence,
to at least partially distinguish between aggregate, regional, and household specific
eﬀects of house prices on household consumption.

    The use of pseudo-panel data limits our analysis in certain ways. With such data
we are not able to precisely identify those households for whom the wealth eﬀect of
house price changes is largest, or for whom borrowing constraints are relaxed when
house prices increase. We can only uncover how likely a person in a given cohort is
to experience a wealth eﬀect due to house price changes, or how likely is it that a
person in a given cohort is borrowing constrained. In addition, pseudo-panel data is
likely to include substantial measurement error.

    With these limitations in mind, we find considerable heterogeneity in the response
of household consumption to house prices. More precisely, we estimate a large pos-
itive eﬀect of house prices on consumption for the cohort of old households who are
homeowners, and an eﬀect that is close to zero for the cohort of young households
who are renters. These are the cohorts of households who are most likely to be long
and short in housing, respectively. The estimated house price elasticity of consump-

                                          3
tion is as large as 1.7 for the old homeowners group, controlling for interest rates,
household income, and other demographic variables. This age heterogeneity is im-
portant since it suggests that as the population ages and becomes more concentrated
in the old homeowners group, aggregate consumption may become more responsive
to house prices. Previous estimates of the elasticity of consumption to house prices
using aggregate data miss this source of time variation since they do not take into
account the slowly changing age structure of the population. However, one should
bear in mind that changing demographics may have general equilibrium eﬀects on the
stochastic processes for production factors and house prices, and the decision rules of
households.

    Controlling for economy-wide house prices and for regional income, we find that
regional house prices have important eﬀects on household consumption. In fact, the
estimated elasticity of consumption with respect to regional house prices is larger than
the estimated elasticity with respect to UK house prices when we include both in the
regression together with regional income. This shows that it is important to consider
regional heterogeneity when estimating the eﬀects of house prices on consumption.

   Finally, we find that consumption responds to predictable changes in house prices,
an eﬀect which is consistent with an increase in house prices relaxing borrowing
constraints, but that may also be explained by a precautionary savings motive or by
myopic household behavior. The eﬀect appears to be weaker among homeowners
with positive home equity, who have unused borrowing capacity. However, since
predictable changes in aggregate and not regional house prices matter, and since the
consumption of renters also responds to predictable house price changes, we conclude
that house prices are related to borrowing constraints or precautionary savings at the
aggregate rather than the household or regional level.

    In our analysis we define cohorts by variables that households themselves choose,
namely location and homeownership. In order to control for the endogeneity of cohort
membership, one should estimate a selection equation jointly with the consumption
Euler equation on the household level. Unfortunately due to the repeated cross-
section nature of the data, this is not feasible. We therefore address endogeneity in
several other ways. First, we use the British Household Panel Survey to calculate
measures of mobility across cohorts for diﬀerent age groups. This analysis tells us that
first-time home purchases are the most common form of cohort transition. Second, we
use the length of time that a household has resided at its present address to implement
alternative cohort definitions for young homeowners. Third, we calibrate a life-cycle


                                           4
model of consumption and housing choices. We use the model to generate simulated
data in which we can assess the potential bias introduced by our endogenous cohort
definitions..

    We also use this model to help us interpret our empirical results. Most impor-
tantly, in the FES data the estimated consumption response of young renters to house
price changes is essentially zero, and not negative as one would expect from a wealth
eﬀect. Interestingly, the response is similar in the simulated data. We show that
this arises from a substitution eﬀect which counteracts the wealth eﬀect: as house
prices increase households tend to substitute non-durable consumption for housing
consumption. This eﬀect is largest in magnitude for young renters.

    There is a small recent literature that uses microeconomic data to study housing.
Much of this literature asks how housing aﬀects savings and asset allocation. En-
gelhardt (1996), Flavin and Yamashita (2002), Goetzmann (1993), Sheiner (1995),
and Skinner (1994) present empirical results, while Cocco (2005) and Yao and Zhang
(2005) develop life-cycle models. Attanasio and Weber (1994), in the paper that is
closest to ours, use FES micro data to investigate whether financial liberalization in
the 1980s was responsible for the UK consumption boom at the end of that decade.
Attanasio and Weber study the consumption patterns of diﬀerent groups that are
likely to be diﬀerently aﬀected by financial liberalization, including homeowners and
renters, and households living in diﬀerent regions. However, they do not estimate
consumption elasticities with respect to house prices for these groups. This and our
model of consumption and housing choices are the main contributions of our paper.

    The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the data, and presents
some summary statistics. This section also describes the diﬀerent ways in which we
construct pseudo-panels from repeated cross sections. Section 3 presents estimation
results for our baseline regression, which consists of regressing changes in cohort
consumption on changes in house prices, controlling for changes in cohort income,
leverage, and demographic variables. In section 4 we set up and solve a life-cycle
model of the consumption and housing choices of households. We use this model
to help us interpret our empirical results. In section 5 we distinguish predictable
and unpredictable movements in house prices and consumption, thereby partially
disentangling wealth eﬀects from other eﬀects of house prices that work through
borrowing constraints, precautionary saving, or myopic behavior. Section 6 concludes.
The appendix provides additional robustness checks.



                                          5
2       The Data

2.1     The Family Expenditure Survey

We obtain household-level data from the UK Family Expenditure Survey (FES) over
the period 1988 to 2000. The FES is a continuous survey of households. Each
household is interviewed only once. Each quarter there are about 1,750 households
interviewed, so that over the thirteen years that constitute our sample there are
approximately 91,000 observations. During a two week period the adult members of
each household keep a diary of their consumption expenditures. In addition the survey
contains a variety of other information, including the region where the household lives,
income, demographics such as age and household composition, homeownerhsip status,
and mortgage information.

    We define total non-durable consumption as the sum of the two week reported
expenditure on fuel, travel (excluding the purchase of any vehicles), food, alcohol,
tobacco, clothing, household services, leisure goods and services, and other expendi-
ture. For each of these goods we also have monthly price indices which we use to
construct a household specific Stone price index, using the household-budget shares
as weights. We use this household-specific price index to obtain real non-durable
consumption and income. These measures are similar to those constructed in empir-
ical consumption studies, which will make it easier to compare our results to those
previously obtained.

    Most of the existing empirical tests of consumption theories focus on non-durable
consumption.3 Durable goods are long-lived and provide households with a flow
of consumption services for several time periods. The FES and other comparable
datasets contain information on durable goods expenditure, but not on durable goods
consumption. This raises the additional diﬃculty of how to translate a given durables
expenditure into a flow of consumption services. Because of these diﬃculties, and as
in most of the consumption literature, we focus our analysis on non-durable consump-
tion.
    3
    Important exceptions are Mankiw (1982) and Heaton (1993). See also Piazzesi, Schneider and
Tuzel (2003) and Yogo (2003) for recent papers testing non-separabilities between non-durable con-
sumption and housing and durable consumption, respectively. Fernandez-Villaverde and Krueger
(2005) characterize the evolution of durable expenditures over the life-cycle.




                                                6
2.2    Life-cycle patterns

In the FES each household is observed only once, so we use the methodology intro-
duced by Browning, Deaton, and Irish (1985) and Deaton (1985) to construct panel
data from a time-series of cross-sections, or a pseudo-panel. In this section we define
cohorts based on the year of birth of the household head. Each cohort consists of
households whose head was born within one five-year period: The oldest cohort is
for individuals born between 1935 and 1939, and the youngest for individuals born
between 1965 and 1969.

    To obtain some insights about the evolution of the variables over the life-cycle
we first regress log consumption and log income on 91 year-cohort dummies, which
correspond to seven cohorts and thirteen years of data, and three quarter dummies
that capture seasonal eﬀects. Each of the estimated coeﬃcients on the year-cohort
dummies capture mean cohort-year log consumption or income. Figure 2 plots the
evolution of annualized non durable consumption and income over the life cycle. Each
line corresponds to a diﬀerent cohort. The age profiles are hump-shaped over the life-
cycle, and similar to those obtained by Attanasio and Browning (1995), Carroll (1997),
and Gourinchas and Parker (2002), among others. It is important to note that Figure
2 does not control for changes in family composition or other demographic variables.

    In Figure 3 we again plot annual consumption and income, but with the sample
restricted to homeowners. As expected, the labor income of homeowners is on average
higher. Comparing the consumption profiles in Figures 2 and 3, we can see that,
for each cohort, the consumption growth of homeowners is higher than that of the
population as a whole. Obviously, one needs to be careful in interpreting this finding.
Homeownership is endogenous, and correlated with income growth and demographic
variables that may aﬀect the growth rate of consumption.

    To illustrate homeownership patterns over the life-cycle Figure 4 plots, for the
diﬀerent cohorts, the proportion of renters, homeowners with a mortgage, and home-
owners outright. The proportion of renters is highest early in life, but declines steadily
over life to reach roughly twenty percent from age forty-five onwards. Early in life and
in mid-life the vast majority of homeowners have a mortgage outstanding. Because
of this one may expect that mortgage payments, and more generally the leverage of
the household, aﬀect consumption patterns.

   In the UK the vast majority of mortgages are adjustable-rate. Fixed-rate mort-


                                            7
gages have become somewhat more common in the last few years, but these are not
comparable to fixed-rate mortgages in the US as they have a fixed rate only for a
couple of years and then revert to an adjustable rate. Figure 5 plots the life-cycle
pattern of real mortgage payments for the sample of mortgage borrowers. Mortgage
payments are highest early in life, and decline over the life-cycle. The decline would
be even larger if we used the full sample of homeowners, as a result of the increase in
the proportion of owners outright shown in Figure 4.

    Real payments on adjustable-rate mortgages are highly sensitive to movements
in inflation and nominal interest rates. An increase in expected inflation drives up
nominal interest rates and required nominal payments, but in the short run the price
level does not increase proportionally so real mortgage payments increase (Campbell
and Cocco, 2003). This eﬀect can be seen in Figure 5, where for each cohort there
is a similar pattern in real mortgage payments over time, with high real mortgage
payments in the early years of the survey, and low in the later years. This reflects
the high nominal interest rates in the years 1989 to 1992 (illustrated in Figure 1).

    To explore this issue further we have also computed, for each cohort, the correla-
tion between real mortgage payments and the nominal interest rate: these correlations
are large and positive, with an average value of 0.81 and a range from 0.71 to 0.89.
Real mortgage payments are more strongly correlated with the nominal interest rate
than with the real interest rate (an average correlation of only 0.67). This reflects
the fact that high nominal interest rates accelerate the required real payments on
adjustable-rate mortgages (Campbell and Cocco, 2003).


2.3    Regional and homeownership cohorts

In the previous section we grouped households only by their year of birth. We now
exploit other information in the dataset by defining cohorts in two alternative ways.
In the first, we define nine cohorts based on the year of birth of the household head
and the region where the household lives. We consider three ranges for the year of
birth and three UK regions: North, Center and South.4 These regions were defined
based on the correlation between house prices among them. We would like to be able
  4
   The North includes households living in Scotland, North West, North East, Yorkshire and
Humberside. Center: East Midlands, West Midlands, Wales, Eastern Anglia. South: South East,
South West, London.



                                            8
to consider finer ranges for year of birth and region in our cohort definitions, but that
would lead to a decrease in cell size and to an increase in measurement error.

    Panel A of Table 1 shows the nine regional cohorts that we consider, together with
the age of the head of the household in 1988 and 2000. We exclude elderly households
since their consumption patterns are likely to be heavily influenced by health consid-
erations which aﬀect their subjective discount rate. The table also reports, for each
cohort, the minimum, maximum, and mean quarterly cell size. The fact that we have
regional consumption and house price data will allow us to investigate whether re-
gional house prices explain regional consumption patterns, beyond what is explained
by UK wide house prices.5

    We construct a second set of cohorts based on the year of birth of the house-
hold head and homeownership status. More precisely, we consider six ranges for the
year of birth, and whether the household is a renter or homeowner. Being able to
distinguish between homeowners and renters is important for understanding the link
between house prices and consumption for several reasons. First, renters are short in
housing and therefore the wealth eﬀect associated with a house price increase should
be negative. Second an increase in house prices does not directly lead to a relaxation
of the borrowing constraints renters face. Thus, unless the house price increase is
due to improved future aggregate economic conditions, which also benefit renters, an
increase in house prices should have a negative eﬀect on the consumption of renters.

    Panel B of Table 1 reports for each cohort of homeowners and renters the mini-
mum, maximum and mean cell size. Mean cell size is relatively small for old renters.
Due to cell size considerations, when we construct cohorts based on homeownership
status we cannot split cohorts further based on the region where the household lives.
This means that we lose explanatory power from regional diﬀerences, unless diﬀerent
cohorts of homeowners and renters tend to live in diﬀerent regions. Another impor-
tant issue that one needs to keep in mind when interpreting the regression results for
these cohorts is that homeowners and renters diﬀer along several important dimen-
sions. Homeowners are on average older than renters (median age of 40 as compared
with 36 for renters), have larger families (mean family size of 3 as compared with 2.8
for renters), 104% greater income, and 33% greater consumption than renters.

       Table 2 reports some summary statistics for our cohort mean data, including con-
   5
    Lustig and Van Nieuwerburgh (2004) use US regional data to test the extent to which borrowing
against housing allows for consumption risk sharing across regions.


                                               9
sumption, income, and family size. The cohort mean is defined as the average of
the logs. Panel A reports the data for the regional cohorts, whereas Panel B reports
the data for the cohorts of homeowners and renters. The sample selection issue that
arises from our split of the sample between homeowners and renters can clearly be
seen in Panel B, in the quarterly diﬀerences in income and consumption. As they
age, those households that remain renters are those with lower income and consump-
tion. In section 4 we explore several alternative ways to handle this endogeneity of
homeownership.


2.4     House price data

We obtain house price data from Nationwide, a leading UK building society. Nation-
wide house prices are mix adjusted, i.e. they track a representative house price over
time, rather than the simple average price. This avoids the house price index being
influenced by a change in the mix of houses (proportion of diﬀerent property types,
locations, etc). Nationwide obtains the house price information from their lending
data for properties at the post survey approval stage. Importantly, this introduces
some lag in the house price data, since the transaction price will probably have been
agreed between buyer and seller a few weeks before this date.6

   We match the quarterly regional house price indices from Nationwide to each
household in the FES. In this way we are able to obtain, for each household, a region
specific measure of house prices, which should allow us to obtain a better estimate of
the eﬀect of house prices on consumption, than simply using a UK wide house price
index.

   Table 3 reports the coeﬃcients of correlation between quarterly (and annual)
house price changes in the three regions we define. As expected the correlations are
higher between regions that are closer geographically (North and Center, and Center
and South), and are somewhat higher for annual than quarterly house price changes.
Figure 6 plots the evolution over time of house prices in these three regions.

    In addition to this information, we obtain quarterly series for nominal interest
rates, namely the Bank of England rate, and the retail price index. We show the
   6
    More information on the methodology used by Nationwide to construct the house price series is
available at http://www.nationwide.co.uk/hpi/methodology.htm. The house price data are available
at http://www.nationwide.co.uk/hpi/historical.htm.


                                               10
history of nominal interest rates and inflation together with house price returns in
Figure 1.



3      House Price Changes and Consumption

3.1      Baseline regression

We first present our baseline regression, which consists of regressing changes in con-
sumption on changes in house prices, controlling for household income, leverage, and
other demographic variables. We estimate this regression using a pseudo-panel con-
structed in several diﬀerent ways, that explore the micro nature of the data, and
allows us to partially disentangle between the diﬀerent channels through which house
prices may aﬀect consumption. More precisely, we estimate:



    ∆ci,t+1 = β 0 + β 1 rt+1 + β 2 ∆yi,t+1 + β 3 ∆pi,t+1 + β 4 ∆mi,t+1 + β 5 Zi,t+1 +   i,t+1   (1)


where the subscript i denotes cohort, rt+1 is the log real interest rate between periods
t and t + 1, ∆ci,t+1 = ln(Ci,t+1 ) − ln(Cit ) is real non-durable consumption growth,
∆yi,t+1 = ln(Yi,t+1 ) − ln(Yit ) is real income growth, ∆pi,t+1 = ln(Pi,t+1 ) − ln(Pit ) is
real house price growth, ∆mi,t+1 = ln(Mi,t+1 )−ln(Mit ) is the growth of real mortgage
payments, and Zi,t+1 is a vector of cohort characteristics which includes demographic
variables.


3.2      Results for regional cohorts

Table 4 shows the estimation results for the baseline regression (1), for several diﬀer-
ent specifications. The standard errors reported in parentheses below the estimated
coeﬃcients are corrected for both first-order serial correlation and heteroscedasticity.
In all specifications we include quarter and cohort dummies (the estimated coeﬃ-
cients are not reported), and we control for demographics by including a second order
polynomial of age and changes in the logarithm of family size.


                                               11
    In specifications (i) and (ii) we include as independent variables changes in log
household income and house prices in the region where the household lives, respec-
tively, whereas in specification (iii) we include these two variables simultaneously.
The estimated coeﬃcients are positive and statistically significant, so that consump-
tion growth is positively correlated with income growth and house price changes.
The estimated coeﬃcients on house prices and income decrease in magnitude when
we include these two variables simultaneously in the regression, which suggests some
degree of collinearity between regional house prices and income. Nevertheless, both
are significant in statistical and economic terms in specification (iii).

    The estimated coeﬃcient on house prices in this specification is 1.22. Thus, a one
percent increase in the value of the house is associated with a 1.22 percent increase
in real non-durable consumption. To understand what such a value means in British
pounds, let us consider the value of a representative house in the UK in the last
quarter of 2000, which was £81,628. In the same year the average consumption from
the FES data was £200 per two-week period or £5200 per year. Thus, an increase
in the value of the house by one percent or £816 would lead to an increase in annual
consumption of £63, equivalent to 8% of the house price increase.

    In specification (iv) we also include as independent variables the change in the
proportion of homeowners, both with a mortgage and outright. The estimated neg-
ative coeﬃcients show that increases in the proportion of homeowners are associated
with slower non-durable consumption growth. However, neither of the estimated
coeﬃcients is significantly diﬀerent from zero.

    The regional cohorts definition allows us to investigate whether regional house
prices explain regional consumption, beyond what is explained by UK wide house
prices. We switch from regional to national house prices in specification (v), and
add both national house prices and the diﬀerence between regional and national house
prices in specification (vi). The diﬀerence between regional and national house prices
is statistically significant, confirming the existence of a regional link between house
prices and consumption.

     Given the prevalence of adjustable-rate mortgages in the UK, changes in mortgage
payments may be an important influence on consumption and may be correlated
with house prices. To explore this eﬀect specification (vii) includes changes in real
mortgage payments as an additional explanatory variable. The estimated coeﬃcient
is not significantly diﬀerent from zero and the inclusion of mortgage payments has
little eﬀect on the house price coeﬃcients. We have also tested whether a given

                                          12
percentage house price increase has a bigger proportional eﬀect on consumption if
households are highly leveraged, by interacting house price growth with the level
of the mortgage-income ratio. When we include this variable in the regression the
estimated coeﬃcient is positive but not significantly diﬀerent from zero. To save
space we do not report this specification in the table.

    The apparent eﬀect of regional house prices on consumption could result from
changes in regional economic conditions that move both house prices and consump-
tion. In order to investigate this possibility we follow Gourinchas and Parker (2002)
and use the unemployment rate to capture the state of the business cycle. Regional
unemployment data are available in the UK only from the second quarter of 1992,
but the regional claimants count rate is highly correlated with regional unemployment
and is available from 1965; therefore we use the latter data series to proxy for regional
business cycle conditions.7 Column (viii) of Table 4 shows regression results when we
include the change in the regional claimant count rate as an additional independent
variable. The estimated coeﬃcient on this new variable is negative, as we would
expect, but not significant, while the estimated coeﬃcient on house price changes
changes only slightly. These results suggest that house prices have an independent
eﬀect on consumption and are not merely proxying for the regional business cycle.

    Due to the cohort nature of the data the estimation results shown in columns
(i) through (viii) of Table 4 are subject to potential problems of measurement error
and endogeneity in the regressors. This problem is likely to be more serious for
income than for house prices, since the latter are measured using house price indices
from Nationwide rather than cohort averages. In order to address this issue, in the
last two columns of Table 4 we estimate instrumental variable regressions, where we
instrument income and house price changes using changes in the regional claimants
count rate, house price changes, and the second lag of changes in income.

    Comparing the results in columns (iii) and (ix), we see that when we instrument
income, the estimated coeﬃcient on income changes is slightly increased, and the
estimated coeﬃcient on house prices decreases by roughly a half but is still positive
and significantly diﬀerent from zero. In column (x) we include as independent vari-
ables the change in UK wide house prices, and the diﬀerence between the change in
regional house prices and the change in UK wide house prices. We include both of
these variables in our set of instruments. Comparing columns (vi) and (x) we see that
   7
   The correlation of the regional claimants count rate with regional unemployment over the period
where both series are available is 0.99 in the North and South, and 0.98 in the Center.


                                               13
as before the estimated coeﬃcients on house price changes decrease, but the eﬀect
of UK house prices on consumption is still positive and significant. The estimated
coeﬃcient on the diﬀerence between regional and UK wide house price changes is now
insignificant, with a p-value of 18%.


3.3    Results for homeownership cohorts

Table 5 estimates the baseline regression for cohorts of homeowners and renters. As
before we find that house price changes are positively correlated with consumption
growth, and that this correlation decreases when we control for labor income growth.
The sensitivity of consumption to house prices may depend on age and homeownership
status. To explore these eﬀects, in specification (iv) we interact house price changes
with dummy variables for young homeowners, young renters, and old renters.8 In
this specification the estimated coeﬃcient on ∆pt measures the eﬀects of house price
changes on the consumption of old homeowners, and the estimated coeﬃcients on the
interaction variables measure the additional eﬀects of house prices for the particular
groups defined by the dummy variables.

    We find significant heterogeneity in the consumption eﬀects of house prices across
the diﬀerent groups. The estimated coeﬃcient on house prices is highest for old home-
owners, and is almost three times the coeﬃcient we estimated in specification (iii)
where we did not interact house price changes with age and homeownership status.
The eﬀects of house prices on consumption are lower for young homeowners and for
renters than for old homeowners, since we estimate negative coeﬃcients for house
price changes interacted with dummy variables for these groups. In fact, the magni-
tude of the estimated coeﬃcients tells us that the eﬀects of house price changes on
consumption are lowest for young renters, followed by old renters and young home-
owners. All these estimated coeﬃcients are statistically diﬀerent from one another
at the 1% significance level, except that the estimated coeﬃcients for young home-
owners and old renters are insignificantly diﬀerent from one another. The eﬀect of
house prices on consumption is not statistically diﬀerent from zero for young renters,
but it is significantly positive for all other groups of individuals. The fact that the
estimated coeﬃcient on house prices for old renters is positive suggests that house
prices may, to some extent, proxy for aggregate economic conditions.
  8
    We set the boundary between youth and old age at 40. To soothe the feelings of the senior
author, we experimented with a boundary of 45 and obtained similar results.


                                             14
    In specifications (v) and (vi) we include changes in real mortgage payments as
an additional explanatory variable. In specification (v) we include it on its own,
and in specification (vi) we include it on its own and also interacted with a dummy
variable for young homeowners. Obviously, for renters these variables are equal to
zero. Interestingly, we find that increases in real mortgage payments are negatively
correlated with consumption growth (specification v), and that this negative eﬀect
is due to the changes in real mortgage payments of young and not old homeowners
(specification vi). Since in the UK the vast majority of mortgages are adjustable-rate,
and mortgage payment changes have no wealth eﬀects for these mortgages (Campbell
and Cocco 2003), the likely explanation for the negative estimated coeﬃcient is the
presence of borrowing constraints.9

    In order to address the issue of measurement error in income, the last column of
Table 5 reports the estimation results for an instrumental variables regression. We
instrument changes in income and in house prices, also interacted with the dummy
variables for age and homeownership status, with changes in unemployment, changes
in house prices, also interacted with the dummy variables, and changes in the second
lag of income. Comparing the estimation results in column (vii) to those in column
(iv) we see that the estimated coeﬃcients on house price changes decrease somewhat,
but they remain statistically significant. It is still the case that the eﬀects of house
price changes on consumption are largest and positive for old homeowners, and are
smallest and close to zero for young renters.

    The small eﬀect of house prices on the consumption of young renters is puzzling
since a wealth eﬀect should lead these households to cut consumption when house
prices increase. In the next section we use a calibrated life-cycle model of consumption
and housing choices to help us understand this finding.
   9
     To further investigate this issue we have looked at the eﬀect of inflation on consumption. In-
flation aﬀects the payments required on adjustable-rate mortgages, and avoids the problem that
mortgage payments vary if households take out bigger mortgages. However, when we include infla-
tion as an additional independent variable its estimated coeﬃcient is not significantly diﬀerent from
zero. To save space we do not report this result in the table.




                                                 15
4    Selection Bias and a Simulated Housing Model

We have divided the sample between homeowners and renters and have treated home-
ownership status as an exogenous variable. This is problematic, because the decision
to become a homeowner is endogenous, and correlated with individual characteris-
tics such as income and consumption. Over the life-cycle, individuals who remain as
renters typically have stagnating or declining incomes, while individuals with rising
incomes tend to become homeowners. It follows that over time for a fixed birth year,
the cohort of renters shrinks and becomes more concentrated in the low-income pop-
ulation. This eﬀect is clearly visible in Table 2, panel B, which shows that average
consumption and income growth are negative for renters and positive for homeowners.
Thus, the endogeneity of homeownership clearly aﬀects the cohort means of consump-
tion and income within our pseudo-panel. Fortunately these average cohort eﬀects
are captured by the fixed eﬀects in our regressions.

    More problematic for our analysis is if there is also an eﬀect on covariances and
thus on the estimated regression coeﬃcients. For example, suppose that house price
movements aﬀect renters’ decisions to buy their first homes. In this case, for a fixed
birth year, the mean consumption of renters in quarter t may be higher or lower than
in quarter t − 1 simply because more or fewer renters with higher consumption and
income became homeowners. Even though in the regressions we are controlling for
the income of the same individuals, there may be some correlation between changes
in house prices and consumption that is simply due to renters becoming homeowners.
This may bias our estimation results.

    The ideal solution to this problem is to estimate a selection equation jointly with
the consumption Euler equation on the household level. Unfortunately due to the
repeated cross-section nature of the data, this is not feasible. We have investigated
if there are techniques that deal with this sample selection issue in a synthetic co-
hort framework, but without success. In addition, all micro datasets that contain
reasonably good consumption data are repeated cross sections.

    As a first step to understand the magnitude of the potential bias arising from
cohort selection, we have calculated measures of regional mobility and housing tenure
by age using the British Household Panel Survey (BHPS). Unlike the FES, the BHPS
is a panel so that each household is tracked over time. However the BHPS contains no
detailed consumption information. The BHPS data are annual and start in 1991. We
use data from 1991 through 1999, corresponding roughly to our FES sample period.

                                          16
    We define the same three regions as we did for the FES, and calculate the frequency
with which households of a given age change their region of residence from one year
to the next. Table A.1 in the Appendix reports these transition probabilities by age.
For the vast majority of age groups and regions, the probability that a household
moves from one region to another is less than one percent. The main exception is
that the youngest group (age 20-24) has a 3% probability of moving from the North
to the Center, and a 1% probability of moving from the North to the South. These
numbers suggest that any bias arising from regional endogeneity is small.

   We have also used the BHPS to calculate transition probabilities from renting to
homeownership and vice versa, by age. Table A.2 in the Appendix reports the results.
Young households move from rental to owner-occupied housing quite frequently; the
transition probabilities start at 12% for age 20-24 and decline smoothly to 9% for age
30-34 and 6% for age 40-44, flattening out in middle age and then declining again
to around 2% for households in their 60’s. Young households also transition from
homeownership to renting, with a 6% probability for age 20-24, but this transition
probability declines rapidly and is 1% or below for households aged between 40 and
80. These numbers suggest that younger homeowners include some households that
have just switched from renting, and this may aﬀect our regression results for younger
households.

    In the Appendix we try variations of our basic method that restrict the sample to
households that have lived for longer than six months at their present address, or that
treat young homeowners that have recently moved as if they were still renters. The
results, reported in Tables A.3 and A.4, are generally comparable to those reported
in the body of the paper.


4.1    A model of housing choice

Another approach to the cohort selection problem is to use a calibrated model of con-
sumption and housing choice in which we can evaluate the magnitude of the eﬀects
caused by cohort selection. We now set up and solve such a model. We augment
the life-cycle framework of Deaton (1991), Carroll (1997), and Gourinchas and Parker
(2002), which allows for borrowing constraints and labor income uncertainty, to in-
clude housing choices, namely the decision to own or rent a house and the size of
house to occupy. The model allows for house price uncertainty and is related to
recent work of Cocco (2005) and Yao and Zhang (2005).

                                          17
   Time parameters and preferences


    We model the consumption and asset choices of a household, indexed by i, who
lives for a maximum of T periods. We allow for uncertain life span in the manner of
Hubbard, Skinner and Zeldes (1994). Let st denote the probability that the household
is alive at date t + 1, conditional on being alive at date t.

   In each period t, the household needs to choose whether to rent or own a house
and its size, Hit , and other non-durable goods consumption, Cit . The date t price
per unit of housing is denoted by Pt , such that a house of size H has price Pt H at
date t. The size of the house should be interpreted broadly as reflecting not only
the physical size, but also its quality. The price of other goods consumption (the
numeraire) is fixed and normalized to one. We assume that a house sale is associated
with a transaction cost λ, which is a proportion of house value.

    The household derives utility from both housing and non-durable goods, and af-
ter death from bequeathing terminal wealth. We assume that preferences are time
additive, and that they are separable between housing and non-durable goods con-
sumption, such that per period utility is given by:


                                              Cit1−γ    H 1−γ
                            u(Cit , Hit ) =          + θ it                        (2)
                                              1−γ       1−γ

where γ is the coeﬃcient of relative risk aversion, and θ measures preference for hous-
ing relative to non-durable consumption goods. The utility derived from bequeathing
terminal wealth is given by:


                                                   Wit1−γ
                                   v(Wit ) = b                                     (3)
                                                   1−γ

where b measures the intensity of the bequest motive, and Wit is the amount of wealth
the household bequeaths its descendants at death. This includes both housing and
non-housing wealth. It is important to note that our preference specification allows
for a precautionary savings motive. We let β denote the time discount factor.




                                              18
   Labor income risk

    The household works for the first K periods of its life. In each of these periods
it is endowed with stochastic labor income, Yit , which cannot be traded or used as
collateral for a loan. As usual we let a lower case letter denote the natural log of the
variable, so yit ≡ log(Yit ). Household i’s log real labor income during working life is
exogenous and is given by:


                           yit = f (t, Zit ) + vit + ω it t < K,                       (4)

where f (t, Zit ) is a deterministic function of age t and other individual characteristics
Zit , and vit and ωit are stochastic components of income. Thus log income is the
sum of a deterministic component that can be calibrated to capture the hump shape
of earnings over the life-cycle, and two random components, one transitory and one
persistent. The transitory component is captured by the shock ωit , an i.i.d. normally
distributed random variable with mean zero and variance σ 2ω . The persistent com-
ponent is assumed to be entirely permanent; it is captured by the process vit , which
is assumed to follow a random walk:


                                    vit = vi,t−1 + η it ,                              (5)
where η it is an i.i.d. normally distributed random variable with mean zero and vari-
ance σ 2η . Income during retirement is assumed to be a proportion r of permanent
income at retirement age such that:


                           yit = r(f (K, ZiK ) + viK ) t ≥ K.                          (6)

   Our assumptions about the labor income process are similar to those made by
Carroll (1997) and Gourinchas and Parker (2002).


House prices

    The price of housing fluctuates over time. Let Pit denote the date t real price of
one unit of housing in the region where household i lives. Real house price growth is
given by:

                                             19
                                       ∆pit = g + δ it ,                                     (7)

a constant g plus an i.i.d. normally distributed shock δ it with mean zero and variance
σ 2δ . To economize on state variables we assume that innovations to house prices are
perfectly positively correlated with innovations to the permanent component of the
household’s labor income so that


                                          δ it = αη it ,                                     (8)
where α > 0. This assumption implies that states with low house prices are also
states with low permanent labor income.10



Financial assets and borrowing

   There is a single financial asset with riskfree interest rate R, in which households
may invest. Homeowners may also borrow at this rate, up to the current value of
the house minus a downpayment. If we let Dit denote date t outstanding debt, the
borrowing constraint faced by homeowners is given by


                                     Dit ≤ (1 − d)Pit Hit ,                                  (9)

where d is the downpayment. We allow homeowners to borrow against the value of
their house at the riskfree rate. Because of this we also rule out default. We do so
by imposing the following additional constraint:


                          Dit (1 + R) ≤ (1 − λ)Pi,t+1 Hit + Yi,t+1 ,                        (10)

where λ is the transaction cost associated with a house sale, Pi,t+1 and Yi,t+1 are
the lower bounds in house prices and labor income in period t + 1. This restriction
guarantees that the household is always able to repay the loan.
  10
   A large positive correlation between income shocks and house prices is also present in Ortalo-
Magné and Rady (2001).



                                                20
Rental cost and probability of a forced move


   We set the rental cost equal to the user cost of housing plus a constant rental
premium, θR . Thus the rental cost is equal to fraction (R−g +θR ) of the house value.
The rental premium covers the moral hazard problem of renting, that tenants have
no incentive to look after a property so that maintenance becomes more expensive.

    We assume that in each period and with probability π the household is forced to
move. In this case homeowners incur the transaction cost associated with the house
sale.



Summary of the household’s optimization problem

    In summary, the household’s control variables are {Cit , Sit , Hit }Tt=1 , where Sit takes
the value of if the household decides to own a house, and zero otherwise. The vector of
state variables is Xit = {t, pit , Wit , Si,t−1 , Hit , Mit }Tt=1 , where Wit is real liquid wealth
or cash-on-hand and Mit is a state variable that takes the value of one in periods the
household is forced to move and zero otherwise.

   The equation describing the evolution of real cash-on-hand for homeowners in a
period in which the homeowner does not move houses:


                              Wi,t+1 = (Wit + Yit − Cit )(1 + R)                              (11)

or in a period when the homeowner sells his house to buy another one:


              Wi,t+1 = (Wit + Yit − Cit − Pit Hit + (1 − λ)Pit Hi,t−1 )(1 + R)                (12)

where λ is the proportional transaction cost of selling a house.




                                                21
4.2    Parameterization of the model

Adult age in our model starts at age 20 and we let T be equal to 100 years. For
computational tractability, we let each period in our model correspond to five years
but we report annualized parameters and data moments for ease of interpretation.
To parameterize survival probabilities, we use data from the interim life tables for
UK males produced by the UK Government actuary’s department.

    We use data from the Family Expenditure Survey to estimate the labor income
profile. More precisely, we regress the natural logarithm of household income on age
dummies, quarter dummies, family composition, and cohort dummies. We then fit a
third order polynomial in age to the estimated age dummies, and compute five-year
labor income by adding estimated labor income over the relevant age group. The
cohort approach to estimating labor income profiles yields a fairly large standard
deviation of residuals, as high as 60% in our implementation. Obviously, this is the
result of measurement error, and cannot be interpreted as a measure of the income
risk faced by households. For this reason we use lower values for the variance of
income shocks, in line with those used by Deaton (1991) and Carroll (1997). These
values are reported in Table 6.

    In order to parameterize the house price process we look at Nationwide house price
data for all UK houses from 1953 to 1999. The mean real house price growth over this
long period was 2.1%, with a standard deviation of 6.2%. Part of the appreciation in
house prices reflects improvements in the quality of housing. For this reason we use
a lower value of 1% for average real house price growth.

   Other parameters of the model are reported in Table 6. We assume that house-
holds have risk aversion of 3 and a discount factor of 0.98. The real interest rate
and the rental premium are both set to 1% , the exogenous moving probability is 5%,
and the transactions cost of selling a house is 8%. Purchasing a house requires a
downpayment of 15% of house value.

    We use the model to generate simulated data. For the baseline parameterization,
all households become homeowners in middle age. In order to better match the
data, we therefore assume that the population is heterogeneous with respect to the
discount factor. More precisely, we assume that 70% of households are described by
the baseline parameters shown in Table 6, and the remaining 30% are more impatient,
with a time discount factor of 0.85. Impatient households tend to rent housing


                                         22
throughout their lives, since they do not wish to accumulate the savings needed to
make a downpayment on a house.

    We also consider another type of heterogeneity, namely in the probability of a
forced move. In this case 70% of households are described by the baseline parameters
shown in Table 6, and the remaining 30% have a 10% annual probability of a forced
move. These households tend to rent housing throughout their lives to avoid the
large transactions costs of forced moves for homeowners. Obviously, it would be
possible to allow other types of heterogeneity, but these two seem to be realistic and
interesting while keeping the model relatively simple.

    Table 7 reports summary statistics from the simulated data and compares them
to the BHPS data for several diﬀerent age groups. The model is fairly successful in
matching homeownership rates in mid- and late life, but is less successful in early life.
The reason is that in the simulated data households seem to take longer than in the
BHPS data to accumulate the downpayment needed to become homeowners. One
possible explanation for this is that some households receive inter-vivos transfers
from their parents to help them buy their first houses. Table 7 also shows the
average annual moving probabilities in the BHPS and simulated data. The largest
diﬀerences are in the moving probability for young homeowners. Households in the
model take longer to become homeowners, and are less likely to move early in life.
In addition, middle-aged and older renters are more likely to move in the model than
in the BHPS data. We could match the data better by assuming an age-varying
probability of a forced move, or an age-varying preference for housing relative to non-
durable consumption. However this would complicate the model and we proceed
with the relatively simple specifications of Table 7.


4.3    Model results: addressing selection bias

In Table 8 we estimate regressions on the simulated data similar to those that we
have previously estimated using FES data. All regressions include a second order
polynomial in age, but to save space we do not report these coeﬃcients. Basic results
are given in column (i) for a population with heterogeneous discount factors, and
column (iv) for a population heterogeneous in moving probability. Just as in the
FES data, house prices have the largest eﬀects on non-durable consumption for old
homeowners, and smaller eﬀects for renters. Contrary to the FES data, however, we
find that the eﬀect of house prices on consumption is lowest for old and not young

                                           23
renters. Columns (ii) and (v) help us understand why.

    In these columns we allow the estimated coeﬃcient on income changes to vary
with homeownership status and age, similarly to the eﬀects of house prices. In this
case we do find that the eﬀects of house price changes on consumption are largest
for old homeowners and smallest for young renters. In addition, we find that the
eﬀects of income changes on consumption are largest for young renters. This higher
sensitivity of consumption to income changes is due to the fact that young renters are
the ones who are most borrowing constrained. When we do not allow the eﬀects of
income changes to vary by age and homeownership status, the estimated coeﬃcient
on ∆yt estimates an average eﬀect across the diﬀerent groups. Since house prices are
correlated with income growth, the regression compensates for its inability to increase
the income coeﬃcient for young renters by increasing the house price coeﬃcient for
young renters.

    We note that in column (ii) old renters have a higher sensitivity to income changes
than old homeowners, but this is not true in column (v). The reason is that in the data
used to estimate (ii), old renters have lower discount rates and tend to be borrowing
constrained, whereas in the data used to estimate (v), old renters are households that
face a higher moving probability but are not necessarily borrowing constrained.

    The regressions in columns (ii) and (v) do not control for the fact that the decision
to become a homeowner is endogenous. That is, we have exogenously specified co-
horts along the housing tenure dimension. This may bias the estimated coeﬃcients.
In order to examine the extent to which that is the case, in columns (iii) and (vi)
we estimate two equations jointly. In the first equation, whose estimation results
are shown in Panel A, the dependent variable is a dummy variable that takes the
value of one when there is a transition from renter to homeowner. The independent
variables are income, financial savings, and house price changes. The second equa-
tion, whose estimation results are shown in Panel B, is similar to the one previously
estimated, with consumption growth as the dependent variable. These equations are
jointly estimated by maximum likelihood.

   The estimation results shown in Panel A indicate that households with higher
income are more likely to become homeowners. Financial savings also predict home-
ownership if the population is heterogeneous in the discount factor. Finally, renters
are less likely to become homeowners in periods of rising house prices.

   Panel B reports the coeﬃcients for the consumption growth equation. As before,

                                           24
we estimate a positive house price coeﬃcient for old homeowners, and the house price
coeﬃcient is smallest for young renters. The main diﬀerence relative to columns (ii)
and (v) is that rising house prices are now estimated to have the largest eﬀect on the
consumption of young homeowners rather than old homeowners. The strong eﬀect
for young homeowners in columns (iii) and (vi) is presumably due to the fact that
these households tend to be borrowing constrained, and rising house prices relax their
constraints. The eﬀect is estimated to be smaller in columns (ii) and (iv) because
low-income households tend to buy houses and join the group of homeowners when
house prices decrease, biasing the house price coeﬃcient downward in the models that
do not account for cohort selection.

    In the simulated data, the total eﬀect of house price changes on consumption for
young renters is close to zero, but is not negative as one would expect from a wealth
eﬀect. This is also the case in the FES data, as reported in Table 5. We can
use our model to understand why young renters do not increase their savings when
house prices increase. In Appendix Table A.5 we use simulated data to estimate
the eﬀects of income and house prices on the decision to buy a house and the size of
the house that is purchased. As house prices increase, renters choose to buy smaller
houses. That is, they substitute nondurable consumption for housing consumption
because housing services are more expensive. This substitution eﬀect oﬀsets the
wealth eﬀect for young renters. Obviously the magnitude of the substitution eﬀect
relative to the wealth eﬀect depends on the degree of substitutability between housing
and non-durable consumption.

    While our model helps us to assess the nature of the selection bias in our empirical
analysis, and to interpret our empirical results, it has an important limitation. There
is no measurement error in the simulated data comparable to the measurement error
that we believe to exist in the FES data. We could generate simulated data that is
subject to measurement error, but this would require arbitrary decisions about the
nature of the error and its cross-sectional variation across groups of households.

    Measurement error in income may explain one discrepancy between our simulated
data and the FES data. Table 8 shows that it is important to allow the coeﬃcient on
income changes to vary by age and with homeownership status. With this in mind
we have estimated a regression on FES cohort data allowing for such variation. This
regression is reported in column (vii) of Table 8. We control for age and family size,
but we do not report the estimated coeﬃcients on these variables. In the FES data we
find that income changes have a larger eﬀect on the consumption of old homeowners,


                                          25
contrary to the intuitive result in the simulated data. One possible explanation is that
in the FES data the income of young renters is subject to more measurement error
than that of old homeowners, biasing the estimated coeﬃcient downwards for young
renters. Fortunately this sort of measurement error cannot overturn our conclusion
that the estimated response of consumption to house price changes is smallest for
young renters. If the income of young renters is subject to more measurement error,
and if their income is positively correlated with house prices, then measurement error
is likely to bias the estimated coeﬃcent on house price changes upwards for young
renters. That is to say, the true eﬀect of house prices on the consumption of young
renters may be smaller than that estimated in column (vii) of Table 8.



5    Predictable versus Unpredictable Changes in House
     Prices

We have estimated the eﬀects of house price changes on consumption changes using
FES data. These eﬀects may be driven by a variety of mechanisms, including wealth
and substitution eﬀects, borrowing constraints, precautionary savings, or even myopic
behavior by households. In order to gain a better understanding of these mechanisms,
we now distinguish between predictable and unpredictable changes in house prices. If
households are forward-looking, then the wealth eﬀect of a house price change occurs
when the change can be anticipated, not when it actually occurs. On the other hand,
a predictable change in house prices–one that has already been anticipated–may still
relax borrowing constraints even if it has no wealth eﬀect. Obviously, this reasoning
requires that there are predictable changes in house prices, and indeed several papers
have documented positive serial correlation in the returns on residential real estate
(Case and Shiller 1989, Poterba 1991). It also requires that housing becomes available
as collateral only when an increase in house prices is realized and not when it can be
predicted. Finally it requires that borrowing capacity depends on the current, and
not on the purchase price of the house.

   The distinction between predictable and unpredictable house price changes does
not allow us to cleanly separate the eﬀects of borrowing constraints from wealth
eﬀects. These two eﬀects are not mutually exclusive: an unexpected increase in
house prices may have a positive wealth eﬀect and at the same time relax borrowing
constraints. Also, precautionary savings or myopic behavior may lead consump-


                                          26
tion to respond to predictable house price changes even in the absence of borrowing
constraints. A theoretical model would allow us to say more, but in the model of
the previous section we assumed for tractability that house prices follow a random
walk. Therefore we cannot use that model to assess the eﬀects of predictable and
unpredictable changes in house prices.


5.1       Predictable changes in house prices

If a predictable increase in house prices relaxes borrowing constraints, the consump-
tion of borrowing-constrained households should respond to predictable changes in
house prices. Likewise, if a fraction of the households within a cohort exhibit pre-
cautionary savings or myopic behavior, then consumption will respond to predictable
changes in house prices. We focus on predictable changes because there should be no
wealth eﬀect associated with them.

    Our test of whether non-durable consumption responds to predictable changes in
house prices is closely related to the literature on the excess sensitivity of consumption
to income. The hypothesis to be tested is the permanent income hypothesis, which
postulates that consumption should respond only to unpredictable changes in income.
Instead, Flavin (1981) found that aggregate consumption responds positively to pre-
dictable changes in income, and interpreted this finding as evidence that consumers
face borrowing constraints. Following Flavin’s influential paper, there have been
many papers investigating excess sensitivity and its link to borrowing constraints,
precautionary savings and myopic behavior, using both macro (Hall 1978, Campbell
and Mankiw 1989, 1991, Carroll and Summers 1991, Christiano, Eichenbaum, and
Marshall 1991) and micro data (Hall and Mishkin 1982, Zeldes 1989, Runkle 1991,
Attanasio and Browning 1995, Attanasio and Weber 1995).11

    The equation that we estimate is the one usually estimated in the excess sensitivity
literature. The novelty of our analysis is that we also include as a regressor house
price growth in the region where the household lives. More precisely we estimate
equation (1) using lagged variables as instruments, which corresponds to estimating
the following model:
 11
      See the survey of Browning and Lusardi (1996) for further references.




                                                 27
    ∆ci,t+1 = β 0 + β 1 Et rt+1 + β 2 Et ∆yi,t+1 + β 3 Et ∆pi,t+1 + β 4 Et Zi,t+1 +   i,t+1   (13)


In words, we ask whether consumption responds to predictable changes in income
and house prices. If the permanent income hypothesis were true, β 2 and β 3 should be
zero. If on the other hand a fraction of the households within a cohort are borrowing
constrained and a predictable increase in house prices increases their borrowing ca-
pacity, or if a fraction of the households within a cohort exhibit precautionary savings
or myopic behavior, the estimated coeﬃcient β 3 will be positive.

    The fact that we take first diﬀerences of cohort means introduces an MA(1) struc-
ture in the residuals of the equation to be estimated, which raises some important
issues for our choice of instruments, and also for the computation of standard errors
(see Deaton (1992) for a textbook treatment). To allow for the MA structure of
the residuals we use instruments dated t − 1 and earlier, i.e. variables twice lagged.
We estimate equation (13) for all cohorts simultaneously, but include as independent
variables cohort fixed eﬀects.

    In the vector of variables Zit+1 we include the first diﬀerences of age, age squared,
and family size. These variables can be expected to appear in the felicity function
so we include their change contemporaneously with the change in consumption. Age
and age squared are taken as exogenous, as are the cohort and seasonal (quarter)
fixed eﬀects. However changes in family size are considered to be endogenous, so we
use as an instrument the second lag of change in family size.

    The real interest rate, ∆yi,t+1 and ∆pi,t+1 are also considered to be endogenous and
are instrumented. We use as instruments the second lag of changes in log consump-
tion, income, house prices, and the second lag of the interest rate and the inflation
rate.


5.2     Unpredictable changes in house prices

If a fraction of households within the cohort are forward-looking and unconstrained,
then their consumption should respond to unpredictable movements in house prices.
To explore this eﬀect, we must first identify unpredictable house price changes. We
first estimate Et ∆pi,t+1 , and then obtain shocks to house prices as ∆pi,t+1 −Et ∆pi,t+1 .

                                               28
In our estimate of expected house price changes, we include as explanatory variables
the same instrumental variables that we used in the previous subsection.

   We repeat this procedure for income, and for consumption, so as obtain mea-
sures of the unexpected changes in income and consumption, (∆yi,t+1 − Et ∆yi,t+1 )
and (∆ci,t+1 − Et ∆ci,t+1 ), respectively. We then test whether unexpected changes in
consumption react to unexpected changes in house prices by estimating the following
regression:



   ∆ci,t+1 − Et ∆ci,t+1 = α0 + α1 (∆ri,t+1 − Et ∆ri,t+1 ) + α2 (∆yi,t+1 − Et ∆yi,t+1 )
                          +α3 (∆pi,t+1 − Et ∆pi,t+1 ) + η i,t+1                     (14)


where η i,t+1 is the residual. It is important to clarify a few issues regarding equation
(14), since this is not an equation usually estimated in the consumption literature.

    If we exclude the unexpected change in house prices from the set of explana-
tory variables, the above equation is not very informative when trying to distinguish
between diﬀerent consumption theories; whether the permanent hypothesis holds, a
fraction of consumers are liquidity constrained, or their behavior exhibits precau-
tionary savings or some degree of myopia, consumption should respond positively to
unexpected changes in income. The same is not true, however, for the response of
consumption to an unexpected change in house prices. The sign of the estimated
coeﬃcient α3 allows us to test whether there are wealth and substitution eﬀects as-
sociated with house price shocks. If the wealth eﬀect dominates the substitution
eﬀect, the coeﬃcient should be positive for households who are long in housing, and
negative or zero for households who are short in housing. As before, we use age
and homeownership status to identify such households. These variables are well
motivated theoretically and relatively accurately measured.

    Since we are using household-level survey data, measurement error can have large
eﬀects on the coeﬃcients that we estimate in equation (14). House prices are mea-
sured by Nationwide, and not reported by households, so measurement error is more
likely to be more serious for consumption and income than for house prices. Orthog-
onal measurement error in income contaminates the estimated innovations to income
and biases the estimate of the coeﬃcient α2 towards zero. Alternatively, if measure-
ment error in income is positively correlated with measurement error in consumption,

                                           29
it biases the estimate of α2 upwards. Below we interpret the results from our regres-
sion analysis in light of these possibilities. In addition, in the Appendix we report
the results for robustness checks to try to minimize the impact of measurement error.


5.3    Results for regional cohorts


Predictable changes in house prices


    The first three columns of Table 9 show estimation results for the instrumen-
tal variables regressions. All specifications include cohort and quarter fixed eﬀects,
changes in age and age squared, and changes in family size, but these coeﬃcients are
not reported. The estimated coeﬃcients on the real interest rate and income growth
variables match those typically obtained in other consumption studies, both in sign
and statistical significance. The estimated coeﬃcient for income growth is positive
and statistically significant. This is the well known finding of excess sensitivity of con-
sumption to income, which has been interpreted by Flavin (1981) and Zeldes (1989a),
among others, as evidence of borrowing constraints, but that is also consistent with
precautionary savings or myopic behavior (Carroll, 1997).

    The novelty of our analysis is that, in addition to income, we also include pre-
dictable changes in house prices as an additional explanatory variable. Since housing
is an asset that can be used as collateral an increase in house prices increases borrow-
ing capacity, and allows borrowing-constrained homeowners to increase consumption.
Interestingly, we estimate positive coeﬃcients on house price changes, both for re-
gional and UK house prices (specifications (i) and (ii), respectively).

    However, in specification (iii) we find that regional house price changes less UK
house price changes have no explanatory power beyond that of UK house price
changes. This suggests that if predictable house prices aﬀect consumption by re-
laxing borrowing constraints, this may be a macro eﬀect rather than a direct channel.
If homeowners in a given region are borrowing constrained, and increases in the price
of their house allow them to increase consumption, we should observe regional house
prices being important. Instead only aggregate house prices matter, which suggests
that aggregate borrowing capacity is the relevant variable.



                                            30
   Unpredictable changes in house prices


   Columns (iv) through (vii) of Table 9 show results for unpredictable house price
changes. As expected, the estimated coeﬃcient on unexpected income changes is
positive. Of more interest is the fact that we also estimate positive coeﬃcients for
unexpected house price changes. Moreover, and in contrast to specification (iii),
unpredictable regional house price changes are statistically significant. This shows
that the wealth channel through which house prices aﬀect consumption has a regional
component.


5.4    Results for homeownership cohorts


Predictable changes in house prices


    In columns (i) through (iv) of Table 10 we examine the eﬀects of predictable
changes in house prices on the consumption of homeowners and renters. In specifica-
tion (i) we find that the estimated coeﬃcient on house prices is significantly positive
so that consumption responds positively to predictable changes in house prices. In
specification (ii) we include as additional dependent variables predictable house price
changes interacted with dummy variables for young homeowners, young renters, and
old renters. The estimated incremental eﬀects of house prices for these three groups
are all negative, but there are diﬀerences in statistical significance.

    The eﬀect of predictable house prices on the consumption of young homeowners
is not statistically diﬀerent from the eﬀects of house prices on the consumption of old
homeowners. Furthermore, the impact of predictable house prices on the consump-
tion of young and old renters is significantly lower than the eﬀects of house prices on
the consumption of old homeowners, and in specification (ii) they are not statistically
diﬀerent from zero. In other words, we cannot reject the null hypothesis that the
estimated coeﬃcients on ∆pt and ∆pt × Young Renter, and on ∆pt and ∆pt × Old
Renter, sum to zero. Thus the results in specification (ii) are consistent with a bor-
rowing constraints channel that operates through changes in the collateral available
to homeowners.

   However, this is no longer the case once we include changes in real mortgage

                                          31
payments as an additional independent variable. In specifications (iii) and (iv) we
still cannot reject the null hypothesis that the estimated coeﬃcients on ∆pt and ∆pt ×
Young Renter sum to zero, but we reject the hypothesis that the estimated coeﬃcients
on ∆pt and ∆pt × Old Renter sum to zero. The consumption of old renters appears to
respond positively to predictable changes in house prices, an eﬀect which cannot be
explained by a relaxation of household-level borrowing constraints through increased
housing collateral.

   This suggests that if predictable changes in house prices aﬀect consumption through
borrowing constraints, then at least for old renters it is an aggregate eﬀect. Obvi-
ously, we cannot rule out that for homeowners the channel is a direct one, but these
results combined with those for the regional cohorts point to the existence of a broader
macroeconomic channel. In other words, an increase in house prices is associated with
an easing of borrowing constraints in the economy as a whole, which stimulates the
consumption of renters as well as homeowners. This could of course reflect reverse
causality if financial liberalization drives up house prices.

    There are several reasons to be cautious when comparing the magnitude of the es-
timated coeﬃcients for old homeowners and old renters. First, for some of the cohorts
of old renters the average cell size is relatively small. Second, renters are on average
poorer than homeowners, so they may face more severe borrowing constraints. Third,
the results in Table 10 may be influenced by precautionary savings eﬀects. As Carroll
(1997) has emphasized, in the presence of a precautionary savings motive the rate
of growth of consumption should depend also on a variance term.12 If next period’s
income, house prices and consumption growth are risky, consumption now should be
lower, and consumption growth should be higher. Renters tend to have lower assets,
and so precautionary savings eﬀects may be stronger for renters. Alternatively, the
results in Table 10 are also consistent with a fraction of the households within the
cohort exhibiting myopic behavior.

   If predictable house price changes influence consumption by relaxing borrowing
constraints, then the eﬀect should be weaker for households with unused borrow-
ing capacity. We have tested this hypothesis in two diﬀerent ways. First, we
have restricted the sample to households that own their houses outright, without any
mortgage borrowing. For some quarters and for the very young cohorts there were
no owners outright, and we dropped these observations from the analysis. For this
  12
    See the buﬀer-stock models of Deaton (1991) and Carroll (1997). Carroll (1992) and Carroll
and Samwick (1997) provide empirical evidence.


                                             32
restricted sample the estimated coeﬃcient on predictable house price changes was
positive but not significantly diﬀerent from zero. Second, we have used the length
of time at the present address combined with the behaviour of regional house price
indices to identify homeowners with positive home equity. More precisely, we have
constructed cohorts restricting the sample to homeowners whose house prices have
increased by at least 10%, 25%, and 50% since they first started living at their current
address. The estimated coeﬃcient on predictable house price changes decreases in
size and statistical significance as we move from 10% to 25%, and then to 50%. The
estimated coeﬃcients (and t statistics) are respectively: 1.46 (2.94), 1.41 (2.61), 1.05
(1.62). Both these results are consistent with the hypothesis that the response of
consumption to predictable house price changes is related to borrowing constraints.
However, there may also be a role for precautionary savings or rule-of-thumb con-
sumption behavior, since homeowners that have benefited from moderate 10% or
25% house price increases show some response to predictable movements in house
prices.


   Unpredictable changes in house prices


    Columns (v) through (vii) of Table 10 estimate the eﬀects of unpredictable house
price shocks on the consumption of homeowners and renters. Recall that theory
predicts that these eﬀects should be largest and positive for old homeowners, and
should be smallest and negative or zero for young renters, depending on the relative
magnitude of the wealth and substitution eﬀects. The results in Table 10 provide
some empirical support for these predictions.

    In specification (vi) we see that the eﬀects of house price shocks are largest and
positive for old homeowners: the estimated coeﬃcients on house price shocks in-
teracted with dummies for young homeowners, old renters, and young renters are
all negative. Among the latter three, the estimated coeﬃcient for young renters is
largest (in absolute value) and statistically diﬀerent from zero. Thus the eﬀects of
house price shocks are smallest for young renters. When we sum the estimated co-
eﬃcients on innovations in ∆pt and innovations in ∆pt × Young Renter we obtain a
coeﬃcient that is insignificantly diﬀerent from zero.

   It is also interesting that in specification (vii) we find no wealth eﬀect of changes
in mortgage payments on consumption. This is consistent with theory given that
these are mostly adjustable-rate mortgages. As Campbell and Cocco (2003) show,

                                          33
an increase in expected inflation and nominal interest rates accelerates real mortgage
payments on adjustable-rate mortgages. This has no wealth eﬀect, but it may force
borrowing constrained homeowners to temporarily cut back their consumption. This
may be the reason why in specification (iii) we estimate a negative mortgage payment
coeﬃcient, while in specification (vii) we do not.

    It is possible that some of the estimated coeﬃcients in Table 10 are influenced by
measurement error. Given that we are using house price data from Nationwide and
income and consumption data from the FES, measurement error in consumption is
less likely to be correlated with house prices than with income. Although we cannot
rule out the possibility that measurement error aﬀects the statistical significance or
the magnitude of the estimated coeﬃcients, it is nevertheless striking that we estimate
the smallest and largest wealth eﬀects of house prices for those households that are
most likely to be short and long in housing.



6    Conclusion

In this paper we have used UK micro level data to estimate the response of household
consumption to house prices. We have estimated the largest house price elasticity of
consumption for older homeowners, and the smallest elasticity, insignificantly diﬀerent
from zero, for younger renters. These are the households that are most likely to
gain and lose from house price increases. The estimated elasticity for the older
homeowners group is as large as 1.7, controlling for interest rates, household income,
and other demographic variables. This finding has macroeconomic implications since
it suggests that as the population ages and becomes more concentrated in the old
homeowners group, aggregate consumption may become more responsive to house
prices; of course, it is possible that demographic changes will alter the stochastic
processes for house prices and income, and the decision rules of households. In
recent years both the UK and the US have experienced rising property prices and
strong private consumption, pointing to the relevance of our estimates.

    We have found, controlling for economy-wide house prices and for regional income,
that regional house prices influence regional consumption. This shows that it is
important to allow for regional heterogeneity when estimating the eﬀects of house
prices on consumption.



                                          34
    Finally, we have found that consumption responds to predictable changes in house
prices, an eﬀect which is consistent with an increase in house prices relaxing borrow-
ing constraints, but that may also be explained by reverse causality from financial
liberalization to house prices, or by a precautionary savings motive. The consump-
tion eﬀects of predictable changes in house prices appear to be weaker for households
that have unused borrowing capacity, but they aﬀect both renters and homeowners
and work through national rather than regional house prices. This suggests that UK
house prices are related to the ease or diﬃculty of borrowing in the economy as a
whole.




                                         35
7      Appendix: Robustness

7.1     Moving probabilities and alternative cohort definitions

Tables A.1 and A.2 report moving probabilities from one region to another, and
between rental and owner-occupied housing, by age. These tables show that young
households frequently switch homeownership status. In order to further address
the issue of endogenous homeownership, we use a variable in the FES data which
measures the length of time that the head of the household has lived at the present
address. As a first approach, we restrict the sample to those households who have
lived for more than six months at the present address. This means dropping five
(fourteen) percent of homeowning (renting) households. We then construct cohorts
of homeowners and renters for this restricted set of households, excluding households
which changed homeownership status recently.13

    As a second approach, we construct broader cohorts of renters, so as to include in
the analysis households that switch from renters at t − 1 to homeowners at t. Most
households who switch from renting to homeowning do so early in life. Therefore, we
have constructed cohorts of renters that include both renters who have lived at the
present address for more than six months, and homeowners younger than 32 years of
age who have lived at the present address for less than six months, i.e. the group of
“new homeowners.” We classify the latter as renters for the purpose of computing
cohort averages. The cohorts of homeowners were defined as in our first approach
to exclude recent movers, that is they include those who own a house and who have
lived at the present address for more than six months.14

    In order to investigate the extent to which the transition from renting to home-
owning is correlated with house prices, and also to pick a suitable cutoﬀ age for our
definition of the new homeowners group, we have estimated the ratio of the size of
the new homeowners group to the size of the renters group, for those younger than
a given age. This ratio, an estimate of the transition rate from renting to home-
  13
     Households who were renters at time t − 1, bought the same house they were living in and
became homeowners at t will still be included in the sample, but there are not likely to be many
such households.
  14
     This approach still excludes households that switch from homeowners at t − 1 to renters at t.
Identifying such households is diﬃcult given the nature of the data available. However, since we
have restricted the sample to households with head not older than 60 years of age, these households
are likely to be far fewer than those switching from renting to homeowning.

                                                36
owning, averages about 20 percent when we set the cutoﬀ age to 32. This cutoﬀ
age maximizes the correlation between the ratio and house price changes. The max-
imized correlation is 18 percent, but marginally insignificant with a robust p-value
just above 10 percent. The significance of the correlation decreases further when we
include quarter fixed eﬀects in the regression. Thus there seems to be some evidence
that the transition from renting to homeowning is positively correlated with house
price changes, but the evidence is statistically weak.

    Table A.3 shows estimation results for our baseline regression. Column (i) repli-
cates the results shown in column (vi) of Table 6. Column (ii) shows the results when
we restrict the sample to households who have lived at the present address for more
than six months, and column (iii) shows the results when we include new homeowners
as well in the cohort of renters. As can be seen from table A.1, the results in columns
(ii) and (iii) are similar to those in column (i). The estimated coeﬃcients on income
changes are slightly larger, and those on house price changes slightly smaller, but
they are of a similar order of magnitude. It is still the case that the eﬀects of house
prices on consumption are largest for old homeowners and smallest for young renters.
Table A.4 shows that we also obtain similar results for the IV regressions and for the
wealth eﬀects of house price changes.

    In this section we have used length of time at the present address to at least
partially deal with the bias that may arise because of households switching home-
ownership status in response to house prices. In unreported results, we have used
the same variable to deal with regional mobility in the definition of regional cohorts.
When we restrict the sample to households who reported living at the present address
for at least six months, we obtained similar results for regional cohorts.


7.2    Other robustness checks

We have carried out several other robustness checks which we now describe. Since
the results are similar to those already reported we merely give a brief summary here.
First, we have considered an expanded set of instrumental variables. In addition to
the second lag of changes in consumption, income, house prices, mortgage payments,
interest rate and inflation rate, we have also included the third lag of these variables.
Second, we have tried to minimize the impact of measurement error by truncating
the values of income and consumption changes below and above the 5th and 95th
percentiles of their respective distributions, at their 5th and 95th percentile values,

                                           37
respectively. In addition, and bearing in mind that measurement error is more likely
to be an issue for those cohorts whose quarter cell sizes are not very large, we have
estimated regressions that weight observations by the inverse of cell size.

   Third, we have expanded the dataset by constructing an unbalanced panel. Our
baseline results use a pseudo-panel that is balanced in the sense that over the whole
sample we have data on households with certain fixed birth years. But this means
that our panel is on average thirteen years older at the end of the sample than at the
beginning, and by the end of the sample we have no observations on people younger
than 30. This is unfortunate since we are interested in the behavior of young renters,
who are disproportionately people in their 20’s.

    To address this issue we have added four new cohorts of homeowners/renters that
enter the dataset after 1988: two with birth year between 1970 and 1974, and two with
birth year between 1975 and 1979. Obviously, there are no observations for these
cohorts at the beginning of the sample period. Therefore we set them to missing
values and estimate an unbalanced panel. In addition to the previously included
dummy variables (young/old renters and young/old homeowners), we have created
two additional dummy variables: one for the youngest renters and another for the
youngest homeowners. As before we interact these dummy variables with house
price changes. For a cut-oﬀ age of 28 and for the baseline regression the estimated
coeﬃcients of house price changes times the dummies for youngest homeowners and
renters are both negative but not statistically significant (the t statistics are around
minus one). We have experimented with the cut-oﬀ age for the dummy variables for
the youngest groups, but the results are not very sensitive to cut-oﬀ ages between
25 and 30. Thus we find that the eﬀects of house prices on consumption appear to
be smallest for the very young, but our estimates of these eﬀects are not statistically
significant.

    Finally, we have explored whether lagged house prices aﬀect consumption. When
we include the first lag of house price growth in the regression, the estimated coeﬃcient
is negative but insignificantly diﬀerent from zero. When we include both the first
and second lags of house price changes the estimated coeﬃcients on these variables
are both positive, but insignificantly diﬀerent from zero. In all specifications the
estimated coeﬃcient on current house price changes remains positive and statistically
significant.




                                           38
  References

Attanasio, Orazio P. and Martin Browning, 1995, “Consumption over the Life Cycle
    and Over the Business Cycle,” American Economic Review 85, 1118—1137.
Attanasio, Orazio P. and Guglielmo Weber, 1994, “The Aggregate Consumption
    Boom of the Late 1980s: Aggregate Implications of Microeconomic Evidence,”
    Economic Journal 104, 1269—1302.
Attanasio, Orazio P. and Guglielmo Weber, 1995, “Is Consumption Growth Consis-
    tent with Intertemporal Optimization? Evidence from the Consumer Expendi-
    ture Survey,” Journal of Political Economy 103, 1121—1157.
Banks, James and Sarah Tanner, 2002, “Household Portfolios in the United King-
   dom”, Chapter 6 in Luigi Guiso, Michael Haliassos, and Tullio Jappelli eds.,
   Household Portfolios, Cambridge, MA, MIT Press.
Benjamin, John, Peter Chinloy, and G. Donald Jud, 2004, “Real Estate Versus
    Financial Wealth in Consumption,” Journal of Real Estate Finance and Eco-
    nomics, forthcoming.
Bertaut, Carol C. and Martha Starr-McCluer, 2002, “Household Portfolios in the
    United States”, Chapter 5 in Luigi Guiso, Michael Haliassos, and Tullio Jappelli
    eds., Household Portfolios, Cambridge, MA, MIT Press.
Bhatia, Kul B., 1987, “Real Estate Assets and Consumer Spending”, Quarterly
    Journal of Economics 102, 437—444.
Browning, Martin J., Angus S. Deaton, and Margaret Irish, 1985, “A Profitable
    Approach to Labor Supply and Commodity Demands Over the Life-Cycle,”
    Econometrica, 53, 503—44.
Browning, Martin J., and Annamaria Lusardi, 1996, “Household Saving: Micro
    Theories and Micro Facts,” Journal of Economic Literature, 34, 1797—1855.
Campbell, John Y. and João F. Cocco, 2003, “Household Risk Management and
   Optimal Mortgage Choice,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 118, 1449—1494.
Campbell, John Y. and N. Gregory Mankiw, 1989, “Permanent Income, Current
   Income, and Consumption,” in Olivier J. Blanchard and Stanley Fisher, eds.,
   NBER Macroeconomics Annual, Cambridge, MA, MIT Press.

                                        39
Campbell, John Y. and N. Gregory Mankiw, 1991, “The Response of Consumption
   to Income,” European Economic Review 35, 723—767.

Carroll, Christopher D., 1992, “The Buﬀer-Stock Theory of Saving: Some Macro-
    economic Evidence”, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 61—156.

Carroll, Christopher D., 1997, “Buﬀer-Stock Saving and the Life-Cycle/Permanent
    Income Hypothesis”, Quarterly Journal of Economics 114, 433—495.

Carroll, Christopher D. and Andrew A. Samwick, 1997, “The Nature of Precaution-
    ary Wealth”, Journal of Monetary Economics 40, 41—71.

Carroll, Christopher D. and Lawrence H. Summers, 1991, “Consumption Growth
    Parallels Income Growth: Some New Evidence,” in B.D. Bernheim and J.B.
    Shoven eds., National Savings and Economic Performance, Chicago: University
    of Chicago Press.

Case, Karl E. and Robert J. Shiller, 1989, “The Eﬃciency of the Market for Single-
    Family Homes,” American Economic Review, 79, 125—137.

Case, Karl E., J. Quigley, and Robert J. Shiller, 2003, “Comparing Wealth Eﬀects:
    The Stock Market Versus the Housing Market,” unpublished paper.

Christiano, Lawrence J., Martin Eichenbaum, and David Marshall, 1991, “The Per-
    manent Income Hypothesis Revisited,” Econometrica, 59, p. 397—423.

Cocco, João F., 2005, “Portfolio Choice in The Presence of Housing,” Review of
    Financial Studies 18, 535—567.

Deaton, Angus S., 1985, “Panel Data from a Time-Series of Cross-Sections,” Journal
    of Econometrics 30, 109—126.

Deaton, Angus S., 1991, “Savings and Liquidity Constraints,” Econometrica 59,
    1221—1248.

Deaton, Angus S., 1992, “Understanding Consumption,” Oxford University Press,
    Oxford.

Engelhardt, Gary V., 1996, “House Prices and Home Owner Saving Behavior,” Re-
    gional Science and Urban Economics 26, 313—336.



                                       40
Fernández-Villaverde, Jesús and Dirk Krueger, 2005, “Consumption over the Life
    Cycle: Some Facts from Consumer Expenditure Survey Data,” Review of Eco-
    nomics and Statistics, forthcoming.

Flavin, Marjorie, 1981, “The Adjustment of Consumption to Changing Expectations
    About Future Income”, Journal of Political Economy 89, 974—10091.

Flavin, Marjorie and Takashi Yamashita, 2002, “Owner-Occupied Housing and the
    Composition of the Household Portfolio”, American Economic Review 92, 345—
    362.

Goetzmann, William N., 1993, “The Single Family Home in the Investment Portfo-
    lio”, Journal of Real Estate Finance and Economics 6, 201—222.

Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier and Jonathan Parker, 2002, “Consumption Over the Life
   Cycle”, Econometrica 70, 47—89.

Hall, Robert E., 1978, “Stochastic Implications of the Life Cycle-Permanent Hy-
     pothesis: Theory and Evidence”, Journal of Political Economy 86, 971—987.

Hall, Robert E. and Frederic S. Mishkin, 1982, “The Sensitivity of Consumption to
     Transitory Income: Estimates From Panel Data on Households”, Econometrica
     50, 461—481.
Heaton, John, 1993, “The Interaction Between Time-Nonseparable Preferences and
    Time Aggregation”, Econometrica 61, 353—385.
Lustig, Hanno and Stijn Van Nieuwerburg, 2004, “Housing Collateral and Consump-
    tion Insurance Across US Regions,” unpublished paper, University of Chicago.
MaCurdy, Thomas, 1982, “The Use of Time Series Processes to Model The Error
   Structure of Earnings in a Longitudinal Data Analysis”, Journal of Economet-
   rics 18, 83—114.
Mankiw, N. Gregory, 1982, “Hall’s Consumption Hypothesis and Durable Goods”,
   Journal of Monetary Economics 10, 417—425.
Muellbauer, John and Anthony Murphy, 1990, “Is the UK Balance of Payments
   Sustainable?”, Economic Policy 11, 345—383.
Muellbauer, John and Anthony Murphy, 1997, “Booms and Busts in The UK Hous-
   ing Market”, Economic Journal 107, 1701—1727.

                                      41
Ortalo-Magné, François and Sven Rady, 2001, “Housing Market Dynamics: On the
    Contribution of Income Shocks and Credit Constraints,” unpublished paper,
    LSE.

Piazzesi, Monika, Martin Schneider, and Selale Tuzel, 2003, “Housing, Consumption,
    and Asset Pricing,” unpublished paper, University of Chicago.

Poterba, James M., 1991, “House Price Dynamics: The Role of Tax Policy and
    Demography,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2, 143—183.

Runkle, David E., 1991, “Liquidity Constraints and the Permanent Income Hypoth-
   esis,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 27, 73—98.
Sheiner, Louise, 1995, “Housing Prices and the Savings of Renters”, Journal of Urban
    Economics 38, 94—125.
Shiller, Robert J., 1998, Macro Markets: Creating Institutions for Managing Society’s
     Largest Economic Risks, Oxford University Press, New York, NY.
Sinai, Todd and Nicholas Souleles, 2005, “Owner-Occupied Housing as a Hedge
    Against Rent Risk”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120, 763—789.
Skinner, Jonathan, 1989, “Housing Wealth and Aggregate Saving”, Regional Science
    and Urban Economics 19, 305—324.
Skinner, Jonathan, 1994, “Housing and Saving in the United States”, in Yukio
    Noguchi and James M. Poterba eds. Housing Markets in the United States
    and Japan, University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL, 191—213.
Tracy, Joseph and Henry Schneider, 2001, “Stocks in the Household Portfolio: A
    Look Back at the 1990’s”, Current Issues in Economics and Finance 7(4) (Fed-
    eral Reserve Bank of New York, New York, NY), 1—6.

Yao, Rui and Harold H. Zhang, 2005, “Optimal Consumption and Portfolio Choices
    with Risky Housing and Borrowing Constraints,” Review of Financial Studies
    18, 197—239.
Yogo, Motohiro, 2003, “A Consumption-Based Explanation of Expected Stock Re-
    turns”, unpublished paper, Harvard University.
Zeldes, Stephen, 1989a, “Consumption and Liquidity Constraints: An Empirical
    Investigation”, Journal of Political Economy 97, 305—346.

                                        42
Zeldes, Stephen, 1989b, “Optimal Consumption with Stochastic Income: Deviations
    from Certainty Equivalence”, Quarterly Journal of Economics 104, 275—298.




                                     43
            Table 1, Panel A: Regional Cohort Definition and Cell Size



 Cohort Region Year of birth Age in 1988 Age in 2000 Min cell size Max cell size Mean cell size
  N1    North   1940-1949      39-48       51-60         64           160             99
  N2    North   1950-1959      29-38       41-50         82           161            112
  N3    North   1960-1969      19-28       31-40         58           209            105
  C1    Center  1940-1949      39-48       51-60         53           120            74
  C2    Center  1950-1959      29-38       41-50         51           141            79
  C3    Center  1960-1969      19-28       31-40         28           159            71
   S1   South   1940-1949      39-48       51-60         77           205            113
   S2   South   1950-1959      29-38       41-50         94           201            124
   S3   South   1960-1969      19-28       31-40         65           286            117


Note to Table 1, Panel A: This table shows the regional cohort definitions and quar-
terly cell sizes. We consider three regions: North, Center and South. North: Scotland,
North West, North East, Yorkshire and Humberside. Center: East Midlands, West
Midlands, Wales, Eastern Anglia. South: South East, South West, London.
        Table 1, Panel B: Homeownership Cohort Definition and Cell Size



 Cohort Homeownership Year of birth Age in 1988 Age in 2000 Min cell size Max cell size Mean cell size
  H1     Homeowner     1940-1944      44-48       56-60         69           166            99
  R1       Renter      1940-1944      44-48       56-60         18            54            28
  H2     Homeowner     1945-1949      39-43       51-55         95           209            127
  R2       Renter      1945-1949      39-43       51-55         19            56            31
  H3     Homeowner     1950-1954      34-38       46-50         84           185            116
  R3       Renter      1950-1954      34-38       46-50         23            51            35
  H4     Homeowner     1955-1959      29-33       41-45         91           192            119
  R4       Renter      1955-1959      29-33       41-45         22            75            43
  H5     Homeowner     1960-1964      24-28       36-40         84           226            115
  R5       Renter      1960-1964      24-28       36-40         29           104            55
  H6     Homeowner     1965-1969      19-23       31-35         12           206            75
  R6       Renter      1965-1969      19-23       31-35         25           118            57


Note to Table 1, Panel B: This table shows the homeownership cohort definitions and
quarterly cell sizes.
       Table 2, Panel A: Cohort Mean Data Summary for Regional Cohorts.



                       Variable    Mean     Min        Max
                                     North
                       ∆c          0.327 -52.377      58.865
                       ∆y          0.413 -38.768      49.111
                       ∆m          0.325 -38.604      37.708
                       Family size 2.564 1.558         3.401
                                     Center
                       ∆c          0.386 -44.617      51.261
                       ∆y          0.332 -51.387      55.881
                       ∆m          0.453 -32.799      38.689
                       Family size 2.632 1.521         3.441
                                     South
                       ∆c          0.489 -50.052      54.368
                       ∆y          0.515 -37.129      49.516
                       ∆m          0.225 -31.136      32.878
                       Family size 2.511 1.558         3.178


Note to Table 2, Panel A: First diﬀerences are all percentage points per quarter.
c denotes log consumption, y denotes log income, m denotes the log of mortgage
payments for the sample of mortgage borrowers. Family size is the number of adults
plus children in the household. This panel shows summary statistics for the regional
cohorts defined in Table 1, Panel A.
    Table 2, Panel B: Cohort Mean Data Summary for Homeownership Cohort
                                  Definition.



                      Variable    Mean       Min      Max
                                    Renters
                      ∆c          -0.485 -54.157     44.901
                      ∆y          -0.082 -60.956     75.190
                      Family size 2.314     1.270     3.667
                                 Homeowners
                      ∆c           0.611 -55.743     66.204
                      ∆y           0.401 -39.140     49.224
                      Family size 2.547     1.642     3.428


Note to Table 2, Panel B: First diﬀerences are all percentage points per quarter. c
denotes log consumption and y denotes log income. Family size is the number of
adults plus children in the household. This panel shows summary statistics for the
homeownership cohorts defined in Table 1, Panel B.
 Table 3: Summary Statistics and Correlation Matrix for Quarterly (Annual) Log
                              House Price Returns



               Region     North          Center        South
               Mean    1.27 (4.43)     1.23 (3.42)  0.94 (2.84)
               St Dev 3.04 (9.11)      3.80 (9.83)  3.59 (10.02)
               Min    -3.47 (-5.45) -4.43 (-11.15) -6.26 (-16.22)
               Max    9.69 (33.95) 14.70 (42.54) 9.83 (21.50)
                               Correlation Matrix
                          North          Center        South
               North       1.00
               Center 0.62 (0.80)         1.00
               South   0.30 (0.35)     0.72 (0.77)      1.00


Note to Table 3: This table shows summary statistics and correlation between quar-
terly (annual) house price returns for the three UK regions that we consider: North,
Center and South. North: Scotland, North West, North East, Yorkshire and Humber-
side. Center: East Midlands, West Midlands, Wales, Eastern Anglia. South: South
East, South West, London.
          Table 4: Benchmark Regression Results for Regional Cohorts



Independent Variable      (i)    (ii)    (iii)    (iv)   (v)     (vi)   (vii)    (viii)   (ix) IV (x) IV
Real interest rate       0.097  0.094   0.091    0.092  0.102   0.096   0.096   0.104      0.050   0.053
                       (0.029) (0.030) (0.027) (0.027) (0.027) (0.027) (0.027) (0.027)    (0.013) (0.013)
∆yt                      0.466          0.406   0.424   0.414   0.414   0.411   0.410      0.498   0.497
                       (0.036)         (0.035) (0.037) (0.038) (0.038) (0.039) (0.038)    (0.116) (0.125)
∆pt                             1.585   1.222   1.218                                      0.574
                               (0.179) (0.164) (0.165)                                    (0.131)
∆pUt K                                                  1.334   1.371   1.381   1.320              0.631
                                                       (0.184) (0.184) (0.185) (0.186)            (0.193)
∆pt − ∆pUt K                                                    0.724   0.716   0.688              0.376
                                                               (0.313) (0.314) (0.313)            (0.251)
∆mt                                                                     0.015   -0.075
                                                                       (0.039) (0.078)
∆ Claimants count                                                               -0.046
                                                                               (0.028)
∆ Own outright                                  -0.187 -0.135 -0.160 -0.157 -0.153                 -0.174
                                               (0.137) (0.138) (0.138) (0.138) (0.137)            (0.236)
∆ Mortgage                                      -0.092 -0.068 -0.077 -0.075 -0.075                 -0.141
                                               (0.078) (0.078) (0.079) (0.079) (0.078)            (0.136)
∆ Age                   -0.112 -0.077   -0.07   -0.075 -0.054 -0.062 -0.062 -0.060         -0.076 -0.068
                       (0.045) (0.049) (0.043) (0.044) (0.044) (0.044) (0.044) (0.044)    (0.053) (0.057)
∆ Age squared            0.001  0.001   0.001   0.001   0.001   0.001   0.001    0.001      0.001   0.001
                       (0.000) (0.000) (0.001) (0.001) (0.001) (0.001) (0.001) (0.001)    (0.001) (0.001)
∆ Ln family size         0.135  0.167   0.150   0.150   0.131   0.142   0.142    0.138      0.116   0.114
                       (0.049) (0.053) (0.047) (0.047) (0.047) (0.047) (0.047) (0.046)    (0.039) (0.041)
R2                       0.702  0.607   0.707   0.708   0.708   0.708   0.708   0.698
Note to Table 4: The dependent variable is ∆ct , where c is the log of real non-durable
consumption. The independent variables include the real interest rate, quarterly
growth of household income, and quarterly growth of house prices, both regional
(∆p) and national (∆pU K ). ∆p − ∆pUK is the diﬀerence between regional and na-
tional house price growth. ∆m is the growth in real mortgage payments. ∆ Own
outright (∆ Mortgage) is the diﬀerence in the proportion of homeowners outright
(with a mortgage). ∆ Claimants count is the change in the regional claimants count
rate, a proxy for the regional unemployment rate. The equation was estimated using
synthetic cohort techniques and data for regional cohorts. All regressions include
quarter dummies and cohort dummies (not reported). The standard errors shown
in parentheses are corrected for heteroscedasticity and first order serial correlation.
The last two columns report instrumental variables regression results, with ∆yt in-
strumented using the regional claimants count rate, changes in house prices, and the
second lag of changes in income.
      Table 5: Benchmark Regression Results for Homeownership Cohorts



Independent Variable        (i)      (ii)
                                        (iii)    (iv)    (v)     (vi) (vii) IV
Real interest rate         0.072    0.056
                                       0.065    0.067   0.073  0.070    0.050
                          (0.029)   (0.03)
                                      (0.029) (0.028) (0.028) (0.028) (0.012)
∆yt                        0.367       0.320    0.333   0.344  0.344   0.265
                          (0.031)     (0.032) (0.032) (0.032) (0.032) (0.106)
∆pt                            1.022   0.651    1.673   1.705  1.700    1.149
                              (0.132) (0.129) (0.291) (0.290) (0.290) (0.141)
∆pt × Young Homeowner                          -0.877 -0.772 -0.676    -0.479
                                              (0.367) (0.369) (0.373) (0.116)
∆pt × Young Renter                             -1.670 -1.694 -1.676    -1.134
                                              (0.344) (0.343) (0.343) (0.340)
∆pt × Old Renter                               -0.931 -0.966 -0.958    -0.578
                                              (0.356) (0.355) (0.354) (0.093)
∆mt                                                    -0.129   0.007
                                                      (0.061) (0.098)
∆mt × Young Homeowner                                          -0.217
                                                              (0.123)
∆ Age                  -0.114 -0.115 -0.108 -0.108 -0.120 -0.110       -0.116
                      (0.052) (0.055) (0.051) (0.051) (0.051) (0.051) (0.039)
∆ Age squared           0.001  0.001   0.001    0.001   0.001   0.001   0.001
                      (0.000) (0.000) (0.000) (0.000) (0.000) (0.000) (0.000)
∆ Ln Family size        0.155  0.214   0.160    0.160   0.154   0.152   0.159
                      (0.037) (0.039) (0.037) (0.037) (0.036) (0.036) (0.063)
R2                      0.603  0.542   0.613    0.622   0.624  0.625    0.624
Note to Table 5: The dependent variable is ∆ct , where c is the log of real non-durable
consumption. The independent variables include the real interest rate, quarterly
growth in household income, quarterly growth in house prices (∆p) , quarterly growth
in house prices interacted with dummy variables for young homeowners and young and
old renters, and quarterly growth in mortgage payments (∆mt ), also interacted with
a dummy for young homeowner. Young (old) are those younger (older) than 40 years
of age. The equation was estimated using synthetic cohort techniques and data for
the the cohorts of homeowners and renters. All regressions include quarter dummies
and cohort dummies (not reported). The standard errors shown in parentheses are
corrected for heteroscedasticity and first order serial correlation. The last column
reports instrumental variables regression results, with ∆yt instrumented using the
regional claimants count rate, changes in house prices, and the second lag of changes
in income.
                  Table 6: Calibrated and estimated parameters



              Description                         Parameter Value
              Risk aversion                           γ        3
              Discount factor                         β       .98
              Preference for housing                  θ      1.00
              Bequest motive                          b      1.00
              Downpayment ratio                       d       .15
              Transaction cost                        λ       .08
              Moving probability                      π       .05
              Interest rate                           R       .01
              Rental Premium                         θR       .01
              Mean log real house price growth        g       .01
              S.d. of log real house price growth    σδ      .062
              S.d. of transitory income shocks       σω      .100
              S.d. of persistent income shocks       ση      .030


Note to Table 6: All parameters are in annual terms. The income data are from the
FES from 1988 through 1999. The house price data are from Nationwide from 1962
to 1999.
                     Table 7: BHPS Data and Simulated Data



                               Panel A: BHPS Data
                                                     Age Group
                                               20-39 40-59 60-79
              Fraction homeowners               0.61    0.78   0.66
              Annual moving probability         0.17    0.04   0.03
              Annual mov. prob. renters         0.23    0.07   0.04
              Annual mov. prob. homeowners 0.12         0.04   0.02
                   Panel B: Heterogeneous discount rate model
                                                     Age Group
                                               20-39 40-59 60-79
              Fraction homeowners               0.24    0.68   0.59
              Annual moving probability         0.21    0.10   0.08
              Annual mov. prob. renters         0.23    0.22   0.10
              Annual mov. prob. homeowners 0.05         0.05   0.07
                Panel C: Heterogeneous moving probability model
                                                     Age Group
                                               20-39 40-59 60-79
              Fraction homeowners               0.26    0.76   0.63
              Annual moving probability         0.20    0.09   0.09
              Annual mov. prob. renters         0.21    0.17   0.13
              Annual mov. prob. homeowners 0.05         0.06   0.08


Note to Table 7: This table shows the proportion of homeowners, annual uncon-
ditional moving probability, and moving probability conditional on homeownership
status, by age. Panel A shows the data from the British Household Panel Survey.
Panels B and C show the results obtained from simulated data. Panel B shows
the results for 70 percent of the households facing the baseline parameters shown in
Table 9, and for the remaining 30 percent facing the same parameters except for a
lower discount factor equal to 0.85. Panel C shows the results for 70 percent of the
households facing the baseline parameters shown in Table 9, and for the remaining
30 percent facing the same parameters except for a higher moving probability equal
to 0.10.
             Table 8: Estimation results based on simulated data



                             Het. discount rate             Het. moving        FES data
                           (i)       (ii)      (iii)   (iv)      (v)     (vi)     (vii)
                   Panel A: Dependent Variable Renter-Homeowner
Income                                        0.067                     0.076
                                            (0.021)                    (0.004)
Financial savings                             0.238                     0.031
                                            (0.021)                    (0.001)
∆pt                                          -1.769                     -2.230
                                            (0.348)                    (0.315)
                           Panel B: Dependent Variable ∆ct
∆yt                      0.402     0.164      0.166   0.284     0.163   0.169     0.596
                        (0.004) (0.004) (0.004) (0.003) (0.004) (0.003)         (0.083)
∆yt × Young Homeowner              0.056      0.184             0.052   0.197    -0.056
                                  (0.008) (0.012)             (0.008) (0.012)   (0.114)
∆yt × Young Renter                 0.518     0.469              0.387   0.336    -0.361
                                  (0.006) (0.008)             (0.006) (0.006)   (0.094)
∆yt × Old Renter                   0.397     0.391             -0.034   0.027    -0.314
                                  (0.007) (0.006)             (0.007) (0.007)   (0.094)
∆pt                      0.689     0.806      0.847   0.713     0.793   0.804     1.294
                        (0.021) (0.014) (0.012) (0.017) (0.013) (0.012)         (0.314)
∆pt × Young Homeowner -0.507 -0.219          0.162   -0.370 -0.244      0.164    -0.428
                        (0.042) (0.031) (0.028) (0.035) (0.029) (0.029)         (0.386)
∆pt × Young Renter       -0.425 -0.748 -0.810 -0.473 -0.735 -0.751               -1.047
                        (0.030) (0.021) (0.022) (0.025) (0.020) (0.021)         (0.381)
∆pt × Old Renter         -0.576 -0.726 -0.761 -0.519 -0.504 -0.472               -0.846
                        (0.034) (0.023) (0.018) (0.032) (0.024) (0.019)         (0.414)
Renter-Homeowner                             -0.131                     -0.112
                                            (0.005)                    (0.004)
Note to Table 8: The dependent variable in Panel A is a dummy variable that takes
the value of one in periods in which the household switches from renting to owning,
and zero otherwise. The independent variables include household income, financial
savings, and the growth in house prices (∆p). The dependent variable in Panel B is
∆ct , where c is the log of real non-durable consumption. The independent variables
include the growth in household income, growth in house prices (∆p), growth in
income and house prices interacted with dummy variables for young homeowners,
young renters, and old renters. Young are those younger than 40 years of age. Old
are those older than 40 years of age, but younger than 60 years of age. We also include
as independent variables a second order polynomial of age (estimated coeﬃcients not
reported). In columns (i) through (iv) the data were generated by the model with 70
percent of the households facing the baseline parameters shown in Table 6, and the
remaining 30 percent facing the same parameters except for a lower discount factor
equal to 0.85. In columns (v) through (viii) the data were generated by the model
with 70 percent of the households facing the baseline parameters shown in Table 6,
and the remaining 30 percent facing the same parameters except for a higher moving
probability equal to 0.10. In columns (i), (ii), (v) and (vi) we estimate regressions
similar to those that we have estimated on the data, i.e. without controlling for
the endogeneity of the decision of whether to become a homeowner. In columns
(iii), (iv), (vii) and (viii) we estimate jointly the decision to become a homeowner,
and the impact of house price changes on consumption. Both equations include as
independent variables a second order polynomial on age.
         Table 9: Predictable and Unpredictable Eﬀects for Regional Cohorts



                                   Predictable Eﬀects        Unpredictable Eﬀects
Independent Variable             (i)       (ii)     (iii)    (iv)    (v)      (vi)
Real interest rate              0.092     0.120    0.129
                               (0.063) (0.062) (0.064)
∆yt                             0.497     0.526    0.549
                               (0.215) (0.210) (0.214)
∆pt                             1.950
                               (0.499)
∆pUt K                                    2.506    2.451
                                         (0.517) (0.525)
∆pt − ∆pUt K                                      -0.599
                                                 (1.008)
Innov. in real interest rate                                 0.074   0.080   0.076
                                                            (0.026) (0.026) (0.026)
Innov. in income                                             0.420   0.417   0.416
                                                            (0.036) (0.037) (0.037)
Innov. in ∆pt                                                0.794
                                                            (0.160)
Innov. in ∆pUK
            t                                                        0.842   0.867
                                                                    (0.182) (0.182)
Innov. in ∆pt − ∆pUt K                                                       0.585
                                                                            (0.293)
Note to Table 9: In specifications (i) through (iii) the dependent variable is ∆ct , where
c is the log of real non-durable consumption. The independent variables include the
real interest rate, quarterly growth in household income, and quarterly growth in
house prices, both regional (∆p) and national (∆pUK ). ∆p − ∆pUK is the diﬀerence
between regional and national house price growth. The regressions include changes in
age, age squared, changes in family size, quarter dummies and cohort dummies (not
reported). The equation was estimated using synthetic cohort techniques and instru-
mental variables. The instruments used were the second lag of changes in non-durable
consumption, income, regional and national house prices, the second lags of nominal
interest rates and inflation, and the second lag of changes in family size. In speci-
fications (iv) through (vi) the independent variables are the innovations in income,
house prices and real interest rate obtained as the residual of the first stage regres-
sions in the IV estimation. The standard errors are corrected for heteroscedasticity
and first-order serial correlation.
  Table 10: Predictable and Unpredictable Eﬀects for Homeownership Cohorts


                                           Predictable Eﬀects            Unpredictable Eﬀects
Independent Variable                  (i)      (ii)     (iii)   (iv)     (v)     (vi)    (vii)
Real interest rate                   0.171    0.183    0.120   0.126
                                    (0.065) (0.065) (0.069) (0.069)
∆yt                                  0.331    0.392    0.369   0.377
                                    (0.122) (0.122) (0.121) (0.122)
∆pt                                  1.573    3.280    4.164   4.139
                                    (0.731) (0.916) (0.974) (0.974)
∆pt × Young Owner                            -1.353 -1.354 -1.415
                                            (0.872) (0.868) (0.871)
∆pt × Young Renter                           -2.719 -2.791 -2.728
                                            (0.825) (0.821) (0.825)
∆pt × Old Renter                             -2.256 -2.377 -2.363
                                            (0.832) (0.829) (0.829)
∆mt                                                   -0.669 -0.455
                                                     (0.260) (0.363)
∆mt × Young Owner                                              -0.342
                                                              (0.406)
Innov. in real interest rate                                             0.049    0.053   0.056
                                                                        (0.028) (0.028) (0.028)
Innov. in income                                                         0.349    0.350   0.355
                                                                        (0.033) (0.033) (0.034)
Innov. in ∆pt                                                            0.519    1.108   1.112
                                                                        (0.129) (0.325) (0.328)
Innov. in ∆pt × Young Homeowner                                                  -0.463 -0.348
                                                                                (0.416) (0.429)
Innov. in ∆pt × Young Renter                                                     -1.097 -1.107
                                                                                (0.388) (0.390)
Innov. in ∆pt × Old Renter                                                       -0.403 -0.411
                                                                                (0.396) (0.399)
Innov. in ∆mt                                                                            -0.010
                                                                                        (0.095)
Innov. in ∆mt × Young Homeowner                                                          -0.098
                                                                                        (0.126)
Note to Table 10: In specifications (i) through (iv) the dependent variable is ∆ct ,
where c is the log of real non-durable consumption. The independent variables include
the real interest rate, quarterly growth in household income, quarterly growth in
house prices, also interacted with dummies for young homeowners and young and
old renters, and quarterly changes in mortgage payments, also interacted with a
dummy for young homeowners. The regressions include changes in age, age squared,
changes in family size, quarter dummies and cohort dummies (not reported). The
equation was estimated using synthetic cohort techniques and instrumental variables.
The instruments used were the second lag of changes in non-durable consumption,
income, regional and national house prices, the second lags of nominal interest rates
and inflation, and the second lag of changes in family size. In specifications (v)
through (vii) the independent variables are the innovations in income, house prices
and real interest rate obtained as the residual of the first stage regressions in the IV
estimation. The standard errors are corrected for heteroscedasticity and first-order
serial correlation.
  Table A.1: Regional Transition Probabilities: North (N), Center (C), South (S).



  Age Group    N-N     N-C      N-S    C-N      C-C     C-S     S-N     S-C     S-S
  20-24        0.960   0.029   0.011   0.000   1.000   0.000   0.000   0.000   0.994
  25-29        0.992   0.004   0.003   0.008   0.980   0.008   0.008   0.011   0.981
  30-34        0.993   0.002   0.005   0.005   0.990   0.004   0.003   0.007   0.991
  35-39        0.991   0.004   0.004   0.000   0.990   0.008   0.002   0.006   0.991
  40-44        0.997   0.001   0.001   0.003   0.990   0.005   0.001   0.003   0.995
  45-49        0.994   0.003   0.003   0.001   0.996   0.003   0.000   0.004   0.996
  50-54        0.998   0.000   0.000   0.003   0.992   0.003   0.001   0.001   0.998
  55-59        0.998   0.002   0.000   0.000   0.998   0.002   0.000   0.004   0.996
  60-64        0.997   0.002   0.002   0.000   1.000   0.000   0.000   0.006   0.992
  65-69        1.000   0.000   0.000   0.003   0.997   0.000   0.001   0.000   0.998
  70-74        0.998   0.002   0.000   0.000   0.997   0.003   0.000   0.000   1.000
  75-79        0.996   0.002   0.002   0.000   0.998   0.002   0.000   0.004   0.996
  80-84        1.000   0.000   0.000   0.000   0.988   0.009   0.000   0.002   0.998
  85-89        1.000   0.000   0.000   0.000   0.990   0.010   0.000   0.000   1.000


Note to Table A.1: This table shows annual transition probabilities for households
living in diﬀerent regions, North (N), Center (C), and South (S), for diﬀerent age
groups. The data are from the British Household Panel Survey for the years 1991
to 1999. North (N): Scotland, North West, North East, Yorkshire and Humberside.
Center (C): East Midlands, West Midlands, Wales, Eastern Anglia. South (S): South
East, South West, London.
          Table A.2: Renter (R)/Homeowner(H) Transition Probabilities



  Age Group    R-R     R-H     H-R     H-H Frac. R Frac. H Mean Cell Size
  20-24        0.877   0.123   0.065   0.935 0.60    0.40       84
  25-29        0.888   0.112   0.046   0.954 0.40    0.60      287
  30-34        0.910   0.090   0.026   0.974 0.31    0.69      530
  35-39        0.914   0.086   0.013   0.987 0.26    0.74      643
  40-44        0.941   0.059   0.010   0.990 0.23    0.77      615
  45-49        0.964   0.036   0.005   0.995 0.21    0.79      581
  50-54        0.942   0.058   0.006   0.994 0.21    0.79      495
  55-59        0.965   0.035   0.004   0.996 0.23    0.77      411
  60-64        0.985   0.015   0.005   0.995 0.27    0.73      391
  65-69        0.984   0.016   0.006   0.994 0.32    0.68      447
  70-74        0.983   0.017   0.002   0.998 0.37    0.63      478
  75-79        0.991   0.009   0.006   0.994 0.41    0.59      368
  80-84        0.996   0.004   0.013   0.987 0.47    0.53      261
  85-89        0.988   0.012   0.015   0.985 0.55    0.45      133


Note to Table A.2: This table shows annual transition probabilities from renter to
renter, renter to homeowner, homeowner to renter, and homeowner to homeowner
for diﬀerent age groups. The table also shows the proportion of homeowners and
renters. The data are from the British Household Panel Survey for the years 1991
to 1999.
Table A.3: Endogeneity of Homeownership: Benchmark Regression Results.



         Independent Variable     (i)           (ii)      (iii)
         Real interest rate      0.070         0.076     0.075
                               (0.028)       (0.028)   (0.027)
         ∆yt                     0.344         0.360     0.371
                               (0.032)       (0.032)   (0.032)
         ∆pt                     1.700         1.705     1.652
                               (0.290)       (0.292)   (0.283)
         ∆pt × Young Homeowner  -0.676        -0.636    -0.631
                               (0.373)       (0.368)   (0.358)
         ∆pt × Young Renter     -1.676        -1.827    -1.655
                               (0.343)       (0.339)   (0.336)
         ∆pt × Old Renter       -0.958        -1.097    -1.078
                               (0.354)       (0.354)   (0.345)
         ∆mt                     0.007         0.015     0.014
                               (0.098)       (0.098)   (0.095)
         ∆mt × Young Homeowner -0.217         -0.175    -0.179
                               (0.123)       (0.122)   (0.119)
         ∆ Age                  -0.110        -0.105    -0.089
                               (0.051)       (0.051)   (0.051)
         ∆ Age squared           0.001         0.001     0.001
                               (0.000)       (0.000)   (0.000)
         ∆ Ln Family size       0.152          0.165     0.178
                               (0.036)       (0.036)   (0.036)
           2
         R                       0.625         0.613     0.635
Note to Table A.3: The dependent variable is ∆ct , where c is the log of real non-
durable consumption. The independent variables include the real interest rate, quar-
terly changes in household income, quarterly changes in house prices (∆p), quarterly
changes in house prices interacted with dummy variables for young homeowners, and
young and old renters, and quarterly changes in mortgage payments (∆mt ), also in-
teracted with a dummy for young homeowners. Young (old) are those younger (older)
than forty years of age. The equation was estimated using synthetic cohort techniques
and data for the the cohorts of homeowners and renters. The columns diﬀer in the
way the cohorts of homeowners and renters are defined. In (i) homeowners (renters)
in quarter t are those who reported being homeowners (renters) in that quarter. In
(ii) homeowners (renters) are those who reported being homeowners (renters) in quar-
ter t and who reported living at the current address for at least six months. In (iii)
homeowners (renters) are those who reported being homeowners (renters) in quarter
t and who reported living at the current address for at least six months. In addition
in (iii) we classify as renters those who reported being homeowners who have lived at
their present address for less than six months and who are younger than 32 years of
age.
     All regressions include quarter dummies and cohort dummies (not reported). The
standard errors shown in parentheses are corrected for heteroscedasticity and first
order serial correlation.
Table A.4, Panel A: Endogeneity of Homeownership: IV Regressions.

       Independent Variable     (i)          (ii)      (iii)
       Real interest rate     0.120         0.137     0.117
                             (0.069)      (0.076)   (0.073)
       ∆yt                    0.369        0.354      0.391
                             (0.121)      (0.118)   (0.125)
       ∆pt                    4.164        3.822      3.533
                             (0.974)      (0.919)   (0.927)
       ∆pt × Young Homeowner -1.354        -1.136    -1.198
                             (0.868)      (0.868)   (0.872)
       ∆pt × Young Renter     -2.791       -2.982    -2.635
                             (0.821)      (0.821)   (0.839)
       ∆pt × Old Renter       -2.377       -2.344    -2.372
                             (0.829)      (0.832)   (0.838)
       ∆mt                    -0.669       -0.483    -0.488
                             (0.260)      (0.330)   (0.330)

Table A.4, Panel B: Endogeneity of Homeownership: Wealth Eﬀects.

    Independent Variable          (iv)          (v)       (vi)
    Innov. in real int. rate     0.056        0.062     0.062
                                (0.028)      (0.028)   (0.028)
    Innov. in income             0.355        0.379      0.390
                                (0.034)      (0.035)   (0.034)
    Innov. in ∆pt                1.112        1.076      1.068
                                (0.328)      (0.331)   (0.321)
    In. in ∆pt ×Young Homeowner  -0.348       -0.264    -0.277
                                (0.429)      (0.430)   (0.417)
    In. in ∆pt ×Young Renter     -1.107       -1.211    -1.057
                                (0.390)      (0.387)   (0.379)
    In. in ∆pt ×Old Renter       -0.411       -0.563    -0.559
                                (0.399)      (0.402)   (0.390)
    In. in ∆mt                   -0.010        0.023     0.024
                                (0.095)      (0.094)   (0.091)
    In. In ∆mt ×Young Homeowner -0.098        -0.117    -0.133
                                (0.126)      (0.126)   (0.122)
Note to Table A.4: In specifications (i) through (iii) the dependent variable is ∆ct ,
where c is the log of real non-durable consumption. The independent variables include
the real interest rate, quarterly growth in household income, quarterly growth in
house prices (∆p), also interacted with dummies for young homeowners and young
and old renters, and quarterly changes in mortgage payments (∆mt ). The regressions
include changes in age, age squared, changes in family size, quarter dummies and
cohort dummies (not reported). The equations were estimated using synthetic cohort
techniques and instrumental variables. The instruments used were the second lag of
changes in non-durable consumption, income, house prices, mortgage payments, the
second lag of nominal interest rates and inflation, and the second lag of changes in
family size. In columns (iv) through (vi) the dependent variable is the innovation
in ∆ct . The independent variables are the innovations in income, house prices, the
real interest rate, and real mortgage payments obtained as the residuals of the first
stage regressions in the IV estimation. The columns diﬀer in the way the cohorts of
homeowners and renters are defined. In (i) and (iv) homeowners (renters) in quarter
t are those who reported being homeowners (renters) in quarter t. In (ii) and (v)
homeowners (renters) are those who reported being homeowners (renters) in quarter
t and who reported living at their current address for at least six months. In (iii)
and (vi) homeowners (renters) are those who reported being homeowners (renters) in
quarter t and who reported living at their current address for at least six months. In
addition in (iii) and (vi) we classify as renters those who reported being homeowners
who live at the present address for less than six months and who are younger than
32 years of age. Standard errors are shown in parentheses. The standard errors are
corrected for first order serial correlation and heteroscedasticity.
Table A.5: House Size Choices in Simulated Data


                             (i)        (ii)
Panel A: Dependent Variable Renter-Homeowner
Income                     0.063      0.078
                          (0.004)    (0.004)
Financial savings          0.217      0.032
                          (0.011)    (0.001)
∆pt                        -1.651     -2.285
                          (0.345)    (0.321)
       Panel B: Dependent Variable ∆ht
∆yt                        -0.011     -0.007
                          (0.002)    (0.001)
∆yt × Young Homeowner 0.068           0.069
                          (0.004)    (0.005)
∆yt × Young Renter         0.744       0.614
                          (0.010)    (0.009)
∆yt × Old Renter           0.561      0.244
                          (0.011)    (0.016)
∆pt                        0.084      0.063
                          (0.007)    (0.008)
∆pt × Young Homeowner -0.247          -0.232
                          (0.014)    (0.015)
∆pt × Young Renter         -0.515     -0.469
                          (0.027)    (0.030)
∆pt × Old Renter           -0.391     -0.180
                          (0.033)    (0.039)
Renter-Homeowner           -0.214     -0.172
                          (0.006)    (0.007)
Note to Table A.5: The dependent variable in Panel A is a dummy variable that takes
the value of one in periods in which the household switches from renting to owning,
and zero otherwise. The independent variables include household income, financial
savings, and the growth in house prices (∆p). The dependent variable in Panel B
is ∆ht , where h is the log of real house size. The independent variables include the
growth in household income, growth in house prices (∆p), growth in income and house
prices interacted with dummy variables for young homeowners, young renters, and
old renters. Young are those younger than 40 years of age. Old are those older than
40 years of age, but younger than 60 years of age. We also include as independent
variables a second order polynomial of age (estimated coeﬃcients not reported). In
columns (i) the data were generated by the model with 70 percent of the households
facing the baseline parameters shown in Table 6, and the remaining 30 percent facing
the same parameters except for a lower discount factor equal to 0.85. In column (ii)
the data were generated by the model with 70 percent of the households facing the
baseline parameters shown in Table 6, and the remaining 30 percent facing the same
parameters except for a higher moving probability equal to 0.10. We estimate jointly
the decision to become a homewoner, and the impact of house price changes on house
size. Both equations include as independent variables a second order polynomial on
age.
                                   Figure 1: Interest Rate, Inflation, and House Prices in the United Kingdom

                               0.16                                                                                              0.35

                               0.14                                                                                              0.3
                                                                                                                                 0.25




                                                                                                                                         House Price Return (annual)
Interest Rates and Inflation




                               0.12
                                                                                                                                 0.2
                                0.1                                                                                              0.15
          (annual)




                               0.08                                                                                              0.1

                               0.06                                                                                              0.05
                                                                                                                                 0
                               0.04
                                                                                                                                 -0.05
                               0.02                                                                                              -0.1
                                  0                                                                                              -0.15
                                    Q1 Q1 Q1 Q1 Q1 Q1 Q1 Q1 Q1 Q1 Q1 Q1 Q1
                                   1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000
                                                                               Year

                                       Nominal Interest Rate                Inflation          Nominal House Price Return

                               Note to Figure 1: This figure shows nominal interest rates, inflation rate and house price return for the United
                               Kingdom. The inflation rate measure is the change in the Retail Price Index. The house price data is from
                               Nationwide. The series are quarterly, but are in annual terms.
                              Figure 2: Non Durable Consumption and Income Over the Life Cycle

                  14
                  13
                  12
                  11
                  10
Thousand Pounds




                   9
                   8
                   7
                   6
                   5
                   4
                   3
                   2
                   1
                   0
                       20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 36 38 40 42 44 46 48 50 52 54 56 58 60 62
                                                                          Age

                       Note to Figure 2: This figure plots annual real non-durable consumption (solid line) and real income (dashed line
                       over the life-cycle for different cohorts. The data is from the UK Family Expenditure Survey. The age-cohort
                       income and consumption were obtained by regressing consumption and income on year-cohort dummies.
                       Annual values were obtained by multiplying the two week consumption and income by twenty six.
                            Figure 3: Non Durable Consumption and Income Over the Life Cycle for
                                                       Homeowners

                  14
                  13
                  12
                  11
                  10
Thousand Pounds




                   9
                   8
                   7
                   6
                   5
                   4
                   3
                   2
                   1
                   0
                       20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 36 38 40 42 44 46 48 50 52 54 56 58 60 62
                                                                           Age

                       Note to Figure 3: This figure plots annual real non-durable consumption (solid line) and real income (dashed line
                       over the life-cycle for different cohorts, and with the sample restricted to homeowners. The data is from the UK
                       Family Expenditure Survey. The age-cohort income and consumption were obtained by regressing consumption
                       and income on year-cohort dummies. Annual values were obtained by multiplying the two week consumption an
                       income by twenty six.
            Figure 4: Proportion of Renters (dashed), Owners with Mortgage (solid), and
                                          Owners Outright

 1

0.9

0.8

0.7

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

 0
      20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 36 38 40 42 44 46 48 50 52 54 56 58 60 62
                                                           Age


       Note to Figure 4: This figure plots the proportion of renters, homeowners with mortgage, and owners outright
       over the life-cycle for different cohorts. The data is from the UK Family Expenditure Survey for the years 1988
       to 2000.
                                Figure 5: Mortgage Payments Over the Life Cycle

         1200



         1000



          800
Pounds




          600



          400



          200



            0
                20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 36 38 40 42 44 46 48 50 52 54 56 58 60 62
                                                                  Age


           Note to Figure 5: This figure plots annual real mortgage payments over the life-cycle for mortgage holders,
           and for different cohorts. The data is from the UK Family Expenditure Survey for the years 1988 to 2000.
                                    Figure 6: Regional House Prices in The United Kingdom

                   5.4
                   5.3
                   5.2
                   5.1
Log House Prices




                    5
                   4.9
                   4.8
                   4.7
                   4.6
                   4.5
                   4.4
                         1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000
                          Q1   Q1   Q1   Q1   Q1   Q1   Q1   Q1   Q1   Q1   Q1   Q1

                                        Cohorts N1 - N3             Cohorts C1 - C3            Cohorts S1 - S3

                         Note to Figure 6: This figure shows the evolution of house prices in the three UK regions that we
                         consider: North, Center, and South.
                         North: Scotland, North West, North East, Yorkshire and Humberside.
                         Center: East Midlands, West Midlands, Wales, Eastern Anglia.
                         South: South East, South West, London.
