                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                  HOW DO FRIENDSHIPS FORM?

                                            Bruce Sacerdote
                                            David Marmaros

                                         Working Paper 11530
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w11530


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       July 2005




The authors thank the National Science Foundation for generous funding and thank dsicussants and seminar
participants at Wharton, DELTA, Ohio State University, and the NBER for helpful suggestions. We thank
two anonymous referees and all three QJE editors. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by Bruce Sacerdote and David Marmaros. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
How Do Friendships Form?
Bruce Sacerdote and David Marmaros
NBER Working Paper No. 11530
July 2005
JEL No. J0, J2

                                           ABSTRACT



We examine how people form social networks among their peers. We use a unique dataset that tells

us the volume of email between any two people in the sample. The data are from students and recent

graduates of Dartmouth College. First year students interact with peers in their immediate proximity

and form long term friendships with a subset of these people. This result is consistent with a model

in which the expected value of interacting with an unknown person is low (making traveling solely

to meet new people unlikely), while the benefits from interacting with the same person repeatedly

are high. Geographic proximity and race are greater determinants of social interaction than are

common interests, majors, or family background. Two randomly chosen white students interact three

times more often than do a black student and a white student. However, placing the black and white

student in the same freshman dorm increases their frequency of interaction by a factor of three. A

traditional "linear in group means" model of peer ability is only a reasonable approximation to the

ability of actual peers chosen when we form the groups around all key factors including distance,

race and cohort.



Bruce Sacerdote
6106 Rockefeller Hall
Department of Economics
Dartmouth College
Hanover, NH 03755-3514
and NBER
bruce.sacerdote@dartmouth.edu
I.      Introduction

        It is frequently argued that friends and peers have a large influence on how we behave, how

much education we obtain, what career we pursue, and even whom we marry. (See for example

Harris [1998], Case and Katz [1991], Evans Oates and Schwab [1992], Zimmerman [2003], Hoxby

[2000a], and Marmaros and Sacerdote [2002]). Families self select into certain neighborhoods and

students into certain schools because of the perceived peer effects as in Hoxby [2000b], Winston

[1999] and many others. However, less has been written on how we actually choose and are chosen

by a specific group of friends within a neighborhood, school or workplace.1 We find that long term

friendships grow from chance meetings and that small and random differences in proximity have a

big impact on our circle of friends.

        One reason for the lack of studies on friendship is the scarcity of large micro data sets in

which we can identify who is friends with whom, with the notable exceptions of Case and Katz

[1991] and Holahan, Wilcox, and Burnam [1978].2 We solve this problem by measuring the level

of social interaction between any two individuals as the volume of email exchanged between the

two people during the prior thirteen months. The subjects are students and recent alumni at

Dartmouth College.        Our exercise is particularly interesting given the random assignment of

students to rooms and dorms during their freshman year.                   The exogenous shock of random

assignment allows us to test the power of geographic proximity against other potentially important

factors like race, family background, and common interests like athletic teams.

        Our methodology also provides a very direct measure of the amount of racial segregation on

a campus. Bowen and Bok [2001] explain that most selective universities have made a major push

during the last 30 years to increase the racial diversity of their student bodies. However, as argued



1
 One exception is Falk and Kosfeld [2003] who study the shape of networks in an experimental setting.
2
 For example the NLSY and GSS do ask respondents several questions about their friends, but not enough to allow the
sort of detailed analysis we propose here.
                                                                                                                  2
in Richards [2002], the universities' objectives may be partially blunted if the white and non-white

groups on campus spend very little time interacting.

       In the recent Supreme Court cases addressing affirmative action, eight universities

(Dartmouth, Harvard, Yale, Brown, University of Chicago, Duke, University of Pennsylvania and

Princeton) jointly filed an amicus brief which emphasized the importance of racial diversity in the

educational process. The brief argues that students educate each other and that several studies

(Bowen and Bok [2001], Bowen and Levin [2003], Epstein [2002]) demonstrate that cross racial

learning takes place and is valued by students and the labor market.

       However, other than Duncan, Boisjoly, Kremer, Levy and Eccles [2002] few large scale

studies actually measure whether much interracial interaction is taking place. If anything, the

evidence we have from campus newspapers and personal anecdotes suggests massive amounts of

racial segregation on nearly every campus. See for example Shapiro [2003] describing Emory

University or Hills [2003] describing Bryn Mawr.

       In a test of Bowen and Levin's [2003] thesis, we are able to ascertain the degree to which

athletes or minority students are either isolated from the rest of campus or systematically interacting

with peers who have lower academic ability. For example, we show that more than half of a black

student's interactions take place with non-black students.

       We add to the existing literature on friendship or social interactions in several ways. First,

we have a more detailed measure of the level of social interaction than has been possible with prior

studies. Second we explore the relative importance (in determining social interactions) of

geography, architecture, race, athletic interests, social interests, intellectual interests and family

background. We explore how the importance of these factors varies within versus across race and

within versus across gender relationships. And finally we ask whether a linear in means approach

captures the social influences experienced by a student.



                                                                                                     3
        Our regressions and simulations lead us to three related conclusions: First, proximity does

have a large effect (3x) on the likelihood of social interaction among individuals, regardless of race

or family background. However proximity is not the most powerful policy tool for increasing

interracial interactions on a given campus, because the proximity effect is only important over short

distances (ie within building.) Given the physical reality that a student can be housed in truly close

proximity to only 45 or so other students, it would be difficult to generate large increases in the total

amount of interracial interaction simply through more mixing of the housing.3

        In contrast, placing two students in the same entering class (cohort) has a 6x effect on the

frequency of their interacting, even if the two students are of a different race or are at different ends

of the academic ability distribution. Thus overall cohort composition is important in determining

peer group and this fact can be used to influence the number of interracial interactions or

interactions with high SAT scorers experienced by the modal Dartmouth student.

        Second, a simple group means or linear in means model of peer influences does not

necessarily assign students to their true peer group, as measured by the number of email

interactions. The majority of existing peer effects studies use a linear in means approach to creating

measures of peer background ability or peer outcomes. Researchers typically use the mean outcome

or mean pre-treatment characteristic for a group which is assumed to represent the individual's peers

or friends. For some examples, see Graham [2004], Betts [2004], Hoxby [2002] and the studies

referenced above. The econometrics of social interactions literature including Manski [1993],

Graham and Hahn [2004] uses the linear in means model as a starting point.

        A large question for the literature is whether the group means approach approximates the

peer influences a student or subject actually experiences. Studies of peer effects at the university

level (Sacerdote [2001], Zimmerman [2003], Stinebrickner and Stinebrickner [2004], Duncan et al


3
  For an average white student only about 9 percent of her interactions with black students involve black students from
her freshman dorm. While proximity increases the likelihood of interaction for any pair of students, same dorm
interracial interactions are still a modest fraction of overall interracial interactions.
                                                                                                                      4
[2003], Foster [2002, 2003], Arcidiacono et al [2003]) calculate peer means at the room, hallway

and dorm level. Our data indicate that peer groups constructed in this way can be a reasonable

approximation to the true peer groups that form only if we construct peer groups along all

dimensions that matter including race, entering class, and geographic distance. And we estimate

significantly larger peer effects when we use a more appropriate definition of peer group rather than

a simple dorm or hallway mean.

       Our third conclusion is that having a minority roommate or dormmate does not appear to

lead students into a broader social network of minority students. When a white student is assigned a

black hallmate, she experiences additional interactions with that hallmate but not with other black

students living elsewhere on campus.

       Finally, by looking at the same students over time, we discuss how social interactions

change following the students' departure from campus after graduation. The panel aspect of the

data allow one test of the Gaspar Glaeser thesis [1998] that email communication is a complement

to face to face communication, rather than a substitute.



       I.A. On Peers, Race and Location

       There is a burgeoning literature on peer effects at the elementary, secondary, and post-

secondary levels of education. Hoxby [2000a] finds large peer effects in reading and math test

scores among elementary school students. Case and Katz [1991] and Evans, Oates, and Schwab

[1992] show that peers are influential in determining risky youth behaviors including drug use,

criminal activity, and unprotected sex. A series of papers including Sacerdote [2001], Zimmerman

[2003], Stinebrickner and Stinebrickner [2002], Kremer and Levy [2000], Foster [2002], Duncan,

Boisjoly, Kremer, Levy and Eccles [2002, 2003] use college or university roommates to examine

peer effects on both academic and social (particularly drinking) outcomes.



                                                                                                   5
       Like us, several authors including Festinger at al [1963], Abu-Ghazzeh [1999], and Holahan,

Wilcox and Burnam [1978] have emphasized the importance of geographic proximity in

determining who interacts with whom. Festinger gathered data on social interactions among new

MIT students in MIT owned housing. Glaeser and Sacerdote [2000] show that individuals in more

dense housing structures are much more likely to interact with their neighbors.

       Duncan, Boisjoly, Kremer, Levy and Eccles [2003] show that the racial composition of

freshman housing assignments can have a long run impact student attitudes. For example, if student

X is randomly assigned a black roommate, X is somewhat more likely to support affirmative action

in admissions and societal income redistribution. We show that housing assignments lead to long

run social interactions among roommates and dormmates both within and across races.

       Several psychology researchers have studied the determinants of friendship, and the results

of Rainio [1966] and Tuma and Hallinan [1978] imply that similarity and status are two important

factors. Waller [1938] and Blau [1964] develop models in which offers of friendship are made and

accepted or rejected based on the costs and benefits of the relationship.



Modeling the friendship/ peer group formation process

       In conducting our analysis we have in mind a certain model of how friendships form and

blossom. Every potential social interaction has associated costs and benefits. The benefits are both

a.) a flow of information and ideas and b.) the utility from sharing a common experience and

conversation with another human being. The utility from the common experience component is

assumed to increase with the number of previous social interactions that one has had with this

specific person. The costs are the time it takes to have the face to face conversation, phone




                                                                                                  6
conversation or email exchange. Perhaps the biggest time cost of all is finding out that the other

person exists and might be a useful person with whom to speak.4

        Distance presents itself as a big cost when the value of the social interaction is unknown and

especially if the person with whom the interaction might take place is unknown.                       Common

background, interests and race between two people could raise or lower the benefits of a given

social interaction. For example, a white senior from Newton, MA may have little in common with a

black freshman from Chicago. This might increase the benefits of the interaction to both since the

two people have disjoint sets of information. On the other hand if the goals and concerns of the two

people are also completely orthogonal, then the value of the interaction may be low despite a large

knowledge gap between the two.

        With some functional form assumptions, we might write each agent's expected utility from a

potential interaction as:



        E[U(.)] = E[f(information gathered)+ g(shared experience benefit)] –c(time used)



        where g(.) is a function that increases with the number of previous social interactions and

c(.) is a function of the amount of time spent learning that the other person exists, traveling to their

location, and talking to them.

        Suppose that E[f+g] is low mean and high variance for interactions with new (unknown)

peers. Then our agent maximizes utility by soaking up lots of local, low cost social interactions.

Once she knows someone well, which raises E[f+g], then it pays to continue to interact with that

friend even if the friend moves far away. This concept appears to describe our results as well as

those of Festinger [1963].

4
  In theory, student X could walk .7 miles to another part of campus to find out if some other dorm might house a
previously unknown peer who can help him with his calculus problem set, or a new friend who wants to have dinner.


                                                                                                               7
         The alternative hypothesis (which we reject) is that our agent can predict with some

certainty who would be a good future friend or partner for social interaction. If this were true, then

she would probably be likely to travel across campus to meet someone new if that person was a

good future prospect.

         Suppose that interacting with a student of a different race is more costly than interacting

within race.5 Since the expected benefit of interacting with any unknown person is small, even a

small additional cost associated with cross race interaction could have a large effect on the initiation

of cross race friendships. And this racial barrier would be self perpetuating since in our model

people derive utility from interacting with the same person repeatedly. Thus even small costs

associated with race could create a barrier to new social interactions that works in the same manner

as geographic distance.

         There is also a potential free rider problem; everyone in the society might agree that more

interracial interaction would lower the costs of such interaction for everyone. But as an individual I

may ignore this social benefit from my activities. This could explain why on modern university

campuses students express both public and private support for reduced social segregation, and yet

high levels of segregation persist (See Reid, 2005).



Empirical Framework

         One goal of our analysis is to estimate the relative importance of geographic distance, racial

similarity, family background and common interests in determining who interacts with whom.6 We

do this by forming all possible pairs of students and asking who emails whom and with what

intensity. We run Poisson regressions of the following form:


But making this trip with no additional information, would be a costly and probably embarrassing thing for X to do,
particularly if the probability of success is low.
5
  Indeed the neuroscience literature suggests that white-black interaction is more stressful than within race interaction as
measured in functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) scans (Richeson et. al. [2003]).



                                                                                                                          8
E (# of emails between person 1 and person 2) = eXβ

where Xβ=α + B1*(dummies for person1's race, varsity athlete status, gender, Greek status, type of

high school, financial aid status) + B2*(dummies for person 2's race, varsity athlete status, gender,

Greek status, type of high school, financial aid status) + β3*(dummy for same graduating class) +

β4*(dummy for same freshman dorm) + B5*(interactions of race and same freshman dorm) + B6*

(interactions of female with same dorm dummy, race dummies)

        Here we combine into a single data point the volume from person A sending to person B and

B sending to A. But we obtained similar results when we kept A to B and B to A as two distinct

observations.

        We run Poisson regressions for two related reasons. First sending or receiving email is a

rare, binomial event which can occur in any of the instants in time during the sample period. We

are summing up over many instants in time (the sample period is 13 months long). Thus the

number of emails should have a Poisson distribution. The histogram of the data supports this

conjecture.     And when we look at "effects" of right hand side variables the effects appear to be

multiplicative rather than additive suggesting a Poisson or other semi-logarithmic functional form.

For example, putting two people in the same dorm and graduating class generally multiplies the

expected number of emails by a factor of roughly 10, even for subgroups that have a very different

baseline expected number of emails.7

        In our regression tables we report the regression coefficients, standard errors and

e^(coefficient).     The latter tells us how much the expected number of emails changes

multiplicatively if the right hand side variable increases by one. (Since Poisson regression fits the

number of emails to the form eXβ, increasing x by one multiplies the predicted value by eβ). For



6
  We then take these estimates and ask questions such as, a.) how could policy makers increase levels of interaction
across diverse groups, and b.) does a group means approach to peer effects adequately describe the social influences
experienced by these students.
7
  We are greatly indebted to both referees for suggesting that we switch from OLS to Poisson.
                                                                                                                   9
example, the coefficient on "same freshman dorm" is estimated to be 1.3, which means that being in

the same freshman dorm raises the number of emails by a factor of 3.7.8



Do Emails Equal Friendship?

        A natural question to ask is whether our email measure captures friendship or at least a

meaningful level of social interaction. We believe strongly that within the campus we are studying

the answer is yes. This conclusion is based upon our own experiences and a formal survey of

friendship that we conducted in order to validate the emails measure.

        Use of the Blitz (Dartmouth's email) system on campus is pervasive. Virtually all planned

face to face interaction (for students, faculty, or staff) is organized over Blitz. Blitz is designed

specifically to deliver intra-campus email messages instantaneously, so it serves the same purpose

as Instant Messaging software which is popular in other organizations. In fact, pairs of roommates

or faculty members with offices on the same hallway blitz (email) each other a great deal.

        In order to demonstrate the strong positive correlation between friendship and email volume

between two students, we surveyed a small subset of the subjects in our dataset. We asked students

to name their five closest friends on campus, knowing that we could then match this list against

their emailing patterns. We emailed out 300 surveys and received back roughly 105 responses.

Thus (for this validation exercise) we have a list of close friends for 105 students and email volumes

between each of these 105 students and all other students.

        If a student A considers student B to be a close friend, then there is a 75 percent chance that

10 or more emails are sent between A and B during the 13 month period of the study. And the

average volume between A and B is 136 messages. If A does not consider B to be a close friend,

then there is a .2 percent chance that the total volume of emails exceeds 10, and the average volume


8
  Researchers often rely on the approximation that Poisson coefficients roughly correspond to percentage changes in the
dependent variable. But in our case many coefficients of interest are too large in absolute value for this approximation
to be helpful.
                                                                                                                      10
is .21 messages. In short, we observe a strong connection between email volumes and self reported

friendship.

         There are of course important caveats to this conclusion. First, our small survey of friends

has only a 30 percent response rate and response is biased towards heavier users of Blitz. So the

connection between emails and friendship may be less strong in the rest of the population. And

smaller email volumes between two students might indicate a working relationship or brief

exchange of information (e.g. times or dates for a meeting) rather than a friendship. Readers of this

paper can substitute the term social interaction for friendship and hopefully still find the results

meaningful.9



II.      Data Description

         We have the number of email messages sent and received among our users during June 2002

through July 2003. The data on email volumes are from Dartmouth's Netblitz email system.

NetBlitz is the web based version of Dartmouth's email software and is frequently used by students

and alumni whenever they are off campus. To be included in the study as a primary user, a student

must have used NetBlitz to check or send email at some point during the sample period, and a large

fraction of students did so (see below). A single use of NetBlitz gives us access to that student's

entire Dartmouth email history, whether the messages were created with Netblitz, or Dartmouth's

standard mail utility (Blitz), or any other email software. We recorded the number of email

messages between any two students on the system between June 1, 2002 and July 31, 2003.

         Whenever a student logged into NetBlitz, and had agreed to participate in the study, we

captured ID numbers and volumes for the senders and recipients of their messages from the Inbox,

Sent Messages folder, and any other folders that the student maintained. Thus, a single use of



9
  We were deliberately bold in choosing the paper title because we believe that the qualitative results generalize beyond
simply understanding email volumes among students at an elite college.
                                                                                                                       11
NetBlitz provides us with reams of data from the student's on and off campus email use.10 A given

message could be picked up from the sender's account, the recipient's account or both. Our

algorithm avoids double counting and distinguishes between sent and received messages.

        We label the students using NetBlitz as primary users. Secondary users are those Dartmouth

students who do not use NetBlitz but who appear in the data set by virtue of sending (or receiving)

an email to (or from) a primary user. A sufficient but not necessary condition to capture all of a

primary user's correspondence is that the user logs in to NetBlitz every six months. We drop the

few primary users that logged in less frequently than every six months.

        We dropped all emails that were sent to more than one person. Though such emails are

often sent among friends, the emails also are sent to working groups and large organizations in

which the individual members may have little interest or interpersonal interaction.

        Numerous steps were taken to protect the human subjects in the study.                            First as the

researchers, our copy of the data did not include names but rather unique randomly assigned ID

numbers. Second, no information on the content of the email messages was ever collected; we

merely collected numbers of messages sent and received. Third all subjects were given informed

consent and the opportunity to opt out the study.11

        In addition to data on email volumes, we also collected for each student the following data

items: SAT scores, name of high school attended, financial aid status, race, gender, Dartmouth GPA

as of July 2003, participation in varsity athletics, and a binary variable for membership in a

fraternity, sorority or co-ed Greek organization. These data are all available in Dartmouth's Banner

database. We are indebted to the Computing Services department for merging these student

characteristics with our email data using student ID numbers.




10
   In other words, we capture not just volumes sent during that particular session, but any information in the student's
folders.
11
   Eight percent of NetBlitz users opted out of the study.
                                                                                                                     12
        Table I shows a tabulation of the primary users by graduating class. Nearly half of the

graduating class of 2003 (491 out of 1050) and 39 percent of the class of 2004 are primary users.

Essentially everyone else in these classes is a secondary user, because everyone communicated with

one or more primary users during the 13 month period of the study. The percentage of primary

users is smaller in the classes of 2005 and 2006 for two reasons. First, these classes spent less time

off campus during the sample year and therefore had less need of NetBlitz. Second, Marmaros had

previously made a point of advertising (via email) the availability of NetBlitz to the two older

classes.

        Table II shows some summary statistics on the primary users in the data set. On average the

group is 48 percent male, 72 percent white and 49 percent had joined a fraternity or sorority by June

of 2003. Table II also shows averages for several measures of academic ability including incoming

math SAT score and incoming Academic Index. The Academic Index can range from 60 to 240

and is a weighted average of SAT I scores (weight=1/3), SAT II scores (weight=1/3), and re-scaled

high school class rank (weight=1/3). On average the primary users exchanged (sent or received)

853 messages during the sample period with a standard deviation of 877 messages.

        Three percent of primary users graduated from a New York City Specialized ("exam") High

School, meaning Stuyvesant, Brooklyn Tech, Bronx Science or Hunter College High school.12 Five

percent of primary users attended one of the well known, selective private schools that serves as a

major feeder high school for Dartmouth.13 We use these two high school dummies as indicators to

tell us something about a student's background. Fifty three percent of primary users are financial

aid recipients.




12
   Technically Hunter College High School is not one of the traditional specialized high schools that use the same
standardized test to admit students. (Hunter has its own exam). In practice Hunter is the one of the top, selective New
York City public high schools that sends many students to Dartmouth.
13
   We created a dummy equal to 1 for students from private prep schools that fall within the top 20 feeder to schools to
Dartmouth (in recent years). The list of schools includes Andover, Exeter, Walt Whitman (MD), Lawrenceville, St.

                                                                                                                     13
        Each student has roughly 35 other freshman in their randomly assigned freshman dorm. On

average, there are 10 other freshman on one's freshman hallway.

        A natural question to ask is whether the primary users are representative of Dartmouth

students as a whole. We address this question in Appendix Table I where we compare the primary

users to everybody else, (i.e. the secondary users). The primary users are much more likely to be

members of a fraternity or sorority, but this discrepancy is partly due the fact that only 107

freshman are primary users and the freshman are prohibited from joining. When we compare

primary and secondary users who are juniors or seniors, the difference in fraternity membership is

no longer statistically significant.

        Average math SATs for the primary users and secondary users are similar at 715 and 706

respectively. And cumulative GPA is similar across the two groups. Overall we believe that our

group of primary users is large enough and diverse enough to enable us to form conclusions about

the behavior of Dartmouth students as a group, even though primary users select into our sample by

choosing to use NetBlitz.

        Black students are significantly underrepresented among the primary users; 4.9 percent of

primary users are black versus 8.0 percent of the secondary users. If the black secondary users have

significantly different patterns of interaction than the black primary users, our results may not

generalize across the two groups. Even given this bias we are still well positioned to study cross

race interaction because the only emails that do not enter our dataset are those exchanged between

two secondary users. Suppose that black students never used Netblitz but that all white students

did. We would end up with the complete census of white-black email interactions since the set of

secondary users includes everyone.

        We examine the volume of emails exchanged between each primary user and all other

students (summing over emails going in either direction). To do this, we form all possible pairwise


Paul's, Deerfield, St. Ann's (NY), Horace Mann, Punahou, Winsor, Trinity (NY), Buckingham Browne and Nichols,

                                                                                                          14
combinations of a primary user and any student in the data set (be they a primary or secondary

user). We cross the set of 1250 primary users with 4000+ students which results in 5.3 million pairs

of students. We then eliminate duplicate observations resulting from A to B and B to A potentially

being counted as separate pairs leaving us with 4.2 million unique pairs. Any of these 4.2 million

possible social connections might be active (i.e. have email traffic), though in fact about 29,000 of

the connections are active during the sample period.

         For the tables and associated discussion, we label the first person in the pair (who is always

a primary user) as "Person 1" and the second person in the pair (who may be a primary or secondary

user) as "Person 2."

        Table III shows summary statistics at the pair level. In the first row, we see that in .7

percent of the pairs, person 1 has sent one or more emails to person 2 and received one or more

emails from person 2.14 In .2 percent of pairs 5 or more emails have traveled in each direction (for a

total volume of 10 or more).15 Conditional on having sent and received email from the other person

in the pair, 32.4 messages are sent on average, though the standard deviation is 113 messages and

the maximum volume in a pair is over 3,700 messages. Roughly 24 percent of the pairs consist of

two members from the same graduating class. .3 percent of pairs are from the same class and the

same freshman hallway. One percent of pairs are from the same class and same freshman dorm.

        The pair members' relative location freshman year is important for several reasons. First, we

show that there is an incredibly strong correlation between freshman year housing assignment and

the likelihood (and intensity) of person 1 emailing person 2. This connection remains strong even




Dalton School, Pingry School, Loomis Chafee, and Collegiate.
14
   We define an indicator variable called "talks" which equals 1 if persons 1 and 2 have sent and received emails from
each other.
15
   Our empirical results are similar whether our dependent variable is the actual volume, or a dummy for 2 or more
emails sent (total) or a dummy for 10 emails sent (total).
                                                                                                                     15
after graduation. Second, because freshman dorms and hallways are randomly assigned (as in

Sacerdote [2001]), we can give this correlation a causal interpretation.16



III.    Results

        In Table IV we examine how the amount of social interaction between two students varies

by the race of the students and whether or not they are in the same entering freshman dorm. We

limit the sample to pairs from the same entering class and for which person 1 is white. The top row

shows that white-non-black pairs not in the same freshman dorm exchange .71 emails on average.17

If both people are in the same dorm, the mean jumps to 2.95, indicating a multiplicative effect from

being in the same dorm of 4.2x.

        When person 1 is white and person 2 is black, the multiplicative effect of being in the same

freshman dorm is 2.92, but measured from a much lower base level of interaction; the mean volume

between a randomly chosen black student and a randomly chosen white classmate is .21 messages

for students in different dorms and .62 for students in the same dorm.

        Next we consider the race effect by comparing rows 1 and 4. Holding constant that both

students are in the same dorm (column 2) and that person 1 is white, the second person being black

reduces mean email volume by a factor of 4.76 (i.e. 2.95/.62). For students not in the same dorm,

the second student being black reduces email volume by a factor of 3.34.

        Table IV also shows the mean probability that the two people exchange at least one email in

each direction ("talk"). Moving a white-black pair to the same dorm increases the probability of

talking by a factor of 2.63.

        We draw several conclusions from this analysis. First, the effects of race, geography, and

being from the same cohort are large.             White non-black pairs have roughly 3-5 times more

16
  The housing office takes all of the freshman housing applications and separates them into several groups based on
gender and self reported smoking, neatness, and sleeping habits. The groups are then shuffled. Groups of roommates
are created randomly within a pile. Floormates and dormmates are drawn randomly across piles.

                                                                                                                16
interaction than white black pairs. When two people are from the same graduating class, being in

the same dorm raises the amount of interaction by a factor of 3 or 4. For white-black pairs, the

positive effect of being in the same dorm is nearly large enough to offset the negative race effect;

white-black pairs in the same dorm have mean email volumes of .62 versus .71 for white-non-black

pairs not in the same dorm.

         Second, the analysis of means suggests we should model the effects from student

characteristics using a multiplicative form (e.g. a Poisson regression) rather than a linear form. The

same dorm effect is on the order of a 3-4x increase whether we start from the baseline level of a

mixed race pair or the higher base level of a same race pair. The race effect is on the order of a 3x

effect whether we consider interaction within versus across freshman dorms.

         We next ask how much having a black freshman roommate or a greater than median

percentage of black students on one's freshman hallway increases a student's interaction with black

students. For all the non-black students, having a black roommate raises the fraction of emails

volume exchanged with black students from 4.4 to 4.9 percent.18 This only amounts to an extra 3

emails exchanged with black students. We show later in the paper that this increase in emails can

easily be accounted for by the extra email volume between white students and their own black

roommates.       The effects are not suggestive of a multiplier effect in which black roommates

introduce white students to new networks of black students. Living on a hallway with more than

median percent black raises a non-black student's fraction of emails exchanged with black students

from 4.2 percent to 4.7 percent.

         In Table V we limit the sample to white students and run regressions at the student level.

We regress the student's percent of email volume exchanged with black students on the percent

black in her dorm, her hallway, and a dummy for having any black roommate.19 We control for all


17
   In results not reported, we limited the sample to white-black plus white-white pairs and found similar means.
18
   We set the dummy for having a black roommate equal to one if one or more roommates are black
19
   The dorm and hallway percent black calculation excludes the student herself.
                                                                                                                   17
observed student characteristics including gender, SAT scores, financial aid status, type of high

school attended, Greek and athletic status. Using column (1), a 10 percent increase in the percent

black in a student's dorm leads to a .1 percent increase in volume exchanged with black students,

which translates to .9 messages. This effect is fully explained by the same dorm effect for any two

students, and need not imply that having black dormmates increases a white student's likelihood of

interacting with black students outside her dorm.20 In column (3) the point estimate indicates that

having a black freshman roommate raises a white student's percent of emails sent to blacks by .2

percent and the effect is not statistically significant.

        In Table VI we arrange the data at the student-pair level and run Poisson regressions of total

emails exchanged on the characteristics of both students in the pair. Each column is a separate

regression. Each row shows the coefficient, the standard error in parentheses, and e^coefficient in

square brackets []. The purpose of the latter is to show the multiplicative effect of a one unit change

in the right hand side variable. The omitted categories for person 1 and 2's race is always white.

The interaction dummies are constructed such that the coefficients should multiplied together to

calculate the total effect. For example, the interaction effect for person 2 being "black and in the

same class and dorm" is on top of the baseline effects of "same freshman dorm" and "same class."

        In column (1) we limit the sample to pairs in which person 1 (the primary user) is white.

We regress the number of emails on dummy variables for person 2 being black, being in the same

freshman dorm, and being in the same freshman class. We show this simplified specification

mainly to verify that the Poisson regressions reproduce the same effects that we observed in the

means of the raw data in Table IV. The regression shows that being in the same freshman dorm

multiplies the number of emails by 4.13. Table IV indicates a multiplicative effect of 4.16. If




20
   A 10 percent increase in the fraction black would correspond to adding about 3 more black students to the white
student's dorm. Using the means for same dorm versus not in Table 4 , we would expect an additional .4*3=1.2
messages.
                                                                                                               18
person 2 is black, the expected number of emails is multiplied by .299 (a 70 percent reduction),

which is also consistent with Table IV.

           Column (2) again limits the sample to pairs in which person 1 is white and includes all

characteristics for both students in the pair. Many of our key results can be seen in this column.

Being in the same class year has a multiplicative effect of 5.8.

           We include all interactions of person 2's race and same freshman dorm21. The omitted

category for person 2's race is always white. For white-white pairs, being in the same freshman

dorm has a multiplicative effect of 3.7 (on top of the same class effect).          Interestingly, the

interactions of same dorm with race are generally not significantly different from the white-white

same dorm effect. In other words, geographic proximity enhances cross race interactions to the

same degree that proximity enhances within race interactions.

           However there are large negative level effects from person 2 being black when person 1 is

white. Overall, white-black pairs are estimated to have 64 percent fewer interactions (1 minus the

.36 shown in square brackets for the "person 2 is black" estimate). White-asian pairs have 44

percent fewer interactions and white-hispanic pairs have 20 percent fewer interactions.

           We turn now to the effects of both students in the pair having similar interests including

athletic participation, fraternity and sorority membership and college majors. Again considering

pairs where person 1 is white, being in the same college major raises the number of interactions by

27 percent. This effect is not statistically significant when person 1 is black, asian, or hispanic

(columns (3)-(5)).

           Being an athlete has a negative level effect on interaction, whether we examine the

coefficient for person 1 being an athlete or person 2 being an athlete. However, the interaction term

for both students being athletes has a multiplicative effect of 3.7 on the number of emails. If person

1 is an athlete and person 2 is not, we find 46 percent fewer emails relative to the base category of


21
     "Same freshman dorm" always implies same class.
                                                                                                   19
nonathlete-nonathlete pairs. However, athlete-athlete pairs enjoy 13 percent more emails than the

base category.22 The effects for Greek membership work in much the same way. If only person 1

is Greek, there are 49 percent fewer emails relative to non-Greek-non-Greek pairs. If both 1 and 2

are Greek we see 64 percent more emails relative to the base category. Since athletic status, Greek

status and majors are all determined endogenously, we offer these as descriptive statistics rather

than causal effects. Furthermore, we don't know whether athletes are talking mostly to individuals

on their same team or to athletes on other teams. And Greek members may simply be interacting a

great deal with members of their own organization and not with members of other organizations.

           In the next rows we ask whether differences in academic ability reduce the amount of social

interaction.      We take combined SAT score (math plus verbal) as a measure of pre-treatment

academic ability. We look at the effect of the absolute difference in SAT score between person 1

and person 2, controlling for the SAT score for both students. Differences in SAT scores do reduce

the amount of interaction between the pair, but the effect is modest in size. A 200 point difference

in SATs results in a 0.6 percent reduction in email volume.                        This effect is only statistically

significant when person 1 is white. The effect is statistically insignificant when person 1 is Black,

Asian, or Hispanic. We tried many alternative specifications such as creating dummies for person 1

and person 2's quartiles of SAT and running the fully interacted specification. We found no

evidence that a particular combination of SAT scores stimulated or hindered social interaction

among students.

           We also examine the effects of family background using dummy variables for three different

characteristics. We know whether each student is on financial aid, whether they attended one of

New York's Specialized (exam) High Schools (Stuyvesant, Bronx Science, Brooklyn Tech, Hunter

College High), and whether they attended one of the elite private high schools that is among the

major feeder schools to Dartmouth. Student pairs who both went to a NY exam school exchange 9x

22
     Here we multiplied the three relevant effects from person 1 is an athlete, person 2 is an athlete and the interaction

                                                                                                                       20
as many emails as student pairs in the base category. The effect of both students attending an elite

private school is smaller and not statistically significant.

         Some of the large effect on both students attending NY Specialized High Schools probably

stems from the students in the pair knowing each other before enrolling at Dartmouth. If true, this

would be consistent with our model of friendship formation in which once a social connection is

established, people derive utility from interacting with the same person over and over again.

         If one of the students in the pair is a financial aid recipient and not the other, the number of

emails is reduced by 20 percent, relative to the base category of non-aid – non-aid. If both students

receive financial aid, then the amount of interaction is roughly equal to the base category. These

results are from column (2) which uses pairs where person 1 is white. When person 1 is Black,

Asian, or Hispanic, (columns (3)-(5)) no clear pattern emerges from the effects of financial aid

status on the level of interaction.

         The final rows of Table VI address whether having a black dormmate or roommate affects

my interracial interactions with black students outside my dorm. For pairs in which person 1 is

white, we include dummy for person 1 having a black freshman roommate and the percent black in

1's freshman dorm. We then interact these characteristics for person 1 with a dummy for whether

person 2 is black. Having a black roommate or a high percentage black in one's dorm has no

statistically significant effect on a white student's volume of interactions with black students in

general.23 This is consistent with the student level analysis we showed in Table V.

         A separate question is whether or not minority students become socially isolated if they are

grouped together in the same freshman rooms or dorms. In results not reported here we find that for

black students, having a black roommate or increased percent black in one's dorm does not increase

the volume of interactions with other black students outside of one's dorm.


term to get the total effect.
23
   There is still of course the direct effect that being close to any student of any race makes 1 more likely to interact with
that particular student.
                                                                                                                           21
       Columns (3) –(5) limit the sample to pairs in which person 1 is Black, Asian and Hispanic

respectively. In general many of the key results from column (2) remain. For example, there is a

large same freshman dorm effect that increases the number of emails sent by a factor of between 3.5

and 5. The same dorm effect is largest for pairs in which person 1 is Asian. There is a large and

positive same race effect for black students. In column (3) where person 1 is black, the coefficient

on person 2 being black is 2.816 which means that email volume is increased by factor of 16.7.

This same race effect is much larger than the same race attraction experienced by other groups.

       In column (6) we switch the dependent variable to a dummy variable for person 1 having

sent and received at least one email from person 2. The mean of this dummy is .007 meaning that .7

percent of pairs are in active email communication ("talking"). We limit the sample to pairs in

which person 1 is white. We run a probit regression and report partial derivatives. We find results

that are qualitatively similar to the Poisson regression in column (2). Being in the same freshman

dorm raises the probability of talking by 1.3 percent which indicates that the same dorm effect

increases the probability of talking by a factor of 2.9. The interactions between "same dorm" and

person 2's race are generally small indicating that the same dorm effect on talking is the same

magnitude both within and across races. White-asian pairs have a slightly larger same dorm effect

than white-white pairs while white-black pairs have a slightly smaller effect. There are still large

and statistically significant level effects from person 2's race. For white-black pairs, the likelihood

of talking falls by .2 percent relative to white-white pairs.

       In Table VII we investigate more closely the effect of distance and how this effect changes

from freshman to senior year. We limit the sample to pairs in which person 1 is white. To measure

geographic distance in more detail we include dummies for same freshman year room, floor

(hallway), dorm and cluster of dorms. At Dartmouth, a cluster of dorms is a collection of 2-4

buildings that are connected by common rooms, porches or outdoor breezeways. We also include

the physical distance between the freshman year rooms of person 1 and person 2, measured in

                                                                                                    22
thousands of feet. We include all the same student characteristics used in Table VI (race, gender,

graduating class, fraternity membership etc) but only report coefficients on the distance measures.

           Sharing the same freshman year dorm (but not the same hallway) doubles the number of

emails sent (column 1) and increases the probability of talking by .3 percent (column 2). Sharing

the same floor delivers a 2.3x effect over and above the 2.0x effect from being in the same dorm.

Being in the same room adds an additional effect of 3.1x.                           This means that freshman year

roommates share 14.3 times as many emails relative to two randomly chosen classmates who are

not from the same freshman dorm.24

           Being in the same cluster has no additional effect, nor does the linear measure of distance.

This means that proximity only has a significant effect at very close distances. We show below that

this fact limits the degree to which proximity can be used by policy makers to create shifts in the

overall amount inter-group interaction that occurs.

           In columns (3) and (4) we run the Poisson regression separately for freshmen and seniors.

As one would expect the freshmen show larger effects from freshman year housing distance. In

their first year, freshman roommates are exchanging 44.6 times more emails than two freshmen not

in the same dorm. But interestingly the effects of freshman housing are still strong three years later.

As seniors, former freshman roommates are exchanging 9.8 times more emails than two randomly

chosen seniors.

           This is consistent with our proposed model of friendship in which chance meetings lead to

long term bonds between two people. At the time of enrollment, a student's list of Dartmouth social

connections is a mostly blank slate. Dartmouth randomly creates a social network by housing

freshman together and this network shows a great deal of persistence. In results not show here, we

find that following graduation, former freshmen roommates and dormmates continue to be much

more likely to email each other than randomly chosen classmates.


24
     The regression controls but does not report the effect from the two students being in the same class.
                                                                                                               23
       Furthermore, given the panel nature of the data we are able to observe the volume of

interaction between a pair of students during months when they are both on campus and months

where one of the students is off campus. We find that email volumes are significantly higher when

both students are on campus and hence able to interact face to face as well as through email. Our

preferred interpretation of this fact is that email is a complement to face to face interaction.

Students can use email to set up face to face interaction or perhaps they get more utility from

exchanging emails with someone with whom they have just seen or will see shortly.



How Isolated Are Various Groups and Can Housing Policies Change This?

       Bowen and Levin [2003] raise the concern that within the College and Beyond Schools

athletes may be an isolated group of students who fail to interact with the rest of the campus. As

mentioned above, other authors and policy makers have similar concerns about the degree to which

minority students form isolated social groups.      To investigate this, we calculate the fraction of

correspondents and fraction of emails that are within group versus out of group for three segments

of the population: football players, all athletes, and black students. The student body is roughly 7

percent black, 26 percent athletes and 2.3 percent football players.

       Black primary users share about 44 percent of their email volume with other black students,

whereas non-black students share about 4 percent of their email volume with black students.

Athletes exchange 52 percent of their emails with other athletes. Most striking is the fact that

football players exchange 30 percent of their emails with other football players despite being

roughly 2 percent of the population.

       Whether these numbers are high or low depends on the reader's priors. We can reject

extreme hypotheses of isolation since black students have more than half of their interactions with

non-black students. And athletes have nearly half of their interactions out of group.



                                                                                                  24
          One interesting question from a peer effects and policy perspective is the degree to which

out of group interaction could be increased by creating further mixing within freshman dorms. Our

results are not particularly encouraging if the goal is to generate further cross race interaction.

          We have tried various simulations of redistributing black freshman across dorms to increase

predicted black-white interaction. We take the coefficients from the Poisson regression from Table

VI Column (2). We reassign black freshmen across dorms to deliver a uniform percent black in

each dorm, for a given class year. This is a meaningful exercise because the actual random

assignment to groups of 30 to 50 yielded some dorms with as few as 0 or as many as 6 black

students rather than the roughly 3 of a perfectly even distribution. Across the entire campus after

reassigning the black students' housing, we predict an additional 146 emails between white -black

pairs as compared to the current white-black total volume of 16,800 messages. This indicates that

each white student would exchange an additional .16 emails with black students, or a less than one

percent increase on the mean of 18-19 emails currently exchanged during the sample period.

          The intuition for this finding is as follows: We found in Tables IV and VI that placing two

freshmen in the same dorm increases their email volume by a factor of 3 or 4. However, in the case

of white black interactions, that increase is from a low base of .2 emails. If we could give each

white freshman an additional black dormmate (say from an all black dorm if one existed), she

would experience the increase of .4 emails to that black student shown in Table IV. But since we

are redistributing the black students, rather than creating a net increase we get much less than the .4

effect.

          An opposite policy experiment to consider would be complete segregation of the black

freshmen. For the average white student, this would be a loss of about 3 black dormmates and

would result in a reduction of 3*.4=1.2 emails exchanged with black students. This is again modest

relative to the current average of 19 emails. Proximity has a strong positive effect but only 3



                                                                                                      25
percent of pairs in the sample share the same freshman dorm and class. On average only about 9

percent or so of black-white emails take place within one's freshman dorm group.

       In contrast, changing the entire class's composition would have large effect on my social

interactions. A student interacts 5-7 times more with a student from her own class than with a

student from a different class. When we add another minority student or high SAT student into a

class, every student of 1,050 in the class experiences a large jump in expected interactions with that

student. Adding two black students to the class would generate another 1.4 emails with black

students for every white student. Thus the negative effects of subtracting two black students might

have a greater effect on total black-white interactions than the negative effect of complete housing

segregation discussed above.

Does A "Group Means" Model Approximate Social Networks?

       As discussed above, most peer effects studies assume that an agent is affected by the mean

characteristic or outcome of the other individuals in the group. Studies of peer effects in primary

school often take the classroom as the relevant group and university level studies may take the

cohort-major cell or the freshman dormitory as the relevant group. Here we have the opportunity to

ask how much students actually interact with the other students assigned to their group. We then

calculate mean SAT scores and Dartmouth GPAs for each student's dorm group and for their actual

peer group campus wide as demonstrated by whom they email. We show the correlation between

mean test scores (and GPA) for the "actual" group and their freshman dorm group.

       For the freshmen (class of 2006) about 19 percent of total emails are exchanged with

members of their freshman dorm. The sophomores exchange 16 percent of total emails with

classmates from their freshman dorm and this percentage falls to 8 percent for the seniors. If

instead of weighting by email volume (as above) we ask what fraction of correspondents come from

one's freshman dorm, we get roughly the same answer.



                                                                                                   26
        Perhaps the more relevant question for peer effects research is how correlated "actual" peer

ability is with constructed group ability when groups are formed by the econometrician around

freshman hallway assignments. To address this, we calculate for each student average peer SAT

scores (and GPA) in four ways. First we weight peer SATs (GPA) by the volume of email

exchanged with that peer. If zero emails are exchanged, the peer observation is given zero weight.

Second we calculate mean peer SATs using the simple average over all other students on one's

freshman hallway, excluding own observation. Third we calculate the mean within one's hallway

and race cell. Finally we calculate mean peer SAT weighting by the predicted email volume with

that peer. We predict volume using the set of regressions in Table VI which include all student

characteristics for both students in a pair. This last measure is intended to be an extreme (though

unrealistic) upper bound on what a researcher could predict about peer ability given all of the right

hand side variables.

        The hallway mean SAT score is relatively uncorrelated with the actual (emails) weighted

mean. The correlation is .03. However the dorm-race mean has a correlation of .29 with the actual

weighted mean. The prediction weighted mean of peer SATs has a correlation of .42 with the actual

weighted mean.

        The message is that race matters in the formation of peer groups. Even among a relatively

homogenous group of college students (relative to the set of all US college students), race places a

large role in determining social interactions. If researchers are seeking to form the most realistic

peer groups, one specification to include is one in which peer groups condition on race.

Conditioning on all the other right hand side variables (gender, fraternity membership, financial aid

status etc) AND weighting these variables by the regression coefficients raises the correlation from

.29 to .42.




                                                                                                  27
       We find a similar message when we examine peers Dartmouth GPAs rather than peer SATs.

Mean GPA of freshman hallway group has a .08 correlation with actual weighted GPA. Mean GPA

for the dorm-race cell has a correlation of .23 with actual weighted GPA.

       In Figure 2 we examine what fraction of black students emails are exchanged with peers in

various deciles of the SAT distribution. The horizontal axis shows the decile of the Dartmouth SAT

distribution. The "Actual" line shows that roughly 26 percent of emails were exchanged with

students in the first decile. The relatively flat line ("Geography") shows that an equal fraction of

emails would fall in each decile if the students' interactions were based purely on geography

(freshman dorm and room location.) We simulated this distribution by predicting emails for every

pair of students using a Poisson regression which included only the geographic variables on the

right hand side. We then calculated what fraction of predicted emails fell in each decile.

       The "Race and Geography" line shows what happens when black students interact based on

geography and race. These are calculated from predicted number of emails where we predict using

a Poisson regression of emails on the race dummies for person 2, geographic variables, and the

interactions of race and same dorm. Here we see that the addition of the race information yields a

predicted SAT distribution that is close to the actual distribution. When we predict using all the

right hand side variables, the predicted line lies almost directly on top of the actual line (not shown).



How Much Does Using a Better Peer Group Proxy Affect Estimated Peer Effects?

       Finally, we ask how much measured peer effects change if we switch from a dorm mean to a

mean that weights based by the level of interaction (emails). In Table VIII we run linear probability

models of own decision to join a fraternity or a sorority on the peer average decision. We focus on

this outcome rather than on an academic outcome like GPA because previous work (e.g. Sacerdote

[2001], Zimmerman [2003], Duncan et al [2003], Foster [2003]) indicates that peer effects in social

outcomes are larger and more robust than peer effects in academic outcomes.

                                                                                                      28
        In column (1) we regress a student's decision to join a fraternity on the dorm mean for the

same outcome and find a coefficient of .71, with a t-statistic of 10.3. If we instead weight the peer

mean outcome by emails exchanged between the student and the other students on campus, the peer

effect coefficient increases to 1.0 (column (2)).

        This latter coefficient is of course biased by the fact that students sort into their peer groups

and we are not taking advantage of the randomized assignment of freshman housing. As a partial

solution, we follow Foster [2003] and instrument for the peer average of fraternity status using the

average background characteristics for the randomly assigned peers in a student's freshman hallway

group. Our instruments for peer group mean outcomes are the dorm averages of SAT scores,

academic index, New York exam high school attendance, prep school attendance, and financial aid

status. The first stage regressions are shown in Appendix II. In column (1) of Appendix II the

dependent variable is the dorm average fraternity status and the instruments predict this outcome

with an F statistic of 13.0. In column (2) the dependent variable is the email weighted average of

fraternity status and the F statistic is 7.4.

        In Table VIII column (3) we regress own fraternity status on the hallway mean of fraternity

status where the instruments are the hallway mean background characteristics described above. The

peer effect coefficient is .51 and is statistically significant. In column (4) we regress own outcome

of fraternity status on peer outcome, where the peer outcome is weighted by email volumes. We

again instrument for peer outcomes using hallway average characteristics. Using our emails to

define peer groups, we find a peer effect that is 50 percent larger than that found using hallways to

define peer groups. However, given the lack of precision we can't reject that the peer effects

coefficients in columns (3) and (4) are equal.

        The message from this exercise is a fairly intuitive one: Conventional peer effects estimates

may understate the total peer influences experienced by an individual because researchers rarely

know the true peer group and must therefore form peer groups based on observables like classroom,

                                                                                                      29
or dorm assignment or neighborhood. In our case, the estimated effect increases by about 50

percent when we use email volumes to first determine who is interacting with whom before we

estimate the peer effect.



Conclusion

       We find that geographic closeness, racial similarity, family background and common

interests like academic majors, Greek organizations and varsity athletics all have positive effects on

the likelihood that two students interact. Cross race interactions are much less likely than within

race interactions. Two white students in the same class have about a 2 percent chance of interacting

whereas a white and a black student in the same class have a .8 percent chance of interacting.

Placing either of these pairs in the same dorm multiplies the likelihood of interaction by a factor of

3. Expressed in terms of email volume, randomly chosen white-white pairs send each other about .7

emails versus .2 emails for white-black pairs. Putting either pair in the same dorm raises the

volume of email between the two by a factor of 3 or 4.

       There does not appear to be any extended network effect in which having a black roommate

increases a white student's interaction with other black students outside of her room, hallway or

dorm. When we simulate different housing policies it becomes clear that it is difficult to create

meaningful amounts of additional interracial interaction simply by moving students around. This is

in part because the proximity effect is relevant for very small distances, so it is impossible to make a

given student closer to large numbers of other students.    The vast majority of a student's interracial

interactions take place outside her freshman dorm group simply because only 1 percent of other

students on campus share her same freshman dorm.

       In contrast the effects of being in the same entering class on the amount of interaction are

also large in magnitude and operate on a much larger group (roughly 1050 students). Thus changes

in the racial or SAT makeup of my class could have a large effect on the characteristics of my peer

                                                                                                     30
group. Within the context of this study, differences in ability across students do not create a

sizeable barrier to interaction. A low SAT scoring student is almost as likely to interact with his

classmates and dormmates as any other student.

       These facts help explain why colleges and universities go to great lengths to manage the

composition (racial, geographic, athletic) of each incoming freshman class. Adding a few more

international students to a class can have a large effect on the likelihood that the modal student in

that class interacts with one of these international students.

       We asked whether a linear in means approach is a good approximation to constructing a

student's true peer group. We find that the mean ability (SAT or GPA) of one's hallmates is only

modestly correlated with the mean ability of one's correspondents as weighted by email volume.

However, if we use the hallway-race cell, we get a much stronger correlation between the group

mean and the mean ability of actual peers as identified through email exchanges.

       Overall the study indicates that small differences in location can have large impacts in the

amount that the two people interact. We posit that this is because small distance costs matter when

the other person and hence the benefit of the interaction is unknown. Race appears to be a real

barrier to interaction, but the positive effects of proximity on interaction can offset the negative

effects of two people being from a different race.

       Proximity, race, family background and interests all determine who interacts with whom.

And these interactions blossom into friendships which can have a profound influence on our lives,

our career choices, and perhaps our preferences.




                                                                                                  31
       References


Abu-Ghazzeh, Tawfiq M., "Housing Layout, Social Interaction, and the Place of Contact in Abu-
   Nuseir, Jordan," Journal of Environmental Psychology, XIX (1999), 41-73.

Alesina, Alberto, Reza Baqir, and Caroline M. Hoxby, “Political Jurisdictions in Heterogeneous
   Communities,” Journal of Political Economy, CXII (2004), 348-396.

Amicus Brief of Harvard University, Brown University, University of Chicago, Dartmouth College,
  Duke University, The University of Pennsylvania, Princeton University, and Yale University,
  Case Numbers 02-241 and 02-516, Barbara Grutter v. Lee Bollinger, Et Al., Supreme Court of
  the United States, 2003.

Arcidiacono, Peter, Gigi Foster and Joshua Kinsler, "Estimating Spillovers In The Classroom With
   Panel Data," mimeo Duke University, 2004.

Betts, Julian R. and Andrew Zau, "Peer Groups and Academic Achievement: Panel Evidence from
   Administrative Data," Working Paper from University of California, San Diego and Public
   Policy Institute of California, 2004.

Blau, Peter Michael., Exchange and Power in Social Life (New York: Wiley, 1964).

Bowen, William G. and Derek Bok, The Shape Of The River : Long-Term Consequences Of
  Considering Race In College And University Admissions (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University
  Press, 1998).

Bowen, William G. and Sarah A. Levin, Reclaiming The Game : College Sports And Educational
  Values (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 2003).

Case, Anne C. and Lawrence F. Katz, "The Company You Keep: The Effect of Family and
   Neighborhood on Disadvantaged Youths," National Bureau of Economic Research Working
   Paper No. 3705, 1991.

Duncan, Greg, Johanne Boisjoly, Michael Kremer, Daniel Levy and Jacquelynne S. Eccles
   "Empathy or Antipathy? The Consequences of Racially and Socially Diverse Peers on Attitudes
   and Behaviors," Joint Center for Poverty Research Working Paper No. 326, February 2003.

Duncan, Greg, Johanne Boisjoly, Michael Kremer, Daniel Levy and Jacquelynne S. Eccles "Peer
   Effects in Binge Drinking Among College Students," Mimeo, Northwestern University,
   December 2003.

Epstein, Richard, "A Rational Basis for Affirmative Action: A Shaky But Classical Liberal Defense,
   Michigan Law Review, C (2002), 2036-2053.

Evans, William N., Wallace E. Oates, and Robert M. Schwab, "Measuring Peer Group Effects: A
   Study of Teenage Behavior," Journal of Political Economy, C (1992), 966-991.

Falk, Armin and Michael Kosfield, "It's All About Connections: Evidence on Network Formation,"
   mimeo, University of Zurich, 2003.
                                                                                                 32
Festinger, Leon and Stanley Schachter and Kurt Back, Social Pressures In Informal Groups : A
   Study Of Human Factors In Housing (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1963).

Foster, Jennifer, "Peerless Performers," Mimeo 2003, University of South Australia.

Foster, Jennifer, "It's not your peers, and it's not your friends: Some progress toward understanding
   the educational peer effect mechanism," Mimeo 2004, University of South Australia.

Gaspar Jess and Edward Glaeser, "Information Technology and the Future of Cities," Journal of
   Urban Economics, XLIII (1998), 136-156.

Gaviria, Alejandro and Stephen Raphael, "School Based Peer Effects and Juvenile Behavior,"
   Review of Economics and Statistics, LXXXIII (2001), 257-68.

Glaeser, Edward and Bruce Sacerdote, "The Social Consequences of Housing," Journal of Housing
   Economics, IX (2000), 1-23.

Graham, Bryan S. and Jinyong Hahn “Identification And Estimation Of The Linear-In-Means
   Model Of Social Interactions,” mimeo Harvard University and University of Southern
   California, 2003.

Graham, Bryan S. “Identifying Social Interactions Through Excess Variance Contrasts,” Ph.D.
   Dissertation, Harvard University, 2004.

Grinblatt, Mark, Matti Keloharju and Seppo Ikaheimo, "Interpersonal Effects in Consumption:
   Evidence from the Automobile Purchases of Neighbors," National Bureau of Economic
   Research Working Paper No. 10226, 2004.

Hallinan, Maureen T., "The Process of Friendship Formation," Social Networks, I (1978/9), 193-
   210.

Harris, Judith Rich, The Nurture Assumption: Why Children Turn out the Way They Do (New York,
   NY: The Free Press, 1998).

Holahan, C.J., B.L. Wilcox and M.A. Burnam, "Social Satisfaction and Friendship Formation as a
   Function of Floor Level in High-Rise Student Housing," Journal of Applied Psychology, LXIII
   (1978), 527-529.

Hoxby, Caroline M., "Peer Effects in the Classroom: Learning from Gender and Race Variation,"
   National Bureau of Economics Working Paper Number 7866, 2000.

Hoxby, Caroline M., "Does Competition among Public Schools Benefit Students and Taxpayers?"
   American Economic Review, XL (2000), 1209-38.

Hanushek, Eric A., John F. Kain, Jacob M. Markman, Steven G. Rivkin, "Does Peer Ability Affect
   Student Achievement?," National Bureau of Economics Working Paper No. 8502, 2001.

Hills, Lindsay Marie, A Thin Line Between Red and Green: Emerging Patterns in Group Preference
    an Exploration at Bryn Mawr College, Bryn Mawr Senior Thesis, 2003.
                                                                                                  33
Kremer, Michael, "How Much Does Sorting Increase Inequality?," Quarterly Journal of
   Economics, CXII (1997), 115-139.

Manski, Charles F., "Identification of Endogenous Social Effects: The Reflection Problem," Review
  of Economic Studies, LX (1993), 531-542.

Marmaros, David and Bruce Sacerdote, "Peer Effects in Occupational Choice," European Economic
  Review, XLVI (2002), 870-879.

Rainio, K., "A Study of Sociometric Group Structure: An Application of a Stochastic Theory of
   Social Interaction," in J. Berger, M. Zelditch, and B. Anderson, Sociological Theories in
   Progress, Vol. 1. (Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin, 1966).

Reid, Stuart A., "Students Question True Diversity of Campus," The Dartmouth, CLXII (February
   4, 2005), 1.

Richards, Phillip, "Prestigious Colleges Ignore the Inadequate Intellectual Achievement of Black
   Students," The Chronicle of Higher Education, XLIX (September 13, 2002), B11.

Richeson, Jennifer A, Abigail A Baird, Heather L Gordon, Todd F Heatherton, Carrie L Wyland,
   Sophie Trawalter & J Nicole Shelton, "An Fmri Investigation Of The Impact Of Interracial
   Contact On Executive Function," Nature Neuroscience, VI (2003), 1323 – 1328.

Sacerdote, Bruce I., "Peer Effects With Random Assignment, " Quarterly Journal of Economics,
   CXVI (2001), 681-704.

Schapiro, Amy, "Unlocking Emory's Racial Segregation," The Emory Wheel, LXXXV (April 4,
   2003).

Stinebrickner, Todd and Ralph Stinebrickner, "What Can Be Learned About Peer Effects Using
    College Roommates? Evidence from new survey data and students form disadvantaged
    backgrounds.," mimeo, 2004.

Tuma, Nancy B. and Maureen T. Hallinan, "The Effects of Sex, Race and Achievement on
   Schoolchildren's Friendships," Social Forces, LVII (1979), 1265-1285.

Waller, Willard, The Family: A Dynamic Interpretation (New York, NY: Dryden, 1938).

Winston, Gordon C., "Subsidies, Hierarchy and Peers: The Awkward Economics of Higher
   Education," Journal of Economic Perspectives, XIII (1999), 13-36.

Zimmerman, David J., "Peer Effects in Academic Outcomes: Evidence from a Natural Experiment,"
   Review of Economics and Statistics, LXXXV (2003), 9-23.




                                                                                              34
                                       Table I
              Frequency Tabulation of Primary Users By Graduating Class
Primary users are those who use the NetBlitz system for email and have agreed to participate. We have the full census
of emails sent and received (not just on NetBlitz) for all primary users. Our data set includes nearly half of the classes
of 2003 and 2004. The analysis that follows considers emails sent between primary users and all other students on
campus. The set of primary users is large enough that all students appear at least once in the data set, by virtue of
exchanging email with a primary user.


                                    Sender's                                Fraction
                                    class                       Freq.       Of Class

                                    2003                          491           0.47
                                    2004                          416           0.39
                                    2005                          236           0.23
                                    2006                          107           0.11

                                    Total                       1,250


                                             Table II
                                Summary Statistics for Primary Users

Primary users are those who use the NetBlitz system for email and have agreed to participate. N=1,250. The analysis
that follows considers emails sent between primary users and the set of all students.

           Variable                                                Mean     Std. Dev.         Min        Max

           Male                                                     0.48         0.50           0           1
           Member of fraternity/sorority                            0.49         0.50           0           1
           White (0-1)                                              0.72         0.45           0           1
           Black                                                    0.05         0.21           0           1
           Asian                                                    0.14         0.35           0           1
           Hispanic                                                 0.06         0.24           0           1
           Academic Index (from admissions)                       215.30        13.00      159.67      240.00
           Cumulative GPA (as of 7/03)                              3.38         0.35        1.78        3.99
           Combined SAT Score                                    1427.43       103.89       1000        1600
           Total Messages Sent and Received                       853.51       877.68          63       8737
           Attended NYC Specialized High School                     0.03         0.17           0           1
           Attended prep school with strong Dartmouth               0.05         0.22           0           1
           connection
           Receives Financial Aid                                    0.53        0.50           0            1
           Has 1 or More Black Freshman Roommates                    0.08        0.27           0            1
           Percent Freshman Floor Black                              0.06        0.08           0            1
           Percent Freshman Dorm Black                               0.06        0.05           0          0.2
           Number of Freshman Dormmates                            34.49        17.63           0          91
           Number of Freshman Hallmates                             9.93         4.88           0          25




                                                                                                                       35
                                                Table III
                                     Pair Level Summary Statistics

We consider all possible pairings of primary users and all Dartmouth students. The analysis that follows looks at the
volume sent (if any) between each primary user and every student on campus. In the labels below, person 1 is the
primary user and person 2 is the other person in the pair (be they a primary or secondary user).

Variable                                                       Obs           Mean     Std. Dev.        Min         Max

Talks (0-1) (ie email each other at least once)          4,225,623          0.007        0.083            0           1
Email each other at least 5 times each way               4,225,623          0.002        0.048            0           1
Volume sent between person 1 and 2                       4,225,623          0.253        9.831            0        3745
Volume sent conditional on volume>=1                        29,197         32.381      112.910            2        3745
Persons 1 and 2 are members of same class year           4,225,623          0.237        0.425            0           1
Same freshman floor                                      4,225,623          0.003        0.054            0           1
Same freshman dorm building                              4,225,623          0.010        0.101            0           1
Same freshman year cluster of buildings                  4,225,623          0.031        0.172            0           1
Distance between freshman rooms in thousand              4,225,623          1.421        0.839        0.060       3.273
of feet
Same major                                               4,225,623           0.069       0.254            0             1




                                                                                                                        36
                                   Table IV
        Mean Volumes and Probabilities Of Talking By Race and Geography
We limit the sample to pairs from the same class and in which person 1 (the primary user) is white. We stratify by the
second person being black and by being in the same freshman dorm. For each pair we compute the mean volume
(number of messages sent back and forth) and the probability of talking (i.e. sending at least one message in each
direction).

                                                                         Same Dorm?           Ratio (Same
                                                                                                 Dorm to
                                                                                                      Not)
                 Person 2 Black?                                       No          Yes
                               No        Mean (Volume)              0.708        2.947                4.162
                                          Mean (Talks?)             0.017        0.054                3.176
                                                       N          643,294       28,874


                               Yes       Mean (Volume)              0.212        0.619                2.920
                                          Mean (Talks?)             0.008        0.021                2.625
                                                       N           48,182        2,220




                                                                                                                     37
                                    Table V
 Student Level Regressions of Fraction of Interactions That Are Cross-Race On
                 Racial Composition of Dorm, Hallway, Room
We limit the sample to white students. For each student we compute the fraction of their interactions that take place
with black students. We regress this fraction on the percent black on the student's freshman hallway, percent black in
freshman dorm, and a dummy for having a black roommate. We also control for the student's characteristics including
race, SAT scores, gender, fraternity membership, financial aid status, athlete status, type of high school attended
(coefficients not reported).

                                                 (1)                        (2)                           (3)
                                   Fraction Volume             Fraction Volume               Fraction Volume
                                With Black Students         With Black Students           With Black Students
                                   (Person 1 White)            (Person 1 White)              (Person 1 White)
     Percent Dorm                             0.095
     Black                                 (0.040)*

     Percent                                                                  0.014
     Hallway Black                                                          (0.024)

     Black                                                                                                  0.002
     Roommate                                                                                             (0.007)

     Constant                                   0.082                         0.083                        0.083
                                             (0.032)*                      (0.032)*                     (0.032)*
     Observations                                 900                           900                          900
     R2                                         0.021                         0.015                        0.015
Standard errors in parentheses
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%




                                                                                                                     38
                                  Table VI
  Regression of Number of Emails Exchanged (Volume) and "Talks" on Sender
                        and Recipient Characteristics
The dependent variables are a.) the total number of emails sent or received between person 1 and 2 and b) a dummy
("talks") which equals 1 if person 1 sent and received back one or more emails from person 2. The mean of the dummy
variable is .007, meaning that there is .7 percent chance that a randomly chosen pair interacts. The mean number of
emails exchanged is .253. Each column conditions on the race of person 1. White is always the excluded category for
race. The pairs are structured so that person 1 is a primary user and person 2 is any other student.

Columns (1)-(5) are Poisson regressions. The number in square brackets [ ] is e^coefficient which is the multiplicative
effect from a unit change in the right hand side variable. Column (6) is a probit and partial derivatives are shown.
Standard errors use clustering at the person 1 level. The purpose of column (1) is to show that the race and same dorm
effects estimated via Poisson closely match the multiplicative effects calculated using the means of the raw data (shown
in Table IV).

                                     (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)             (5)             (6)
                            Number of       Number of       Number of       Number of        Number of           Talks?
                                 Emails          Emails          Emails          Emails          Emails       (1+ Each
                            Exchanged       Exchanged       Exchanged       Exchanged        Exchanged            Way)
                                 Person          Person          Person          Person          Person          Person
                             1 is White      1 is White      1 is Black      1 is Asian    1 is Hispanic     1 is White
                              (Poisson)       (Poisson)      (Poisson)       (Poisson)         (Poisson)        (Probit)
                                                                                                                  ∂y/∂x
Person 2 Same Freshman            1.419           1.295           1.366           1.573            1.277          0.013
Dorm And Class               (0.101)**       (0.122)**       (0.293)**       (0.192)**        (0.331)**      (0.001)**
                                [4.133]         [3.651]         [3.920]         [4.821]          [3.586]
Black Person 2* Same                             -0.247          -0.641           0.886           -0.373        -0.002
Freshman Dorm                                   (0.293)         (0.449)       (0.448)*           (0.477)     (0.001)**
                                                [0.781]         [0.527]         [2.425]          [0.689]
Asian Person 2* Same                              0.521           0.095          -1.228           -0.266          0.001
Freshman Dorm                                 (0.255)*          (0.612)      (0.314)**           (0.526)       (0.001)*
                                                [1.684]         [1.100]         [0.293]          [0.766]
Hispanic Person 2*                                0.858           0.317          -0.420           -1.060          0.001
Same Freshman Dorm                            (0.350)*          (0.618)         (0.450)          (0.597)        (0.001)
                                                [2.358]         [1.373]         [0.657]          [0.346]
Other Non-White 2 *                              -0.039           0.488           0.534           -0.332          0.002
Same Freshman Dorm                              (0.383)         (0.379)         (0.448)          (0.734)        (0.001)
                                                [0.962]         [1.629]         [1.706]          [0.717]
Person 2 Is Black                -1.209          -1.019           2.816          -0.337           -0.166        -0.002
                             (0.100)**       (0.144)**       (0.441)**          (0.365)          (0.289)     (0.000)**
                                [0.298]         [0.361]       [16.710]          [0.714]          [0.847]
Person2 Is Asian                                 -0.569          -0.058           1.539           -0.435         -0.002
                                             (0.116)**          (0.285)      (0.160)**         (0.193)*      (0.000)**
                                                [0.566]         [0.944]         [4.660]          [0.647]
Person 2 Is Hispanic                             -0.217           0.683           0.317            0.992         0.000
                                              (0.097)*       (0.234)**          (0.237)       (0.205)**      (0.000)**
                                                [0.805]         [1.980]         [1.373]          [2.697]
Person 2 Is Other                                -0.533           0.111          -0.802           -0.003        -0.002
Non-White                                    (0.179)**          (0.475)      (0.210)**           (0.468)     (0.000)**
                                                [0.587]         [1.117]         [0.448]          [0.997]
Same Class Year                   1.898           1.762           1.575           1.965            1.608         0.009
                             (0.064)**       (0.068)**       (0.149)**       (0.132)**        (0.156)**      (0.000)**
                                [6.673]         [5.824]         [4.831]         [7.135]          [4.993]
Varsity Athlete                                  -0.613          -0.350          -0.405           -0.962        -0.002
(Person 1)                                   (0.096)**          (0.377)         (0.221)       (0.245)**      (0.000)**
                                                [0.542]         [0.705]         [0.667]          [0.382]

                                                                                                                     39
Varsity Athlete              -0.566       -0.731       -1.071       -0.547      -0.002
(Person 2)               (0.105)**    (0.207)**    (0.129)**    (0.162)**    (0.000)**
                            [0.568]      [0.481]      [0.343]      [0.579]
Both Are Athletes             1.297        1.296        1.553        1.019       0.010
                         (0.142)**     (0.576)*    (0.343)**    (0.355)**    (0.001)**
                            [3.658]      [3.655]      [4.726]      [2.770]
Greek Member                 -0.682       -0.042       -0.179       -0.319      -0.003
(Person 1)               (0.097)**       (0.218)      (0.217)      (0.247)   (0.000)**
                            [0.506]      [0.959]      [0.836]      [0.727]
Greek Member                 -0.207       -0.514       -0.308       -0.107      -0.001
(Person 2)                (0.097)*    (0.190)**       (0.163)      (0.250)   (0.000)**
                            [0.813]      [0.598]      [0.735]      [0.899]
Both Are In Greek             1.382        1.859        1.008        0.842       0.010
Organizations            (0.131)**    (0.279)**    (0.254)**    (0.322)**    (0.001)**
                            [3.983]      [6.417]      [2.740]      [2.321]
Same Major                    0.239        0.093        0.097        0.175       0.002
                         (0.091)**       (0.166)      (0.194)      (0.202)   (0.000)**
                            [1.270]      [1.097]      [1.102]      [1.191]
Absolute Difference in       -0.003       -0.001       -0.001        0.000       0.000
SAT Scores               (0.000)**       (0.001)      (0.001)      (0.001)   (0.000)**
                            [0.997]      [0.999]      [0.999]      [1.000]
Person 1 is Male             -0.150        0.098       -0.148        0.166       0.000
                          (0.069)*       (0.209)      (0.138)      (0.189)     (0.000)
                            [0.861]      [1.103]      [0.862]      [1.181]
Person 2 is Male             -0.333       -0.375       -0.393       -0.572       -0.001
                         (0.049)**     (0.151)*    (0.109)**    (0.134)**    (0.000)**
                            [0.717]      [0.687]      [0.675]      [0.564]
Both are Male                -0.122        0.086        0.030        0.005       0.003
                          (0.050)*       (0.154)      (0.109)      (0.137)   (0.000)**
                            [0.885]      [1.090]      [1.030]      [1.005]
Person 1 Went To NYC          0.565       -0.131       -0.647       -1.259       0.002
Exam School               (0.270)*       (0.178)   (0.250)**    (0.289)**     (0.001)*
                            [1.759]      [0.877]      [0.524]      [0.284]
Person 2 Went To NYC         -0.052       -0.045       -0.071        0.341       0.000
Exam School                 (0.140)      (0.333)      (0.301)      (0.323)     (0.000)
                            [0.949]      [0.956]      [0.931]      [1.406]
Both 1 And 2 Went To          1.779        0.389        1.369        0.678       0.003
NYC Exam Schools         (0.643)**       (0.522)   (0.491)**       (0.359)     (0.002)
                            [5.924]      [1.476]      [3.931]      [1.970]
Person 1 Went                -0.247       -0.045       -0.725        0.026       0.000
To Fancy Prep School      (0.116)*       (0.216)   (0.239)**       (0.255)     (0.000)
                            [0.781]      [0.956]      [0.484]      [1.026]
Person 2 Went                 0.173       -0.563        0.079       -0.008       0.000
To Fancy Prep School        (0.178)    (0.222)*       (0.190)      (0.246)     (0.000)
                            [1.189]      [0.569]      [1.082]      [0.992]
Both 1 And 2 Went             0.536       -0.320       -0.751        0.086       0.004
To Fancy Prep Schools       (0.284)      (0.734)      (0.731)      (0.651)   (0.001)**
                            [1.709]      [0.726]      [0.472]      [1.090]
Person 1 on Financial        -0.175       -1.101        0.148       -0.230      -0.001
Aid                         (0.093)   (0.346)**       (0.213)      (0.264)   (0.000)**
                            [0.839]      [0.333]      [1.160]      [0.795]
Person 2 on Financial        -0.294       -0.583        0.241       -0.848       -0.001
Aid                      (0.075)**       (0.408)      (0.221)   (0.260)**    (0.000)**
                            [0.745]      [0.558]      [1.273]      [0.428]
Both on Financial Aid         0.393        1.074        0.028        1.032       0.001
                         (0.113)**     (0.469)*       (0.261)   (0.300)**    (0.000)**
                            [1.481]      [2.927]      [1.028]      [2.807]
Person 2 Is Black *          -0.291                                             -0.001
Person 1 Has Black          (0.312)                                            (0.001)

                                                                                    40
Roommate                                     [0.748]
Person 2 Is Black* %                           1.516        -3.501          1.624         4.791           0.002
Black In 1's Freshman                        (1.749)       (3.765)        (4.063)       (2.681)         (0.004)
Dorm                                         [4.554]       [0.030]        [5.073]     [120.422]
Person 1's Percent                            -1.128                                                     -0.003
Dorm Black                                   (0.752)                                                    (0.002)
                                             [0.324]
Person 1 Has                                   0.181                                                      0.000
a Black Roommate                             (0.144)                                                    (0.000)
                                             [1.198]
Constant                       -2.242         -1.140         -2.129         -2.382        -1.666
                           (0.054)**      (0.103)**      (0.437)**      (0.258)**     (0.347)**

Observations               3,021,484      2,923,120       192,279        560,120        245,165      2,923,120

Robust standard errors in parentheses. * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%. NYC Exam Schools included are
Stuyvesant, Bronx Science, Brooklyn Tech and Hunter College High School. Fancy prep schools include Andover,
Exeter, Walt Whitman (MD), Lawrenceville, St. Paul's, Deerfield, St. Ann's (NY), Horace Mann, Punahou, Winsor,
Trinity (NY), Buckingham Browne and Nichols, Dalton School, Pingry School, Loomis Chafee, and Collegiate. These
are the private high schools that are within the top 20 feeder high schools to Dartmouth.




                                                                                                            41
                                          Table VII
                     The Effect of Distance on the Amount of Interaction
                     And How The Effects of Distance Degrade with Time
Sample is limited to pairs in which person 1 is white. The dependent variables are the total volume exchanged between
person 1 and person 2 during September 2002-July 2003 and a dummy for "has sent and received 1 or more emails."
Columns (1), (3), and (4) are poisson regressions. Standard errors use clustering at the person 1 level. The number in
square brackets [ ] is e^coefficient. This is the multiplicative effect on the predicted number of emails for a one unit
change in the right hand side variable. Column (2) is a probit and partial derivatives are shown. Column (3) is for
freshmen and (4) is for seniors. The point here is to see the degree to which the effects of freshman year distance
degrade over time.

Regressions also control for (but suppress coefficients for) all Xs in previous table include race, financial aid, athletic,
fraternity status, same graduating class etc.

                                                        (1)                     (2)                      (3)                         (4)
                                              Total Volume          Sent at least 1          Total Volume               Total Volume
                                                                             email            (Person 1 is a      (Person 1 is a Senior
                                        (Person 1 is White)    (Person 1 is White)     Freshman and White)                 and White)
 Same Room                                            1.134                  0.034                    1.857                       0.971
                                                 (0.160)**              (0.005)**                (0.312)**                   (0.286)**
                                                    [3.108]                                         [6.404]                     [2.641]

 Same Freshman                                         0.838                 0.011                       1.649                         0.379
 Year Floor                                       (0.217)**              (0.001)**                  (0.375)**                        (0.375)
                                                     [2.312]                                           [5.202]                       [1.461]

 Same Freshman                                         0.661                 0.003                      0.289                          0.925
 Year Dorm                                        (0.225)**              (0.001)**                    (0.336)                       (0.408)*
                                                     [1.937]                                          [1.335]                        [2.522]

 Same Freshman                                         0.237                 0.001                      0.308                          0.471
 Year Cluster Of Dorms                               (0.165)             (0.000)**                    (0.403)                        (0.316)
                                                     [1.267]                                          [1.361]                        [1.602]

 Freshman Year                                      -0.088                    0.000                    -0.070                        0.037
 Residential Distance                              (0.049)                    0.000                   (0.107)                      (0.072)
 In Thousands Of Feet                              [0.916]                                            [0.932]                      [1.038]
 Observations                                2,923,120                  2,923,120                    230,920                    1,094,550
Robust standard errors in parentheses
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%




                                                                                                                               42
                                               Table VIII
                                Peer Effects in Fraternity Membership

We estimate peer effects in the decision to join a Greek organization using four different specifications. In Column (1)
we run own decision on the average of the dormmates' decision as in Sacerdote [2001]. In column (2) we use the
average decision of all peers where we weight the peer outcome by the amount of email volume exchanged with that
peer. In column (3) we follow Foster [2003] by instrumenting for the dorm mean of fraternity membership using
average characteristics of randomly assigned dormmates. Instruments are dormmate means of the following variables:
combined SAT score, Academic Index, NY Exam School status, Prep School Status, and Financial Aid Status. First
stage regressions are shown in Appendix II. In column (4) we use the same set of instruments to instrument for the
email weighted peer average of fraternity membership.


                                                        (1)               (2)                  (3)               (4)
                                            Greek Member        Greek Member       Greek Member        Greek Member
                                                    (OLS)              (OLS)                 (IV)              (IV)
 Freshman Dorm Mean Of "Greek"                       0.711                                  0.505
                                                (0.069)**                                (0.196)*
 Email Weighted Peer Mean Of                                              0.990                                  0.771
 "Greek"                                                             (0.037)**                              (0.294)**
 Student Is Black                                    -0.059               0.036              -0.064              0.012
                                                    (0.071)             (0.058)             (0.071)            (0.068)
 Student Is Asian                                    -0.005               0.047              -0.011              0.031
                                                    (0.040)             (0.033)             (0.041)            (0.040)
 Student Is Hispanic                                  0.052               0.068               0.051              0.064
                                                    (0.059)             (0.049)             (0.060)            (0.050)
 Student Is Other Non-White                          -0.038              -0.032              -0.037             -0.032
                                                    (0.096)             (0.079)             (0.096)            (0.080)
 Varsity Athlete (0-1)                                0.092               0.024               0.097              0.044
                                                 (0.033)**              (0.027)          (0.033)**             (0.037)
 Sat Score (Math+Verbal)                             -0.000              -0.000              -0.000             -0.000
                                                  (0.000)*              (0.000)           (0.000)*             (0.000)
 Male                                                 0.023               0.038               0.020              0.032
                                                    (0.027)             (0.023)             (0.028)            (0.024)
 Went To NYC Exam School                              0.043               0.009               0.042              0.015
                                                    (0.081)             (0.067)             (0.081)            (0.068)
 Went To Fancy Prep School                            0.101               0.041               0.111              0.062
                                                    (0.061)             (0.051)             (0.062)            (0.059)
 Receives Financial Aid (0-1)                        -0.136              -0.063              -0.140             -0.083
                                                 (0.028)**           (0.023)**           (0.028)**           (0.035)*
 Constant                                             0.704               0.213               0.803              0.393
                                                 (0.232)**              (0.192)          (0.249)**             (0.315)
 Observations                                         1233                1233                1233                1233
 R-Squared                                            0.122               0.399               0.115              0.382
Standard errors in parentheses
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%




                                                                                                                     43
                                          Appendix I
                           Comparison of Primary and Secondary Users
 The Primary users are those that participated in the study and for whom we have a complete record of their outgoing
 and incoming email volumes. The Secondary users are people who appear in the data set by virtue of having been in
 contact with one of the Primary users. The set of Primary users is large enough that virtually every student (and most
 faculty members) appear in the data set at least once. The comparison in the table is a simple t-test of the difference in
 means for the difference between the two groups.

Variable                             Obs             Obs            Mean            Mean            T-test           T-test
                               Primary=0       Primary=1        Primary=0       Primary=1             For       Difference
                                                                                               difference       For Juniors
                                                                                                in means         & Seniors

Male                                2,684            1,250            0.51             0.48         1.423             1.207

Member                              2,684            1,250            0.33             0.49        -9.749            -1.422
Fraternity/Sorority
White                               2,463            1,250            0.60             0.72        -2.561            -0.157

Black                               2,463            1,250            0.07             0.05         2.957             2.350

Asian                               2,463            1,250            0.13             0.14        -0.881            -2.821

Hispanic                            2,463            1,250            0.07             0.06         0.885             1.196

Academic Index                      2,624            1,250          212.12          215.30         -6.412            -4.915
(From Admissions)
Cumulative GPA                      2,684            1,250            3.28             3.38        -8.044            -6.479

Math SAT Score                      2,609            1,250          706.30         714.738         -4.239            -3.628




                                                                                                                        44
                                             Appendix II
                                First Stage Regressions for Table VIII
Table VIII columns (3) and (4) use average background characteristics of randomly assigned dormmates to instrument
for the freshman dorm mean of fraternity status ("Greek") and the peer mean of fraternity status where the peer average
is weighted by email volumes.
                                                                                   (1)                             (2)
                                                            Freshman Dorm Mean of              Peer Mean of "Greek"
                                                                             "Greek"        Using Email Volumes as
                                                                                                             Weights
     Dorm Average SATs                                                          0.002                           0.001
                                                                           (0.000)**                          (0.001)
     Dorm Average Academic Index                                               -0.014                          -0.006
                                                                           (0.003)**                          (0.005)
     Dorm Average of NY Exam School Status                                     -0.617                          -0.640
                                                                           (0.194)**                        (0.319)*
     Dorm Average for Prep School Status                                       -0.810                          -0.005
                                                                           (0.129)**                          (0.212)
     Dorm Average for Financial Aid Status                                     -0.601                          -0.302
                                                                           (0.057)**                       (0.094)**
     Black (0-1)                                                               -0.009                          -0.111
                                                                              (0.028)                       (0.045)*
     Asian (0-1)                                                               -0.026                          -0.071
                                                                              (0.016)                      (0.026)**
     Hispanic (0-1)                                                            -0.003                          -0.019
                                                                              (0.023)                         (0.038)
     Other Non-White (0-1)                                                     -0.011                          -0.013
                                                                              (0.037)                         (0.061)
     Varsity athlete (0-1)                                                      0.016                           0.079
                                                                              (0.013)                      (0.021)**
     Combined SAT Score                                                         0.000                          -0.000
                                                                              (0.000)                       (0.000)*
     Male (0-1)                                                                -0.012                          -0.022
                                                                              (0.011)                         (0.017)
     Went to NYC Exam School (0-1)                                             -0.005                           0.033
                                                                              (0.031)                         (0.052)
     Went to Fancy Prep School (0-1)                                            0.035                           0.093
                                                                              (0.024)                       (0.039)*
     Financial Aid Status (0-1)                                                -0.011                          -0.081
                                                                              (0.011)                      (0.018)**
     Constant                                                                   1.780                           1.131
                                                                           (0.371)**                          (0.610)
     Observations                                                               1233                            1233
     R-squared                                                                  0.138                           0.083

    F( 15, 1217) =                                                              13.02                          7.37
Standard errors in parentheses
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%




                                                                                                                      45
                                                                         Figure I
                                                       Average Volume of Email Sent At Each Distance
The data consist of all pairs of students who entered Dartmouth in the same year. Distance refers to the distance
between the two students' freshman rooms. Physical distance is grouped into 22 categories and we take the average
volume (including zeroes) across all pairs within a distance category.
                              1
              Average Volume of Emails Exchanged
                        .6    .4        .8




                                                   0               1                   2                3              4
                                                           Freshman y ear residential distance in thousands of f eet




                                                                                                                           46
                                    Figure II
      Actual and Hypothetical SAT Distribution of Black Students' Peers
   Weighting By the Level of Interaction Between Each Student and Her Peers
This shows the fraction of black students' emails that are exchanged with students in each decile of the Dartmouth SAT
distribution. The line labeled actual shows the true distribution. The flat line labeled "geography" shows what the
distribution would look like if students used only freshman year location (geography ) to determine their peer group.
This uses predicted email volumes from a poisson regression of email volumes on all of the geographic variables. The
"race and geography" line shows the distribution that results if students use both the race and geography to determine
their peer group. If we predict email volumes using all Xs for each student in the pair (not shown on the graph), we get
a peer SAT distribution that matches the Actual line almost exactly.


  0.300




  0.250

                         Actual

  0.200

             Race and
             Geography
  0.150


                                                                                   Based on Geography
  0.100




  0.050




  0.000
             1           2         3          4          5          6          7            8           9       10




                                                                                                                      47
