                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             DIGITAL RIGHTS MANAGEMENT AND
                             THE PRICING OF DIGITAL PRODUCTS

                                              Yooki Park
                                           Suzanne Scotchmer

                                          Working Paper 11532
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w11532


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       July 2005




We thank seminar and conference participants at U.C. Berkeley, Hitotsubashi University, GRIP, IDEI
(Touluose), the NET Institute, University of Washington, U.S.C., CORE, ECARES, WEIS2005, Joan
Feigenbaum, Filomena Garcia, Kazuharu Kiyono, Scott Shenker, and especially Emmanuel Farhi, who
corrected an error and made many other useful comments. Financial support from the NET Institute
(http://www.NETinst.org) is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by Yooki Park and Suzanne Scotchmer. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Digital Rights Management and the Pricing of Digital Products
Yooki Park and Suzanne Scotchmer
NBER Working Paper No. 11532
July 2005
JEL No. L13, L14, L15, K21, O33

                                           ABSTRACT




As it becomes cheaper to copy and share digital content, vendors are turning to technical protections

such as encryption. We argue that if protection is nevertheless imperfect, this transition will

generally lower the prices of content relative to perfect legal enforcement. However, the effect on
prices depends on whether the content providers use independent protection standards or a shared

one, and if shared, on the governance of the system. Even if a shared system permits content

providers to set their prices independently, the equilibrium prices will depend on how the vendors

share the costs. We show that demand-based cost sharing generally leads to higher prices than

revenue-based cost sharing. Users, vendors and the antitrust authorities will typically have different

views on what capabilities the DRM system should have. We argue that, when a DRM system is

implemented as an industry standard, there is a potential for "collusion through technology."



Yooki Park
2204 Glen Avenue
Berkeley, CA 94709
yooki@berkeley.edu

Suzanne Scotchmer
Department of Economics and GSPP
2607 Hearst Avenue
University of California
Berkeley, CA 94720-7320
and NBER
scotch@berkeley.edu
1. Introduction

As copying of digital content has become easier, content vendors have started to use
technical protections rather than relying on legal protections. Technical protections,
such as encryption and copy controls, are often lumped together under the name
“digital rights management (DRM).” The purpose of this paper is to understand how
the transition from legal to technical protections aﬀects the pricing of digital content
when the DRM system is implemented by the content vendors themselves rather than
by third-party providers.
       Competition requires that the vendors set their prices independently. The
technical capabilities built into a shared DRM system can either facilitate or obstruct
independent pricing of content. However, the outcome in the market will also depend
on the vendors’ incentive to price competitively, which is aﬀected by how the vendors
share the costs of the system. We show that, even with independent price-setting,
competition may be compromised by cost sharing.
       Technical protections have been evolving since the 1980s. Some have been
industry-wide eﬀorts, for example the legally mandated Serial Copy Management Sys-
tem for digital audio tape that was authorized by Congress. This system caused
the quality of copies to degrade, so that, as with analog audio tapes, it was hard to
make faithful copies of copies. The solution was inelegant at best, but in any case
became obsolete due to the proliferation of other digital mediums. Other measures
were introduced by vendors themselves, such as the one-installation features imposed
by some distributors of computer software. One-installation features were rapidly
circumvented.
       As content distribution has moved to the Internet, watermark and encryption
technologies have developed. A watermark, by analogy with a watermark on paper
stationery, is a piece of software code embedded in a program. If illicit copies of
the software circulate, the watermark can identify the original buyer or licensee of
the copy that is circulating. This may or may not be useful, depending on whether
the original buyer or licensee can be held liable. Encryption systems attempt to make
digital content uninterpretable or inaccessible without use of a code key. The code key

                                           1
generally authorizes playing the content on a specific piece of hardware. For example,
the movie industry has developed digital versatile disks (DVDs), which are protected
by a technology called the Content Scrambling System (CSS). CSS authorizes access
by matching a code embedded in disks to a code embedded in DVD players. Among
other purposes, this system ensures that movies released for viewing in one region of
the world cannot be viewed in another.
        The DVD technology is just one example of a system shared by multiple ven-
dors.   Shared DRM systems raise a host of issues regarding ownership, licensing,
and price control over players as well as content. For DVDs, both the hardware and
software are proprietary, and jointly licensed. On the hardware side, Toshiba admin-
isters the licenses, charging per-unit license fees on the sale of DVD media, players,
and decoders. The collected fees are then distributed to the patent holders (Hitachi,
Matsushita Electric, Time Warner, Toshiba, and Victor) proportionally to each mem-
ber’s holdings in the patent portfolio. On the software side, the Motion Pictures
Expert Group (MPEG), which includes manufacturers of players, content companies,
and others, use similar terms to license the digital video and audio algorithms (called
“codecs”) used on DVDs and digital television. Finally, the DVD Copy Control Associ-
ation (DVD-CCA), controlled primarily by the content industry, licenses the technical
protection measure known as the Content Scramble System (CSS). These license fees
are linked to players rather than to usage of digital content.
        The license on DVD hardware is for a “pool” of patents. Patent pooling for
standardization is generally thought to be pro-competitive, barring practices that
are anticompetitive or not necessary for the dissemination of intellectual property
(Shapiro 2001). The Department of Justice Antitrust Division issued favorable review
letters on both the DVD and the MPEG licensing agreements. Notably, however,
the review of these agreements focused almost entirely on the competitive eﬀects in
player markets. As the licensing fees were only at the encoding/decoding level in the
physical media, the eﬀect on the content market was assumed to be minimal, and only
briefly considered. Similarly, in VirginMega v. Apple, the French antitrust authorities
considered (and dismissed) an antitrust claim to force licensing of FairPlay, the DRM


                                           2
system used for Apple’s iTunes Music Store. Again, the arguments were focused on
the market for players (iPods), rather than the market for music.
       In this paper we are concerned with the market for content, rather than with
the market for players. From an economic perspective, disentangling the relationship
between the the content market and the player market is not trivial, since the demand
for players is derived from the demand for content. And from a technical perspective,
standardization of technical protections does not necessarily require standardization of
players, or vice versa. A given DRM system can be implemented on diﬀerent players,
and a given player can be compatible with diﬀerent DRM systems.
       The main harm that might arise from cartelization of the player market is that
it could divert profit from creators, and thus erode the incentive to create. Since the
ultimate source of value in the player markets is content, there is a natural antidote
to cartelization in the device market: content vendors can implement and maintain
their own protection system(s), and players can be made compatible with each vendor’s
system. However, that solution might introduce new possibilities for competitive harm.
The purpose of this paper is to explore the eﬀect on content prices when digital rights
management is under the control of the content providers.
       Key to our analysis is that the strength of protection is endogenous, and has
an eﬀect on prices. We also recognize that vendors must choose whether to implement
independent systems or share a common one. An advantage of sharing is that it
reduces setup costs. A disadvantage is that the shared system is a more attractive
hacking opportunity — a single hack gives access to more content. The shared system
must therefore provide a higher level of protection.
       In sections 2 and 3, we show that a threat of circumvention reduces prices
relative to perfect legal enforcement. This is because the optimal way to deter cir-
cumvention is a combination of lower prices (giving up revenue) and protection (paying
costs). However, despite the lower prices, we show that vendors as well as users may
prefer technical protection. Even if per-period profit is smaller with technical pro-
tections, there is no necessary end to protection by technical means. In section 2
we discuss a single vendor, and in section 3, we introduce competition between two


                                           3
vendors, and show that a threat of circumvention reduces prices whether the vendors
compete on prices or collude. We also show that the vendors’ incentives to share a
system are not perfectly aligned with eﬃciency. For example, because of price eﬀects,
vendors may share a system when it would be less costly to use independent systems.
Section 4 illustrates these results in an extended example.
       Even though collusion through a shared system may improve the welfare of
users relative to perfect legal enforcement, the antitrust authorities may want to set
rules about the technology. For example, they may insist on mechanisms that preserve
independent pricing. In sections 5 and 6, we ask to what extent independent pricing
is possible with a shared system. We show that, even if the DRM system permits the
vendors to set their prices independently, the rules for sharing the costs of the system
may have a collusive eﬀect. We show that demand-based cost sharing is more collusive
than either revenue-based cost sharing or fixed cost shares.
       The ideas in this paper are related to an older literature of the 1980’s about
the feared harms of photocopying. These include, for example, Novos and Waldman
(1984), and Besen and Kirby (1989). These papers were focused mainly on the cost
and quality of copies, and how the market for copies aﬀects the price of originals
and consumer welfare more generally.       In contrast, we assume that digital copies
are faithful to the original, and that the cost of copying is endogenous to the level
of protection, which we take as an optimizing choice of vendors.        More recently,
authors have focused on government interventions as a solution to digital copying. For
example, Chen and Png (2003) characterize optimal fines for copying, in conjunction
with subsidies and taxes, which collectively can mitigate the harms of digital copying.
       We follow Conner and Rumelt (1991) in our premise that the threat of copy-
ing will cause vendors to lower their prices. (See Sundararajan (2004) for empirical
evidence for the existence of DRM price eﬀects.) We follow Belleflamme (2003) in
noticing that a shared DRM system aﬀects pricing behavior through the threat of
hacking. In Belleflamme’s paper, demands would be independent if the vendors had
perfect legal enforcement, but demands become interdependent if hacking is a threat.
We depart from these papers in assuming that the level of protection (cost of hack-


                                           4
ing) is an endogenous choice, and in the welfare questions we address.        It may be
easier to deter hacking by using independent DRM systems than by using a shared
DRM system. We therefore investigate the choice between independent and shared
protections, and how it compares to what is optimal. We also investigate the eﬀect on
prices of how the shared system is governed, in particular, comparing demand-based
cost sharing with revenue-based cost sharing.

2. The Price-Reducing Eﬀect of Technical Protections

Probably the most severe criticism of intellectual property as an incentive mechanism
is that, in allowing content creators to raise prices to the monopoly level, it creates
deadweight loss by excluding users. Will technical protections exacerbate this problem
or serve as an antidote? One reason the answer is not obvious is that the strength of
protection is an optimizing choice. Even if it is possible to exclude all unauthorized
users, the vendor will not typically find it profitable to do so. It may be cheaper to
price so that circumvention is deterred rather than to bear the high costs of imple-
menting a hack proof protection system. The incentive to avoid circumvention and
to avoid the high cost of protection will have a moderating influence on price.
       The assumption here, following Conner and Rumelt (1991), is that a user will
buy a legitimate copy instead of circumventing the protection system whenever the
price of the legitimate copy is lower than the cost of circumvention.      The vendor’s
optimizing strategy takes account of this. We also assume that, although individual
circumventors can circumvent without detection, they cannot make the content freely
available on the Internet, or sell a circumvention tool. Those activities would be easily
detectable and would put the circumventor in jeopardy under the Digital Millennium
Copyright Act.
       We show that technical protection will generally result in a lower market price
than the monopoly price that would be charged with perfect legal enforcement. In
the Appendix, we show that dispersion in the costs of circumvention may exert yet
another downward influence on price.
       To be more concrete, index agents by θ ∈ [0, 1], uniformly distributed, and


                                           5
suppose that the willingness to pay of agent θ is θ. For each price p, the number of
potential users with θ ≥ p is 1 − p. At price p, the consumers’ surplus of buyers is
               Z   1               1
      s(p) =           (θ − p) dθ = (1 − p)2                                         (2.1)
               p                   2
We assume that the marginal cost of copying is zero. Thus, if copying can be con-
trolled, the monopoly price will be p∗ = 12 , which maximizes per-period profit,

      π(p) = p(1 − p).

However, if the copies cannot be controlled, the demand curve for legitimate copies
falls to zero. Technical protection measures can mitigate this problem.
       Index the strength of protection by e ∈ R+ , and interpret e as the cost of
circumvention. Formalizing the intuition that the cost of protection increases super-
linearly in the cost of circumvention, denote the cost of implementing protection level
e by K(e) > 0, where K and K 0 are increasing. We shall first suppose that the cost of
circumvention is the same for all users, namely, e. After the right holder has chosen
the strength of protection, e, he must set a price. If e > p∗ , then the optimal price is
p∗ . It is therefore wasteful to implement a protection e > p∗ , since the proprietor does
not need such strong protection in order to charge the monopoly price.          If e < p∗ ,
the optimal price is p = e, the cost of circumvention. At that price, no users will
circumvent the technical protection measure in equilibrium.
       Thus, for any e ≤ p∗ , the firm’s profit as a function of e is π(e) − K(e), where
both π and K are increasing, and π flattens out for e > p∗ . The profit-maximizing
level of protection, say ê, maximizes the diﬀerence between profit and cost, and must
be lower than p∗ . Thus,

Remark 1. If each user’s cost of circumvention is e when the protection level is
e, the profit-maximizing level of protection ê satisfies ê < p∗ , where p∗ is the profit-
maximizing price with perfect legal enforcement. The profit-maximizing price satisfies
p̂ = ê < p∗ . There is no circumvention in equilibrium.

       Thus the threat of circumvention lowers the price of content. We show in the
appendix that dispersion in circumvention costs may lower it even more.

                                               6
        While the price and profit are lower in each period, the technical protection
can continue forever, and may thus be more profitable than perfect legal enforcement,
which eventually expires. This may even be true if the costs K are taken into account.
Moreover, it is not obvious that the threat of circumvention increases consumer welfare,
even though it reduces the per-period price.                This is again because the technical
protection can continue indefinitely. In fact, a technical protection system can increase
both consumer welfare and the proprietor’s profit, as compared with perfect legal
enforcement for a limited duration.            We will show this in an example, but first we
make a preliminary comment on the optimal structure of rewards to creation.
        For each p, let DW L(p) be the lost consumers’ surplus at the price p (dead-
weight loss). Remark 2 says that if a lower price is coupled with longer protection to
just the extent that total profit is preserved, and if this has the eﬀect of reducing the
deadweight-loss-to-profit ratio, consumers are better oﬀ. This ratio test is satisfied
for linear demand curves, as assumed here.
        By assuming that revenue is held fixed, Remark 2 focuses on the optimal struc-
ture of rewards ex post. It allows us to consider ex post eﬃciency without considering
the ex ante incentive to create. In the remainder of this paper, where we consider gov-
ernance structures for sharing technical protections, the ex ante and ex post eﬃciency
issues are not so easy to disentangle.

Remark 2. Suppose a legal regime lasts T ∗ discounted years1 with monopoly price
p∗ , and suppose a technical protection regime lasts T (e) discounted years, T (e) > T ∗
with price p(e) that satisfies p(e) < p∗ . Suppose that the revenue earned in both
regimes is the same, π(p(e))T (e) = π(p∗ )T ∗ . Then consumers are better oﬀ if and
   1
     The length of protection T is taken to Rbe already discounted. If the statutory length of protection
                                              τ
is τ, and the discount rate is r, then T = 0 e−rt dt. The discounted length of protection, T, cannot
be larger than 1r , which corresponds to τ = ∞.




                                                   7
          2
only if
         DW L(p∗ )   DW L(p(e))
             ∗
                   >                                                                             (2.2)
          π(p )       π(p(e))

Proof. Since p(e) < p∗ , the per-period consumers’ surplus is higher, s (p(e)) > s (p∗ ).
With perfectly enforceable copyrights, total consumers surplus is
                          µ         ¶
              ∗   1
                  ∗
       s (p ) T +   − T ∗ s(0),
                  r
                      1
where s(0) =          2
                          is the per-period consumers’ surplus after the protection ends, when
the product will be “sold” at the competitive price, zero. Analogously, we shall write
                              µ           ¶
                                  1
       s (p(e)) T (e) +             − T (e) s(0)
                                  r
for consumers’ surplus with the technical protection in place. Consumers are better
oﬀ with technical protection of length T (e) if and only if:

       [s (0) − s (p∗ )] T ∗ − [s (0) − s (p(e))] T (e) > 0                                      (2.3)

          Remark 2 follows from the observation that the consumers’ surplus that is lost
due to higher than competitive prices is equal to profit plus deadweight loss. Therefore,

       s (0) − s (p∗ ) = π(p∗ ) + DW L(p∗ )

       s (0) − s (p(e)) = π(p(e)) + DW L(p(e))

Then, using T ∗ π(p∗ ) = T (e)π(p(e)), the inequality (2.3) holds if and only if (2.2)
holds.
          However, this conceptual experiment is not quite the right one for comparing
costless enforcement of copyrights with technical protections. Technical protections
can continue forever — protection will not end at the duration T (e) required for the
   2
     The ratio test for whether a simultaneous price reduction and lengthening of protection helps
consumers was introduced in the antitrust context by Kaplow 1984 to evaluate the desirability of
licensing practices, and in the patent design context by Tandon (1982) and many subsequent authors
(see Scotchmer (2005), chapter 4) to evaluate the desirability of making patents broad or narrow.
The notable feature of the ratio test is that the comparison is reduced to a static one. Even though
deadweight loss lasts longer in the technical protection regime, we only have to observe that the ratio
of deadweight loss to profit is reduced in each period in order to know whether in total the technical
protection regime is better for consumers.

                                                   8
profit equivalence. Further, technical protections are costly. Nevertheless, this line
of reasoning correctly suggests that technical protections can sometimes make both
creators and consumers better oﬀ. We show this with an example.


Example: As argued above, if there is no dispersion of circumvention costs, the optimal
price with a technical protection is p(e) = e. Thus, consumers’ surplus per period of
time with technical protection is s(p(e)) = 12 (1 − e)2 .
       Social surplus is greater with technical protection than with perfect legal en-
forcement if
                    µ                 ¶
       ∗    ∗   1             1
      T s(p ) +   − T ∗ s(0) ≤ s(p(e))                                               (2.4)
                r             r
       Profit is greater with technical protection than with perfect legal enforcement
if
                                      1
      T ∗ [p∗ (1 − p∗ )] ≤              [e(1 − e) − K(e)]                            (2.5)
                                      r
Let the cost function K be given by
                (
                             1                   1
                            80
                                        if e ≤   4
      K(e) =            2        1               1
                    e −          20
                                        if e >   4


       The level of protection that maximizes e(1 −e)− K(e) is e = 14 . The conditions
(2.5) and (2.4) on profit and social surplus are satisfied if the discount rate and length
of legal protection satisfy
      7            7
         < rT ∗ <
      12          10

3. Independent Protections versus Shared Protections

We now turn from monopoly to oligopoly, and consider how the pricing of digital
content depends on the protection system. Prices will depend on whether the content
providers implement independent systems or share a common one. If they share a
common one, the market outcome will depend on whether they price independently,
and on how they share the costs of the protection system.


                                                        9
       The table below lays out the cases for comparison, partly as a guide to notation.
Vendors may implement independent systems to protect their content or a shared
one, and they might price independently or collude. When vendors share a protection
system, they must somehow cover their shared protection costs. The three notations
ˆ I,
I, ˜ I¯ refer to diﬀerent ways of sharing cost while pricing independently: fixed shares,
or cost shares equal to demand shares or revenue shares, respectively. This section
discusses the price outcomes in the regimes where the cost sharing considerations do
not arise, including the case of a shared system leading directly to collusive pricing
(J). The next section then provides an illustrative example of the results. In section
5 we turn to the impact of cost sharing rules.
                                                Protections:
       Pricing:            None                 Independent
                                                                     Shared System
                     Legal Enforcement            System
    Independent              Iˆ                      I                    ˆ I,
                                                                          I, ˜ I¯
   Joint (collude)            Ĉ                     C                       J

       A conclusion of this section is that a shared system can be socially preferable to
independent systems even if the vendors use the shared system to collude. Moreover,
the shared system can be superior even in the narrow sense of reducing prices for
content, even if sharing does not significantly lower the costs of protection. The
lower prices are due to the price-moderating eﬀect of a threat of circumvention, which
operates more powerfully if the vendors share a system than if they use independent
systems. A shared system is more tempting to hackers, since a single hack gives access
to more content. To deter circumvention, the shared protection must be stronger,
hence more costly. Instead of bearing the high cost of joint protection, it may be
cheaper for the vendors to deter circumvention by lowering prices instead.
       Even if sharing does not reduce prices, due to collusion, it may have the social
and private benefit of reducing the total cost of protection, since setup costs are only
paid once instead of twice. Balanced against the saving in fixed costs is the fact that
marginal costs of deploying more protection will be higher in a shared system.
       Suppose that the firms face demands D1 (p1 , p2 ), D2 (p1 , p2 ), each decreasing in
its own price and increasing (nondecreasing) in the other firm’s price. Some people will

                                           10
buy both products, but others will buy only one of the products. In order to focus on
the pure eﬀects of cost sharing or other arrangements that aﬀect prices, we will assume
that the vendors are in symmetric positions, and we focus on symmetric equilibria.
Asymmetries between the vendors, such as in the popularity of their content, will have
additional eﬀects not considered here.
       The cost of protection will again be given by a positive function K, which in-
cludes fixed costs and increasing marginal costs as the strength of protection increases.
We again assume that there is no dispersion in circumvention costs, and that the level
of protection, e, is calibrated to be the cost of circumvention.
       We will find it useful to define revenue functions and profit functions:

      Ri (p1 , p2 ) = pi Di (p1 , p2 )   for i = 1, 2                                     (3.1)

      ΠIi (p1 , p2 ) = Ri (p1 , p2 ) − K(pi )    for i = 1, 2                             (3.2)

       We assume throughout that at a suﬃciently high price, each firm’s demand,
hence revenue, becomes zero, regardless of the other firm’s price.
       In the profit functions ΠIi (where “I” standards for “independent”), we have
entered pi as the argument in K, recognizing that the optimal choice of price and
protection satisfies e = pi for firm i. “Unused” protection, e > pi , is wasteful, and less
protection, e < pi , would lead to zero revenue.
       We define the following equilibria:
                       ˆ   ˆ                                                          ˆ   ˆ
   • The prices (pI , pI ) are an equilibrium with perfect legal enforcement if R1 (pI , pI ) ≥
               ˆ
      R1 (p, pI ) for all p ≥ 0 and symmetrically for firm 2.

   • The prices (pI , pI ) are an equilibrium with independent technical protections if
      ΠI1 (pI , pI ) ≥ ΠI1 (p, pI ) for all p ≥ 0, and symmetrically for firm 2.

       We will assume that these symmetric equilibria exist.
       As a benchmark, now suppose that the firms collude, even though they imple-
ment independent protections. We will assume that the profit-maximizing prices are
symmetric. Let (pĈ , pĈ ) be the prices that maximize

      ΠĈ (p1 , p2 ) = R1 (p1 , p2 ) + R2 (p1 , p2 )                                      (3.3)

                                                       11
which is the joint profit with perfect legal enforcement.               Let (pC , pC ) be the prices
that maximizes joint profit with independent protections, defined as

      ΠC (p1 , p2 ) = R1 (p1 , p2 ) + R2 (p1 , p2 ) − K(p1 ) − K(p2 )                         (3.4)

For the case of shared protection, let (pJ , pJ ) be the collusive prices that maximize
joint profit

      ΠJ (p1 , p2 ) = R1 (p1 , p2 ) + R2 (p1 , p2 ) − K(p1 + p2 )                             (3.5)

Here we assume that the vendors will choose high enough protection so that all hacking
is deterred, which requires that p1 + p2 ≤ e. We have again substituted p1 + p2 for
e in the cost function.      The only plausible alternative would be for the vendors to
choose a level of protection that is higher than each individual price but lower than
the sum. We assume this is not optimal. With this lower level of protection, some
consumers who would otherwise pay for a single product would switch to hacking, and
receive both products at the hacking cost e. And consumers who would otherwise pay
for both products would surely switch to hacking instead of paying.                  Both changes
in behavior are costly to the producers, especially if many consumers would buy both
products when p1 + p2 ≤ e.

       To compare prices, we need some additional assumptions. The price diﬀerences
are due to the fact that, with protection, price can only be increased by incurring the
marginal cost of more protection.


Assumption 1. Given the revenue and profit functions defined above:

(a) The cross-partial derivatives of the revenue and profit functions (3.1) and (3.5)
      are nonnegative.

(b) Revenue and profit functions (3.1), (3.2), (3.3), (3.4), and (3.5) are quasiconcave
      on the domains where they are nonnegative.




                                                 12
                                                                     ∂
(c) The own derivatives of (3.1) and (3.2), (e.g.                      ΠI (p , p ),)
                                                                    ∂p1 1 1 2
                                                                                        are decreasing in the
       symmetric price p. That is, for i = 1, 2,

                ∂2 I                ∂2
                    Π  (p ,
                         1 2p ) +         ΠI (p1 , p2 ) < 0
                ∂p21 i            ∂p1 ∂p2 i
                 ∂2                 ∂2
                     R (p ,
                      i 1 2 p ) +         Ri (p1 , p2 ) < 0
                ∂p21              ∂p1 ∂p2

         The cross-partial property in assumption 1(a) also follows for profit functions
(3.2), (3.3), and (3.4). Assumption 1(a) asserts that prices are strategic complements.
Assumption 1(c) ensures that the symmetric equilibria are unique.3

Proposition 1 (A threat of circumvention reduces prices). Suppose that As-
sumption 1 holds.

(a) The symmetric prices that result from perfect legal enforcement are higher than
                                                                                                           ˆ
       those that result when vendors use independent DRM systems. That is, pI > pI .

(b) The symmetric prices that maximize joint profit with perfect legal enforcement
       are higher than those that maximize joint profit with independent DRM systems,
       and the latter are higher than the symmetric prices that maximize joint profit
       with a shared DRM system. That is, pĈ > pC > pJ .

Proof. (a) We use the Corollary to Theorem 6 of Milgrom and Roberts, 1990 and
                                                                             ˆ
Theorem 13 of Milgrom and Shannon, 1994. To show pI > pI , write

                                             R1 (p1 , p2 ) + tK(p1 )

for firm 1’s profit function (symmetrically, firm 2’s profit function), and let t ∈ [−1, 0]
define a class of games. Then t = −1 is the profit function (3.2) for the game with
separate technical protections, and t = 0 is the profit function (3.1) for the game with
perfect legal enforcement. The class of games defined by t ∈ [−1, 0] are symmetric,
   3
    Suppose that the game is defined by functions Π1 (p1 , p2 ) , Π2 (p1 , p2 ) , which are symmetric,
and that assumption 1 holds. Suppose now that there arehtwo equilibria, (p̂, p̂) andi (p̃, p̃). Then
∂Π1            ∂Π1                  ∂Π1            ∂Π1
                                                                   R p̃ ∂Π21             ∂Π21
∂p1 (p̃, p̃) = ∂p1 (p̂, p̂) = 0, so ∂p1 (p̃, p̃) − ∂p1 (p̂, p̂) =0= p̂ ∂p1 ∂p1 (t, t) + ∂p1 ∂p2 (t, t) dt, which is a
contradiction.

                                                        13
(smooth) supermodular, and satisfy the single crossing property. Therefore the unique
                                                                                          ˆ
symmetric equilibrium prices of the games defined by t are increasing in t, so pI ≥ pI .
One can see from the derivatives that the inequality is strict.
       (b) For pĈ > pC , write the maximand as

                       R1 (p1 , p2 ) + R2 (p1 , p2 ) + t [K(p1 ) + K(p2 )]

This maximand is supermodular in (p1 , p2 ) and has increasing diﬀerences in (p1 , p2 ; t),
(Milgrom and Shannon, 1994, Theorem 6), so the maximum is monotonic in t (Milgrom
and Shannon, 1994, Theorem 5). The value t = −1 represents the optimum of (3.4)
and the value t = 0 represents the optimum of (3.1). Therefore pĈ ≥ pC , and, again,
one can see from the derivative that the inequality is strict.
       To show pC > pJ write

      R1 (p1 , p2 ) + R2 (p1 , p2 ) − [K(p1 + p2 ) + t (K(p1 ) + K(p2 ) − K(p1 + p2 ))]

Again, by hypothesis this maximand has increasing diﬀerences in (p1 , p2 ; t), so the
maximum is monotonic in t (Milgrom and Shannon, 1994, Theorems 5 and 6). The
optimum of (3.4) is the maximum where t = 1, and the optimum of (3.5) is the
maximum when t = 0. The result follows.
       A shared system can be socially more eﬃcient than independent systems even
if the vendors use the shared system to collude, and even if the collusive prices are
higher than with independent systems. This is because the shared system saves costs.
However, even if the firms can use a shared system to collude, they will not necessarily
make the eﬃcient decision whether to share.
       In the following remark, by competition we mean independent pricing with
independent protection systems, and by collusion we mean maximization of joint profit,
using a shared system. If one is more profitable than the other, then presumably that
is the system the vendors would choose, even if it not eﬃcient.              Eﬃciency in this
remark means from an ex post point of view, namely, that the deadweight loss plus
the cost of the protection system is smaller in the more eﬃcient arrangement. However,
reducing profit may reduce the incentives to create content, which also entails a social
cost. In this remark, we are not taking that cost into account.

                                               14
Remark 3 (Ex post eﬃciency, and the choice among protection systems).



(a) If pI > pJ and 2K(pI ) < K(2pJ ), competition is more profitable for content
        providers than collusion, although collusion might be socially more eﬃcient.

(b) If pI > pJ and 2K(pI ) > K(2pJ ), competition might be more profitable for the
        content providers than collusion, although collusion is socially more eﬃcient.

(c) If pI < pJ and 2K(pI ) > K(2pJ ), collusion is more profitable for the content
        providers than competition, although competition might be socially more eﬃ-
        cient.

(d) If pI < pJ and 2K(pI ) < K(2pJ ), collusion might be more profitable for the con-
        tent providers than competition, although competition is socially more eﬃcient.

         The example in the next section illustrates that the vendors will not always
choose the more eﬃcient arrangement as to sharing or using independent DRM sys-
tems.

4. Collusion versus Independent Pricing: An Example

In the previous section we compared the prices charged by vendors who can perfectly
enforce their legal rights and with the prices charged by vendors who use indepen-
dent protection systems. We also compared collusive prices, assuming, respectively,
that the content of vendors is legally enforced, that they use independent protection
systems, and that they share a common system.          Proposition 1 summarizes these
comparisons, but conspicuously omits a comparison of collusive prices with competi-
tive prices, when using DRM. Oddly, the comparison can go either way, as we now
                                                          ˆ
show. More precisely, the competitive prices pI (also pI ) can be lower or higher than
prices with a shared system and collusion, pJ .
         Because the products are substitutes, collusion has a tendency to raise price
                                                                      ˆ
relative to independent pricing with perfect legal enforcement, pI , and relative to
competition with legal enforcement, pI . But because joint protection is more costly

                                            15
than independent protection (or no protection), there is an oﬀsetting eﬀect. Perhaps
                                                      ˆ
counterintuitively, it may occur that pJ < pI , pI . As a consequence, consumers can
benefit from consolidation through a DRM system, even if it leads to collusive pricing.
       We now give an example to show what the comparison depends on. Consider
two firms 1, 2, each facing a demand for its content that depends negatively on its own
price and positively on the competitor’s price. Let firm 1’s demand be defined as

      D1 (p1 , p2 ) = max{1 − p1 + cp2 , 0}                                          (4.1)

where 0 ≤ p1 , p2 ≤ 1, and 0 ≤ c ≤ 1. The parameter c determines the degree of
substitutability between the two products. Firm 2’s demand is symmetrically defined.
       Let the costs of protection be defined by

      K(e) = k + κe2

so that k is a fixed cost and 2κe is the marginal cost of increasing the cost of circum-
vention.
       When the firms compete using independent protection systems, firm 1’s best
                       1+cp2
response function is   2+2κ
                               (symmetrically for firm 2), and the symmetric Nash equi-
librium prices and per-firm profits are given by:
                  1
      pI =                                                                           (4.2)
             2 + 2κ − c
                 1+κ
      πI   =               −k                                                        (4.3)
             (2 + 2κ − c)2
       As noted previously, technical protection moderates the price of content (with
κ > 0), compared to perfect legal protection. The equilibrium price with perfect legal
                          ˆ      1
enforcement would be pI =       2−c
                                    ,   which is higher than pI .
       Suppose now that firms own a technical protection system as a joint monopolist.
The level of protection must satisfy e ≥ p1 + p2 , and this inequality will be satisfied as
an equality. The firms maximize joint profit (3.5). The symmetric profit-maximizing
prices, quantities, and total profits are:
                  1
      pJ =                                                                           (4.4)
             2 + 4κ − 2c
                2(1 − c)
      πJ   =                −k                                                       (4.5)
             (2 + 4κ − 2c)2

                                                 16
Proposition 2 (Pricing with linear demand, quadratic protection costs). In
the context of the above model with linear demand and quadratic protection costs, the
profit-maximizing prices with a shared protection system, (pJ , pJ ), are higher than the
competitive prices with separate protection systems, (pI , pI ), if 2κ < c, and otherwise
are lower.

       The proof follows directly from comparing the expressions (4.2) and (4.4). The
price-moderating eﬀect of the shared protection is increasing in κ, but the collusive
eﬀect of joint pricing is increasing in c. The latter eﬀect dominates if 2κ < c.
       Aside from any strategic benefit due to coordinating prices, vendors have an
incentive to share a technical protection system in order to save fixed costs. This
incentive is oﬀset by the higher marginal costs of protection in a shared system, which
will also cause the price to be lower. As noted in remark 4, therefore, depending
on the relative magnitudes of these eﬀects, firms may or may not prefer the more
socially eﬃcient system. Moreover, a shared protection system may be beneficial to
both consumers and vendors.
       Suppose, for example, that the demands for the content are independent (c = 0)
and marginal costs for protection are positive, (κ > 0.) According to Proposition 2,
the pI > pJ , so consumers prefer the shared system, even with collusive pricing. Now
consider the firm’s profits given by (4.3) and (4.5), noting that each firm gets half the
profit. Vendors prefer collusion in a shared system if
          1        1
              −           <k                                                        (4.6)
      2(1 + κ) 2(1 + 2κ)2
       Therefore, if (4.6) holds, vendors and consumers both prefer shared protection.
From an aggregated standpoint, shared protections are better when 2s(pJ ) + π J >
2s(pI ) + 2π I , which holds if
      (1 + 2κ)2    (1 + 4κ)2         1        1
               2
                 −           2
                               +         −           <k                             (4.7)
      4(1 + κ)     4(1 + 2κ)     2(1 + κ) 2(1 + 2κ)2
Because the diﬀerence between the first two terms of (4.7) is negative, (4.7) holds if
(4.6) holds, but not necessarily vice versa. Thus, for a wide range of parameter values,
firms will be too reluctant to share a system, relative to what is eﬃcient.

                                           17
       Suppose now that c > 0 and κ = 0. Then pI > pJ , so consumers are un-
ambiguously worse oﬀ with collusion than with competitive pricing and independent
                                                                                    πJ
protections. Comparing (4.3) and (4.5), for all k ≥ 0, c > 0, we find that π I <     2
                                                                                       .
Since the collusive prices are higher than the competitive prices, and the total costs
are smaller, profits are higher with joint protection.
       Perhaps the most notable conclusion is that, depending on the relative mag-
nitude of the collusive eﬀects and cost advantages, collusive pricing with a shared
protection system may be socially and privately preferable to the competitive out-
come with independent protections.

5. Independent Pricing and Cost Sharing

We have so far compared competition when vendors use independent systems with
collusion when they use a shared system. However, these are not the only options. In
those situations where collusive pricing is not socially preferable, it may be possible
to have both the cost advantages of a shared system and the competitive benefits of
independent pricing. In this section we ask whether, by appropriate choice of the
technology, competition can be maintained even though the vendors share a DRM
system. One can imagine a shared technology that gives to each vendor the ability
to enter its own price, to be administered by the system. With such a technology,
pricing is independent. However, the vendors must share the costs of the system, and
the cost sharing arrangement may itself lead to collusion.
       We center our discussion on three cost sharing schemes:

  1. independent pricing with demand-based cost shares (cost shares equal to shares
                                   ˜
     of total downloads) (notation I);

  2. independent pricing with revenue-based cost shares (cost shares equal to revenue
                       ¯
     shares) (notation I);

                                                          ˆ
  3. independent pricing with fixed cost shares (notation I).

       We use pJ as a collusive benchmark against which to consider pricing under
these cost sharing rules. Together with the level of protection, e, each cost sharing

                                           18
rule leads to a diﬀerent profit function, and therefore a diﬀerent game played by the
content providers. Proposition 3 suggests that the three cost sharing schemes are listed
above in decreasing order of collusiveness. It is almost obvious that option 3, fixed
                                                                                          ˆ
cost shares, leads to the outcome with perfect legal enforcement, pI . More interesting
are cases 1 and 2.
       To define the games that result from the first and second cost sharing rules, we
define cost shares α̃ and ᾱ as follows for firm 1 (and symmetrically for firm 2).
                         (         D1 (p1 ,p2 )
                             D1 (p1 ,p2 )+D2 (p1 ,p2 )
                                                         if D1 (p1 , p2 ) + D2 (p1 , p2 ) > 0
      α̃1 (p1 , p2 ) =                                                                          (5.1)
                                      1/2                if D1 (p1 , p2 ) + D2 (p1 , p2 ) = 0
                         (         R1 (p1 ,p2 )
                             R1 (p1 ,p2 )+R2 (p1 ,p2 )
                                                         if R1 (p1 , p2 ) + R2 (p1 , p2 ) > 0
      ᾱ1 (p1 , p2 ) =                                                                          (5.2)
                                      1/2                if R1 (p1 , p2 ) + R2 (p1 , p2 ) = 0

       The conclusions below about independent pricing can largely be understood
by examining the cost sharing rules. The demand-based cost share α̃1 is increasing
with demand D1 and decreasing with the other firm’s demand, D2 , hence decreasing
with the vendor’s own price p1 .                    By increasing price, the vendor reduces its cost
share, which makes a high price more attractive than it otherwise would be.                     This
suggests that with demand-based cost sharing, prices will be higher than with fixed
cost shares.
       The revenue-based cost share ᾱ1 can be either increasing or decreasing with
p1 , since R1 can be either increasing or decreasing with p1 . Even if the cost share ᾱ1
decreases with p1 like α̃1 , it decreases at a smaller rate — revenue decreases less quickly
than demand as price rises, because the increase in price oﬀsets the fall in demand.
This suggests that there is less incentive to raise price with revenue-based cost sharing
than with demand-based cost sharing, and that prices will be lower. These intuitions
are correct, but they are incomplete because they do not take account of the strategic
interaction between the firms, and they do not use the fact that the firms can constrain
their pricing by choice of e, the level of protection.
       The profit functions for firm 1 (symmetrically for firm 2) in games 1, 2 and 3
are the following, conditional on the cost of protection K (e) :



                                                           19
                                   (
                                       R1 (p1 , p2 ) − α̃1 (p1 , p2 )K(e)   if   p1 + p2 ≤ e
         π̃1 (p1 , p2 ; e) =
                                                − (1/2) K(e)                if   p1 + p2 > e
                                   (
                                       R1 (p1 , p2 ) − ᾱ1 (p1 , p2 )K(e)   if   p1 + p2 ≤ e
         π̄1 (p1 , p2 ; e) =                                                                            (5.3)
                                                − (1/2) K(e)                if   p1 + p2 > e
                                   (
                                       R1 (p1 , p2 ) − α̂1 K(e)         if p1 + p2 ≤ e
         π̂1 (p1 , p2 ; e) =
                                             −α̂1 K(e)                  if p1 + p2 > e

where (α̂1 , α̂2 ) are fixed and sum to 1.
             The sequence of choices in each of the three games is that the vendors first
choose e, which is then fixed, after which they compete on price.4                             In the three
diﬀerent games, the vendors maximize the diﬀerent profit functions defined by (5.3).
In each game, the no-hacking constraint implies that the symmetric price is bounded
above by e/2.          Before coming to that, however, in Proposition 3 we sort out the
pure eﬀect of cost sharing on price competition, ignoring the no-hacking constraint
p1 + p2 ≤ e.
             Consider the following profit functions for firm 1 (symmetrically for firm 2),
which are the same as (5.3), but without the no-hacking constraint p1 + p2 ≤ e.

         π̃1K (p1 , p2 ) = R1 (p1 , p2 ) − α̃1 (p1 , p2 )K

         π̄1K (p1 , p2 ) = R1 (p1 , p2 ) − ᾱ1 (p1 , p2 )K                                              (5.4)

         π̂1K (p1 , p2 ) = R1 (p1 , p2 ) − α̂1 K
         ˜         ¯           ˆ
Let pI (K) , pI (K) , pI (K) be, respectively, symmetric equilibrium prices in the games
defined by these profit functions. It is clear that for all K, the symmetric equilibrium
 ˆ                                                                               ˆ        ˆ         ˆ
pI (K) of the game with profit functions π̂1K , π̂2K satisfies pI (K) = pI , where pI is the
symmetric equilibrium price defined above for perfect legal enforcement. To compare
prices, we make additional assumptions on the profit functions.
     4
    One of the diﬃculties in the asymmetric case is that the vendors may disagree about the level
of protection in the first place, which would introduce a bargaining problem. By focusing on the
symmetric case, we can separate out our investigation of cost sharing rules, without cluttering the
analysis with that bargaining issue.


                                                           20
Assumption 2. For the revenue and profit functions defined in (3.1) and (5.4),

(a) The cross-partial derivatives are non-negative.

(b) The profit functions are quasiconcave in own price on domains where profit is
       positive.5

                                                                     ∂
(c) The own derivatives of the profit functions, such as               π̃ K (p, p),
                                                                    ∂p1 1
                                                                                      are decreasing in
       the symmetric price p. That is,
              ∂2 K              ∂2
                  π̃ (p, p) +        π̃ K (p, p) < 0
              ∂p21 1          ∂p1 ∂p2 1
(d) Firm 1’s revenue function (similarly, firm 2’s revenue function) satisfies
               ∂                                      ˆ
                  R1 (p, p) > 0         for p < pI
              ∂p1
               ∂                                      ˆ
                  R1 (p, p) < 0         for p > pI
              ∂p1

These assumptions are non-primitive, but not unreasonable, at least in the domains
that aﬀect optimizing choices. As before, assumption 2(c) implies that there is a
unique symmetric equilibrium. Note that, as before, we are restricting attention to
the case where symmetric equilibria exist, which is, among other things, an assump-
tion on the level of costs. If costs are high enough that the symmetric prices result in
negative profits, but that a single firm could make positive profits, there is no sym-
metric equilibrium, and possibly no equilibrium in pure strategies at all, due to the
discontinuity in the profit functions.

Proposition 3 (The pure eﬀect of cost sharing on prices). Suppose that assump-
                                         ˆ    ¯           ˜
tion 2 holds. Given K > 0, let pI , pI (K), pI (K) be unique symmetric equilibria of
the games defined by the profit functions (5.4), and suppose that the vendors earn
                                                  ˆ           ¯     ˜
positive profits in the equilibria. Then pI ≤ pI (K) < pI (K) with strict inequality if
                                                                           ˆ     ˜
the cross partials of revenue functions are positive. Further, pI(·) , pI (·) are increasing.
   5
    But it would not be reasonable to assume that the profit functions are quasiconcave on the whole
domain. Consider the profit function π̄1K . If firm 2 is pricing so that it earns positive revenue, firm
1 can earn zero revenue and zero profits by pricing very low or very high. At intermediate prices
that generate revenue, firm 1’s profit may be negative because it must share the costs. But then the
profit function is not quasiconcave.

                                                  21
                                                                        ˆ       ¯
Proof.    We first show that at this equilibrium, pI < pI (K) . The first-order condi-
tions are the following for firm 1, and symmetrically for firm 2.
       ∂ K
          π̄ (p1 , p2 )
      ∂p1 1
             ∂                     ∂
        =       R1 (p1 , p2 ) − K      ᾱ1 (p1 , p2 )                                                              (5.5)
            ∂p1                   ∂p1
                              Ã                                  !
             ∂                                    K
        =       R1 (p1 , p2 ) 1 −                                                                                  (5.6)
            ∂p1                    R1 (p1 , p2 ) + R2 (p1 , p2 )
                                                Ã                                        !
                        KR1 (p1 , p2 )               ∂                  ∂
            +                                          R1 (p1 , p2 ) +     R2 (p1 , p2 )
               (R1 (p1 , p2 ) + R2 (p1 , p2 ))2 ∂p1                    ∂p1
                    ˆ        ∂                                       ∂                      ∂
If p1 = p2 ≤ pI , then         R
                            ∂p1 1
                                       (p1 , p2 ) ≥ 0, and             R
                                                                    ∂p1 1
                                                                            (p1 , p2 ) +      R
                                                                                           ∂p1 2
                                                                                                    (p1 , p2 ) ≥ 0, the
latter with strict inequality if the cross partial of R2 is positive. Profit is positive if
                            ³                                  ´
                                               K                                                               ˆ
and only if R1 (p1 , p2 ) 1 −      R1 (p1 ,p2 )+R2 (p1 ,p2 )
                                                                   > 0. Therefore, at p1 = p2 < pI , (5.6)
is zero or positive, depending on whether the cross partial of R2 is zero or positive.
                                 ∂
Since the own derivative           π̄ K
                                ∂p1 1
                                          (p1 , p2 ) is monotonic at symmetric prices, a symmetric
                                              ˆ        ¯
equilibrium must therefore satisfy pI ≤ pI (K), with strict inequality if the cross partial
of R2 is positive.
                                   ¯              ˜
       We now show that pI (K) < pI (K). The derivatives satisfy
       ∂ K
          π̄ (p1 , p2 )
      ∂p1 1
             ∂ K                          KR1 (p1 , p2 )
        =       π̃1 (p1 , p2 ) −                                                                                   (5.7)
            ∂p1                    (R1 (p1 , p2 ) + R2 (p1 , p2 ))2
              Ã                                       !
                                      K
            − 1−                                        D1 (p1 , p2 )
                        R1 (p1 , p2 ) + R2 (p1 , p2 )
                                                         ∂                           ∂
Thus, at every symmetric price, p1 = p2 ,                  π̃K
                                                        ∂p1 1
                                                                    (p1 , p2 ) >       π̄ K
                                                                                    ∂p1 1
                                                                                              (p1 , p2 ) , and similarly
for firm 2, and therefore the only symmetric equilibrium is at higher prices.
                ˆ       ˜
       That pI (·), pI (·) are increasing follows from uniqueness of equilibrium and the
monotone-comparative-statics theorems (Theorem 6 of Milgrom and Roberts (1990)
or Theorem 13 of Milgrom and Shannon (1994)).
       We now return to the question of the vendors’ choice of e (and hence K.)
By the no-hacking constraint, p1 + p2 ≤ e, the choice of e can serve as a price cap
for the competing vendors. However, Proposition 3 suggests another role for costly

                                                           22
protection, namely, to give the competing firms an incentive to raise price.          The
eﬀectiveness of this incentive depends on how much cost the firm can avoid by raising
price and decreasing its cost share. If the incentive to pull up prices up to the collusive
level pJ is strong enough, then the collusive outcome can be achieved by using eJ as
a price cap. However, there is no reason that prices must be pulled up that far by
K(eJ ). If not, the firms may choose a level of protection higher than necessary to
prevent hacking, as a way to commit to high prices. This strategy also wastes costs.
       We now show that whether the firms can support the collusive outcome, and
support it without wasting costs, depends on how much of the cost is fixed, that is,
independent of the level of protection. We state this result as Proposition 4, and prove
it using Lemma 1. We add the following assumption about cost:

Assumption 3. The cost of protection K(e) can be written K(e) = k + κ(e) where
κ is convex, positive, and increasing.

       For intuition on how costs aﬀect equilibrium prices, refer to Figure 1. Figure
                                           ¯
1 depicts symmetric equilibrium prices pI (κ(e)) for the game with revenue-based cost
sharing.   Figure 1 shows that the equilibrium price is increasing in κ (e) , hence
increasing in e. (A similar diagram for demand-based cost sharing would have the
                                               ¯            ¯
same feature.) Figure 1 also shows that pI (k + κ(e)) > pI (κ(e)) for k > 0: if the cost
of protection increases, in particular, because the fixed costs increase, the symmetric
equilibrium prices also increase.
       Part (a) of Lemma 1 says that, for high enough fixed costs, the collusive prices
are an equilibrium without wasted costs. That is, if the costs are already high enough,
the firms do not have to artificially increase costs by increasing the level of protection
e in order to sustain the collusive prices.
       Part (b) says that, to achieve the collusive prices without excessive protection
e, the fixed costs must be even higher with revenue-based cost sharing than with
demand-based cost sharing. This is for the reason explored above, that revenue-based
cost sharing makes it harder to sustain high prices. Part (b) also says that if the
fixed costs are lower than required to achieve the collusive prices without excessive


                                               23
\




                                           p I (k + κ (e))

                                                                              p I (κ (e))
pJ



                                                                                   κ (e)
                                      κ(e )J




     Figure 1: Equilibrium prices increase when the cost of protection increases




                                         24
protection, then the firms can either sustain prices below the collusive price or can
sustain the collusive price with excessive protection (or, implicitly, some of each).
             Part (c) suggests that demand-based cost sharing is more supportive of collu-
sion than revenue-based cost sharing.
             Let pJ be the optimum of (3.5), using assumption 3. Notice that we can write
pJ without any ambiguity as k varies, because the optimum does not depend on k.

Lemma 1. Suppose that assumptions 2 and 3 hold, that firms make positive profit
                                                                                                                    ˆ
in equilibrium when k = 0, and that symmetric equilibrium prices satisfy pI < pJ and
         ³        ´            ³           ´
 ˆ   ¯                     ˜
pI , pI κ(eJ ) , pI κ(eJ ) < pJ .

(a) There exist k̃, k̄, with k̄ > k̃, such that

                   ˜
                       ³                   ´                                      ˜
                                                                                      ³        ´
                 pI k̃ + κ(eJ ) = pJ                         and              pI k + κ(eJ ) ≥ pJ if k ≥ k̃
                   ¯
                       ³                   ´                                      ¯
                                                                                      ³        ´
                 pI k̄ + κ(eJ ) = pJ                         and              pI k + κ(eJ ) ≥ pJ if k ≥ k̄


(b) Given κ(e), k̃, and k̄ defined above,

                                                 ˜
                                                     ³                   ´                 ˜
                 if k < k̃, then pI k + κ(eJ ) < pJ , and pI (k + κ(e)) = pJ only if e > eJ .
                                                 ¯
                                                     ³                   ´                 ¯
                 if k < k̄, then pI k + κ(eJ ) < pJ , and pI (k + κ(e)) = pJ only if e > eJ .

                                                                 ³                    ´                ³   ´
                                                             ¯                                     ˜
(c) If k satisfies k̄ > k > k̃, then pI k + κ(eJ ) < pJ < pI k + κ(eJ ) .

Proof. For Lemma 1(a), we must establish that there exists k̄ high enough that the
following two conditions hold:
          ∂ k̄+κ(e) ³ J J ´
            π̄       p ,p   = 0 and                                                                                      (5.8)
         ∂p1 1
                                                                             Ã                                  !
                           ³               ´             ³               ´               k̄ + κ(e)
                 k̄+κ(e)           J   J                     J       J
               π̄1             p ,p            = R1 p , p                     1−                                    >0   (5.9)
                                                                                 R1 (p , pJ ) + R2 (pJ , pJ )
                                                                                      J

                                                                                      ¯
By Proposition 3, the function of k defined by pI (k + κ (e)) is increasing. Let k̄ be high
                               ¯
enough so that pI (k + κ (e)) = pJ as in figure 1, so that (5.8) holds. (In particular,
                               ³           ´             ³           ´
                  ∂
choose k̄ =         R
                 ∂p1 1
                                   pJ , pJ / ∂p∂ 1 ᾱ1 pJ , pJ − κ(2pJ ) > 0.) Using the expression for the


                                                                             25
                                                              ³       ´           ³    ´      ³       ´
                                                       ∂                   ∂
derivative given by (5.5) and using                      R
                                                      ∂p1 1
                                                              pJ , pJ +      R
                                                                          ∂p1 2
                                                                                  pJ , pJ = K 0 2pJ > 0,
                                             ³     ´
                                ∂                                          ˆ
and remembering that              R
                               ∂p1 1
                                                                           I
                                             pJ , pJ < 0, since pJ > p , (5.8) implies (5.9) . A similar
                             k̃+κ(e)
argument applies to        π̃1       .
                  ¯                          ˜
          Since pI (k + κ(e)) < pI (k + κ(e)) by Proposition 3, and since both prices are
increasing in k, it follows that k̄ > k̃.
          Lemma 1(b) follows from Lemma 1(a) and Proposition 3, as follows. By Propo-
                                         ³             ´          ³        ´              ³       ´
                                     ˜                        ˜                       ˜
sition 3, k < k̃ implies pI k + κ(eJ ) < pI k̃ + κ(eJ ) , hence pI k + κ(eJ ) < pJ .
                   ˜
Now suppose pI (k + κ(e)) = pJ for some arbitrary e, and k < k̃. As κ(e) is increasing
             ³         ´
         ˜                       ˜
in e, pI k + κ(eJ ) < pI (k + κ(e)) = pJ implies e > eJ . A similar argument applies
     ¯
for pI (k + κ(e)).
          2(c) follows from 2(a) and 2(b).
                                                      ˆ
          We consider the case that pI < pJ , since otherwise collusion should not be
much of a concern.

Proposition 4 (The collusive eﬀect of cost sharing). Suppose that assumptions
                                 ˆ
2 and 3 hold and that pI < pJ .

(a) Regardless of whether the vendors share costs according to revenue or demand,
         for high enough fixed costs of protection (high enough k), the equilibrium price
         will be the collusive price pJ , and eJ = 2pJ .

(b) Demand-based cost sharing supports the collusive price whenever revenue-based
         cost sharing does so, but not vice versa.

(c) The firms’ equilibrium profits are higher (no lower) with demand-based cost shar-
         ing than with revenue-based cost sharing.

Proof. (a) follows from Lemma 1(a).
          (b) follows from Lemma 1(c).
          (c) Given e, there are three cases:
                             ¯                    ˜
         pJ (K (e)) < pI (K (e)) < pI (K (e))
          ¯                                       ˜
         pI (K (e)) < pJ (K (e)) < pI (K (e))
          ¯                  ˜
         pI (K (e)) < pI (K (e)) < pJ (K (e))

                                                           26
If the first case applies at e = eJ , the firms can support the collusive price without
waste, using either demand-based or revenue-based cost sharing. If the second case
applies at e = eJ , demand-based cost sharing can support the collusive price without
waste, but revenue-based cost sharing cannot. If the third case applies at e = eJ ,
the collusive prices cannot be supported without waste, with either demand-based
or revenue-based cost sharing. But a higher price can be supported at each e with
demand-based cost sharing than with revenue-based cost sharing. Since joint profit
is rising in the symmetric price for p < pJ , the higher price is more profitable.

6. Collusion through Technology

Because the technological capability of the DRM system has important eﬀects on
prices, the technology deployed should not be irrelevant to the antitrust authorities.
The vendors, users, and antitrust authorities will typically have diﬀerent preferences
as to which capabilities should be deployed. But it is not obvious what the right
antitrust objective should be, given that the protected content generally has copyright
protection in the first place, and given that the DRM system will dissipate profits
that might otherwise reward creators for creating their content. Should the antitrust
                            ˆ
objective be one of pJ , pI , pI , perhaps the lowest one? Or should the antitrust objective
be explicitly procedural, such as insisting that the vendors implement independent
systems? Should the antitrust authorities allow a shared system only under the proviso
that the technology facilitate independent pricing? Should it at the same time create
rules as to royalties or cost sharing?
       As we pointed out in Remark 3, the prices pI that result from independent
protections may or may not be lower than the collusive price with a shared system,
pJ . But even if higher, the vendors’ profit may be lower because the costs of protection
are higher. Thus, the antitrust authorities cannot avoid the tradeoﬀ between incentives
for vendors and access for users at low prices.
       In the previous section we showed that competition between the vendors sharing
a system is aﬀected by two important aspects of the governance structure:



                                            27
   • whether they set prices independently, and

   • how they share costs.

       Independent pricing is surely the most important aspect: if the subsidiary sets
prices on behalf of the vendors jointly, or sets a royalty that is then redistributed to
the vendor-owners of the DRM subsidiary, it will surely support the collusive prices
pJ . Whether there is independence in price-setting depends on the technological ca-
pabilities of the DRM system, but the incentive to price competitively also depends
on the cost sharing arrangement.
       But if independent pricing is the objective, how can it be assured? A natural
scheme would be to create a technical capability for each vendor to key in its own
price, unrelated to the other vendors’ prices. As we argued at the end of the last
section, that system may or may not sustain the collusive price pJ , depending partly
on how costs are shared. It is more likely to sustain the collusive price if the vendors
share cost according to demand rather than revenue. If low prices are the goal, the
antitrust authorities may favor revenue-based cost sharing.
       Suppose, on the other hand, that a DRM system that decrypts and authorizes
through a call-home system imposes a price-per-view for all content (or charges a
royalty per view,) and distributes the net profit to the vendors proportionately to
the revenue generated by the content. If the DRM can implement a single price, it
is reasonable to suppose that, acting on behalf of its vendor-owners, the subsidiary
would choose the profit-maximizing price and level of protection. In the symmetric
case considered here, the best price would be the first-best collusive outcome (although
a common price would be a second-best solution if content varied in popularity). The
vendors would surely approve if the DRM system implemented this, at least if it could
prevent cheating.
       But the DRM cartel, like all cartels, must worry about price cutting. An
obvious way for a vendor to cheat the cartel is to oﬀer rebates to customers outside
the system, and thus increase its demand. This would ordinarily be a capability
favored by antitrust authorities, but it comes at the price of privacy. The vendors
can only circumvent the common price with rebates if they know who the purchasers

                                          28
are. In choosing the technical capabilities of the DRM system, there may be a conflict
between privacy and competition policy. In yet another twist, however, rebates on the
side cannot be reflected in the cost sharing scheme, which will have to be demand-based
rather than revenue-based. We have already shown that demand-based cost sharing
has greater potential to support the collusive price, and vendors may therefore forego
the opportunity to make rebates, even if that were possible.
       Finally, it is possible that the subsidiary covers the costs of the protection
system by charging a royalty per view, while the vendors charge independent prices.
But unless the DRM system is “rate regulated,” there will still be profit or loss which
must be apportioned between the vendors. If the subsidiary charges a royalty equal to
the collusive price, and if the total profit or loss is apportioned according to revenue
shares, then the vendors’ individual profits are their own revenues minutes revenue-
based cost shares. The vendors will prefer the collusive outcome, but will have an
incentive to break the royalty-supported cartel, for example, by making price rebates,
in the same circumstances as with revenue-based cost sharing.

7. Conclusions and Open Questions

In addition to exploring price consequences of a shared DRM system, we also explored
the divergence between the private incentive to create a shared system and the cir-
cumstances in which that would be eﬃcient. There are two incentives for content
providers to share a system. One is that it saves the fixed costs of implementing and
administering the system. The other is that it may give them an opportunity for coor-
dinated or collusive pricing. One of these is in the public interest, and the other may
not be. But collusive pricing is less a threat than it appears because a shared system
is an attractive target for circumvention, and the firms can reduce circumvention by
lowering prices. In addition, the technology might conceivably maintain independence
in pricing, which has some potential for avoiding collusion, especially if cost shares
are based on revenue rather than demand. Of course the vendors would not typically
want to choose a technical system that avoids collusion.
       The welfare implications are ambiguous. Technical protections are expensive.


                                          29
The expense is a social waste, as compared to perfect legal enforcement.        Content
providers are burdened in two ways: by the cost of protection and by the lower prices
they receive for access to the content. In the end, smaller rewards for content providers
will mute the creative impulse. Nevertheless, we have found a silver lining, namely,
that the threat of hacking leads to lower prices, whether vendors choose independent
systems or collude through a shared system.
       The pricing options we have investigated do not exhaust the possibilities sug-
gested in the introduction.    The systems we have considered govern the pricing of
content, rather than players, and content itself can be priced in diﬀerent ways, de-
pending on how use can be metered.       Content today can be purchased on physical
media, giving the right to unlimited or only a few viewings, or it can be purchased on a
per-viewing basis such as video-on-demand. Subscription services like cable television
bundle these services in yet another way, by giving unlimited viewings per unit time.
Basing royalties on usage has the virtue of taxing the more popular content and the
higher-demand users more highly. It may thus reduce distortions as compared, for
example, to putting the royalty on media players or charging a fixed royalty per unit
time. Taxing the media players will presumably create distortions at the “extensive
margin,” that is, in the number of users in the market. The competitive eﬀects of
what is priced have not yet been explored.

8. Appendix: Prices with Dispersion in Circumvention Costs

In this appendix, we show that the price-reducing eﬀect of a threat of circumvention
holds also with dispersion in circumvention costs, with the diﬀerence that there will
be circumvention in equilibrium, which compounds the profit loss.
       We define an “eﬀective” demand curve that recognizes that some agents may
circumvent rather than buy legitimate copies. To define the eﬀective demand curve,
assume that each user will buy if both his willingness to pay and his personal cost
of circumvention, say c, are higher than the price. Agent θ will buy if θ, c ≥ p. He
will circumvent if both his willingness to pay and the price are higher than his cost
of circumvention, θ, p ≥ c. Suppose that the costs of circumvention are distributed


                                           30
according to a distribution function G with density g, independently of θ, such that,
if e > e0 , then G(·; e) stochastically dominates G(·; e0 ).6 At the price and protection
(p, e), the demand for legitimate copies is

         (1 − p)(1 − G(p; e))

The term (1 − p) represents the fraction of consumers for whom willingness to pay is
higher than the price, and the term (1 − G(p; e)) represents the fraction for whom the
circumvention cost is higher than the price.
           The proprietor’s profit is

         Π(p, e) = p(1 − p)(1 − G(p; e)) − K(e)                                                     (8.1)

           For each e, let p(e) be the price that maximizes Π(p, e). Given this setup, we
can prove the following:

Remark 4. When the costs of circumvention are dispersed, for every e, p(e) < p∗ .
Suppose that the costs of circumvention are uniformly distributed with expected value
e when the protection level is e. If ê, ẽ are respectively the profit-maximizing protection
levels when circumvention costs are not dispersed and when dispersed uniformly, then
p(ẽ) < ê < p∗ .

           Since Π(p, e) < p(1 − p) at every p, e, profit is smaller with technical protec-
tion than with perfect legal enforcement.                 The optimal proprietary price, say p(e),
maximizes (8.1), conditional on the level of protection e, and satisfies
                                "                                                #¯
          ∂                                 ∂p(1 − p)                             ¯
                                                                                  ¯
             Π(p, e)|p=p(e) = (1 − G(p; e))           − p(1 − p)g(p; e)           ¯
                                                                                  ¯
                                                                                               =0   (8.2)
          ∂p                                   ∂p                                     p=p(e)

                                                       ∂p(1−p)
Since the derivative is negative whenever                ∂p
                                                                 ≤ 0, the optimal price p(e) is lower
than the monopoly price, p∗ = 12 , regardless of e.
           The proprietor also optimizes with respect to the level of protection e. The
derivative of Π with respect to e is
          ∂                             ∂G(p; e)
             Π(p, e)|p=p(e) = −p(1 − p)          − K 0 (e)                                          (8.3)
          ∂e                              ∂e
   6
       That is, G(c; e0 ) > G(c; e) for every c in the support of G.

                                                     31
                                                    ∂G(p;e)
The first term, which is positive since               ∂e
                                                               < 0, represents the saved revenue due
to a decrease in circumvention if e is increased, and the second term represents the
marginal cost. Combining with (8.2),
                                                                              ¯
       ∂                   −(1 − G(p; e)) ∂G(p; e) ∂p(1 − p) ¯¯
          Π(p, e)|p=p(e) =                                    ¯
                                                              ¯
                                                                      − K 0 (e) = 0                   (8.4)
       ∂e                      g(p; e)      ∂e        ∂p       p=p(e)

        It is easy to see in an example that dispersion in circumvention costs can cause
the proprietor to charge a lower price than without dispersion. Suppose that K 0 is
increasing and that the distribution of circumvention costs is uniform on an interval
around the strength of protection e :
                 
                  0
                                      if   p < e − 12
                                 1
       G(p; e) =  p − e +       2
                                       if   e − 12 < p < e +        1
                                                                    2
                 
                   1                   if   p > e + 12

                                     1       1
       g (p; e) = 1     for e −        <p<e+
                                     2       2

        It follows from (8.3) that the optimal (p, e) entails both circumvention and
purchases, so that 0 < 1 − G(p; e) < 1. It follows from (8.2) that p(e) is increasing
                      (1−G(p;e)) ∂G(p;e)
with e. In (8.4),        g(p;e)    ∂e
                                            is less than one. It then follows from (8.4) that the
optimal strength of protection is smaller when circumvention costs are dispersed than
when not, as follows.
        Let ẽ be the optimal protection when circumvention costs are dispersed, and ê
                      ∂p(1−p)
when not. Then          ∂p
                              |p=ê   = K 0 (ê) . It follows from (8.4) that p(ê) < ê. (In fact,
at any given protection level e, not only ê, the optimal price is lower with dispersed
circumvention costs than with no dispersion.) Then if ẽ < ê, it follows that p(ẽ) <
p(ê) < ê; the optimal price is lower with dispersed circumvention costs than not.
Suppose instead that ê ≤ ẽ, which implies that K 0 (ê) ≤ K 0 (ẽ) and p(ê) ≤ p(ẽ).
                                            ∂p(1−p)                ∂p(1−p)
Then using (8.4), it follows that              ∂p
                                                    |p=p(ẽ)   >      ∂p
                                                                           |p=ê   which again implies that
p(ẽ) < ê.
        Thus, in a plausible example, dispersion in the costs of circumvention decreases
the price of content, but also decreases the proprietor’s profit. In addition, there will
be consumers who circumvent the protection in equilibrium, adding to social costs.


                                                      32
       Consumers’ surplus plus profit in each period, designated W (p, e) , is
                                                          Z    p
     W (p, e) = s(p) + p(1 − p) +                                  θ G(θ; e) dθ − C(p, e)
                                                           0
                         Z    1           Z      p
                 =                θdθ +              θ G(θ; e) dθ − C(p, e)
                          p                  0

where C(e; p) is the total cost of circumventions that occur in equilibrium:
                 Z       ÃZ                                    !
                     1            min{p,θ}
     C(p, e) =                               c dG(c; e) dθ
                 0            0




                                                                    33
                                      References
Ayres, I., and P. Klemperer. 1999. “Limiting Patentees’ Market Power without Reduc-
   ing Innovation Incentives: The Perverse Benefits of Uncertainty and Noninjunctive
   Remedies.” Michigan Law Review 97:985-1033.
Belleflamme, P. 2003. “Pricing Information Goods in the Presence of Copying.” W.J.
   Gordon, R. Watts, eds. The Economics of Copyright: Developments in Research and
   Analysis. Edward Elgar Publishers.
Besen, S., and S. Kirby. 1989. “Private Copying, Appropriability and Optimal Copyright
   Royalties.” Journal of Law and Economics 32:255-275.
Chen, Y. and I. Png. 2003. “Information Goods, Pricing, and Copyright Enforcement:
   Welfare Analysis” Information Systems Research 14:107-123
Conner, K. R. and R. P. Rumelt. 1991. “Software Piracy: An Analysis of Protecting
   Strategies.” Management Science 37:125-139.
Conseil de la Concurrence. 2004. Press Release regarding VirginMega v. Apple Com-
   puter.
Gayer, A. and O. Shy. 2004. “Publishers, Artists and Copyright Enforcement.” Mimeo-
   graph. Haifa, Israel: Department of Economics, University of Haifa.
Johnson, W. R. 1985.      “The Economics of Copying.”       Journal of Political Economy
   93:158-174.
Kaplow, L. 1984.    “The Patent-Antitrust Intersection: A Reappraisal.” Harvard Law
   Review 97:1813-1892.
Klein, J. 1997 “Trustees of Columbia University, Fujitsu Ltd., General Instruments
   Corp., Lucent Technologies Inc., Matsushita Electric Industrial Co. Ltd., Mitsubishi
   Electric Corp., Philips Electronics N.V., Scientific-Atlanta Inc., and Sony Corp., Cable
   Television Laboratories Inc., MPEG LA L.L.C.” United States Department of Justice
   Business Review Letter.
Klein, J. 1999 “Hitachi, Ltd., Matsushita Electric Industrial Co., Ltd., Mitsubishi Elec-
   tric Corp., Time Warner Inc., Toshiba Corp., and Victor Company of Japan, Ltd.”
   United States Department of Justice Business Review Letter.



                                             34
Milgrom, P., and Roberts, J. 1990.    “Rationalizability, Learning, and Equilibrium in
   Games with Strategic Complementarities.” Econometrica 58:1255-1277.
Milgrom, P., and Shannon, C. 1994. “Monotone Comparative Statics.” Econometrica
   67:157-180.
Novos, I., and M. Waldman. 1984. “The Eﬀects of Increasing Copyright Protection: An
   Analytic Approach.” Journal of Political Economy 92:236-246.
Scotchmer, S. 2004. Innovation and Incentives. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Shapiro, C. 2001. “Navigating the Patent Thicket: Cross Licenses, Patent Pools, and
   Standard-Setting.” Innovation Policy and the Economy 1:119-150.
Shy, O. and J.-F. Thisse. 1999. “A Strategic Approach to Software Protection.” Journal
   of Economics and Management Strategy 8:163-190.
Sundararajan, Arum. 2004.     “Managing Digital Piracy: Pricing, Protection and Wel-
   fare.” Working paper. New York: Stern School of Business, NYU.
Tandon, P. 1982. “Optimal Patents with Compulsory Licensing.” Journal of Political
   Economy 90:470-486.




                                           35
