                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           INCENTIVES AND PROSOCIAL BEHAVIOR

                                             Roland Bénabou
                                               Jean Tirole

                                          Working Paper 11535
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w11535


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 2005




We thank for useful comments George Akerlof, Roland Fryer, Timur Kuran, Bentley MacLeod, Tom Romer,
Armin Falk, participants at various seminars and conferences and three anonymous referees. We are
especially indebted to Ian Jewitt for valuable suggestions. Bénabou gratefully acknowledges support from
the John Simon Guggenheim Memorial Foundation in 2004 and from the National Science Foundation. The
views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by Roland Bénabou and Jean Tirole. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Incentives and Prosocial Behavior
Roland Bénabou and Jean Tirole
NBER Working Paper No. 11535
August 2005
JEL No. D64, D82, H41, Z13

                                           ABSTRACT




We develop a theory of prosocial behavior that combines heterogeneity in individual altruism and

greed with concerns for social reputation or self-respect. Rewards or punishments (whether material

or image-related) create doubt about the true motive for which good deeds are performed and this

"overjustification effect" can induce a partial or even net crowding out of prosocial behavior by

extrinsic incentives. We also identify settings that are conducive to multiple social norms and those

where disclosing one's generosity may backfire. Finally, we analyze the choice by public and private

sponsors of incentive levels, their degree of confidentiality and the publicity given to agents'

behavior. Sponsor competition is shown to potentially reduce social welfare.



Roland Bénabou                                        Jean Tirole
Department of Economics                               Université des Sciences Sociales
Woodrow Wilson School                                 Manufacture des Tabacs
Princeton University                                  Aile Jean-Jacques Laffont
Princeton, NJ 08544                                   Accueil MF 404
and NBER                                              21, allée de Brienne
rbenabou@princeton.edu                                F-31000 Toulouse
                                                      FRANCE
                                                      tirole@cict.fr
   People commonly engage in activities that are costly to themselves and mostly benefit others. They

volunteer, help strangers, vote, give to political or charitable organizations, donate blood, join rescue squads

and sometimes sacrifice their life for strangers. Many experiments and field studies confirm that a significant

fraction of people engage in altruistic or reciprocal behaviors.     A number of important phenomena and

puzzles, however, cannot be explained by the sole presence of individuals with other-regarding preferences.

   First, providing rewards and punishments to foster prosocial behavior sometimes has a perverse eﬀect,

reducing the total contribution provided by agents. Such a crowding-out of “intrinsic motivation” by extrinsic

incentives has been observed in a broad variety of social interactions (see Bruno S. Frey (1997) and Frey and

Reto Jegen (2001) for surveys). Studying schoolchildren collecting donations for a charitable organization,

Uri Gneezy and Aldo Rustichini (2000b) thus found that they collected less money when given performance

incentives (see also Frey and Lorenz Götte (1999) on volunteer work supply). These findings are in line

with the ideas in Richard Titmuss (1970), who argued that paying blood donors could actually reduce

supply. On the punishment side, George A. Akerlof and William T. Dickens (1982), suggested that imposing

stiﬀer penalties could sometimes undermine individuals’ “internal justification” for obeying the law. Frey

(1997) provided some evidence to that eﬀect with respect to tax compliance and Gneezy and Rustichini

(2000a) found that fining parents for picking up their children late from day-care centers resulted in more

late arrivals. In experiments on labor contracting, subjects provided less eﬀort when the contract specified

fines for inadequate performance than when it did not (Fehr et al. (2001) and Fehr and Gächter (2002))

and they behaved much less generously when the principal had simply removed from their choice set the

most selfish options (Armin Falk and Michael Kosfeld (2004)). These findings extend a large literature in

psychology documenting how explicit incentives can lead to decreased motivation and unchanged or reduced

task performance (see, e.g. Edward Deci (1975), Deci and Richard Ryan (1985)). In studying this class of

phenomena, however, one cannot simply assume that rewards and punishments systematically crowd out

spontaneous contributions. Indeed, there is also much evidence to support the basic premise of economics

that incentives are generally eﬀective, for instance in workplace contexts (e.g., Robert Gibbons (1997), Canice

Prendergast (1999) and Edward P. Lazear (2000a,b)). A more discriminating analysis is thus required.

   A second set of issues relates to the fact that people commonly perform good deeds and refrain from

selfish ones because of social pressure and norms that attach honor to the former and shame to the latter




                                                       1
(e.g., Dan Batson (1998), Richard B. Freeman (1997)). Charitable and non-profit institutions make ample

use of donors’ desire to demonstrate their generosity and selflessness (or at least the appearance thereof),

with displays ranging from lapel pins and T-shirts to plaques in opera houses or hospitals and buildings

named after large contributors.    The presence of a social signalling motive for giving is also evident in the

fact that anonymous donations are both extremely rare —typically, less than 1 percent of the total number2 —

and widely considered to be the most admirable. Conversely, boasting of one’s generous contributions is often

self-defeating. Codes of honor, whose stringency and scope varies considerably across time and societies, are

another example of norms enforced largely through feelings of shame (losing face) or glory. To understand

these mechanisms it is again important to not posit exogenous social constraints, but rather to model the

inferences and market conditions involved in sustaining or inhibiting them.

    Finally, as much as people care about the opinion others have of them, they care about their own self-

image. In the words of Adam Smith (1776), they make moral decisions by assessing their own conduct

through the eyes of an “impartial spectator”, an “ideal mate within the breast”:


    “We endeavour to examine our own conduct as we imagine any other fair and impartial spectator

    would examine it. If, upon placing ourselves in his situation, we thoroughly enter into all the passions

    and motives which influenced it, we approve of it, by sympathy with the approbation of this supposed

    equitable judge. If otherwise, we enter into his disapprobation, and condemn it.”


    In more contemporary terms, psychologists and sociologists describe people’s behavior as being influenced

by a strong need to maintain conformity between one’s actions, or even feelings, and certain values, long-term

goals or identities they seek to uphold.3 Recent empirical studies confirm the importance of such self-image

concerns and their contribution to prosocial behavior.4 A very telling experiment by Jason Dana, Jason


2
    See, e.g., the studies reported in Glazer and Konrad (1996, p. 1021). Note that anonymous contributions
have the same tax-deduction benefits as nonanonymous ones.
3
    Thus Batson (1998) writes that “The ability to pat oneself on the back and feeling god about being
a kind, caring person, can be a powerful incentive to help”; he also discusses the anticipation of guilt. Daniel
Kahneman and Jack Knetsch (1992) find that subjects’ stated willingness to pay for alternative public goods is
well predicted by independent assessments of the associated “moral satisfaction”. Michèle Lamont (2000)
documents the importance attached by her interviewees to the presence or absence of the “caring self” not just
in others, but also in themselves.
4
    For instance, in a transportation-related survey of about 1,300 individuals, Olof Johansson-Stenman and
Peter Martinsson (2003) find that people who are asked which attributes in a car are most important to them
systematically put environmental performance near the top and social status near the bottom; but when asked



                                                       2
Kuang, and Roberto Weber (2003) thus reveals that when people are given the opportunity to remain

ignorant of how their choices aﬀect others, or of their precise role in the outcome (as with firing squads,

which always have one blank bullet), many “altruists” choose not to know and revert to selfish choices.5

   To examine this broad array of issues, we develop a theory of prosocial behavior that combines hetero-

geneity in individuals’ degrees of altruism and greed with a concern for social reputation or self-respect. The

key property of the model is that agents’ pro- or anti-social behavior reflects an endogenous and unobservable

mix of three motivations: intrinsic, extrinsic, and reputational, which must be inferred from their choices

and the context. We obtain four main sets of results.

   — Rewards and punishments. The presence of extrinsic incentives spoils the reputational value of good

deeds, creating doubt about the extent to which they were performed for the incentives rather than for

themselves. This is in line with what psychologists term the “overjustification eﬀect” (e.g., Mark R. Lepper

et al. (1973)), to which we give here a formal content in terms of a signal-extraction problem.6 Rewards act

like an increase in the noise-to-signal ratio, or even reverse the sign of the signal, and the resulting crowding

out of the reputational (or self-image) motivation to contribute can make aggregate supply downward-sloping

over a wide range, with possibly a sharp drop at zero.

   — Publicity and disclosure. The prominence and memorability of contributions strengthen the signaling

motive and thus generally encourage prosocial behavior. When individuals are heterogeneous in their image

concerns, however, a greater prominence also acts like an increase in the noise-to signal-ratio: good actions

become suspected of being motivated by appearances, which limits the eﬀectiveness of policies based on

“image rewards” such as praise and shame. The same concern can lead individuals to refrain from overtly

disclosing their good deeds and from turning down any rewards that are oﬀered. Sponsors may respond to

contributors’ desire to appear intrinsically rather than extrinsically motivated by publicly announcing low

rewards, but then find it profitable to oﬀer higher ones in private, creating a commitment problem.


about the true preferences of their neighbors or average compatriots, they give dramatically reversed rankings.
Interviews with car dealers show intermediate results.
5
    In a related vein, J. Keith Murnighan et al. (2001) find that the fairness of oﬀers in dictator games
is significantly decreased when the precision with which oﬀerers can split the cake is decreased, allowing them
to construe the outcomes as largely outside their control.
6
    It is also consistent with the informal explanation provided by Frey and Jegen (2001), namely that “An
intrinsically motivated person is deprived of the chance of displaying his or her own interest and involvement
in an activity when someone else oﬀers a reward, or orders him/her to do it”.



                                                       3
   — Spillovers and social norms. The inferences that can be drawn from a person’s actions depend on

what others choose to do, creating powerful spillovers that allow multiple norms of behavior to emerge as

equilibria. More generally, individuals’ decisions will be strategic complements or substitutes, depending on

whether their reputational concerns are (endogenously) dominated by the avoidance of stigma or the pursuit

of distinction. The first case occurs when there are relatively few types with low intrinsic altruism and when

valid excuses for not contributing are more rare than events that make participation inevitable, or unusually

easy. The second case applies in the reverse circumstances.


   — Welfare and competition. When setting rewards and publicizing contributions, sponsors will exploit

these complementarities or substitutabilities, which respectively increase or decrease the elasticity of the

supply curve. Because they do not internalize the reputational spillovers that fall on non-participants or on

those who contribute through other sponsors, however, their policies will generally be ineﬃcient. Thus, even

a monopoly sponsor may oﬀer rewards and “perks” (preferred seating, meetings with famous performers,

valuable social networking opportunities, naming rights to a building, stadium or professorial chair, etc.)

that are too generous from the point of view of social welfare, and sponsor competition may further aggravate

this ineﬃciency. The socially optimal incentive scheme, by contrast, subtracts from the standard Pigouvian

subsidy for public goods provision a “tax” on reputation-seeking, which, per se, is socially wasteful. In the

market for prosocial contributions, finally, a form of holier-than-thou competition can also lead sponsors

to oﬀer agents opportunities for reputationally motivated sacrifices that will again reduce social welfare,

without any increase in the supply of public goods..

   While a number of related themes have been examined in the literature, none of the existing models

provides a unified account of this broad range of phenomena. Standard models of public goods provision

or altruistic behavior, whether based on a concern for others’ welfare, a pure joy of giving, or reciprocity,

are not consistent with a (locally) downward-sloping response of prosocial behavior to incentives, nor with

people choosing not to know how their actions will aﬀect others and reverting to selfish behavior when such

ignorance is feasible. Models of giving as a signal of wealth explain monetary donations but not in-kind

prosocial acts such as volunteering, helping, giving blood, etc. (these should instead be avoided, as they

signal a low opportunity cost of time), the greater admiration reserved for anonymous contributions, or

people’s choosing to be modest about their good deeds. Models that postulate a reduced-form crowding out



                                                       4
(or in) of intrinsic motivation by incentives do not really explain its source and miss its dependence on the

informational environment, such as the observability of actions and rewards or the distribution of preferences

in the population. The same is true for models of social norms that assume complementarities in payoﬀs.

    The papers most closely related to the present one take a signaling approach to social interactions,

although none share with it the structure of multidimensional uncertainty that is essential to generating

overjustification eﬀects and net crowding out. In Bénabou and Tirole (2003), a potential conflict between

extrinsic and intrinsic motivation arises from the fact giving an agent high-powered incentives may convey

bad news about the task or his ability. The idea that the principal has private information about these

variables applies well to child-rearing, education and empowerment versus monitoring of employees, but not

to activities such as contributing to a charitable cause, donating blood, voting, etc., which are our focus

here. In B. Douglas Bernheim (1994), individuals take actions designed to signal that their tastes lie close to

“the mainstream”, leading to conformity in behavior and multiple social norms. When reputation bears on

prosocial orientation, however, what is valuable is not to resemble the average but to appear as altruistic as

possible. Such is the case in Corneo’s (1997) signaling model of union membership, with which our analysis

of social norms shares some important insights. On the other hand, Corneo’s model does not give rise to

crowding out, and while Bernheim does not consider the eﬀects of incentives, the similarly unidimensional

structure of his model will also lead to a standard upward-sloping response. Jerker Denrell (1998) shows how

the presence of monetary or side benefits in some activity can destroy the separating equilibrium that would

otherwise obtain. While this again does not lead to crowding out, a principal may obtain higher profits

with a zero reward than with a positive one. Closest to our paper is that of Paul Seabright (2002), where

individuals derive from participating in a “civic activity” both a direct benefit that depends on their private

type and a reputation that will make them more desirable partners in a later matching market. Under a

sorting condition that makes high types care more about reputation, a “payment” discontinuity arises at

zero, in that total participation can be greater when no reward is oﬀered than with a small positive one.7

7
   Our paper naturally also ties in to the large literature on gifts and donations, such as James Andreoni
(1993) Amihai Glazer and Kai A. Konrad (1996), William Harbaugh (1998), Andrea Buraschi and Francesca
Cornelli (2002) and Prendergast and Lars A. Stole (2001). Other related papers include Bodner and Prelec
(2003) and Bénabou and Tirole (2004a) on self-signaling, Akerlof and Rachel E. Kranton (2000) on identity,
Kjell Arne Brekke, Snorre Kverndokk, and Karine Nyborg (2003) on moral motivation, Maarten Janssen and
Ewa Mendys-Kamphorst (2004) on rewards and the evolution of social norms, and Wolfgang Pesendorfer
(1995) and Laurie Simon Bagwell and Bernheim (1996) on ostentatious consumptions as signaling devices.



                                                      5
      The paper is organized as follows. Section I presents the model and an intuitive illustration of the image-

spoiling eﬀect of rewards. Section II formally demonstrates the crowding-out phenomenon, as well as a

related form of the overjustification eﬀect. Section III deals with social norms and more generally identifies

the features of the market that make individual decisions strategic complements or substitutes. Section IV

explores issues of confidentiality and disclosure with respect to rewards or actions. Section V examines the

setting of incentives by public or private sponsors and the eﬀects of competition on social welfare. Section

VI concludes with possible directions for further research. All proofs are gathered in the Appendix.



I. The Model
A.       Preferences and information
We study the behavior of agents who choose the extent of their participation in some prosocial activity:

contributing to a public good or worthy cause, engaging in a friendly action, refraining from imposing

negative externalities on others, etc. Each selects a participation level a from some choice set A ⊂ R that

can be discrete (voting, blood donation) or continuous (time or money volunteered, fuel eﬃciency of car

purchased). Choosing a entails a utility cost C(a) and yields a monetary or other material reward ya. The

incentive rate y ≷ 0 may reflect a proportional subsidy or tax faced by agents in this economy, or the fact

that participation requires a monetary contribution. It is set by a principal or “sponsor” and, for now,

individuals take it as given.

      Denoting by va and vy an agent’s intrinsic valuations for contributing to the social good and for money

(consumption of market goods), participation at level a yields a direct benefit


(1)                                            (va + vy y) a − C(a).


Each individual’s preference type or “identity” v ≡ (va , vy ) ∈ R2 is drawn independently from a continuous

distribution with density f (v) , marginal densities g (va ) and h (vy ) and mean (v̄a , v̄y ). Its realization is

private information, known to the agent when he acts but not observable by others.

      Social signaling. In addition to these direct payoﬀs, decisions carry reputational costs and benefits,


Our work is also technically related to a recent literature on signals that convey diverging news about
diﬀerent underlying characteristics (Aloisio Pessoa de Araújo et al. (2004), Philipp Sadowski (2004), David
Austen-Smith and Roland G. Fryer (2005)).



                                                         6
reflecting the judgements and reactions of others —family, friends, colleagues, employers. The value of

reputation can be instrumental (making the agent a more attractive match, as in Denrell (1998), Herbert

Gintis et al. (2001) or Seabright (2002)) or purely hedonic (social esteem as a consumption good). For

simplicity, we assume that it depends linearly on observers’ posterior expectations of the agent’s type v, so

that the reputational payoﬀ from choosing a, given an incentive rate y is

                               £                                   ¤
(2)                 R(a, y) ≡ x γ a E (va |a, y) − γ y E (vy |a, y) ,   with γ a ≥ 0 and γ y ≥ 0.8


The signs of γ a and γ y reflect the idea that people would like to appear as prosocial (public-spirited)

and disinterested (not greedy), while the factor x > 0 measures the visibility or salience of their actions:

probability that it will be observed by others, number of people who will hear about it, length of time during

which the record will be kept, etc. Defining µa ≡ xγ a and µy ≡ xγ y , an agent with preferences v ≡ (va , vy )
                             ¡       ¢
and reputational concerns µ ≡ µa , µy thus solves

                             ©                                                        ª
(3)                       max (va + vy y) a − C(a) + µa E (va |a, y) − µy E (vy |a, y) .
                           a∈A


In the basic version of the model, µ is taken to be common to all agents and thus public knowledge. In the full

version we also allow for unobserved heterogeneity in image-consciousness, with µ distributed independently

of v according to a density m(µ). Note, finally, that while we shall generally cast the analysis in terms of

eﬀortful or time-consuming prosocial actions such as volunteering, voting, etc., it is equally applicable to

purely monetary (e.g., charitable) donations.9

      Self-signaling and identity. The model admits an important reinterpretation in terms of self-image.

Suppose that, at the time he makes his decision, the individual engages in a self-assessment or receives


8
                                                        ¡              ¢
    This payoﬀ is defined net of the constant (1 − x) γ a v̄a − γ y v̄y , which corresponds to the case where
a remains unobserved. Note that a value of reputation that is a linear functional of the posterior distribution
over the agent’s type (such as its expectation) avoids building into his preferences either information-aversion
(concave functional) or information-loving (convex functional). The more restrictive assumption, which
we make for tractability, is that the coeﬃcients in (2) are independent of the agent’s type v.
9
     Let a now be the number of dollars contributed by an individual with a known, concave utility over
income, represented by the term −C(a). Each dollar generates one unit of public good and entitles the
contributor to y units of perks and privileges (meeting with performers, gala events, networking, etc.),
a “currency” for which he has utility vy . This alternative interpretation of (3) is fully consistent with
the analysis in Section II. One can also capture the case where instead of perks, the sponsor oﬀers a matching
rate y : let vy ≡ 1 and C(a) = ca, where c is the cost of providing a unit of public good, so the net
cost to the contributor is only c−y. This corresponds to the specification of (3) used in most of Sections III-V.



                                                           7
 some external signal about his type: “How important is it for me to contribute to the public good? How

 much do I care about money? What are my real values?” This information, however, may not be perfectly

 recalled or “accessible” later on —in fact, there will often be strong incentives to remember it in a self-serving

 way. Actions, by contrast, are much easier to encode and remember than the underlying motives, making it

 rational to define oneself partly through ones’ past choices: “I am the kind of person who behaves in this

 way”. Suppose therefore that the feelings or signal motivating the participation decision are forgotten with

 some probability proportional to x and that, later on, the agent cares about “what kind of a person he is”.10

 If, for simplicity, this utility from self-image is linear in beliefs, with weights γ a and − γ y on perceived social

 orientation and greediness, the model is formally equivalent to the social-signaling one.

     Relation to altruism and public goods. An agent’s intrinsic motivation to behave prosocially, va , can stem

 from two sources. First, he may care about the overall level of a public good to which his action contributes

 but that is enjoyed by others as well, such air quality. Let this component of utility be wa (nā/nκ ) , where

 ā represents the average contribution, n the size of the group and κ ≥ 0 the degree of congestion; wa then

 measures the intensity of the individual’s “pure” altruism.11 Second, he may experience a “joy of giving”

 ua (independent of social- or self-esteem concerns) that makes him value his own contribution to ā more

 than someone else’s.12 Combining these “pure” and “impure” forms of altruism (Andreoni (1988)) yields

 va = ua + wa /nκ ; in large groups with κ > 0, the second term vanishes. The simplest interpretation of our

 model is thus one where there is a unit continuum of agents, so that va = ua , but where κ = 1 so that the

 average contribution still generates a public good, which individuals value as wa ā. The model applies equally

 well to finite groups of any size n and value κ, however. All that matters is that there be heterogeneity


10
     This may reflect a hedonic motive (people enjoy feeling generous or disinterested, e.g. Akerlof and Dickens
 (1982) or Botond Köszegi (2000)), an instrumental purpose (providing motivation to undertake and persevere
 in long-term tasks or social relationships, e.g. Juan D. Carrillo and Thomas Mariotti (2000) or Bénabou and
 Tirole (2002)), or both. The idea that individuals take their actions as diagnostic of their preferences
 originated in psychology with Daryl J. Bem (1972) and relates closely to cognitive dissonance theory (Leon
 Festinger and James Carlsmith (1959)). The link between imperfect recall and intertemporal self-signaling
 is analyzed in Bénabou and Tirole (2004a), while Bodner and Prelec (2003) examine contemporaneous
 self-signaling in a split-self model.
11
     At the cost of some additional complexity, one could make agents care about social welfare (which
 is then defined as a fixed point) rather than about the level of the public good per se.
12
     Such would be the eﬀect of feelings of empathy (emphasized by Batson (1998)) or reciprocity. Equivalently,
 the marginal cost of participation may include an individual component equal to −ua . The term ua could also
 arise from agents’ following the Kantian imperative to evaluate their actions as if they would lead everyone to
 make those same choices (Brekke et al. (2003)).



                                                          8
 in the intrinsic propensity to contribute or reciprocate, va , no matter its source, and that agents value

 being perceived, or perceiving themselves, as having a high va. This (self) esteem benefit, µa E (va |a, y) , is

 perhaps what corresponds best to the idea of a “warm glow” of giving: gaining social approval, feeling good

 about oneself, etc. Finally, note that the action a chosen by agents and giving rise to reputation could be

 their reaction to someone else’s behavior, such as cooperation or defection. The model is thus applicable to

 reciprocity as well as to unconditional prosocial behavior.

       We now turn to the terms in (3) relating to material compensation. That in vy y requires no explanation,

 except to note that if the individual believes that his receiving y reduces the resources available to the sponsor

 for supporting other activities he cares about, it will be attenuated by an “eviction eﬀect”.13 Consider next

 the potential negative reputation attached to “greed” or money-orientation, −µy E (vy |a, y) . Note first that

 all the paper’s results but one (Proposition 3) obtain with µy ≡ 0 as well. It is nonetheless natural to allow

 for such an eﬀect —“greedy” is no compliment. Someone who has a high valuation for money relative to

 eﬀort and / or public goods is not a very attractive partner in friendship, marriage, hiring to a position

 of responsibility, electing to oﬃce and other situations where it is diﬃcult to always monitor behavior or

 write complete contracts. Demonstrating a low marginal utility for money vy can also be valuable because

 it signals high wealth, a motive that figures prominently in the literatures on charitable contributions and

 on conspicuous consumptions (e.g., Glazer and Conrad (1996), Bagwell and Bernheim (1996)).


 B.       The image-spoiling eﬀect of rewards: basic insights
 We begin with an intuitive presentation of some key mechanisms. Consider the first-order condition for

 an agent’s choice of a, assuming a well-behaved decision problem over a continuous choice set. By (3), an

 individual with type (v, µ) who faces a price y equates


 (4)                                      C 0 (a) = va + vy y + r(a, y; µ),



13
    In experiments on charitable giving (e.g., Gneezy and Rustichini (2000b)), it is typically emphasized
 to subjects that any rewards will come from an entirely separate research budget and therefore not reduce
 the amount actually donated. In the real world, the presence and magnitude of an eviction eﬀect will
 depend on individuals’ beliefs about the level at which the budget constraint binds and how they value
 the alternative uses of funds. Suppose, for instance, that a charity has a fixed budget and will use any
 funds left over to hire “professionals” who produce τ units of a per dollar, or some other public good of
 equivalent value. An individuals’ valuation of a reward y for his contribution will now be (vy −τ wa /nα )y. This
 simply amounts to a redefinition of vy , in a way that contributes to making it negatively correlated with va .



                                                         9
                               vy


                                                                   +                 no-reward condition    ( y = 0)
                                                                   B
                                    reward               A
                                    condition
                                     ( y > 0) ,
                                    unadjusted
                                    reputation benefit

                                                                                        reward condition ( y > 0 ) ,
                                                                                        adjusted reputation
                                                  slope -1/y                 –          benefit
                                                                                 C
                                                                                                                       va
                                                        C '(a) − r (a,0) ≡ va*          va** ≡ C '(a) − r (a, y)

                             Figure 1: the eﬀects of rewards on the pool of participants


where the last term is his (marginal) reputational return from contributing at level a :

                                                                ∂E (va |a, y)      ∂E (vy |a, y)
(5)                                 r(a, y; µ) ≡ µa                           − µy               .
                                                                    ∂a                 ∂a

Three important points are apparent from (4). First, observing someone’s choice of a reveals the sum of his

three motivations to contribute (at the margin): intrinsic, extrinsic, and reputational. In general all three

vary across people, so that learning about va or vy corresponds to a signal-extraction problem. Second, a

higher incentive rate y will reduce the informativeness of actions about va , and the converse for vy . Third,

heterogeneity in agents’ image concerns µ represents an additional source of noise that makes inferences

about both va and vy less reliable, and that is amplified when actions become more visible (higher x).

      To gain further insight into the impact of incentives on inferences and behavior, let us now focus on the

benchmark case where va and vy are independent random variables, while µa and µy are fixed and omitted

from the notation. Figure 1 then shows, for any a > 0, how the set of agents who contribute at least a varies

with the reward y. This group, which we shall term “high contributors”, comprises all agents with


(6)                                                   va + vy y ≥ C 0 (a) − r(a, y),


so its boundary is a straight line corresponding to (4), along which agents choose exactly a. The same

condition applies when the participation decision is discrete, a ∈ {0, 1}, as will be the case in the second half

of the paper, provided we denote C 0 (1) ≡ C(1) − C(0) and r(1, y) ≡ R(1, y) − R(0, y). Along the boundary,

agents are now indiﬀerent between participating and abstaining.

      When no reward is oﬀered, y = 0, the separating locus is vertical: an agent’s contribution reveals nothing



                                                                           10
 about his vy , but is very informative about his va . In the continuous case prosocial orientation is learned

 perfectly, in the discrete case one learns whether it is above or below a known cutoﬀ.

     When a reward y > 0 is introduced, the slope of the separating locus becomes −1/y < 0. If we ignore,

 in a first step, any changes in the inferences embodied in the intercept, the original boundary simply pivots

 to the left, as shown in Figure 1 (everything works symmetrically for a fine or penalty, y < 0). The set of

 agents contributing at least a thus expands, as types in the hatched area (A + B) are drawn in. Since this

 occurs at every level of a, the distribution of contributions shifts up (stochastically), resulting in a higher

 total supply; this is the standard eﬀect of incentives. In equilibrium, however, there are two reputational

 eﬀects:

     a) The new members of the high-contributors’ club have lower va ’s than the old ones, so they drag down

 the group’s reputation for prosocial orientation. The reputation of the low-contributors’ group also declines,

 however, so in the discrete-choice case the net eﬀect on the reputational incentive to participate can clearly

 go either way. Similarly, in the continuous case the reputation E (va |a, y) attached to contributing exactly

 a declines (as that locus pivots to the left), but so does the reputation attached to contributing exactly

 a0 = a − da, where da is small; the eﬀect on the marginal return ∂E (va |a, y) /∂a is thus generally ambiguous.

     b) The new high contributors are “greedy” types (have a vy above the mean), whereas those who still

 contribute below a after the reward is introduced reveal that they care less about money than average.

 This unambiguously reduces the reputational incentive to participate, as is clear in the discrete case. In the

 continuous case this follows from the fact that, after the rotation, the locus for contributing at a − da lies

 below that for contributing a.14

     If the overall impact of these changes in inferences is negative, r(a, y) < r(a, 0), as drawn in Figure 1, the

 reward attracts some new participants (more greedy agents in area B) to contributing a or more, but repels

 some existing ones (more public-spirited agents in area C). This matches precisely William Upton’s (1973)

 findings that oﬀering a monetary reward for giving blood led to reduced donations by those who had regularly

 been giving for free and increased donations from those who never had. Overall, the number of agents who

 contribute at least a may increase or decrease, depending on the weights given to B and C by the distribution

 f (v). If a net decrease occurs at every a, the distribution of contributions shifts down (stochastically) and

14
     This is due to the fact that C 0 (a) − r(a, y) is increasing in a, by the second-order condition for (3).



                                                         11
 total supply actually declines when a reward y > 0 is introduced, starting from a no-reward situation.



 II. The overjustification eﬀect and crowding out
       We now turn to the formal analysis, establishing three main results. First, we show how the “overjustifi-

 cation eﬀect” discussed by psychologists can be understood as a signal-extraction problem in which rewards

 amplify the noise, leading observers (or a retrospecting individual) to attribute less of role to intrinsic moti-

 vation in explaining variations in behavior. We then identify the conditions under which monetary incentives

 crowd out reputational motivation, resulting in a supply curve that is downward-sloping over a potentially

 wide range, or exhibits a sharp drop at zero. Finally, we assess the eﬀectiveness of non-material rewards

 such as praise and shame, showing in particular that it is also limited by a form of overjustification eﬀect.

       We use here a specification of the model that builds on the familiar normal-learning setup. Let actions

 vary continuously over A = R, with cost C(a) = ka2 /2.15

                            ⎛    ⎞     ⎛        ⎡                    ⎤⎞
                                                     2
                            ⎜ va ⎟     ⎜ v̄ a   ⎢ σa            σ ay ⎥⎟
 (7)                        ⎝    ⎠ ∼ N ⎝      , ⎣                    ⎦⎠ ,     v̄a ≷ 0, v̄y > 0,
                                                                   2
                              vy         v̄y      σ ay          σy


 and at first we continue to focus on the case where everyone has the same reputational concerns, µ ≡ (µ̄a , µ̄y ).

 We then extend the analysis to the case where µ is also normally distributed across individuals.16


 A.       Material rewards
 With fixed µ’s, the reputational return (5) is constant across agents and equal to

                                                     ∂E (va |a, y)       ∂E (vy |a, y)
 (8)                                r̄(a, y) ≡ µ̄a                 − µ̄y               .
                                                         ∂a                  ∂a

 Thus, by (4), an agent’s choice of a reveals his va + yvy , equal to C 0 (a) − r̄(a, y). Standard results for normal

 random variables then yield




15
    The case of a general convex function C(a) is treated in Bénabou and Tirole (2004b). Both here and there,
 we focus attention on equilibria in which the reputation vector, E (v|a, y) , is diﬀerentiable in a. .
16
    As is often the case, normality yields great tractability at the cost of allowing certain variables to take
 implausible negative values. By choosing the relevant means large enough, however, one can make the
 probability of such realizations arbitrarily small; but (7) and (17) below should really be interpreted as
 local approximations, consistent with the linearity of preferences assumed throughout the paper.



                                                              12
 (9)                         E (va |a, y) = v̄a + ρ(y) · (ka − v̄a − v̄y y − r̄(a, y))

 (10)                        E (vy |a, y) = v̄y + χ(y) · (ka − v̄a − v̄y y − r̄(a, y)) ,

 where

                                             σ 2a + yσ ay
 (11)                         ρ(y) ≡                               and yχ(y) ≡ 1 − ρ(y).
                                       σ 2a + 2yσay + y 2 σ 2y

 Intuitively, the posterior assessment of an agent’s intrinsic motivation, E (va |a, y) , is a weighted average

 of the prior v̄a and of the marginal cost of his observed contribution, net of the average extrinsic and

 reputational incentives to contribute at that level.

       Finally, substituting (8) into (9)-(10) shows that an equilibrium corresponds to a pair of functions

 E (va |a, y) and E (vy |a, y) that solve a system of two linear diﬀerential equations.


 Proposition 1 Let all agents have the same image concern (µ̄a , µ̄y ). There is a unique (diﬀerentiable-

 reputation) equilibrium, in which an agent with preferences (va , vy ) contributes at the level

                                               va + vy y
 (12)                                    a=              + µ̄a ρ(y) − µ̄y χ(y),
                                                   k

 where ρ(y) and χ(y) are defined by (11). The reputational returns are ∂E(vy |a, y)/∂a = ρ(y)k and ∂E(vy |a, y)
                                                ¡                   ¢
 /∂a = χ(y)k, resulting in a net value r̄(y) = k µ̄a ρ(y) − µ̄y χ(y) .


       The eﬀects of extrinsic incentives on inferences and behaviors can now be analyzed. While a higher y

 increases agents’ direct payoﬀ from contributing, va + vy y, it also tends to reduce the associated signaling

 value along both dimensions. In the benchmark case of no correlation (σ ay = 0), for instance,

                                               1                             yσ 2y /σ 2a
 (13)                           ρ(y) =                        and χ(y) ≡                     ,
                                         1 + y 2 σ 2y /σ 2a                1 + y 2 σ2y /σ 2a

 so a higher y acts much like an increase in the noise-to-signal ratio θ ≡ σ y /σ a , leading observers who

 parse out the agent’s motives to decrease the weight attributed to social orientation, ρ(y), and increase its

 counterpart for greediness, χ(y).17 When σ ay 6= 0, a positive correlation tends to amplify the decline in ρ(y),

 a negative one works to weaken it.18 Indeed, the more va and vy tend to move together, the less observing


17
    More precisely, yχ(y) = 1 − ρ(y) rises with y everywhere, but the same is true of χ(y) only for |y| ≤ 1/θ.
18
    For instance, as the correlation between va and vy rises from −1 to 0 to 1, the function ρ(y) pivots
 downwards over the range 0 < y < 1/θ , from 1/(1−θy) to 1/(1+θ2 y 2 ) and then to 1/(1+θy). The eﬀect of σ ay
 on the slope χ0 (y) is more complex, as it depends on σ 2ay ; the formula is provided in the Appendix.



                                                              13
 a high contribution a, or equivalently a high va + vy y, represents good news about the agent’s intrinsic

 valuation va ; and the larger is y, the stronger is this “discounting” eﬀect.

     Summing (12) over agents yields the (per capita) aggregate supply of the public good ā(y), whose slope,

                                                      v̄y
 (14)                                     ā0 (y) =       + µ̄a ρ0 (y) − µ̄y χ0 (y),
                                                       k

 reflects both the standard eﬀect of incentives and the crowding out or in of reputational motivation that they

 induce. Since the general expression (provided in the appendix) is a bit complicated, we focus here on two

 benchmark cases that make clear the main factors at play. The first one is that of independent values, for

 which we show that as long as the reputational concern over either prosocial orientation or money-orientation

 is above some minimum level, there exists a range over which incentives backfire.


 Proposition 2 (overjustification and crowding out). Let σay = 0 and define θ ≡ σ y /σa . Incentives

 are counterproductive, ā0 (y) < 0, at all levels such that
                                                                          ¡           ¢
                                    v̄y            2yθ2                θ2 1 − y 2 θ2
 (15)                                   < µ̄a · ¡           ¢2 + µ̄y · ¡            ¢2 .
                                     k           1 + y 2 θ2              1 + y 2 θ2

 Consequently, for all µ̄a above some threshold µ∗a ≥ 0 there exists a range [y1 , y2 ] such that ā(y) is decreasing

 on [y1 , y2 ] and increasing elsewhere on R. If µ̄y < v̄y /kθ, then µ∗a > 0 and 0 < y1 < y2 ; as µ̄a increases, y1

 rises and y2 falls, so [y1 , y2 ] widens. If µ̄y > v̄y /kθ2 , then µ∗a = 0 and y1 < 0 < y2 ; as µ̄a increases both y1

 and y2 rise and, for µ̄a large enough, [y1 , y2 ] again widens.


     The role of µ̄a is illustrated in Figure 2a. Crowding out can occur over a fairly wide range, making all

 but very large rewards inferior to none.19

     The second case we highlight is that of “small rewards”, which is interesting for two reasons. First, some

 studies find crowding out (ā(y) decreasing) to occur mostly at relatively low levels, and it is sometimes even

 suggested that the main eﬀect is a discontinuity at zero in subjects’ response to incentives (Gneezy and

 Rustichini (2000b), Gneezy (2003)). Is there something qualitatively diﬀerent between “unrewarded” and

 “rewarded” activities that could cause rational agents to behave in this way? We show that there is, and

 explain when it will matter. The second reason why “small rewards” are of interest is that in real-world

19
    The values used in Figure 2a are v̄a = 4, vy = 1, µy = 0, θ = .2 and µa ∈ {0, 6.7, 8.3, 10, 12, 14.6}. In Figure
 2b they are v̄a = 3, v̄y = 1, µa = µy = 1 and θ ∈ {0, 1, 2, 3, 5}.



                                                              14
              Supply a ( y )                                                                                            Supply a ( y )




               50                                                                                                           6




              37.5
                                                                                                                            4


               25


                                                                                                                            2

              12.5


                                                                                                                            0
       -2.5          0         2.5   5   7.5   10     12.5         15                           -2.5        -1.25               0        1.25   2.5
                                                                 Incentive y                                                                          Incentive y


       Figure 2a: varying µ a (with µ y = 0). The straight line                        Figure 2b: varying θ = σ y /σ a (with µa = 0). The lower straight
       corresponds to µ a = 0 (no reputation concern).                                 line corresponds to µ y = 0 (no reputation concern), the upper one
                                                                                       to θ = 0 (standard one-dimensional signaling model).




situations where time has an opportunity cost, they will actually correspond to substantial values of y.



Proposition 3 (small net incentives and signal-reversal). (1) Small rewards or punishments are

counterproductive, ā0 (0) < 0, whenever
                                                             µ          ¶              Ã                        !
                                               v̄y               σ ay                      σ 2y − 2σ2ay /σ 2a
(16)                                               < µ̄a                       + µ̄y                                .
                                                k                σ 2a                             σ 2a

(2) Let µ̄y > 0 and assume that va and vy are uncorrelated, or more generally not too correlated. Then, as

σ a /σ y becomes small, the slope of the supply function at y = 0 tends to −∞.

(3) Suppose that participation entails a unit opportunity cost with monetary value ŷ. Then ā0 (ŷ) < 0 and

ā0 (ŷ) → −∞ under the conditions stated in (1) and (2) respectively.


   The first term on the right-hand side of (16) reflects the intuition given earlier about the role of correlation

in generating crowding out -or in. Most important is the second term, whose dependence on the noise-to-

signal ratio is illustrated in Figure 2b: letting σ ay = 0, for instance, shows that ā0 (0) = v̄y /k − µ̄y (σ y /σa )2 .

Thus, when individuals’ desire for money becomes much more uncertain (to observers) than their motivation

for the specific task at hand, and even if they have only a minimal concern about appearing greedy (µ̄y

is small), the supply response becomes discontinuous (downward) at zero. The intuition for why “zero is

special” is that, at that point, participation switches from being an “unprofitable” to a “profitable” activity

and thus comes to be interpreted as a signal of greed rather than disinterestedness. This signal reversal

eﬀect, operating specifically around a zero net reward, creates an additional source of crowding out on top



                                                                                 15
 of the general signal-jamming eﬀect (decrease in ρ(y) ) that was shown to operate at all levels of y.20

      If the empirical validity of this signal reversal was restricted to very small prizes and fines, it would be of

 somewhat limited interest. The third result, shows, however, that the relevant “tipping point” is not really

 zero (except in laboratory experiments, where subjects, once there, have no profitable alternative uses of

 their time) but agents’ monetary value of time, which can be quite substantial.


 B.      Image rewards
 Public authorities and private sponsors aiming to foster prosocial behavior make heavy use of both public

 displays and private mementos conveying honor or shame. Nations award medals and honorific titles, char-

 itable organizations send donors pictures of “their” sponsored child, non-profits give bumper stickers and

 T-shirts with logos, universities award honorary “degrees” to scholars, etc. Conversely, the ancient practice

 of the pillory has been updated in the form of televised arrests and publishing the names of parents who

 are delinquent on child support, or the licence plate numbers of cars photographed in areas known for drug

 traﬃcking or prostitution. Peer groups also play an important role by creating a rehearsal mechanism: if

 acquaintances all contribute to a cause, one is constantly reminded of one’s generosity, or lack thereof.21

      Formally, greater publicity or prominence corresponds to a homothetic increase in (µa , µy ). Our model

 then confirms the above intuitions, but also delivers important caveats. In particular, when agents are

 heterogeneous in their reputational concerns, giving greater scrutiny to their behavior may not work that

 well, as good actions come to be suspected of being image-motivated. To analyze these issues we now allow

 agents’ image concerns, like their valuations, to be normally distributed:

                            ⎛    ⎞  ⎛      ⎡                        ⎤⎞
                                               2
                              µ
                            ⎜ a ⎟     µ̄
                                    ⎜ a ⎢ ωa                   ω ay ⎥⎟
 (17)                       ⎝    ⎠∼N⎝     ,⎣                        ⎦⎠ , µ̄a ≥ 0, µ̄y ≥ 0,
                              µy      µ̄y    ω ay              ω 2y


 with v and µ independent. In the first-order condition (4), the reputational return r(a, y; µ) is now also

 normal and independent of v (conditionally on a), with mean r̄(a, y) given by (8) and variance



20
    When the two eﬀects are combined it is easy to get supply curves that have a sharp local minimum
 at y = 0, so that neither oﬀering rewards (up to a point) nor requiring sacrifices raises supply.
21
    People indeed volunteer more help in response to a request to do so, especially when it comes from
 a friend, a colleague or family (Freeman 1997), whose opinion of them they naturally care about more
 than that of strangers.



                                                          16
                                                                         ⎡             ⎤⎛               ⎞
                                µ                                    ¶       2                  a |a,y)
                                                                                  ω ay ⎥ ⎜ ∂E(v∂a
                                                                         ⎢ ωa                           ⎟
 (18)             Ω(a, y)2 ≡        ∂E(va |a,y)
                                                   −
                                                       ∂E(vy |a,y)
                                                                         ⎣             ⎦⎝               ⎠.
                                       ∂a                 ∂a                                ∂E(vy |a,y)
                                                                           ω ay   ω 2y    −     ∂a



 The signal-extraction formulas (9)-(10) thus remain unchanged, except that the updating coeﬃcients ρ(y)

 and χ(y) are respectively replaced by

                                   σ2a + yσ ay                                     yσ 2y + σ ay
 (19)       ρ(a, y) ≡                                     and χ(a, y) ≡                                   .
                        σ2a + 2yσ ay + y 2 σ2y + Ω(a, y)2               σ2a + 2yσ ay + y 2 σ2y + Ω(a, y)2

 An equilibrium then corresponds again to a pair of functions E (va |a, y) and E (vy |a, y) that solve the

 diﬀerential equations (9)-(10), but this system is now nonlinear, due to the term Ω(a, y)2 in ρ and χ. We

 are able to solve it for the intuitive and important class of solutions where Ω is independent of a, so that

 reputations remain linear in a. We cannot a priori exclude the existence of other, nonlinear, equilibria.


 Proposition 4 (1) A linear-reputation equilibrium corresponds to a fixed-point Ω(y), solution to:


 (20)                            Ω(y)2 /k 2 ≡ ω 2a ρ(y)2 − 2ω ay ρ(y)χ(y) + ω 2y χ(y)2 ,


 where ρ(y) and χ(y) are given by (19) with Ω(a, y) ≡ Ω(y). The optimal action chosen by an agent with type

 (v, µ) is then

                                                  va + y · vy
 (21)                                      a=                 + µa ρ(y) − µy χ(y)
                                                      k

 and the marginal reputations are ∂E (va |a, y) /∂a = ρ(y)k and ∂E (vy |a, y) /∂a = χ(y)k, with a net value of

 r(y; µ) = (µa ρ(y) − µy χ(y))k for the agent.

 (2) There always exists such an equilibrium, and if ω ay = 0 it is unique (in the linear-reputation class).


     A greater variability of image motives, Ω(y)2 = V ar (r(y; µ)) , makes individuals’ behavior a more noisy

 measure of their true underlying values (va , vy ), reducing both ρ(y) and χ(y). This variance is itself en-

 dogenous, however, as agents’ reputational calculus takes into account how their collective behavior aﬀects

 observers’ signal-extraction-problem. This is reflected in the fixed-point nature of equation (20).22

     Proposition 4 also allows us to demonstrate how increased publicity gives rise to an oﬀsetting overjustifi-

 cation eﬀect. Let all the reputational weights µ = (µa , µy ) be scaled up by some prominence or memorability


22
    When ω ay 6= 0 there could be multiple equilibria, with diﬀerent degrees of informativeness. Since the
 general theme of multiplicity is investigated in Section III.A, we do not pursue it here.



                                                                 17
 factor, x; the material incentive y remains constant. Aggregate supply is now

                                            v̄a + y · v̄y    ¡                         ¢
 (22)                          ā(y, x) =                 + x µ̄a ρ(y, x) − µ̄y χ(y, x) ,
                                                 k
                                                                  ¡                  ¢
 where the dependence on x indicates that all the covariance terms ω 2a , ω ay , ω 2y in the original equation

 (20), corresponding to x = 1, are now multiplied by x2 . A greater visibility of actions (and of any rewards

 attached to them) thus has two oﬀsetting eﬀects on the reputational incentive to contribute:

     a) a direct amplifying eﬀect, the sign of which is that of µa ρ(y, x) − µy χ(y, x) for an individual and

 µ̄a ρ(y, x) − µ̄y χ(y, x) on average. For people who are mostly concerned about appearing socially-minded (µa

 À µy ) this increases the incentive to act in a prosocial manner, whereas for those most concerned about not

 appearing greedy (µy À µa ) it has the reverse eﬀect.23

     b) a dampening eﬀect, as reputation becomes less sensitive to the individual’s behavior, which observers

 increasingly ascribe to image concerns. Formally, the “eﬀective noise” Ω(y, x) increases with x (in any stable

 equilibrium) and ρ(y, x) and χ(y, x) consequently tend to decrease with it.

     This tradeoﬀ implies that giving increased publicity to pro- or anti-social behavior may be of somewhat

 limited eﬀectiveness, even when it is relatively cheap to do. Consider for instance the case where µy is known

 (ω y = 0), possibly equal to zero. As x becomes large (more generally, xkω 2a >> 1), equation (20) yields
                                                    µ                  ¶1/3
                                                        σ 2a + yσ ay
 (23)                                  ρ(y, x) ≈                              x−2/3 .
                                                            k 2 ω 2a

 The aggregate social benefit from publicity µ̄a xρ(y, x) thus grows only as x1/3 , implying that it is optimal

 to provide only a finite level of x even when it has a constant marginal cost, or even a marginal cost that

 declines slower than x−2/3 .24 Policies by parents, teachers, governments and other principals that rely on

 the “currency ” of praise and shame are thus eﬀective up to a point, but eventually self-limiting.



 III. Honor, stigma, and social norms
     The second main issue we explore is that of social and personal norms. We first show how multiple



23
    We are focussing this discussion, for simplicity, on the “natural” case where ρ and χ are both positive,
 which occurs as long as σ ay is not too negative; see (19).
24
    On the other hand there cannot be full crowding out, namely xρ(y, x) actually decreasing with x :
 otherwise, by (19) and (20) ρ(y, x) would be increasing in x, a contradiction.



                                                            18
 standards of “acceptable” behavior can arise from the interplay of honor and shame, then examine what

 characteristics of the “market”, such as the distribution of social preferences, the availability of excuses or

 the observability of action and inaction, facilitate or impede their emergence.

     For the remainder of the paper we focus on the case of a binary participation decision, A = {0, 1}, in

 which the notions of honor and stigma are most sharply apparent. Unless otherwise specified (Sections

 IV.B and IV.C) we also assume that all agents share the same reputational concern µ ≡ (µa , µy ) and

 the same valuation for money, which we normalize to vy ≡ 1. Their prosocial orientation va , by contrast,

 is distributed on some interval [va− , va+ ].25 Indeed, whereas two-dimensional uncertainty is essential to the

 overjustification and backfiring-incentives eﬀects analyzed earlier, it is not needed for most of the other

 results. This simplification also removes any potential incentive for agents to “burn money” in order to

 signal a low vy .

     We again denote r(y) ≡ R(1, y) − R(0, y) and let c ≡ C(1) − C(0). Thus, an agent now participates if

 va ≥ c − y − r(y) ≡ va∗ (y). To determine the equilibrium threshold of altruism let us define, for any candidate

 cutoﬀ va , the conditional means in the upper and lower tails:


 (24)                                  M− (va )     ≡ E (ṽa |ṽa ≤ va ) ,

 (25)                                    M+ (va ) ≡ E (ṽa |ṽa ≥ va ) .


 The first expression governs the “honor” conferred by participation, which is the diﬀerence between M+ (va )

 and the unconditional mean v̄a . The second one governs the “stigma” from abstention, which is v̄a − M (va ) .

 Since both are nondecreasing functions, the net reputational gain M+ (va ) − M− (va ) and the marginal

 agent’s total non-monetary return to contributing,

                                             £                   ¤
 (26)                        Ψ(va ) ≡ va + µa M+ (va ) − M− (va ) ≡ va + ∆ (va ) ,


 may increase or decrease with overall participation, [va , va+ ]. The slopes of these two functions will play

 central roles in what follows.26


25
    The results generalize to the case where va and vy are independently distributed and reputation bears only
 on the former (µy = 0).
26
    Recall also that, in the discussion of Figure 1, it was argued that the reputation for prosociality of
 contributors may worsen either more or less than that of non-contributors when the separating locus pivots to
 the left due to the presence of a reward y > 0. Indeed, for any given value of vy (over which one then



                                                       19
A.      Endogenous social norms
What makes a given behavior socially or morally unacceptable is often the very fact that “it is just not

done”, meaning that only people whose extreme types make them social outliers would not be dissuaded by

the intense shame attached to it. In other places or times diﬀerent norms or codes of honor prevail, and

the fact that “everyone does it” allows the very same behavior to be free of all stigma. Examples include

choosing surrender over death, not going to church, not voting, divorce, bankruptcy, unemployment, welfare

dependency, minor tax evasion, and conspicuous modes of consumption.

     We show here that such interdependencies between agents’ choices arise endogenously through the infer-

ences made from observed behaviors, creating the potential for multiple norms of social responsibility. In

particular, no assumption of complementarity in payoﬀs (e.g., between va and the average contribution ā,

representing a form of “reciprocity”) is required to explain the common finding that individuals contribute

more to public goods when they know that others are also giving more.27


Proposition 5 (1) When Ψ is increasing, there is a unique equilibrium, which varies with y as described

in Figure 3a.

(2) When Ψ is decreasing, the equilibrium set varies with y as described in Figure 3b. Thus, for all y ∈

(c − Ψ(va− ), c − Ψ(va+ )), there are three equilibria: va∗ = va− (full participation), va∗ = va+ (no participation)

and an interior one defined by Ψ (va∗ ) = c − y that is unstable (in the usual tâtonnement sense).

(3) When Ψ is non-monotonic, there exists a range of values of y for which there are at least two stable

equilibria, of which one at least is interior.


     We provide two examples. When va is uniformly distributed on [0, 1] , Ψ(va ) = va + µa /2 so the supply

curve is a familiar, upward-sloping one, as in Figure 3a. When va has density g (va ) = 2va on [0, 1], by
                                            −1
contrast, Ψ(va ) = va + (2µa /3) (1 + va )       is decreasing for all µa > 6, resulting in three equilibria as in

Figure 3b. For µa ∈ (3/2, 6), Ψ is hump-shaped, making the high-participation equilibrium interior.


 integrates), these reputations respectively correspond to M+ (va∗ − vy y) and M− (va∗ − vy y) , whose diﬀerence
 may increase or decrease with y depending on the slope of M+ − M− .
27
     For instance, James H. Bryan, and M.A. Test (1967) found that motorists were more likely to stop and help
 someone with a flat tire, and walkers-by more likely to put money into a Salvation Army kettle, when
 they had observed earlier someone else (a confederate) doing so a few minutes before. See also Jan Potters,
 Martin Sefton and Lise Vesterlund (2001) on charities’ frequent strategy of publicly announcing “leadership”
 contributions and the higher yields achieved when donors act sequentially rather than simultaneously.



                                                         20
                                                      Full
  c − Ψ (va− )                                    participation
                                                                                                                               Full
                                                                          c − Ψ (va+ )                                       participation
                              Partial                                  No
  c − Ψ (va+ )                participation                            participation             Partial
No                                                                       c − Ψ (va− )            participation
                                                             a( y )                                                                   a( y)
participation
                 0                            1                                          0                            1
                     Figure 3a: unique equilbrium                                            Figure 3b: multiple equilbria



B.       Strategic complementarity and substitutability
The intuition for these results is that agents’ actions will (endogenously) be strategic complements or substi-

tutes, depending on whether it is stigma or honor that is most responsive to the extent of participation. This

same condition will also turn out to play a key role in other results, such as those relating to the disclosure

or confidentiality of rewards and the socially optimal level of incentives.


                                                                                                      0
Definition 1 Participation decisions exhibit strategic complementarities if ∆ (va ) ≡ µa (M+ − M− )0 <

0 for all va .


     When ∆0 < 0, a wider participation (dva < 0) worsens the pool of abstainers more than that of con-

tributors, so that the stigma from abstention v̄a − M− (va ) rises faster than the honor from participation

M+ (va ) − v̄a fades. When ∆0 < −1, or Ψ0 < 0, the resulting net increase in reputational pressure is strong

enough that the marginal agents in [va∗ − dva , va∗ ] , who initially preferred to abstain, now feel compelled to

contribute. This further increases participation and confines abstention to an even worse pool, etc., leading

to corner solutions as the only stable equilibria, as in Figure 3b. When ∆0 ∈ (−1, 0), complementarity is

weak enough that the marginal agents still prefer to stay out, hence stability obtains. This is a fortiori the

case when there is susbtitutability, ∆0 > 0.

     Equipped with this general intuition, we now investigate the main factors that make strategic comple-

mentarity —and thus the existence of multiple social norms— more or less likely.


     Distribution of social preferences. One expects that stigma considerations will be dominant when the

population includes only a few “bad apples” with very low intrinsic values, which most agents will be eager

to diﬀerentiate themselves from. Formally, an increasing density g(va ) makes it more likely that M+ − M−



                                                                  21
 is declining: a rise in va hardly increases E (va |ṽa ≥ va ) but substantially increases E (va |ṽa ≤ va ) , since

 the weight reallocated at the margin is small relative to that in the upper tail, but large relative to that in

 the lower tail. Conversely, honor will dominate when there are only a few heroic or saintly types, whom the

 mass of more ordinary individuals would like to be identified with.28


 Proposition 6 (1) (Jewitt (2004)) If the distribution of va has a density that is (a) decreasing, (b) in-

 creasing, (c) unimodal, then (M+ − M− ) (va ) is respectively (a) increasing, (b) decreasing, (c) quasi convex.

 (2) If the distribution of va has a log-concave density (more generally, a log-concave distribution function),

 then for all µa ∈ [0, 1] the supply function is everywhere upward-sloping.


     The first set of results provide suﬃcient conditions for the monotonicity of M+ − M− , which defines

 complementarity or substitutability. What ultimately matters for uniqueness or multiplicity and the slope

 of the supply curve, on the other hand, is the behavior of Ψ(va ) = va + µa (M+ − M− ) (va ) , for which

 the strength of reputational concerns, µa , is also relevant. The second result thus shows that for µa ∈ [0, 1]

 uniqueness obtains as long as g does not increase too fast —a much weaker condition than (1b). No simple

 analogue is available for the case of multiplicity, but it is clear that it corresponds to situations where

 complementarity obtains and µa is high enough (as in the example given earlier).


     Excuses, forced participation, and observability. We have so far assumed that observers (other agents,

 future “self”) know for sure that the individual had an opportunity to contribute and whether or not he did.

 This is often not the case.

     Suppose that with probability δ ∈ [0, 1], an individual faces (unverifiable) circumstances that preclude

 participation: not being informed, having to deal with some emergency, etc. For any potential cutoﬀ va ,

 the honor conveyed by participation is unchanged, MP (va ) = M+ (va ), while the stigma conveyed by

 non-participation is lessened, taking the form of a weighted average

                                                    δv̄a + (1 − δ) G (va ) M− (va )
 (27)                             MN P (va ; δ) =                                   .
                                                          δ + (1 − δ) G (va )

 The same expressions are easily seen to apply if abstention never gives rise to a signal that the individual

28
    Corneo (1997) provides related insights (but no general result) based on whether the value of reputation is
 a concave (“conformist”) or a convex (“elitist”) function of someone’s perceived rank (which, by definition, is
 uniformly distributed) in the distribution of altruism.



                                                          22
 contributed, but a contribution may go unnoticed (fail to generate such a signal) with probability δ.

     Conversely, suppose that with probability δ 0 ∈ [0, 1] , an individual is forced to contribute, or draws

 a temporarily low cost c The stigma from abstention is now unchanged, MN P (va ) = M− (va ) , but the

 distinction conveyed by participation is dulled, and given by
                                                     ¡     ¢
                                ¡P    0
                                        ¢ δ 0 v̄a + 1 − δ 0 [1 − G (va )] M+ (va )
 (28)                         M va ; δ =                ¡       ¢                  .
                                                   δ 0 + 1 − δ 0 [1 − G (va )]

 The same expressions apply if participation always gives rise to a signal suggesting that the individual

 contributed, but non-participation can go undetected (also lead to such a signal) with probability δ 0 .


 Proposition 7 1) An increase in the probability of unobserved forced participation facilitates the emer-

 gence of strategic complementarities and multiple social norms, whereas an increase in the probability of

 (unobserved) involuntary non-participation inhibits it.

 2) The same results hold for, respectively, an increase in the probability that abstention may escape detection

 and for an increase in the probability that a good deed goes unnoticed.


     The results of this section have empirical and policy implications. First, for behaviors such as crime,

 from which most people are deterred by either a strong intrinsic distaste (the density of va is increasing)

 or strong extrinsic constraints (a high δ 0 ), stigma-avoidance will be the dominant reputational concern (by

 contrast, having no criminal record is not particularly glorious) and actions will be strategic complements,

 potentially leading to substantial variations over time and space. Conversely, opportunities to engage in

 heroic behaviors (risking one’s life for someone else, donating an organ or significant wealth) are relatively

 rare (high δ) and few people are intrinsically motivated to such great feats of abnegation. The signaling

 motive will therefore be dominated here by the pursuit of distinction, making noble acts strategic substitutes

 and their prevalence much less variable than that of (comparably rare, on average) criminal acts.29 Second,

 even absent multiplicity, the two types of behaviors will respond quite diﬀerently to public intervention. For

 crime-like behaviors the eﬀect of rewards and punishments (y) is amplified by the response of social pressure

 (crowding in), whereas for self-sacrifices it moves in the opposite direction (partial crowding out). We shall

29
     A more general intuition can also be oﬀered. For all distributions that have a standard “bell shape”,
 or a full support on R, a suﬃciently high cost of c of behaving prosocially (heroic deeds) will place the
 cutoﬀ va∗ in the upper tail, where ∆ is decreasing (by Part 1.c of Proposition 6), whereas a suﬃciently high cost
 of behaving antisocially (crime, persistent non-employment) will place it in the lower tail, where ∆ increases.



                                                        23
 come back to this point when analyzing the socially optimal level of incentives.



 IV. Disclosure
      Since the presence of material rewards spoils the reputational value of good deeds, it is natural to examine

 what will occur when sponsors can keep them confidential, or when agents have the opportunity to turn

 them down. Similarly, given that explicit publicity also leads to a discounting of intrinsic motivation, we

 will examine the extent to which agents may want to be “modest” about their generosity.


 A.      Should the fee remain confidential?
 We consider here a sponsor (NGO, government agency, religious organization, etc.) that derives from each

 agent’s participation a benefit with equivalent monetary value B, relative to its opportunity cost of funds

 This could reflect the premium placed on a public good by a particularly motivated constituency (friends of

 the arts, environmentalists) or some private benefits tied to the delivery of the public good (rents derived by

 a government agency, bundling of a religious message together with schooling or poverty relief); B could also

 represent, in reduced form, the sponsor’s own signaling or career concerns. We focus here on monopolistic or

 specialized sponsors, deferring to the next section the analysis of competition. A sponsor’s expected payoﬀ

 from setting a reward rate y is thus equal or proportional to π(y) ≡ nā(y) (B − y) .30

      We assume that the sponsor can commit to either of two incentive policies: confidentiality (C), under

 which only the agent knows the level of y oﬀered (but participation is publicly observable), or public disclosure

 (D). We maintain the same specification of preferences as above (unknown va ’s and vy ≡ 1) and assume

 Ψ0 > 0 to avoid a multiplicity of participation equilibria. We also assume that the sponsor’s objective

 function is quasiconcave in y under both policies.
                                                                             ¡         ¢
      Confidentiality. The target audience rationally expects a fee and cutoﬀ y C , vaC satisfying vaC − c + y C +
  ¡ ¢
 ∆ vaC ≡ 0. If the sponsor secretly deviates and oﬀers y, it thus faces the ex-post supply curve

                                                        ¡         ¡ ¢¢
 (29)                                    āC (y) = 1 − G c − y − ∆ vaC ,



30
     In the next section we consider sponsors who also internalize (part or all of) social welfare, maximizing the
 a weighted sum αŪ + π, where Ū is agents’ average utility and α ∈ [0, 1]. One can show that Proposition 8
 extends to this case as well, for all α < 1. For α = 1 the sponsor behaves like a social planner and
 is indiﬀerent between confidentiality and disclosure.



                                                         24
and chooses y to maximize πC (y) ≡ āC (y)(B − y). The equilibrium fee y C is then defined by π 0C (y C ) = 0.

     Public disclosure. The diﬀerence is that the fee is now credibly announced and therefore aﬀects the

reputational value of contributions. For any choice of y, the sponsor thus faces the ex-ante supply curve


(30)                                   āD (y) = 1 − G (c − y − ∆ (va∗ (y)))


and chooses y to maximize πD (y) ≡ āD (y)(B − y). The equilibrium fee y D is then defined by π 0D (y D ) = 0.


Proposition 8 (1) It is optimal for the sponsor to publicly disclose and commit to the fee.

(2) With strategic complements (∆0 < 0) , the sponsor oﬀers a higher fee and elicits a higher participation

under disclosure than under public confidentiality. The reverse holds for strategic substitutes (∆0 > 0) .

(3) The optimal reward under disclosure y D is immune to secret renegotiation between agents and sponsor

when ∆0 < 0. By contrast, when ∆0 > 0, the equilibrium reward when secret renegotiation is feasible is y C .


     Under public disclosure (but not confidentiality), strategic complementarity creates a “bandwagon eﬀect”

that raises the slope of the supply curve and therefore makes announcing higher fees profitable. Ex-post,

the sponsor would like to lower the fee to y C but participants would not agree, so the announced price is

renegociation-proof. Strategic substitutability has the converse eﬀect on supply, leading to y D < y C . In

this case, the sponsor and participants would agree to secretly increase the reward ex-post; anticipating this

collusive renegotiation, the audience properly expects that the actual fee will be y C and not y D .


B.      Turning down rewards
An agent may be eager to participate but concerned that his image will be tainted by an inference that

money played a role in the decision. So even when the sponsor oﬀers y, the agent could turn down part or

all of the reward (assuming y > 0), or even complement his participation (such as giving blood) with a net

monetary contribution. Is this possibility damaging to our results?

     Note first that the issue does not arise if give-backs are not observable by the audience to whom agents

are trying to signal, or if the sponsor can reward them secretly. On the other hand, taking secret rewards

does not help with self-image and may even damage it.

     Suppose now that the realized transfer from the sponsor to the agent is eﬀectively observed. When the

uncertainty is about va , the net reputational gain from participating for y 0 ≤ y, relative to not participating,



                                                       25
 is r(y 0 ) = µa (E (va |1, y 0 ) − E (va |0, y 0 )) . The agent therefore cannot signal his type by turning down any

 part of the reward, or even giving money to the sponsor: the loss of monetary income, vy (y − y 0 ), and the

 net reputational benefit, r(y 0 ) − r(y), are both type-independent.



 Proposition 9 Let vy ≡ 1, while va is unknown. The equilibria studied in Sections III and IV.A are still

 equilibria of the enlarged game in which the individual can turn down part or all of the reward. For the same

 reason, oﬀering menus of rewards cannot benefit the sponsor.31


     By contrast, when the uncertainty is (also) about vy , which is needed to obtain net crowding-out, turning

 down the reward or part of it could be used to signal the absence of greed. Yet even in this case it may

 be that all agents either just accept y or do not participate, but never turn down rewards. The intuition

 is that doing so could lead the audience to question an agent’s motivation along another dimension: is he

 genuinely disinterested, or merely concerned about his social (or self) image? It is thus linked to the general

 idea that good deeds that are “too obvious” may backfire, which was first encountered when studying public

 prominence in Section II.B and will recur again when examining private disclosure.

     To capture this idea, we allow again uncertainty about v = (va , vy ) to combine with uncertainty about

 agents’ degree of image-consciousness µ = (µa , µy ) but focus here on a very simple case, to avoid what

 would otherwise be a rather technical analysis. Suppose that (µa , µy ) = x̃(γ a , γ y ), where (γ a , γ y ) is fixed

 and thus known to the audience, whereas x̃ is independently distributed from (va , vy ) and takes one of two

 extreme values: agents are either image indiﬀerent (x̃ = 0) or image driven (x̃ = +∞). Image-indiﬀerent

 individuals participate if and only if va − c + vy y ≥ 0; when they do, they clearly never turn down the reward

 (or part of it), as this would be a strictly dominated strategy. We assume that if the population consisted

 only of image-indiﬀerent individuals, participation would yield a better reputation than non-participation

 (this always holds for y below some threshold). Turning now to image-driven individuals, they all pool on

 the actions that yield the highest reputation, choosing an a ∈ {0, 1} and a reward y 0 ≤ y that maximize

 R(a, y 0 ) = µa E (va |a, y 0 ) − µy E (vy |a, y 0 ) . If, in equilibrium, a positive fraction of them chose to participate

 and receive y 0 < y, they would be identified as image-driven types, and so their reputation would correspond


31
   It can also be verified that these equilibria satisfy the Never-a-Weak-Best-Response criterion of In-Koo
 Cho and David M. Kreps (1987).



                                                             26
 to the prior mean (v̄a , v̄y ).32 But they would then be strictly better oﬀ pooling with those image-indiﬀerent

 agents who participate at price y. The unique equilibrium thus consists in participation, at the oﬀered price

 y, by all image-driven individuals and by those image-indiﬀerent individuals for whom va − c + vy y ≥ 0.


 Proposition 10 Agents may never turn down the reward, or part of it, even when this would be publicly

 observed and there is uncertainty about vy .


      It is worth pointing out that in deriving this result, we did not assume any social opprobrium on image-

 consciousness; presumably, this would only reinforce agents’ reluctance to turn down rewards.33


 C.      Conspicuous versus anonymous generosity
 People often react with disapproval when someone tries to buy social prestige by revealing how generous,

 disinterested, well-thinking, etc., they are. Conversely, the most admired contributions and sacrifices are

 anonymous ones. To analyze this phenomenon, let us assume that if an agent participates others will

 normally learn of it only with probability x < 1. He can, however, make sure that they find out by verifiably

 disclosing his action, by incurring a time or resources cost d. Agents diﬀer again both in their valuation

 va for the public good (whereas vy ≡ 1, for simplicity) and in their concern for image γ a , with the two

 characteristics being independent.

      In the symmetric information case where each agent’s γ a is observable, one can show that there exist

 thresholds 0 < γ ∗a < γ ∗∗                              ∗                                    ∗∗
                         a such that agents with γ a < γ a never disclose, those with γ a > γ a always do and

 for γ a ∈ [γ ∗a , γ ∗∗
                     a ] there are multiple norms: both disclosure and non-disclosure are equilibrium behaviors,

 because the absence of information about an agent’s contribution carries a lower stigma if comparable others

 do not disclose than if they do.34

      We assume here instead that γ a , like va , is unobservable and show that this can reduce disclosure, which

 now itself carries a stigma, even though there is no social opprobrium on image-consciousness per se. The

32
     If they pooled at multiple values y 0 , all these would need to deliver the same average reputation, which
 would therefore again correspond to the prior mean.
33
     The result also implies that oﬀering menus of rewards along which agents with diﬀerent vy ’s could
 sort themselves, which is optimal when µ is known (see Bénabou and Tirole (2004b) for an analysis),
 may still not benefit sponsors when people also diﬀer in their in image-consciousness.
34
     Thus, if most people belong to some church, synagogue or mosque, anyone who does not risks being seen
 as a selfish materialist, since “doing good” through other channels is less easily demonstrable. The symmetric-
 information case is omitted here for brevity but can be found in Bénabou and Tirole (2004b).



                                                        27
idea is that since the people most prone to advertise their good deeds are those with a high concern for

image, disclosure of a prosocial act makes it more likely that it was motivated by image-seeking (a high γ a )

rather than genuine altruism (a high va ). Formally, suppose that γ a takes values γ H
                                                                                     a for a fraction θ of agents

and γ L     H
      a ≤ γ a for the remaining 1 − θ, such that, under symmetric information, it is an equilibrium for type

γH                        L
 a to disclose and type γ a not to do so. We show the following results.




Proposition 11 Under asymmetric information about the extent of image-consciousness γ a :

(1) In a separating equilibrium where the γ H                            L
                                            a types disclose while the γ a ones do not, disclosure of one’s

contribution to the public good carries a stigma, in that the inferences about the individual’s prosocial orien-

tation are not as favorable as when participation is revealed through other channels: vaH < vaL .

(2) Asymmetric information about the extent of image-consciousness can reduce disclosure: for some range

of values of d, the γ H
                      a type no longer discloses when γ a is unobservable.

3) Suppose that γ L                L
                  a = 0 (so type γ a never discloses) and that disclosure (by the agent or the sponsor) is rela-

tively cheap. Then, starting from either a separating equilibrium as in (1), or one with pooling at no-disclosure

as in (2), the sponsor gains from a policy under which contributions are systematically disclosed.


   A commitment to automatic disclosure acts as a remedy to asymmetric information about γ a , as it relieves

agents from the suspicion of image-seeking attached to discretionary disclosure. This leaves only the direct

eﬀect of an increased visibility of actions, which raises the reputational incentive to participate and thereby

increases the sponsors’ payoﬀ at any given level of y.



V. Welfare and Competition
   We now examine the way in which public or private sponsors will set incentives and the welfare properties

of the resulting equilibrium. For these purposes, we need to make explicit again the public-good aspects of

agents’ contributions. Recall from Section I.A that an individual’s intrinsic motivation can, in general, have

two components: va = ua + wa /nκ , where ua is a pure “joy of giving” whereas wa is the marginal utility of

a public good nā/nκ generated by total contributions nā. To simplify the analysis, we take here ua and wa

to be independently distributed (with again vy ≡ 1) and denote the mean of wa as w̄a .

   Given an incentive rate y, an equilibrium (unique or not) is determined by a cutoﬀ va∗ . Agents’ (expected)



                                                       28
 average welfare is thus


 (31)                    Ū (va∗ ; y) ≡ E [wa (nā/nκ )] + E [a (ua − c + y) + µa va ]
                                        Z va+
                                      =       [(n − 1) (w̄a /nκ ) + va − c + y] g (va ) dva + µa v a .
                                             ∗
                                            va


 This expression embodies three eﬀects. First, each agent who contributes enjoys a direct utility va − c + y

 and additionally generates for the n − 1 others a positive spillover, equal to w̄a /nκ on average. Second, the

 pursuit of esteem is a zero-sum game: the average reputation in society remains fixed at µa v a , reflecting the

 martingale property of beliefs.35 Third, because an agent’s participation decision is based on the private

 reputational return rather the social one (which is zero), it inflicts an externality onto others. Thus, starting

 from equilibrium, the welfare impact of a marginal increase in participation is

                ∂ Ū (va∗ ; y)
 (32)       −                  = [(n − 1) (w̄a /nκ ) + va∗ − c + y] g (va ) = [(n − 1) (w̄a /nκ ) − ∆(va∗ )] g (va ) .
                    ∂va∗

 The first term is the standard public-goods externality, which we shall denote as ē ≡ (n − 1) (w̄a /nκ ).

 The second term reflects the fact that each marginal participant brings down the “quality” of the pool

 of contributors as well as that of non-contributors: by the martingale property, the reputational losses of

 inframarginal agents on both sides must add up to the gains of the marginal participant, ∆(va∗ ). Equivalently,

 we can think of (32) as the diﬀerence between a free-riding eﬀect and a reputation-stealing eﬀect.


 A.     Sponsors’ choice of incentives and the social optimum
 Let B again denote the private monetary value of the benefit that participation by an agent confers to a

 sponsor. In addition, the sponsor could also internalize part or all of agents’ welfare. The general form of a

 monopolistic sponsor’s payoﬀ is thus


 (33)                                            W̄ (y) ≡ αŪ (va∗ (y); y) + π(y),


 where π(y) = nā(y) (B − y) and α ∈ [0, 1]. For a social planner whose preferences mirror the ex-ante

 utility of the n potential contributors and who has access to lump-sum taxes, α = 1 and B = 0. More

35
     That is, E [E [va |a, y]] = v̄a . It thus does not matter whether or not we include agents’ utilities from
 reputation (e.g., vanity) in the definition of social welfare. Note that the zero-sum property also relies
 on the linearity of the reputational payoﬀ and the independence of µa from va . When these assumptions do
 not hold, the distribution of reputation across agents will have allocative and eﬃciency consequences —
 for instance, through subsequent matching patterns.



                                                                29
 generally, B ≥ 0 could reflect a diﬀerent discounting of the welfare of future generations (e.g., with pollution

 or biodiversity) and α ≤ 1 the presence of a shadow cost of public funds: clearly, replacing B − y by

 B − (1 + λ)y in π(y) is equivalent to dividing both B and α in (33) by 1 + λ. For other actors such as NGO’s

 or specialized government agencies, B reflects the purely private benefits (material or reputational) that the

 sponsor derives from contributions transiting through it and α the weight it places on social welfare, both

 normalized by the sponsors’ own opportunity cost of funds.36

     Since rewards that lead to net crowding out, ā0 (y) < 0, are never optimal, we assume that Ψ0 > 0,

 resulting in a unique equilibrium va∗ (y) and supply curve nā(y) = n [1 − G(va∗ (y))] , with elasticity ε(y) ≡

 yā0 (y)/ā(y) > 0. We also assume that W̄ is strictly quasiconcave in all cases (it always is for α = 1). Using
                                        0
 (32) and noting that ā0 (y) = − (va∗ ) (y) · g(va∗ (y)), we have


 (34)                        W̄ 0 (y) = [α (ē − ∆(va∗ (y))) + B − y] · ā0 (y) − (1 − α)ā(y).


 For (symmetric) competitive sponsors, the term π(y) in (33) is replaced by π i (y) ≡ nāi (y) (B − yi ) , where

 āi (y) is the share of total supply specifically channeled to sponsor i; in equilibrium, all rewards are driven

 to B.37 We shall denote the values of α, B, W̄ and y for the social planner, monopolistic and competitive

 sponsors by the superscripts s, m and c respectively, with αs > max {αm , αc } .


 Proposition 12 1) The socially optimal incentive rate,

                                                   αs [ē − ∆(va∗ (y s ))] + B s
 (35)                                       ys =                                 ,
                                                      1 + (1 − αs )/ε(y s )

 is strictly less than the standard Pigouvian subsidy y P ≡ ē + B s that leads agents to internalize the full

 public-good value of their contribution, even when taxation is non-distortionary (αs = 1).

 2) A monopoly sponsor with αm < αs may oﬀer contributors a reward y m that is too generous (or, require of

 them too low a monetary donation) from the point of view of social welfare, resulting in excess participation.

 This is true even when the benefits it derives from agents’ participation coincide exactly with the gap between


36
    It is worth recalling here that the model also applies to charitable monetary donations; see footnote 9.
37
    While this is the standard result, it depends here crucially on the fact that vy = 1 is known. Otherwise,
 there is a reputational payoﬀ to participating for a lower fee and sponsor competition will then lead to
 rewards being bid down rather than up, leaving firms with positive profits. This “reversal” of Bertrand
 competition is analyzed in Bénabou and Tirole (2004b) and shares important similarities with Bagwell
 and Bernheim’s (1996) analysis of the pricing of conspicuous-consumption goods.



                                                             30
their social and private contributions to the public good (B m + αm ē = B s + αs ē).

3) Competition between sponsors increases rewards (or, reduces required monetary contributions) and may

thus reduce social welfare, compared to a monopoly (with the same αc = αm and B c = B m ).


   The first result shows, most transparently when αs = 1, that the optimal incentive scheme should include

a tax that corrects for the reputation-seeking motive to contribute, which in itself is socially wasteful. This

reputational rent is endogenous to the reward, however. Thus with αs = 1, when individual contributions

are complements (resp., substitutes) y s responds less (resp., more) than y P to changes in B s (which leave the

function ∆ unchanged). Similarly, the optimal penalty for antisocial activities such as littering, polluting,

etc., should “leave space” for the eﬀect of opprobrium, which itself depends on the fine. As to a higher

shadow cost of public funds (a proportional reduction in αs and B s ), it naturally tends to reduce y s ; when

contributions are substitutes, some of this reduced public intervention is made up by increased social pressure,

as ∆ rises in response to the decline in participation. With complements, however, the reputational incentive

to contribute is also weakened. These results provide both some support and an important qualification to

arguments (e.g. Brennan and Pettit (2004)) calling for a shift in public policy from the use of fines and other

costly sentences to a greater reliance on public praise and shame. Esteem-based incentives can adequately

replace material rewards and punishments in spheres where gaining distinction is the dominant reputational

concern (self-sacrifice, heroism, great inventions), but not in those where avoiding stigma is most important

(crime, welfare dependency). This point, in turn, suggests that scarce public funds should be allocated much

more to fostering prosocial behaviors (and discouraging antisocial ones) of the latter kind than of the former.

   The intuition for the second result in Proposition 12 is that a monopolist setting y m does not not

internalize the reputational losses of inframarginal agents to the same extent as a planner would. This gives

it an incentive to attract too many “customers”, which works against the standard monopolistic tendency
                                                                                     ¡    ¢0
to serve too few. The tension between these two forces can be seen from the fact that W̄ s (y m ) < 0 if


(36)                  (αs − αm ) [y m /ε(y m ) − ∆(va∗ (y m ))] + B s + αs ē − B m − αm ē < 0.


A low supply elasticity ε causes the monopolist to oﬀer too low a price, as usual. When reputational

concerns are important enough, however (a high µa and therefore a high ∆), the informational externality

can dominate, making the monopolist too “generous” or not demanding enough in the standards it sets for



                                                         31
monetary donations. The last two terms in (36), finally, represent the the total benefits (private benefit plus

internalized contribution to social welfare) derived by each sponsor from a marginal agent’s participation,

each normalized by the corresponding shadow cost of funds. The eﬀect of their diﬀerence on the sign of

y m − y s is straightforward, and Part (2) of the proposition normalizes it to zero as a benchmark.

     Sponsor competition, finally, further exacerbates the above ineﬃciency, because each firm now has a much

higher incentive to raise its oﬀer than a monopolist (it takes the whole market), but still inflicts the same

reputational cost on all inframarginal non-contributors. This suggests, for instance, that universities may

sell the naming rights to professorial chairs and buildings too cheaply, relative to the social optimum.

     Quality of participation.   Sponsors often care about “high-quality” participation, not just total en-

rollment. This arises when participation is an open-ended contract, subject to adverse selection or moral

hazard. Thus, one argument for relatively low pay for the military is to select true patriots rather than

people whose main loyalty is to money (e.g., mercenaries who may find out one day that the enemy pays

better). Similarly, it is often argued that not paying for blood reduces the fraction of donors with hepatitis

and other diseases. These ideas can be captured by introducing a hidden action (beyond a ∈ A, which is ob-

served) whose marginal cost to the individual decreases with va , leading to a benefit for the sponsor B (va ) ,

with B 0 > 0. The theory is then the same, with for example a private sponsor (α = 0) now maximizing

π(y) ≡ Ev,µ [(B (va ) − y) a(v, µ; y)] .


B.      Holier-than-thou competition
We saw that competition may reduce welfare by inducing excessive participation in prosocial activities that

generate only moderate public-good benefits but have a high visibility. We will now see that it can reduce

welfare (relative to a monopolist) even without any change in participation, by leading sponsors to screen

contributors in ineﬃcient ways. This result formalizes in particular the idea of religions and sects competing

on orthodoxy, asceticism and other costly requirements for membership (e.g., Eli Berman (2000)). Another

example of rapidly growing importance is that of charities sponsoring events where agents, instead of simply

donating or raising money (or on top of it), engage time-intensive, strenuous activities such as a day-long

walk, marathon or other test of endurance.

     To capture this phenomenon most simply, let va take values vaH with probability ρ or vaL < vaH with




                                                      32
probability 1−ρ, while maintaining vy ≡ 1. Assume, furthermore, that the non-monetary cost of contributing

is c (possibly zero) unless the sponsor demands a “sacrifice”, which it is able to verify and publicly certify.

The cost then becomes cH for the high type and cL for the low type, where


(37)                                              c < cH < cL .


A sacrifice is a pure deadweight loss, whose only benefit is to help screen agents’ motivation. The assumption

that cL > cH reflects the idea that such a sacrifice is less costly to a more motivated agent. For simplicity, we

will assume that cL is so large that the low type is never willing to sacrifice and will focus on deterministic

contracts oﬀered by sponsors who seeking to maximize their private payoﬀ π(y); that is, we set α = 0 (the

results would extend to any α < 1).

Proposition 13 In the two-type case described above, a monopoly sponsor who wants both types to con-

tribute does not screen contributors ineﬃciently. By contrast, competing sponsors may require high-valuation

individuals to make costly sacrifices that represent pure deadweight losses, thereby reducing social welfare.


   The intuition for this result is that non-price screening imposes a negative externality on low-type agents,

the cost of which a monopolist must fully bear but which competitive sponsors do not internalize. Indeed,

screening through costly sacrifices has two eﬀects: a) it inflicts a deadweight loss cH − c on the high type,

which the sponsor must somehow pay for; b) it boosts the high type’s reputation and lowers that of the low

type. When the high-type’s reputational gain exceeds the cost of sacrifice, the sponsor through which he

contributes can appropriate the surplus, in the form of a lower reward. If this sponsor is a monopolist who

finds it profitable to serve the whole market (which is always the case when ρ is low enough), he must also

compensate the low type for his reputational loss. By a now familiar argument, these losses must exactly

oﬀset the high type’s reputation gains, so the net eﬀect of (b) on agents’ average utility, as well as on the

monopolist’s payoﬀ, is nil. This leaves only the net cost corresponding to (a), implying that a sponsor serving

the whole market will never require sacrifices.

   Things are quite diﬀerent under free entry. First, since vy is known, price competition again drives

all sponsors to oﬀer B. Second, by requiring a sacrifice, entrants can now attract the high types away

from competitors who impose no such requirement, leaving low-types (or their sponsors) with the resulting

reputational loss. This “cream-skimming” leads inevitably to an equilibrium where a proportion ρ of the



                                                       33
 contracts oﬀered by active sponsors require an ineﬃcient sacrifice and attract only high-types, while the

 remaining 1 − ρ require only the normal contribution c and attract the low types.38

     Turning finally to welfare, one can show that both types of agents are better oﬀ under competition than

 under monopoly (see the appendix). The sponsors or their underlying beneficiaries, however, must necessarily

 lose more than all contributors gain: total participation remains unchanged (both types still contribute), the

 same is true of average reputation (by the martingale property), and rewards are pure transfers. There is

 now, however, a deadweight loss of ρ(cH − c), corresponding to the wasteful sacrifices made by the high-types

 to separate. Therefore, competition unambiguously reduces welfare.



 VI. Conclusion
     To gain a better understanding of prosocial behavior we sought, paraphrasing Adam Smith, to “thoroughly

 enter into all the passions and motives which influence it”. People’s actions indeed reflect a variable mix of

 altruistic motivation, material self-interest and social or self image concerns. Moreover, this mix varies across

 individuals and situations, presenting observers seeking to infer a person’s true values from his behavior (or

 an individual judging himself in retrospect) with a signal-extraction problem. Crucially, altering any of the

 three components of motivation, for instance through the use of extrinsic incentives or a greater publicity

 given to actions, changes the meaning attached to prosocial (or antisocial) behavior and hence feeds back

 onto the reputational incentive to engage in it.

     This simple mechanism lead to many new insights concerning individuals’ contributions to public goods as

 well as the strategic decisions of public or private sponsors seeking to increase or capture these contributions.

 This line of research could be extended in several interesting directions. A first one concerns organizations,

 where high-powered incentives or performance pay could potentially conflict with agents’ signaling motives

 that arise from teamwork or career concerns. A second relates to the role and objectives of sponsors, who in

 practice often have their own signaling concerns. A third one, linked to the self-image interpretation of the

 model, is to the topic of identity and the many instances where people refuse transactions that seem to be

 in their best economic interest, but which they judge to be insulting to their dignity.




38
     As long as ρ is not too large, this is the only equilibrium that is robust to the Cho-Kreps (1987) criterion.



                                                        34
                                                    Appendix


Proof of Proposition 1:         Since y is simply a fixed parameter, in what follows we will temporarily omit

from the notation the dependence of all functions on this argument. Diﬀerentiating (9)-(10) with respect to

a yields

                             dE (va |a)                     dE (vy |a)
(A.1)                                   = ρ [k − r̄(a)] and            = χ [k − r̄(a)] .
                                da                             da

Therefore, r̄(a) is a solution to the linear diﬀerential equation r̄(a) = µ (k − r̄0 (a)) , where µ ≡ µ̄a ρ− µ̄y χ ≷ 0.
                                 ¡          ¢
The generic solution is r̄(a) = k µ + ζe−a/µ , where ζ is a constant of integration. Equation(4) yields

a∗ (v) = (va + y · vy ) /k + µ + κe−a/µ and substituting into (9)-(10), we obtain:
                                                  ³                                      ´
(A.2)                   E (va |a∗ (v)) = v̄a + ρ · va − v̄a − y · (vy − v̄y ) − κe−a/µ k
                                                  ³                                      ´
(A.3)                   E (vy |a∗ (v)) = v̄y + χ · va − v̄a − y · (vy − v̄y ) − κe−a/µ k


Applying the law of iterated expectations over v shows that κ = 0, concluding the proof. ¥


Proof of Propositions 2 and 3: From (11), we have
                                                               ¡               ¢
                                  0
                                            2yσ 2a σ 2y + σ ay σ 2a + y 2 σ 2y
(A.4)                            ρ (y) = − ¡                            ¢2 ,
                                               σ 2a + 2yσay + y 2 σ 2y
                                             ¡               ¢         ¡          ¢
                                  0
                                         σ 2y σ 2a − y 2 σ 2y − 2σay yσ 2y + σ ay
(A.5)                            χ (y) =          ¡                           ¢2    .
                                                    σ 2a + 2yσ ay + y 2 σ 2y

Substituting into (14) immediately yields Part (1) of Proposition 3 in the case y = 0, and Part (1) of

Proposition 2 when σ ay = 0. This last inequality can be rewritten as

                                        ¡          ¢2
(A.6)                    Q(y) = (v̄y /k) 1 + y 2 θ2 + µ̄y θ4 y 2 < 2µ̄a θ2 y + µ̄y θ2 ≡ L(y).


The left hand side is a second order polynomial in y 2 , hence convex and symmetric over all of R, with value

Q(0) = v̄y /k > 0 at the origin. The right-hand side is an increasing linear function with L(0) = µ̄y θ2 .

Consequently, if L(0) ≥ Q(0), then for any µ̄a > 0, L(y) intersects Q(y) once on at some y1 < 0 and once

at some y2 > 0. If L(0) < Q(0), on the other hand, then there exists a unique µ∗a > 0 for which L(y) has

a (single) tangency point y ∗ > 0 with Q(y). For all µ̄a < µ∗a , Q(y )˙ > L(y) on all of R∗ , so ā0 (y) > 0

everywhere. For all µ̄a > µ∗a , however, L(y) intersects Q(y) twice, at points 0 < y1 < y2 . These properties,

together with the linearity of L in µ̄a y and the convexity of Q(y), conclude the proof of Proposition 2.



                                                          35
   Part (2) of Proposition 3 follow from the fact that, given Part (1), as θ = σ y /σ a → +∞ the dominant
                                                       h                       i
term in ā0 (0) is asymptotically equivalent to −µ̄y θ2 1 − 2 (σ ay /σ a σ y )2 , which tends to −∞ as long as the
                                                √
correlation between va and vy is less than 1/ 2 in absolute value. ¥

Proof of Proposition 4: The only diﬀerence with Proposition 1 is the presence of the term Ω(y)2 = k 2

V ar[r(y; µ)] in the denominator of ρ and χ (see (19)), leading to the fixed-point equation defining Ω(y) :
                       "   µ                                ¶          Ã                                 !#
           2     2                    σ2a + yσ ay                                  yσ 2y + σ ay
(A.7)    Ω = k V ar µa                                          − µy                                          ≡ Z(Ω2 ).
                               σa + 2yσ ay + y 2 σ2y + Ω2
                                2                                          σ2a + 2yσ ay + y 2 σ2y + Ω2

Since Z(Ω2 ) is always positive but tends to zero as Ω2 becomes large, there is always at least one solution.

When ω ay = 0, moreover, Z(Ω2 ) is the sum of two squared terms that are decreasing in Ω2 , so the solution

is unique. When ω ay 6= 0, one cannot rule out multiple equilibria; note, however, that those that are stable

(in a standard, tâtonnement sense) are those where Z cuts the diagonal from above. Therefore, in any stable

equilibrium Ω is increasing in k, which in turn implies that ρ(y) and χ(y) are decreasing in k, as long as σ ay
                                                 ¡       ¢
is not too negative. Finally, multiplying all the µa , µy ’s by a common “publicity factor” x has the same

eﬀect on (A.7) as multiplying k 2 by x, which concludes the proof. ¥


Proof of Proposition 6: Part (1) is due to Jewitt (2004). For Part (2), we can write:

                      £                   ¤
               va + µa M+ (va ) − M− (va ) = va − M− (va ) + µa M+ (va ) + (1 − µa )M− (va ) ,

                                                                                                     ³R                ´
                                                                                                        va
then observe that both M+ and M− are increasing functions, and so is va −M− (va ) =                      −∞
                                                                                                               G (v) dv /G(va )

if the integral of G is log-concave. Since log-concavity is preserved by integration over convex sets, it suﬃces

that G itself be log-concave. In turn, a suﬃcient condition for this is that g be log-concave. ¥

                                            ¡         ¢
Proof of Proposition 7: To show (1), rewrite MP − MN P (va ; δ) = [M+ (va ) − v̄a ] /[1 − (1 − δ) (1 −

G (va )] and observe that if (MP − MN P )0 (va ; δ) > 0, this expression is also positive for all δ 0 > δ, since
                                                                       ¡ 0   ¢
                            1                         1                 δ − δ (1 − G (va ))
                                             =                       +
                     (MP − MNP ) (va ; δ 0 )   (MP − MN P ) (va ; δ)       M+ (va ) − v̄a
                                                                                             ¡         ¢
and the last term is clearly decreasing in va . Similarly, to show (2) note that in this case MP − MN P (va ; δ) =
                                                    ¡        ¢0
[v̄a − M− (va ) /] [1 − (1 − δ) G (va )] and that if MP − MNP (va ; δ) < 0, it is also negative for all δ 0 > δ.¥




                                                            36
Proof of Proposition 8: (1) A sponsor with the ability to credibly commit to the terms of the contract

he oﬀers can always replicate the equilibrium choice of one without commitment. Since we show below that

he chooses a diﬀerent fee (as long as ∆0 6= 0 ), he must in fact do strictly better.

   (2) and (3). With disclosure, if the sponsor still chooses y = y C the reservation value and level of supply
                                                                                      ¡ ¢
that result remain the same as in the confidentiality equilibrium: since vaC −c+y C +∆ vaC ≡ 0 by definition,

va∗ (y C ) = vaC and therefore āD (y C ) = āC (y C ). The elasticity (or slope) of supply at y C is diﬀerent, however:

                                            ¡           ¡ ¢¢
(A.8)                        ā0C (y C ) = g c − y C − ∆ vaC , whereas
                               0           ¡           ¡ ¢¢
(A.9)                        āD (y C ) = g c − y C − ∆ vaC [1 + ∆0 (va∗ (y)) va∗0 (y]
                                           ¡           ¡ ¢¢                   −1
                                        = g c − y C − ∆ vaC [1 + ∆0 (va∗ (y))] ,

                                                                  0
by the definition of va∗ (y). Therefore, if ∆0 < 0 we have āD (y C ) > ā0C (y C ), hence


                    π 0D (y C ) = ā0D (y C )(B − y C ) − āD (y C ) = ā0D (y C )(B − y C ) − āC (y C )

                                > ā0C (y C )(B − y C ) − āC (y C ) = π0C (y C ) ≡ 0.


Since πD is assumed to be quasiconcave, this implies y D > y C and therefore also āD (y D ) > āD (y C ) = āC (y C ).

The same reasoning works in reverse when ∆0 > 0. Part (3), finally, was proved in the text. ¥


Proof of Proposition 11: We shall assume all supply curves to be uniquely defined and upward sloping

(Ψ0 > 0, for the relevant Ψ).

   (1) Let v̂aL and v̂aH be the valuation cutoﬀs used under symmetric information by types γ L       H
                                                                                             a and γ a

respectively (in the equilibrium under consideration). In particular, vbaH must satisfy

                                            £ + ¡ H¢     ¡ ¢¤
(A.10)                           vbaH + γ H
                                          a M    vba − M− vbaH = c + d − y,
                                           £ + H               ¤
(A.11)                           γH            va ) − M− (b
                                  a (1 − x) M (b          vaH ) ≥ d.


For v̂aL , in the first equation γ H                   L                                     H                  L
                                   a is replaced by xγ a and d by zero. In the second one, γ a is replaced by γ a and

the inequality is reversed. Consider now a separating equilibrium under asymmetric information, in which

types γ H       L                                          H      L
        a and γ a participate when va is above the cutoﬀs va and va respectively. The posterior expectations

of va , conditioned respectively on disclosure and on the information that the individual participated but did
                     ¡          ¢                   ¡ ¯        ¢
not disclose, are E va | D; vaH = M+ (vaH ) and E va ¯N ; vaL = M+ (vaL ), while



                                                             37
                                      R vaH                         hR L                         R∞             i
                                                                     va
               ¡ ¯              ¢ θ    0
                                              v g(v) dv + (1 − θ)    0
                                                                           v g(v) dv + (1 − x)    L
                                                                                                 va
                                                                                                      vg(v)dv
(A.12)        E va ¯φ, vaH , vaL ≡
                                               θG(vaH ) + (1 − θ)[G(vaL ) + (1 − x)(1 − G(vaL )]

is the updated reputation in the absence of information. Thus vaH and vaL are defined by

                                     £ + H      ¡ ¯            ¢¤
(A.13)                     vaH + γ H               ¯    H    L
                                   a M (va ) − E va φ, va , va    = c + d − y,
                                      £ + L       ¡ ¯            ¢¤
(A.14)                     vaL + γ L                 ¯    H    L
                                   a x M (va ) − E va φ, va , va    = c − y,


where the Ψ-type functions in (A.13) and (A.14) are assumed to be increasing. These two inequalities,

together with the image-conscious type γ H
                                         a ’s willingness to disclose,


                             £ + H                         ¡ ¯            ¢¤
(A.15)                    γH             + L                  ¯    H    L
                           a M (va ) − xM (va ) − (1 − x) E va φ, va , va    ≥ d,


imply that vaH < vaL .

(2) We demonstrate the claim by way of an example: suppose that x = 0 (generally, x is not too large).

Then (A.15) and (A.10) respectively reduce to:
                                 Ã    £                     ¤                            !
                              θG(vaH ) M+ (vaH ) − M− (vaH ) + (1 − θ)[M+ (vaH ) − v̄a ]
             ∆H   H
              D (va )  ≡    γH
                             a                                                             ≥ d,
                                                 θG(vaH ) + (1 − θ)
                             £ + H                ¤
             bH
             ∆   vaH ) ≡ γ H
              D (b         a M (bva ) − M− (bvaH ) ≥ d,

                                                             ³     ´0
          b H (va ) > ∆H (va ) for all va . Assuming that 1 + ∆
Note that ∆                                                    b H > 0 and using the fact that v H + ∆H (v H )
            D          D                                         D                              a     D a

           b H (b
and vbaH + ∆     H
                                                      baH < vaH , hence ∆H   H     b H vaH ). Hence, for
             D va ) both equal = c + d − y, we obtain v                  D (va ) < ∆D (b

∆H   H         b H vaH ), disclosure by γ H
 D (va ) < d < ∆D (b                      a types no longer occurs under asymmetric information about γ a .


(3) Let xL and xH ∈ {x, 1} denote the two types’ “visibility” parameters. When γ L       L
                                                                                 a = 0, va does not vary

with xL and/or xH . In a pooling equilibrium xL = xH = x, so a systematic disclosure policy (xL = xH = 1)
                ¡ ¯              ¢      ¡ ¯             ¢
alters neither E va ¯1, vaH , vaL nor E va ¯φ, vaH , vaL . Thus, type γ H
                                                                        a ’s reputational incentive is multiplied by
                                                                                                     ¡ ¯           ¢
1/x and vaH decreases. In a separating equilibrium, xL = x and xH = 1. Keeping xH = 1, E va ¯1, vaH , vaL
                               ¡ ¯          ¢
increases with xL , while E va ¯φ, vaH , vaL decreases with it. Hence vaH decreases when xL increases. ¥


Proof of Proposition 12: Part (1) follows from (34) and the assumed strict quasiconcavity of W̄ s .

The additional properties stated in the text for the case αs = 1 follow from the fact that we then have
¡ s ¢0
 W̄ (y) = [B s + ē − ϕ(y)] · ā0 (y), where ϕ(y) ≡ y + ∆(va∗ (y)) is such that




                                                            38
                                           ∆0 (va∗ (y))      1              1
(A.16)                      ϕ0 (y) = 1 −    0   ∗
                                                        = 0 ∗       =                 > 0.
                                           Ψ (va (y))    Ψ (va (y))   1 + ∆ (va∗ (y))
                                                                           0


and ϕ(−∞) = −∞ = −ϕ(+∞). Therefore, W̄ (y) is strictly concave and maximized at the point where

y s = B s + ē − ∆(va∗ (y s ), which is such that dy s /dB ≷ 1 as ∆0 (va∗ (y s )) ≶ 0.

   For Part (2), note that (36) holds for all B m + αm ē ≤ B s + αs ē as long as ∆(va∗ (y m )) > ā(y)/ā0 (y), or
                                                          µ                  ¶
                                              ∆(va∗ )           g (va∗ )
(A.17)                                                                           > 1,
                                              Ψ0 (va∗ )       1 − G (va∗ )

where va∗. stands for va∗ (y m ). For instance, for αm = 0 and va uniformly distributed on U [0, 1] , we have

va∗ (y m ) = (c−µa /2+1−B)/2 ∈ (0, 1) and y m = (B − 1 + c − µa /2) /2 as long as −µa /2 < 1+B−c < 2−µa /2.

Thus y m > y s = B + ē−µa /2 whenever µa > 1+B −c+2ē, which is consistent with the previous inequalities

as long as µa > 2ē. Part (3), finally, is implied by Part (2), since y c = B c = B m > y m and W̄ s is declining

to the right of y s . ¥


Proof of Proposition 13: (1) As long as ρ is not too small, it is optimal for the monopolist to get both

types on board. If he does not demand any sacrifice, he sets y so as to make the low type indiﬀerent::
                ¡         ¢
y = c − vaL − µa v̄a − vaL , where v̄a ≡ ρvaH + (1 − ρ) vaL is the prior mean. The sponsor’s payoﬀ is then:

                                                                  ¡         ¢
(A.18)                               π1 ≡ B − y = B − c + vaL + µa v̄a − vaL .


Suppose now that the high type is asked to sacrifice. Rewards are then y L = c − vaL and (from incentive
                                      ¡         ¢
compatibility) y H = y L + cH − c − µa vaH − vaL . The sponsor’s payoﬀ is then only

                                                                     ¡      ¢
(A.19)                          π 2 = B − ρy H − (1 − ρ) y L = π1 − ρ cH − c < π 1 .


   (2) Under free entry all sponsors oﬀer, and all contributors accept, y = B. Moreover, if cH − c ≤
  ¡         ¢
µa vaH − vaL , it is now an equilibrium for the high type to separate from the low type by opting for a

sponsor who requires a sacrifice. In the resulting equilibrium (described in the text), both types of agents

are better oﬀ than under monopoly: the low type’s payoﬀ rises from µa vaL to µa vaL + vaL − c + B, while the

high type’s payoﬀ increases by at least vaL − c + B, which is positive from the condition that the monopoly

prefers to enlist both types. The fact that sponsors must necessarily lose more than the agents gain, resulting

in a net welfare loss from competition, was established in the text. ¥



                                                                39
                                             References
Andreoni, James. “Giving with Impure Altruism: Applications to Charity and Ricardian Equivalence.”

Journal of Political Economy, December 1989, 97(6), pp.1447-58.

Akerlof, George A. and Dickens, William T. “The Economic Consequences of Cognitive Dissonance.” Amer-

ican Economic Review, June 1982, 72(3), pp. 307—319.

–– and Kranton, Rachel E. “Economics and Identity.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, August 2000,

115(3), pp. 716—753.

Araújo, Aloisio Pessoa de; Gottlieb, Daniel and Moreira, Humberto. “A Model of Mixed Signals with

Applications to Countersignaling and the GED.” Mimeo, Getulio Vargas Foundation, 2004.

Austen-Smith, David and Fryer, Roland G. “An Economic Analysis of "Acting White",” Quarterly Journal

of Economics, May (2005), 120(2), pp. 551-583.

Bagwell, Laurie Simon and Bernheim, Douglas B. “Veblen Eﬀects in a Theory of Conspicuous Consumption.”

American Economic Review, June 1996 86(3), pp. 349-373.

Batson, Dan. “Altruism and Prosocial Behavior,” in D. Gilbert, S. Fiske, and G. Lindzey eds., Handbook of

Social Psychology vol. II. McGraw Hill, 1998, pp. 282—316.

Bénabou, Roland and Tirole, Jean. “Self Confidence and Personal Motivation.” Quarterly Journal of Eco-

nomics, August 2002, 117(3), pp. 871—915.

–– . “Intrinsic and Extrinsic Motivation.” Review of Economic Studies, 2003, 70(3), pp. 489-520.

–– .“Willpower and Personal Rules.” Journal of Political Economy, August 2004a, 112(4),pp. 848-887.

––. “Incentives and Prosocial Behavior.” CEPR Discussion Paper 4633, September 2004b.

Bem, Daryl. J. “Self-Perception Theory.”in L. Berkowitz , ed., Advances in Experimental Social Psychology,

Vol. 6, New York: Academic Press,1972, pp. 1-62.

Berman, Eli. “Sect, Subsidy and Sacrifice: An Economist’s View of Ultra-Orthodox Jews.” Quarterly Journal

of Economics, Summer 2000, pp. 905-953.

Bernheim, Douglas B. “A Theory of Conformity.” Journal of Political Economy, October 1994 , 102(5), pp.

842—877.

Bodner, Ronit and Prelec, Drazen. “Self-Signaling and Diagnostic Utility in Everyday Decision Making,” in

I. Brocas and J. Carrillo eds. The Psychology of Economic Decisions. Vol. 1: Rationality and Well-Being,




                                                   40
Oxford University Press, 2003, pp.105-126.

Brekke, Kjell Arne; Kverndokk, Snorre and Nyborg, Karine. “An Economic Model of Moral Motivation.”

Journal of Public Economics, September 2003, 87(9-10), pp. 1967-83.

Brennan, Geoﬀrey and Pettit, Philipp. The Economy of Esteem. Oxford, U.K.: Oxford University Press,

2004.

Bryan, James H. and Test, M.A. “Models and Helping: Naturalistic Studies in Aiding Behavior.” Journal

of Personality and Social Psychology, 1967, 6, pp. 400-407.

Buraschi, Andrea and Cornelli, Francesca. “Donations.” CEPR Discussion Paper No. 3488, August, 2002.

Carrillo, Juan D. and Mariotti, Thomas. “Strategic Ignorance as a Self Disciplining Device.” Review of

Economic Studies, Spring 2000, 67(3): 529—544.

Cho, In-Koo and Kreps, David M. “Signaling Games and Stable Equilibria.” Quarterly Journal of Economics,

May 1987, 102(2), pp. 179—221.

Corneo, Giacomo G. “The Theory of the Open Shop Trade Union Reconsidered.” Labour Economics, 4(1),

March 1997, pp. 71-84

Dana, Jason; Kuang, Jason and Weber, Roberto. “Exploiting Moral Wriggle Room: Behavior Inconsistent

with a Preference for Fair Outcomes.” Carnegie Mellon Behavioral Decision Research Working Paper No.

349, June 2003.

Deci, Edward. Intrinsic Motivation. New York: Plenum, 1975.

–– and Ryan, Richard. Intrinsic Motivation and Self-Determination in Human Behavior. New York:

Plenum Press, 1985.

Denrell, Jerker. Essays on the Economic Eﬀects of Vanity and Career Concerns. Stockholm, Sweden: Stock-

holm Institute of International Economics Press, 1998.

Falk, Armin and Kosfeld, Michael. “Distrust - The Hidden Cost of Control.” IZA Discussion Paper 1203,

July 2004.

Fehr, Ernst and Simon Gächter. “Do Incentive Contracts Undermine Voluntary Cooperation?” Institute for

Empirical Research in Economics (Zurich University) Working Paper No. 34, 2002.

––; Klein, Alexander and Schmidt, Klaus. “Fairness, Incentives, and Contractual Incompleteness.” Mimeo,

University of Munich, 2001.




                                                    41
Festinger, Leon and Carlsmith, James. “Cognitive Consequences of Forced Compliance.” Journal of Abnor-

mal and Social Psychology, 1959 58, pp. 203—210.

Freeman, Richard B. “Working for Nothing: the Supply of Volunteer Labor.” Journal of Labor Economics,

January 1997, 15(1), pp. 140—166.

Frey, Bruno S. Not Just for the Money: An Economic Theory of Personal Motivation. Edward Elgar,

Cheltenham,1997.

–– and Götte, Lorenz. “Does Pay Motivate Volunteers?” Institute for Empirical Economic Research,

University of Zurich, Working Paper 7, 1999.

–– and Jegen, Reto. “Motivation Crowding Theory: A Survey of Empirical Evidence.” Journal of Eco-

nomic Surveys, December 2001, 15(5), pp. 589— 611.

Gibbons, Robert. “Incentives and Careers in Organizations,” in: David Kreps and Ken Wallis, eds., Advances

in Economic Theory and Econometrics, vol.2. Cambridge University Press, 1997.

Gintis, Herbert; Smith, Eric and Bowles, Samuel. “Costly Signaling and Cooperation.” Journal of Theoretical

Biology, 2001, 213, pp.103—119.

Glazer, Amihai and Konrad, Kai A. “A Signaling Explanation of Charity.” American Economic Review,

September 1996, 86(4), pp.1019-28.

Gneezy, Uri .“The W eﬀect of Rewards.” Mimeo, University of Chicago, 2003.

–– and Rustichini, Aldo. “A Fine is a Price.” Journal of Legal Studies, January 2000a, 29(1), pp. 1-17.

––. “Pay Enough or Don’t Pay at All.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, August 2000b, 115(3), pp.

791-810.

Harbaugh, William. “What Do Donations Buy? A Model of Philanthropy Based on Prestige and Warm

Glow.” Journal of Public Economics, February 1998, 67(2), 169-284.

Jewitt, Ian. “Notes on the Shape of Distributions.” Mimeo, Oxford University, Summer 2004.

Janssen, Maarten C.W. and Mendys-Kamphorst, Ewa. “The Price of a Price: On the Crowding Out of

Social Norms.” Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 2004, 55:3, pp.377-395.

Johansson-Stenman, Olof and Martinsson, Peter. “Honestly, Why Are You Driving a BMW?” Mimeo,

Göteborg University, 2003. Forthcoming in the Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization.

Kahneman, Daniel and Knetsch, Jack. “Valuing Public Goods: the Purchase of Moral Satisfaction.” Journal




                                                    42
of Environmental Economics and Management, January 1992, 22(1), pp. 57-70.

Köszegi, B. (2004) “Utility from Anticipation and Personal Equilibrium,” Mimeo, U.C. Berkeley , June.

Lamont, Michèle. The Dignity of Working Men. New York: Russel Sage Foundation Press, 2000.

Lazear, Edward. “Performance Pay and Productivity.” American Economic Review, December 2000a, 90(5),

pp.1346—1361.

–. “Personnel Economics and Economic Approaches to Incentives.” HKCER Letters, September/October

2000b, 61.

Lepper, Mark; Greene, D. and Nisbett, Richard. “Undermining Children’s Interest with Extrinsic Rewards:

A Test of the ‘Overjustification Hypothesis’.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 1973, 28, pp.

129— 137.

Murnighan, J. Keith; Oesch, John M. and Pillutla, Madan. “Player Types and Self-Impression Management

in Dictatorship Games: Two Experiments.” Games and Economic Behavior, November 2001, 37(2), pp.

388-394.

Pesendorfer, Wolfgang. “Design Innovation and Fashion Cycles.” American Economic Review, September

1995, 85(4), pp. 771—792.

Potters, Jan; Sefton, Martin and Vesterlund, Lise. “Why Announce Leadership Contributions? An Experi-

mental Study of the Signaling and Reciprocity Hypotheses.” Mimeo, University of Pittsburgh, 2001.

Prendergast, Canice. “The Provision of Incentives in Firms.” Journal of Economic Literature, March 1999,

37(1), pp. 7—63.

–– and Stole, Lars. “The Non-Monetary Nature of Gifts.” European Economic Review, December 2001,

45(10), pp. 1793—1811.

Sadowski, Philipp. “Overeagerness.”Mimeo, Princeton University, 2004.

Seabright, Paul. “Continuous Preferences Can Cause Discontinuous Choices: an Application to the Impact

of Incentives on Altruism.” Mimeo, IDEI, Toulouse, 2002.

Smith, Adam. The Theory of Moral Sentiments. New York: Prometheus Books, 1759

Titmuss, Richard. The Gift Relationship. London: Allen and Unwin, 1970.

Upton, William. “Altruism, Attribution and Intrinsic Motivation in the Recruitment of Blood Donors,” in

Selected Readings in Donor Motivation and Recruitment, Vol. II, American Red Cross ed., 1973.




                                                   43
