                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              AN EMPIRICAL MODEL OF GROWTH
                              THROUGH PRODUCT INNOVATION

                                            Rasmus Lentz
                                           Dale T. Mortensen

                                         Working Paper 11546
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w11546


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 2005




This research was supported by a collaborative grant to the authors from the NSF. Funding for data access
was provided by the Danish Social Science Research Council through a grant to Bent Jesper Christensen as
part of other collaborative research. Rasmus Lentz acknowledges support for this research from Center for
Applied Microeconometrics at University of Copenhagen. The authors thank Victor Aguirregabiria, Joseph
Altonji, Robert Hall, John Kennan, Samuel Kortum, Jean-Marc Robin, and Rob Shimer for useful comments
and suggestions. All remaining errors are ours. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by Rasmus Lentz and Dale T. Mortensen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
An Empirical Model of Growth Through Product Innovation
Rasmus Lentz and Dale T. Mortensen
NBER Working Paper No. 11546
August 2005
JEL No. E22, E24, J23, J24, L11, L25, O3, O4

                                           ABSTRACT


Productivity dispersion across firms is large and persistent, and worker reallocation among firms is

an important source of productivity growth. The purpose of the paper is to estimate the structure of

an equilibrium model of growth through innovation that explains these facts. The model is a

modified version of the Schumpeterian theory of firm evolution and growth developed by Klette and

Kortum (2004). The data set is a panel of Danish firms than includes information on value added,

employment, and wages. The model's fit is good and the structural parameter estimates have

interesting implications for the aggregate growth rate and the contribution of worker reallocation to

it.



Rasmus Lentz
Department of Economics
Boston University
270 Bay State Road, Room 403
Boston, MA 02215
rlentz@bu.edu

Dale T. Mortensen
Department of Economics
Northwestern University
2003 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208-2600
and NBER
d-mortensen@northwestern.edu
1    Introduction

In their review article, Bartelsman and Doms (2000) draw three lessons from empirical productivity

studies based on longitudinal plant and firm data: First, the extent of dispersion in productivity

across production units, firms or establishments, is large. Second, the productivity rank of any unit

in the distribution is highly persistent. Third, a large fraction of aggregate productivity growth is

the consequence of worker reallocation.

    Although the explanations for productive firm heterogeneity are not fully understood, economic

principles suggest that its presence should induce worker reallocation from less to more productive

firms as well as from exiting to entering firms. There is ample evidence that workers do flow from

one firm to another frequently. As Davis, Haltiwanger, and Schuh (1996) and others document, job

and worker flows are large, persistent, and essentially idiosyncratic in the U.S. Recently, Fallick and

Fleischman (2001) and Stewart (2002) find that job to job flows without a spell of unemployment

in the U.S. represent at least half of the separations and is growing. In their analysis of Danish

matched employer-employee IDA data, Frederiksen and Westergaard-Nielsen (2002) report that the

average establishment separation rate over the 1980-95 period was 26%. About two thirds of the

outflow represents the movement of workers from one firm to another.

    In a companion paper, Lentz and Mortensen (2005) develop a stochastic general equilibrium

model in which more profitable firms grow faster and contribute more to the aggregate growth rate

through product innovation. The model is a variation on that proposed by Klette and Kortum

(2004), which itself builds on the endogenous growth model of Grossman and Helpman (1991). By

design, their model is consistent with stylized facts about product innovation and its relationship

to the dynamics of firm size evolution. We adopt the approach because it provides an explanation

for the fact that there is no correlation between labor force size and labor productivity but a strong

positive association between value added and labor productivity in Danish firm data. Furthermore,

the model provides a direct link between worker reallocation and productivity growth.

    In the model, firms are monopoly suppliers of differentiated intermediate products that serve as

inputs in the production of a final consumption good. Better quality products are introduced from

time to time as the outcome of R&D investment by both existing firms and new entrants. As new


                                                  2
products displace old, the process of creative destruction induces the need to reallocate workers

across productive activities. In the version of the model estimated here, product quality differs

across firms. In our earlier paper, we established the existence of a general equilibrium solution to

the model. In this one, we use the equilibrium relationships implied by the model and information

drawn from a Danish panel of firms to estimate the model’s parameters.

        Providing a good fit to data, the model is estimated on among other moments the relationship

between firm size and firm growth which is slightly negative in the data. The model satisfies a

theoretical version of Gibrat’s law, but nevertheless replicates the negative relationship between

size and growth found in data. The model is also estimated to fit a standard growth decomposition

which suggests a large growth contribution from reallocation and while the model does in fact imply

a large reallocation contribution, the reduced form decomposition is largely explained through

measurement error and the fundamental sources of productivity growth are only loosely reflected

in the reduced form decomposition.

        Given the parameter estimates obtained, we explore the model’s quantitative implications for

productivity growth and its sources. The model implies an annual rate of overall productivity

growth equal to 2.3%. We find that the reallocation of workers from less to more productive

surviving firms accounts for 70% of productivity growth in equilibrium.


2        Danish Firm Data

Danish firm data provide information on productivity dispersion and the relationships among pro-

ductivity, employment, and sales. The available data set is an annual panel of privately owned

firms for the years 1992-1997 drawn from the Danish Business Statistics Register. The sample of

approximately 4,900 firms is restricted to those with 20 or more employees. The sample does not

include entrants.1 The variables observed in each year include value added (Y ), the total wage

bill (W ), and full-time equivalent employment (N ). In this paper we use these relationships to

motivate the theoretical model studied. Both Y and W are measured in Danish Kroner (DKK)

while N is a body count.
    1
     The full panel of roughly 6,700 firms contains some entry, but due to the sampling procedure, the entrant popu-
lation suffers from significant selection bias. We have chosen not to rely on the entrant population for identification
of the model.


                                                          3
       Non-parametric estimates of the distributions of two alternative measures of a firm’s labor

productivity are illustrated in Figure 1. The first measure of firm productivity is value added per

worker (Y /N ) while the second is valued added per unit of quality adjusted employment (Y /N ∗ ).

Standard labor productivity misrepresents cross firm productivity differences to the extent that

labor quality differs across firms. However, if more productive workers are compensated with

higher pay, as would be true in a competitive labor market, one can use a wage weighted index of

employment to correct for this source of cross firm differences in productive efficiency. Formally,

the constructed quality adjusted employment of firm j is defined as Nj∗ = Wj /w where
                                                         P
                                                       j         Wj
                                                   w= P                                                          (1)
                                                             j   Nj

is the average wage paid per worker in the market.2 Although correcting for wage differences across

firms in this manner does reduce the spread and skew of the implied productivity distribution

somewhat, both distributions have high variance and skew and are essentially the same general

shape.

       Both distributions are consistent with those found in other data sets. For example, productivity

distributions are significantly dispersed and skewed to the right. In the case of the adjusted measure

of productivity, the 5th percentile is roughly half the mode while the 95th percentile is approximately

twice as large are the mode. The range between the two represents a four fold difference in value

added per worker across firms. These facts are similar to those reported by Bartelsman and Doms

(2000) for the U.S.

       There are many potential explanations for cross firm productivity differentials. A comparison of

the two distributions represented in Figure 1 suggests that differences in the quality of labor inputs

does not seem to be the essential one. The process of technology diffusion is a well documented.

Total factor productivity differences across firms can be expected as a consequence of slow diffusion

of new techniques. If technical improvements are either factor neutral or capital augmenting,

then one would expect that more productive firms would acquire more labor and capital. The

implied consequence would seem to be a positive relationship between labor force size and labor
   2
    In the case, where a firm is observed over several periods, the implicit identification of the firm’s labor force
quality is taken as an average over the time dimension to address issues of measurement error. The alternative
approach of identifying a quality measure for each year has no significant impact on the moments of the data set.


                                                         4
                                   Figure 1: Productivity Distributions.

       pdf
     0.004



     0.003

                                             Y
                                             N∗   pdf

     0.002

                   Y
                   N   pdf

     0.001



     0.000
             0.0                  0.3                   0.6                    0.9                    1.2
                                                                                             Y /N , Y /N ∗
    Note: The shaded areas represent 90% bootstrap confidence intervals. Value added (Y ) measured in 1
          million DKK. N is the firm’s labor force head count and N ∗ is the quality adjusted labor force size.



                                Table 1: Productivity – Size Correlations
                         Employment (N)      Adjusted Employment (N*)             Value Added (Y)
             Y/N             0.0017                    0.0911                          0.3138
             Y/N*           -0.0095                   -0.0176                          0.1981

productivity. Interestingly, there is no correlation between the two in Danish data.

   The correlations between the two measures of labor productivity with the two employment

measures and sales as reflected in value added are reported in Table 1. As documented in the table,

the correlation between labor force size and productivity using either the raw employment measure

or the adjusted one is zero. However, note the strong positive associate between value added and

both measures of labor productivity. Non-parametric regressions of value added and employment

on the two productivity measures are illustrated in Figure 2. The top and bottom curves in the

figures represent a 90% confidence interval for the relationship. The positive relationships between

value added and both measure of labor productivity are highly significant.


                                                        5
                              Figure 2: Firm Size–Productivity Relationships.

                  Y /N ∗ vs. Y                                              Y /N vs. Y
      Y                                    pdf              Y                                    pdf
     90                                     0.004          90                                     0.004

                Y /N ∗ pdf
     70                                     0.003          70                                     0.003
                                                                      Y /N pdf

     50                                     0.002          50                                     0.002

     30                                     0.001          30                                     0.001

     10                                      0.000         10                                      0.000
          0.0   0.3     0.6       0.9    1.2                    0     0.3       0.6      0.9   1.2
                                          Y /N ∗                                                Y /N
                 Y /N ∗ vs. N ∗                                             Y /N vs. N
     N∗                                    pdf             N                                     pdf
    100                                     0.004        100                                      0.004

                Y /N ∗ pdf
     85                                     0.003          85                                     0.003
                                                                      Y /N pdf

     70                                     0.002          70                                     0.002

     55                                     0.001          55                                     0.001

     40                                      0.000         40                                      0.000
          0.0   0.3     0.6       0.9    1.2                    0     0.3       0.6      0.9   1.2
                                          Y /N ∗                                                Y /N
Note: The shaded areas represent 90% bootstrap confidence intervals. Value added (Y ) measured in 1 million
      DKK. N is the firm’s labor force head count and N ∗ is the quality adjusted labor force size.



    The theory developed in this paper is in part motivated by these observations. Specifically, it

is a theory that postulates labor saving technical progress of a specific form. Hence, the apparent

fact that more productive firms produce more with roughly the same labor input per unit of value

added is consistent with the model.


3    An Equilibrium Model of Creative Destruction

As is well known, firms come is an amazing range of shapes and sizes. This fact cannot be ignored

in any analysis of the relationship between firm size and productivity. Furthermore, an adequate


                                                     6
theory must account for entry, exit and firm evolution in order to explain the size distributions

observed. Klette and Kortum (2004) construct a stochastic model of firm product innovation and

growth that is consistent with stylized facts regarding the firm size evolution and distribution. The

model also has the property that technical progress is labor saving. For these reasons, we pursue

their approach in this paper.

   Although Klette and Kortum allow for productive heterogeneity, firm productivity and growth

are unrelated because costs and benefits of growth are both proportional to firm productivity in

their model. Allowing for a positive relationship between firm growth and productivity is necessary

for consistency with the relationships found in the Danish firm data studied in this paper.

3.1   Preferences and Technology

Intertemporal utility of the representative household at time t is given by
                                                       Z       ∞
                                                Ut =               ln Cs e−ρ(s−t) ds                             (2)
                                                           t


where ln Ct denotes the instantaneous utility of the single consumption good at date t and ρ

represents the pure rate of time discount.                     Each household is free to borrow or lend at interest

rate rt . Nominal household expenditure at date t is Et = Pt Ct . Optimal consumption expenditure

must solve the differential equation Ė/E = rt − ρ. Following Grossman and Helpman (1991), we

choose the numeraire so that Et = 1 for all t without loss of generality, which implies rt = r = ρ

for all t. Note that this choice of the numeraire also implies that the price of the consumption good

expressed in terms of the numeraire, Pt , falls over time at a rate equal to the rate of growth in

consumption.

   The quantity of the consumption produced is determined by the quantity and quality of the

economy’s intermediate inputs. Specifically, there is a unit continuum of inputs and consumption

is determined by the production function
                                   Z       1                                           Z       1
                         ln Ct =               ln(At (j)xt (j))dj = ln At +                        ln xt (j)dj   (3)
                                       0                                                   0


where xt (j) is the quantity of input j ∈ [0, 1] at time t, At (j) is the quality or productivity of input

j at time t, and At represent aggregate productivity. The level of productivity of each input and


                                                                     7
aggregate productivity are determined by the number of technical improvements made in the past.

Specifically,
                                      Jt (j)
                                      Y                                                    Z       1
                           At (j) =                qi (j) and ln At ≡                                  ln At (j)dj.                     (4)
                                      i=1                                                      0

where Jt (j) is the number of innovations made in input j up to date t and qi (j) > 1 denotes the

quantitative improvement (step size) in productivity attributable to the ith innovation in product

j. Innovations arrive at rate δ which is endogenous but the same for all intermediate products.

   The model is constructed so that a steady state growth path exists with the following properties:

Consumption output grows at a constant rate while the quantities of intermediate products and

the endogenous innovation frequency are stationary and identical across all intermediate goods. As

a consequence of the law of large numbers, the assumption that the number of innovations to date

is Poisson with arrival frequency δ for all intermediate goods implies
                                      Z       1                         Z          t (j)
                                                                                1 JX                            Z       1
                 ln Ct = ln At +                  ln x(j)dj =                              ln qi (j)dj +                    ln x(j)dj   (5)
                                          0                                 0     i=1                               0
                                                  Z       1
                        = E ln(q)δt +                         ln x(j)dj.
                                                      0


where EJt (j) = δt for all j is the expected number of innovations per intermediate product and
         R1       PJt (j)
E ln(q) ≡ 0 Jt1(j) i=1    ln qi (j)dj is the expected quality step size. In other words, consumption

grows at the rate of growth in productivity which is the product of the creative-destruction rate

and the expected log of the size of an improvement in productivity induced by each new innovation.

3.2    The Value of a Firm

Each individual firm is the monopoly supplier of the products it created in the past that have

survived to the present. The price charged for each is limited by the ability of suppliers of previous

versions to provide a substitute. In Nash-Bertrand equilibrium, any innovator takes over the market

for its good type by setting the price just below that at which consumers are indifferent between the

higher quality product supplied by the innovator and an alternative supplied by the last provider.

The price charged is the product of relative quality and the previous producer’s marginal cost of

production. Given the symmetry of demands for the different good types and the assumption that

future quality improvements are independent of the type of good, one can drop the good subscript


                                                                    8
without confusion. Given stationary of quantities along the equilibrium growth path, the time

subscript can be dropped as well.

     Labor is the only factor in the production of intermediate inputs. Labor productivity is the

same across all inputs and is set equal to unity. Hence, p = qw is the price in terms of the

numeraire of every intermediate good as well as the value of labor productivity where w, the wage,

represents the marginal cost of production of the previous supplier and q > 1 is the step up in

quality of the innovation. As total expenditure is normalized at unity and there is a unit measure

of product types, it follows that total revenue per product type is also unity given the specification

of preferences and technology, i.e., px = 1. Hence, product output and employment are both equal

to
                                                 1   1
                                            x=     =    .                                          (6)
                                                 p   wq
and the gross profit associated with supplying the good is

                                                             1
                                    1 > π = px − wx = 1 −      > 0.                                (7)
                                                             q

The labor saving nature of improvements in intermediate input quality is implicit in the fact that

labor demand is decreasing in q.

     The model of quality improvements can equally well be viewed as a model of efficiency improve-

ments, that is, a reduction of the amount of labor that is required to produce a unit of output.

This is easily seen by re-interpreting the argument above in terms of quality units of output. Given

that one unit of labor produces of unit of output, an increase in product quality of a unit of output

is analogous to a reduction of the amount of labor that is required to produce a quality unit. In

terms of quality units, the price is ever decreasing, demand for quality units of a product is ever

increasing, and the amount of labor engaged in production in a given industry remains stable. In

the short run, labor demand does fluctuate depending on the exact realization of the current lead

that the industry leader has to the nearest follower - the greater the lead, the lower the demand.

     Following Klette and Kortum (2004), the discrete number of products supplied by a firm, de-

noted as k, is defined on the integers and its value evolves over time as a birth-death process

reflecting product creation and destruction. In their interpretation, k reflects the firm’s past suc-

cesses in the product innovation process as well as current firm size. New products are generated

                                                  9
by R&D investment. The firm’s R&D investment flow generates new product arrivals at frequency

γk. The total R&D investment cost is wc(γ)k where c(γ)k represents the labor input required in

the research and development process. The function c(γ) is assumed to be strictly increasing and

convex. According to the authors, the implied assumption that the total cost of R&D investment is

linearly homogenous in the new product arrival rate and the number of existing product, “captures

the idea that a firm’s knowledge capital facilitates innovation.” In any case, this cost structure is

needed to obtain firm growth rates that are independent of size as typically observed in the data.

    The market for any current product supplied by the firm is destroyed by the creation of a

new version by some other firm, which occurs at the rate δ. Below we refer to γ as the firm’s

creation rate and to δ as the common destruction rate faced by all firms. 3 As product gross profit

and product quality are one-to-one, the profits earned on each product reflects a firm’s current

labor productivity. The firm chooses the creation rate γ to maximize the expected present value of

its future net profit flow.

    Firms differ with the respect to the quality of their products. Hence, each type is characterized

by profitability, π, as defined in equation (7). The value of the firm of type π that currently markets

k products is
                          ©                                                             ª
             rVk (π) = max [π − wc(γ)] k + γk[Vk+1 (π) − Vk (π)] + δk[Vk−1 (π) − Vk (π)] .                    (8)
                        γ≥0

The first term on the right side is current gross profit flow accruing to the firms product portfolio

less current expenditure on R&D. The second term is the expected capital gain associated with the

arrival of a new product line. Finally, the last term represents the expected capital loss associated

with the possibility that one among the existing product lines will be destroyed.

    The unique solution to (8) is proportional to the number of product lines. Formally,
                                                   ½           ¾
                                                     π − wc(γ)
                                   Vk (π) = k max                                                             (9)
                                              γ≥0    r+δ−γ
as one can verify by substitution. Consequently, any positive optimal choice of the product creation

rate for a type π firm must satisfy the first order condition
                                                           ½           ¾
                             0                               π − wc(γ)
                          wc (γ(π)) = Vk+1 − Vk = max                    .                                   (10)
                                                       γ≥0    r+δ−γ
  3
    These are in fact the continuous time job creation and job destruction rates respectively as defined in Davis,
Haltiwanger, and Schuh (1996).


                                                       10
Hence, the second order condition, c00 (γ) > 0, and the fact that the marginal value of a product

line is increasing in π imply that the a firm’s creation rate increases with profitability.

3.3   Firm Entry and Labor Market Clearing

The entry of a new firm requires innovation. Suppose that there are a constant measure m of

potential entrants, identical ex ante. The rate at which any one of them generates a new product is

γ 0 and the total cost is wc(γ 0 ) where the cost function is the same as that faced by an incumbent.

The firm’s type is unknown ex ante but is realized immediately after entry. Since the expected

return to innovation is Eπ {V1 } and the aggregate entry rate is η = mγ 0 , the entry rate satisfies the

following free entry condition
                             ³η´       Z                        Z           ½               ¾
                         0                                                      π − wc(γ)
                    wc             =           V1 (π)φ(π)dπ =        max                        φ(π)dπ   (11)
                             m             π                        π γ≥0       r+δ−γ

where φ(π) is the density entrant types. Of course, the second equality follows from equation (9).

   There is a fixed measure of available workers, denoted by L, seeking employment at any positive

wage. In equilibrium, these are allocated across production and R&D activities, those performed by

both incumbent firms and potential entrants. Since the number of workers employed for production

purposes per product of quality q is x = 1/wq = (1 − π)/w from equations (6) and (7), the

total number demanded for production activity by firms of type π with k products is L x (k, π) =

k(1 − π)/w > 0. The number of R&D workers employed by incumbent firms of type π with k

products is LR (k, π) = kc(γ(π)). Because each potential entrant innovates at frequency η/m, the

aggregate number of worker engaged by all m in R&D is LE = mc(η/m). Hence, the equilibrium

wage satisfies the labor market clearing condition
                             Z X ∞
                      L =           [Lx (k, π) + LR (k, π)] Mk (π)dπ + LE                                (12)
                                   π k=1
                                   Z µ                       ¶X
                                                              ∞                ³η´
                                               1−π
                              =                    + c(γ(π))    kMk (π)dπ + mc
                                   π            w                               m
                                                                    k=1

where Mk (π) represents the mass of firms of type π that supply k products.

3.4   The Steady State Distribution of Firm Size

Once a firm enters, its size as reflected in the number of product lines supplied evolves as a birth-

death process. As the set of firms with k products at a point in time must either have had k

                                                           11
products already and neither lost nor gained another, have had k − 1 and innovated, or have had

k + 1 and lost one to destruction over any sufficiently short time period, the equality of the flows

into and out of the set of firms of type π with k > 1 products requires


                       γ(π)(k − 1)Mk−1 (π) + δ(k + 1)Mk+1 (π) = (γ(π) + δ)kMk (π)


for every π where Mk (π) is the steady state mass of firms of type π that supply k products. Because

an incumbent dies when its last product is destroyed by assumption but entrants flow into the set

of firms with a single product at rate η,


                                     φ(π)η + 2δM2 (π) = (γ(π) + δ)M1 (π)


where φ(π) is the fraction of the new entrants that realize profit π. Births must equal deaths in

steady state and only firms with one product are subject to death risk. Therefore, φ(π)η = δM 1 (π)

and
                                                                               µ          ¶k−1
                                        k−1            ηφ(π)                       γ(π)
                               Mk (π) =     γ(π)Mk−1 =                                                      (13)
                                         k              δk                          δ

by induction.

      The size distribution of firms conditional on type can be derived using equation (13). Specifi-

cally, the total firm mass of type π is
                                           ∞
                                           X                              ∞    µ          ¶k−1
                                                    φ(π)η X 1                      γ(π)
                              M (π) =     Mk (π) =                                                          (14)
                                                      δ        k                    δ
                                      k=1                 k=1
                                           µ         ¶
                                      η         δ       δφ(π)
                                    =   ln                    .
                                      δ      δ − γ(π) γ(π)

where convergence requires that the aggregate rate of creative destruction exceed the creation rate

of every incumbent type, i.e., δ > γ(π) ∀π. Hence, the fraction of type π firm with k product is
                                                               ³          ´k
                                                           1       γ(π)
                                              Mk (π)       k        δ
                                                     = ³        ´.                                          (15)
                                              M (π)        δ
                                                      ln δ−γ(π)

This is the logarithmic distribution with parameter γ(π)/δ.4 Consistent with the observations on

firm size distributions, that implied by the model is highly skewed to the right.
  4
      This result is in Klette and Kortum (2004). We include the derivation here simply for completeness.




                                                         12
   By equation (15), the mean of the firm size distribution conditional on product profitability is
                                            ∞                             γ(π)
                                            X kMk (π)                    δ−γ(π)
                                E [k|π] =                      =         ³            ´,            (16)
                                                      M (π)         ln         δ
                                            k=1                              δ−γ(π)

As the product creation rate increases with profitability, expected size does also. Formally, because

(1 + a) ln(1 + a) > a > 0 for all positive values of a, the expected number of products is increasing

in firm profitability,
                                µ                                              ¶
                    ∂E[k|π]         (1 + a(π)) ln(1 + a(π)) − a(π)                    δγ 0 (π)
                            =                                                                  >0   (17)
                      ∂π               (1 + a(π)) ln2 (1 + a(π))                   (δ − γ(π))2
                γ(π)
where a(π) =   δ−γ(π) .

   Although more profitable firms supply more products, total expected employment, nE[k] where

n = (1−π)/w+c(γ(π)), need not increase with π in general and decreases with π if innovation is not

related to profitability because innovation is labor saving. Hence, the hypothesis that firms with

the ability to create products of better quality grow faster is consistent with dispersion in labor

productivity and the correlations between value added, labor force size, and labor productivity

observed in Danish data reported above.

   Finally, the rate of creative-destruction is the sum of the entry rate and the aggregate creation

rates of all the incumbents given that the total mass of products is fixed. Because the new product

arrival rate of a firm of type π with k products is γ(π)k and the measure of such firms is M k (π),
                                              Z              ∞
                                                             X
                                      δ=η+            γ(π)         kMk (π)dπ.                       (18)
                                                  π          k=1


3.5    Equilibrium

Definition A steady state market equilibrium is a triple composed of a labor market clearing wage

      w, entry rate η, and creative destruction rate δ together with an optimal creation rate γ(π)

      and a steady state size distribution Mk (π) for each type that satisfy equations (11), (12), (10),

      (13), and (18) provided that γ(π) < δ, for every π in the support of the entry distribution.

Proposition If the cost of innovation, c(γ), is strictly convex and c0 (0) = c(0) = 0, then a steady

      state market equilibrium with positive entry exists. In the case of a single firm type, there is

      only one.

                                                        13
Proof. See Lentz and Mortensen (2005).5


4     Estimation

If product quality is a permanent firm characteristic, then differences in firm profitability are asso-

ciated with differences in the product creation rates chosen by firms. Specifically, more profitable

firms grow faster, are more likely to survive in the future, and supply a larger number of products

on average. Hence, a positive cross firm correlation between current gross profit per product and

sales volume should exist. Furthermore, worker reallocation from slow growing firms that supply

products of lesser quality to more profitable fast growing firms will be an important sources of

aggregate productivity growth. On the other hand, if product quality were iid across innovations

and firms, all firms grow at the same rate even though persistent differences in profitability exist

as a consequence of different realizations of product quality histories.

    In this section, we demonstrate that firm specific differences in profitability are required to

explain Danish interfirm relationships between value added, employment, and wages paid. In the

process of fitting the model to the data, we also obtain estimates of the investment cost of innovation

function that all firms face as well as the sampling distribution of firm productivity at entry.

4.1    Danish Firm Data

If more productive firm’s grow faster in the sense that γ 0 (π) > 0, then (17) implies that more

productive firms also supply more products and sell more on average. However, because production

employment per product decreases with productivity, total expected employment, nE[k] where

n = (1 − π)/w + c(γ(π)), need not increase with π in general and decreases with π when growth is

independent of a firm’s past product quality realizations. These implications of the theory can be

tested directly.

    The model is estimated on an unbalanced panel of 4,872 firms drawn from the Danish firm

panel described in Section 2. The panel is constructed by selecting all existing firms in 1992 with

more than 20 workers and following them through time, while all firms that enter the sample in the
   5
     Although the cost of entry is linear in the paper cited while the cost is convex here, the principal argument holds
in this case as well.




                                                          14
subsequent years are excluded. In the estimation, the observed 1992 cross-section will be interpreted

to reflect steady state whereas the following years generally do not reflect steady state since survival

probabilities vary across firm types. Specifically, due to selection the observed cross-sections from

1993 to 1997 will have an increasing over-representation of high creation rate firm types relative

to steady state. Entry in the original data set suffers from strong selection bias and the sampling

choice to leave out entry altogether is consequently partly driven by data limitations but is also

useful in identifying dynamic features of the model. Table 2 presents a number of data moments

with standard deviations in parenthesis. The standard deviations are obtained by bootstrapping.

Unless otherwise stated, nominal amounts are in 1,000 DKK.

   The dynamic moments relating to firm growth rates (∆Y /Y ) include firm death, so specifically

an exiting firm will contribute to the statistic with a −1 observation. Should one exclude firm

deaths from the growth statistic, one will obtain a more negative correlation between firm size and

growth due to the strong negative correlation between firm size and the firm exit hazard rate.

   In addition to the moments in Table 2, the model will also be estimated against a standard

reduced form labor productivity growth decomposition. We use the preferred formulation in Foster,

Haltiwanger, and Krizan (2001) which is taken from Baily, Bartelsman, and Haltiwanger (1996).

The decomposition takes the form,
               X                      X                              X                   X
    ∆Pt =            set−1 ∆pet +           (pet−1 − Pt−1 ) ∆set +         ∆pet ∆set +         (pet − Pt−1 ) set −
               e∈C                    e∈C                            e∈C                 e∈N
               X
                      (pet−1 − Pt−1 ) set−1 ,                                                                        (19)
               e∈X
             P
where Pt =       e set pet ,   pet = Yet /Net , and set = Net /Nt . Thus, (19) will be used to decompose

growth in value added per worker into 5 components in the order stated on the right hand side;

within, between, a cross component, and entry and exit. The within component is interpreted

to capture growth in the productivity measure due to productivity improvements by incumbents,

the between component is designed to capture productivity growth from reallocation of labor from

less to more productive firms. The cross component captures a covariance between share of input

and productivity growth and the last two terms capture the growth contribution from entrants

and exits. The decomposition shares in the data are shown in Table 3. As mentioned, the sample

in this paper does not include entry, so there is no entry share in the decomposition and the

                                                         15
                                 Table 2: Data Moments (std dev in parenthesis)
                                  1992         1997                                             1992      1997
                                                                      h                    i
                                  4,872.00     3,628.00                   Y     Y+1              0.476     0.550
            Survivors                                           Cor       N ∗ , N+1
                                                                                 ∗
                                         -      (32.13)                                        (0.088)   (0.091)
                                 26,277.26     31,860.85              £   Y      Y
                                                                                           ¤    -0.227    -0.193
            E [Y ]                                              Cor       N∗ , ∆ N∗
                                  (747.00)    (1,031.25)                                       (0.103)   (0.057)
                                 13,471.00    16,432.10                                          0.852     0.857
            M ed [Y ]                                           Cor [Y, W ]
                                  (211.35)     (329.77)                                        (0.035)   (0.045)
                                 13,294.48    15,705.09               £   Y
                                                                                   ¤             0.198     0.143
            E [W ]                                              Cor       N∗ , Y
                                  (457.47)     (609.60)                                        (0.036)   (0.038)
                                  7,229.70     8,670.28               £   Y      ∗
                                                                                       ¤        -0.018    -0.026
            M ed [W ]                                           Cor       N∗ , N
                                   (92.75)     (154.90)                                        (0.013)   (0.011)
                                  52,798.52    64,129.07                                        -0.029
            Std [Y ]                                            E [∆Y /Y ]
                                 (5,663.63)   (7,742.51)                                       (0.008)
                                  30,616.94    35,560.60                                         0.550
            Std [W ]                                            Std [∆Y /Y ]
                                 (6,751.09)   (8,138.66)                                       (0.067)
                £   Y
                         ¤          384.40       432.12                                         -0.061
            E       N∗                                          Cor [∆Y /Y, Y ]
                                    (2.91)       (5.10)                                        (0.012)
                    £   Y
                             ¤      205.09       305.35
            Std         N∗         (19.63)      (42.50)


decomposition shares in Table 3. Consequently, the decomposition cannot be directly related to

the results in Foster, Haltiwanger, and Krizan (2001), although a full decomposition is performed

on the estimated model in section 4.5.2.

   The decomposition provides additional information on dynamics in the data and is therefore

valuable for identification purposes. But it is also a useful method of directly relating the model to

a standard reduced form measure of sources of productivity growth. In section 5, we determine the

labor productivity growth rate and the structural decomposition for the estimated model. Labor

productivity growth in the model is only loosely related to growth in value added per worker and

consequently, there is no reason to expect the decomposition in equation (19) to coincide with the

structural decomposition in section 5.




                                                           16
           Table 3: Y /N 1992 to 1997 Growth Decomposition. Std Dev in parentheses.
                                                    Growth Shares
                                                        1.015
                                        Within
                                                       (0.146)
                                                            0.453
                                        Between
                                                           (0.112)
                                                            -0.551
                                         Cross
                                                           (0.196)
                                                            0.084
                                          Exit
                                                           (0.066)


4.2    Model Estimator

An observation in the panel is given by ψ it = (Yit , Wit , Nit∗ ), where Yit is real value added, Wit the

real wage sum, and Nit∗ quality adjusted labor force size of firm i in year t. Let ψ i be defined by,
      ¡             ¢
ψ i = ψ i1,..., ψ iT and finally, ψ = (ψ 1 , . . . , ψ I )

   Simulated minimum distance estimators, as described in for example Gourieroux, Monfort, and

Renault (1993), Hall and Rust (2003), and Alvarez, Browning, and Ejrnæs (2001), are computed

as follows: First, define a vector of auxiliary data parameters, Γ (ψ). The vector consists of all the

items in Table 2 except the number of survivors in 1992 and three of the moments in table 3. Thus,

Γ (ψ) has length 33. Second, ψ s (ω) is simulated from the model for a given set of model parameters

ω. The model simulation is initialized by assuming that the economy is in steady state in the first

year and consequently that firm observations are distributed according to the ω-implied steady

state distribution. Alternatively, one can initialize the simulation according to the observed data in

the first year, (ψ 11 , . . . , ψ 1I ). The assumption that the economy is initially in steady state provides

additional identification in that (ψ 11 , . . . , ψ 1I ) can be compared to the model-implied steady state

distribution (ψ s11 (ω) , . . . , ψ s1I (ω)). The simulated auxiliary parameters are then given by,
                                                     S
                                                   1X
                                        Γs (ω) =       Γ (ψ s (ω)) ,
                                                   S
                                                     s=1

where S is the number of simulation repetitions.

   The estimator is then the choice of parameters that minimizes the weighted distance between




                                                     17
the data and simulated auxiliary parameters,

                                           ¡              ¢0  ¡              ¢
                               ω̂ = arg min Γs (ω) − Γ (ψ) A−1 Γs (ω) − Γ (ψ) ,                                       (20)
                                       ω∈Ω


where A is some positive definite matrix. If A is the identity matrix, ω̂ is the equally weighted

minimum distance estimator (EWMD). If A is the covariance matrix of the data moments Γ (ψ),

ω̂ is the optimal minimum distance estimator (OMD). The OMD estimator is asymptotically more

efficient than the EWMD estimator. However, Altonji and Segal (1996) show that the estimate of

A as the second moment matrix of Γ (·) may suffer from serious small sample bias. Horowitz (1998)

suggests a bootstrap estimator of A. The estimation in this paper adopts Horowitz’s bootstrap

estimator of the covariance matrix A.

   In addition to the ω̂ estimator, the analysis also presents a bootstrap estimator as in Horowitz
                                                                                  ¡ ¢
(1998). In each bootstrap repetition, a new set of data auxiliary parameters Γ ψ b is produced,

where ψ b is the bootstrap data in the bth bootstrap repetition. ψ b is found by randomly selecting

observations ψ i from the original data with replacement. Thus, the sampling is random across

firms but is done by block over the time dimension (if a particular firm i is selected, the entire

time series for this firm is included in the sample). For the bth repetition, an estimator ω b , is found

by minimizing the weighted distance between the re-centered bootstrap data auxiliary parameters
£ ¡ b¢        ¤                                                    £ ¡ ¢            ¤
 Γ ψ − Γ (ψ) and the re-centered simulated auxiliary parameters Γs ω b − Γs (ω̂) ,

                    ³£                ¤   £                     ¤ ´0            ³£                ¤   £               ¤´
   b                      s       s           b                            −1         s       s           b
  ω = arg min            Γ (ω) − Γ (ω̂) − Γ(ψ ) − Γ (ψ)                A             Γ (ω) − Γ (ω̂) − Γ(ψ ) − Γ (ψ)        .
              ω∈Ω


In each bootstrap repetition, a different seed is used to generate random numbers for the determina-

tion of Γs (ω). Hence, the bootstrap estimator of V (ω̂) captures both data variation and variation

from the model simulation.

   The bootstrap estimator of the structural parameters is then the simple average of all the ω b

estimators,
                                                             B
                                                    bs     1 X b
                                               ω̂        =     ω ,                                                    (21)
                                                           B
                                                                b=1

where B is the total number of bootstrap repetitions. In the estimation below, B = 500 and S = 10.




                                                           18
4.3   Model Simulation

To fit the data, the model simulation produces time paths for value added (Y ), the wage sum (W ),

and labor force size (N ) for I firms. The estimation introduces a stochastic demand realization for

each of a firm’s products, Z̃. Thus, the demand for product j is given by xj = Z̃/pj . The random

variable, Z̃, is iid across products and is assumed to follow a log-normal distribution,
                                       ³          ´
                               Z̃ = exp ξ̃σ z + µz where ξ̃ ∼ N (0, 1) .                         (22)
                                    h i
Denote the expected value of Ze by E Z̃ = Z. Given the formulation of the firm’s problem, the

innovation rate is affected by the Z̃ distribution only through the expectation of Z̃ and not by any

of the higher order moments.

   To properly capture the labor share in the data, a capital cost κ ≡ K/Z is added to the model

where K is the capital associated with the production of a given product and κ is the capital cost

relative to average product expenditure. This modifies the pricing of the intermediary goods. Now,

providing an intermediary good at price p yields expected operational profits, Z (1 − w/p − κ).

Thus, the price of intermediary good j is, p = qw/ (1 − κ) since consumers are exactly indifferent

between buying from the quality leader at this price and the from the immediate follower at price

p = w/ (1 − κ) , which is as low as the follower is willing to go. The inclusion of a non-labor cost

then modifies the definition of production profits, π, as defined in (7). The more general definition

that allows for non-labor cost is given by,

                                         π = (1 − κ) (1 − q −1 ),                                (23)

which is identical to (7) if κ = 0.

   The quality of each new innovation (and thereby the profit associated with it) is a stochastic

realization drawn from a distribution which is contingent on the firm’s type. Specifically, the profit

of any particular innovation is assumed to satisfy

             e = (1 − κ) (1 − qe−1 ), where qe = 1 + exp (ξσ πe + µπe (π)) and ξ ∼ N (0, 1) .
             π                                                                                   (24)

where the mean E [e
                  π |π] = π represents the firm’s profitability type, the determinant of its creation

rate. Each firm’s type is itself a random variable realized after entry. We assume that the steady

                                                   19
state distribution profit distribution, denoted as p(π), is characterized by


               π = (1 − κ) (1 − q −1 ), where q = 1 + exp (zσ π + µπ ) and z ∼ N (0, 1)            (25)


where in both (24) and (25) N (0, 1) represents the standard normal distribution. For future refer-

ence,
                                                         M (π)
                                            p(π) ≡ R                                               (26)
                                                       π M (π)dπ

where M (π), the steady state mass of firms of type, is given by equation (14).

   Denote by Πk = (π 1 , . . . , π k ) the quality realizations of a firm’s k products. Similarly let

Z k = (Z1 , . . . , Zk ) be the demand realizations of the firm’s k products. The value added of a type
                                              ¡       ¢
π firm with k products characterized by Πk , Z k is given by,

                                          ³         ´ Xk
                                            k   k
                                        Yk Π , Z , π =   Zi ,                                      (27)
                                                            i=1

where each product demand realization Zi is drawn according to (22). The wage bill is given by,

                            ³           ´    k
                                             X       ¡           ¢       ¡    ¢
                                k   k
                          Wk Π , Z , π =           Zi 1 − κ − π i + kZwc̃ γ(π) ,                   (28)
                                             i=1

where b
      c (γ) = c (γ) /Z.

   The estimation allows for measurement error in both value added and the wage bill. The

measurement error is introduced as a simple log-additive process,

                                  ³             ´        ³            ´
                            ln Ỹk Πk , Z k , π   = ln Yk Πk , Z k , π + ξ Y
                                  ³             ´         ³            ´
                           ln W̃k Πk , Z k , π    = ln Wk Πk , Z k , π + ξ W ,

             ¡       ¢           ¡       ¢
where ξ Y ∼ N 0, σ 2Y and ξ W ∼ N 0, σ 2W . The estimation is performed on the quality adjusted

labor force size. Consequently, the wage bill measurement error is assumed to carry through to the
                     ¡            ¢     ¡            ¢
labor force size, Ñk Πk , Z k , π = W̃k Πk , Z k , π /w since by construction, Ni∗ w = Wi for all firms

in the data.

   Lentz and Mortensen (2005) analyze the firm’s creation rate choice in the general case where

product quality is a stochastic process. Because the value of the next product is linear in profit

and the profit realizations across products are iid for each firm, the optimal choice of creation rate


                                                     20
for a firm of type π solves,

                                            E [e
                                               π ] − wb
                                                      c (γ)           π − wb
                                                                           c (γ)
                        γ (π) = arg max                     = arg max                               (29)
                                        γ     r+δ−γ                γ  r+δ−γ

                                                                        c (γ) = c 0 γ 1+c1 . Then, the
as in the deterministic case sketch above. Specify the cost function as b

first order condition for the optimal creation rate choice is,

                               w (1 + c1 ) c0 γ c1 (r + δ − γ) = π − wc0 γ 1+c1 .                   (30)

   Equations (27) and (28) provide the foundation for the model simulation. It then remains to

simulate product paths for all firms. The simulation is initialized by the assumption of steady state.

By (15), the steady state product size distribution conditional on survival is given by,
                                                            ³     ´k
                                                          1 γ(π)
                                               Mk (π)     k   δ
                             Pr (k ∗ = k|π) =         = ³           ´.                              (31)
                                               M (π)     ln     δ
                                                                    δ−γ(π)

First, a firm’s type, π, is determined according to (25). Then, the initial product size of a firm (k 1 )

is determined following (31).

   With a given initial product size, simulation of the subsequent time path requires knowledge of

the transition probability function Pr (k2 = k|k1 , π). Denote by pπ,n (t) the probability of a type

π firm having product size n at time t. As shown in Klette and Kortum (2004), p π,n (t) evolves

according to the ordinary differential equation system,

       ṗπ,n (t) = (n − 1) γ (π) pπ,n−1 (t) + (n + 1) δpπ,n+1 (t) − (δ + γ (π)) pπ,n (t) , ∀n ≥ 1

       ṗπ,0 (t) = δpπ,1 (t) .                                                                      (32)

Hence, with the initial condition,
                                                     ½
                                                         1 if n = k1
                                        pπ,n (0) =                                                  (33)
                                                         0 otherwise.

one can determine Pr (k2 = k|k1 , π) by solving the differential equation system in (32) for pπ,k (1).

Solving for pπ,k (1) involves setting an upper reflective barrier to bound the differential equation

system. It has been set sufficiently high so as to avoid biasing the transition probabilities. Based on

the transition probabilities Pr (kt+1 = k|kt , π) one can then iteratively simulate product size paths

for each firm. The procedure correctly captures the evolution of kt but it does not identify the

                                                         21
                  ¡          ¢                  ¡          ¢
exact evolution of Πkt , Z kt . The evolution of Πkt , Z kt is assumed to follow the net change in

products.6

       Finally, the simulation allows for an exogenous growth factor in both value added and the

wage bill, denoted as gb, that is independent of the endogenous quality improvements produced by

incumbents and entrants.

4.4      Identification

The set of model parameters to be identified (ω) is given by,

                                ©                                                             ª
                             ω = c0 , c1 , δ, κ, Z, σ 2z , σ π2e , σ 2π , µπ , gb, σ 2Y , σ 2W ∈ Ω,


where Ω is the feasible set of model parameters choices. The interest rate will be set at r = .05. The

wage w is immediately identified as the average worker wage in the sample w = 190.24. Experi-

mentation with non-parametric identification of the firm type distribution has been performed with

a distribution with 4 support points. Because the results showed little sensitivity in the remaining

model parameters to this alternative specification, we report only those parameters obtained given

the assumed parametric distribution of types.

4.5      Estimation Results

The model parameter estimates are given in Table 4. Table 5 produces a comparison of the data

moments and the simulated moments associated with the model parameter estimates.

       The estimated model does well in fitting the labor productivity distribution and the correlations

between productivity and firm size. These relationships are also shown in Figure 3. Notice that the

model has not been fitted to the higher order moments of these relationships but fits them quite

well nonetheless.

       The estimation implies a significant level of firm type heterogeneity. In Table 4, it is expressed

via the distribution of the firm’s expected quality improvement of an innovation. The type dis-
   6
                                                                                   ¡           ¢
    Suppose firm i is simulated to lose one product in a given year. In this case, Πkit , Z kit is updated by randomly
eliminating one element from it. This assumes that the net loss of one product took place by the gross destruction of
one product and zero gross creation. This is the most likely event by which the firm loses one product. However, the
net loss could also ¡come about ¢ by the gross destruction of two products and gross creation of one product during the
year. In this case, Πkit , Z kit should be updated by randomly eliminating two elements and adding one. There are in
principle an infinite number of ways¡ that the¢ firm can loose one product over the year. The estimation consequently
over-estimates the persistency of Πkit , Z kit . The bias will go to zero as the period length is reduced, though.


                                                              22
                                     Table 4: Model Parameter Estimates
                                           Point Estimate       Bootstrap Estimator         Std Deviation
                       c0                        595.2774                  598.6864               50.8455
                       c1                          4.4186                    4.4224                0.0785
                       κ                           0.4420                    0.4403                0.0055
                       Z                      17,024.5242               17,053.0482              428.3154
                        δ                          0.0794                    0.0791                0.0029
                      σ 2z                         0.9138                    0.8612                0.0487
                      σ π2e                        2.3317                    2.0939                0.3692
                      µπ                          -4.6093                   -4.7304                0.3004
                      σ 2π                         5.9086                    6.8098                0.7993
                       gb                          0.0163                    0.0166                0.0012
                      σ 2Y                         0.0114                    0.0093                0.0047
                      σ 2W                         0.0283                    0.0293                0.0039
              Inferred Estimates
                       η                             0.0456                        0.0448          0.0018
                       m                             1.2370                        1.2116          0.0973
                      M                              0.7174                        0.7069          0.0209
                       L                            44.8899                       44.6207          1.2804
                       γ̄                            0.0338                        0.0344          0.0029
             Entry q-distribution
                10th percentile                       1.0004                       1.0003          0.0001
                    Median                            1.0072                       1.0064          0.0018
                90th percentile                       1.1327                       1.1402          0.0261
          Steady state q-distribution
                10th percentile                       1.0004                       1.0003          0.0001
                    Median                            1.0099                       1.0091          0.0025
                90th percentile                       1.2206                       1.2410          0.0462

tribution at entry is such that the median firm expects to produce a 0.72% quality improvement

upon discovering an innovation. The 90th percentile firm expects a 13.27% improvement. The

heterogeneity in creation rates across types is reflected in the steady state distribution where the

high type firms are over-represented relative to the entry distribution to the point where the 90 th

percentile firm in steady state expects a 22.06% quality improvement when it innovates. We have

experimented with more flexible choices of type distributions and have found the current choice to

be non-restrictive.

      Given the steady state equilibrium definition, one can infer the overall entry rate, η, and the

measure of potential entrant, m.7 The implied values of these parameters are also reported in

Table 4. The average incumbent creation rate, γ̄, is simply the difference between the entry rate
  7
      The formulas used to make the calculations are presented in the appendix.


                                                         23
                                         Table 5: Model Fit
                                            Data                  Simulated Model
                                      1992          1997          1992        1997
               Survivors            4,872.000     3,628.000     4,872.000   3,594.300
               E [Y ]              26,277.262    31,860.851    23,832.346 28,088.419
               M ed [Y ]           13,471.000    16,432.098    13,536.529 15,718.961
               E [W ]              13,294.479    15,705.087    11,976.439 13,868.172
               M ed [W ]            7,229.704     8,670.279     7,146.571   8,234.080
               Std [Y ]            52,798.524    64,129.072    39,536.429 46,974.187
               Std
                 £ [W¤]            30,616.944    35,560.602    15,439.476 17,810.208
               E N£Y∗ ¤               384.401       432.118       384.046     421.007
               Std hNY∗       i       205.095       305.348       199.185     216.350
                   Y     Y+1
               Cor N ∗ , N+1
                          ∗             0.476         0.550        0.798         0.793
                  £Y           ¤
               Cor N ∗ , ∆ NY∗          -0.227        -0.193       -0.295       -0.312
               Cor [Y,
                    £ YW] ¤              0.852         0.857        0.855        0.853
               Cor £ N ∗ , Y ¤           0.198         0.143        0.207        0.230
               Cor NY∗ , N ∗            -0.018        -0.026       -0.021       -0.011
               E [∆Y /Y ]               -0.029             –        0.011            –
               Std [∆Y /Y ]              0.550             –        0.844            –
               Cor [∆Y /Y, Y ]          -0.061             –       -0.029            –
               Growth decomp.
                – Within                 1.015            –         0.939            –
                – Between                0.453            –         0.350            –
                – Cross                 -0.551            –        -0.429            –
                – Exit                   0.084            –         0.140            –

and the destruction rate. It is seen that the estimates imply that more than half of all innovation

comes from entrants. Given the estimated steady state distribution of firms, p(π), and the other

parameters of the model, one can also infer the ex ante type distribution, φ (π). The cdf’s of the

two distributions are shown in Figure 4 along with the incumbent creation rate choice conditional

on firm type. It is clear from the figure that the higher quality type firms choose higher creation

rates and consequently grow faster. Therefore, those with better products will make up a larger

fraction of firms in steady state relative to their shares at entry. The consequences of this fact for

aggregate growth are explored more fully below.

   The estimation is performed given the assumption that the true firm population of interest

coincides with the size censoring in the data. That is, the estimation does not correct for size

censoring bias. While this is obviously a strong assumption, it reasonable assumption that the

large number of very small firms in the economy are qualitatively different from those in this


                                                 24
                Figure 3: Firm Productivity and Size, 1992 (Data and Simulation).


                    Y /N ∗ vs. Y                                           Y /N ∗ vs. N ∗
 Y                                    pdf (×0.001) N ∗                                        pdf (×0.001)
 90                                             4 100                                                   4


 70                                               3        75                                            3


 50                                               2        50                                            2


 30                                               1        25                                            1


 10                                               0         0                                            0
      0       0.3         0.6       0.9       1.2               0    0.3         0.6        0.9      1.2
                                               Y /N ∗                                                 Y /N ∗

Note: Observed relationships drawn in bold pen and estimated relationships drawn in thin pen. Value added mea-
      sured in 1 million DKK.



analysis and are not just firms with fewer products.

   The estimation explicitly includes a number of dynamic moments. In addition, it should be

noted that since the estimation is performed on cross-section moments not just in 1992 but also in

1997 and because of the specific sampling procedure in the data, the estimation implicitly address

dynamic features of the model. The trends in the moments over time are in part interpreted as a

result of systematic selection bias due to creation rate heterogeneity across types.


Size Distributions        The model captures the medians of the Y and W distributions, but under-

estimate the mean and the variance. Thus, the model is not quite capturing the heaviness of the

right-tail of the size distributions. This can likely be remedied by a more flexible choice of demand

and supply shock processes.

   The dispersion estimate is a result of a combination of the stochastic nature of the birth-death

process of products, the demand shock process, and to a lesser extend the measurement error

processes. Model simulation without measurement error (σ 2Y = σ 2W = 0) yields a reduction in the

1992 value added standard deviation estimate from 39, 536.43 to 37, 697.31. A model simulation

                                                      25
                     Figure 4: Creation Rate Choice and Firm Type Distributions.

                  Creation Rate Choice                                            Firm Type Distributions
  γ(π)                                                         cdf
 0.08                                                       1.000
              δ                                                           Entry
                                                                                    Incumbent (steady state)
 0.06                                                       0.875


 0.04                                                       0.750


 0.02                                                       0.625


 0.00                                                       0.500
        0.0          0.2           0.4            0.6               0.0              0.2          0.4          0.6
                                                        π                                                            π

Note: Type distribution at entry drawn in solid pen. The steady state type distribution drawn in dashed line.



with no demand shocks (σ 2Z = 0) yields a reduction in the 1992 value added standard deviation

estimate from 39, 536.43 to 28, 838.20.


Productivity–Size Correlations Type heterogeneity and supply side shocks, σ 2π and σ π̃2 respec-

tively, play an important role in explaining the productivity – size correlations. Type heterogeneity

provides the foundation for a positive correlation between productivity and output size through a

greater product creation rate for higher productivity type firms. The overall heterogeneity in prod-

uct quality realizations both through type heterogeneity and random quality realizations within

types explains the difference between the productivity – input size correlation and the productivity

– output size correlation. Together σ 2π and σ π̃2 are chosen to get the exact levels of the correlations

right. Measurement error has the potential of explaining these correlations as well. The estima-

tion allows for both input and output measurement error which are estimated at fairly moderate

amounts. If the model is simulated without the measurement error (σ 2Y = σ 2W = 0), the 1992

size–productivity correlations change to corr (Y /N, Y ) = 0.210 and corr (Y /N, N ) = 0.0190. Thus,

measurement error is estimated to have virtually no impact on these moments in the data. Rather,

these moments are explained to be a result of the labor saving innovation process at the heart of

                                                        26
the model.


Right-Shift of Size Distributions         Notice that the model successfully captures the right shift of

the Y and W distributions of survivors from 1992 to 1997. There are three effects that contribute to

the right shift: Generally, since the sampling eliminates the flow in of entrants, the model predicts a

general decrease in mass of firms of all product sizes and types, Mk (π) , since all firms face an overall

negative product growth rate. However, since entrants are assumed to flow in from the lower end of

the size distribution, the reduction in mass is relatively stronger at the lower end and consequently

the size distribution of survivors will begin to place relatively more weight on the upper end as

time passes. Thus, the model predicts that the use of an unbalanced panel that excludes entry

will itself produce a right shift of the distributions since entrants are assumed to enter as small

firms. Second, the positive exogenous growth estimate directly predicts a right shift of the Y and

W distributions. The third effect comes from type heterogeneity. In steady state, larger firms will

over-represent high type firms with high creation rates and small firms will over-represent low type

firms with low creation rates. Thus, smaller firms face greater net product destruction than large

firms. In the absence of entry, the negative correlation between size and net product destruction

rate will in isolation produce a right shift of the Y and W distributions over time. Hence, this

effect is also a consequence of the use of an unbalanced panel that excludes entry, but is separate

from the first explanation which is not a result of destruction rate heterogeneity.


Value Added per Worker Distribution               The distribution of firm labor productivity Y /N is

explained primarily through type heterogeneity, the capital share, the structural noise processes,

and measurement error. The mean level of value added per worker is closely linked to the estimate of

κ. The dispersion in Y /N across firms is explained primarily and in roughly equal parts through type

heterogeneity and the positive estimate of σ π̃2 - supply side shocks. Measurement error adds to the

dispersion measure, but to a smaller extend. Simulation without measurement error (σ 2Y = σ 2W = 0)

yields a reduction in the 1992 Y /N standard deviation measure from 199.19 to 174.62. To an even

lesser extend dispersion in Y /N is also affected by the positive estimate of σ 2Z , that is, demand side

shocks because the size of the R&D department is unaffected by particular demand realizations for


                                                   27
a firm’s products. In the absence of the R&D department, demand side shocks cannot affect labor

productivity because an increase in Z realizations will increase value added and manufacturing

labor demand by the same fraction. However, since the demand for R&D labor is unaffected by

an increase in overall demand, a positive demand shock will result in an increase in the overall

labor productivity measure, Y /N . Demand side shocks turn out to be a secondary source of labor

productivity dispersion, though. Simulating the model with σ 2Z = 0 yields a reduction in the 1992

Y /N standard deviation measure from 199.19 to 194.03.

   The right shift of the value added per worker distribution from 1992 to 1997 is explained as

a combination of the exogenous growth estimate and the selection effect in that more productive

firms have lower exit hazard rates. However, given the relatively low estimate of overall creative

destruction, the primary effect is from the exogenous growth estimate.


Value Added per Worker Persistence and Mean Reversion The persistence in firm labor
                ³       ´
                  Y Y+1
productivity cor N , N+1 can be explained directly through σ 2π , σ 2Z , the magnitudes of the creation

and destruction rates γ (π) and δ, and measurement error. The estimate of the relatively low level

of overall creation and destruction implies that both the supply and the demand shock processes are

fairly permanent and they turn out to contribute very little in the explanation of the persistence

and mean reversion of value added per worker. Thus it is left to the transitory nature of the

measurement error processes to explain the exact persistence and mean reversion of the value added

per worker measures. Simulating the model without measurement error (σ 2Y = σ 2W = 0) results in
                                                  ³       ´              ¡Y       ¢
                                                    Y Y+1                       Y
1992 persistence and mean reversion moments of cor N , N+1 ≈ .97 and cor N  , ∆N    ≈ −.015. So,

without the measurement error, the model implies a high level of value added per worker persistence,

which is ultimately reduced by the measurement error components. It is important to note that

transitory demand shocks have much the same impact as the measurement error components along

this dimension. One can speculate that the introduction of an additional demand noise component

of a more transitory nature will result in a lower measurement error noise estimate.




                                                  28
                Figure 5: Kernel Regression of Firm Growth Rate and Size (1992).

              ∆Y /Y                                                                      pdf
             0.20                                                                         0.006




             0.00                                                                           0.004




           −0.20                                                                            0.002

                                         Y pdf (right axis)


           −0.40                                                                            0.000
                    0                                50                               100
                                                                                            Y
   Note: Estimated model drawn in solid line. Data drawn in dashed line. Value added measured in 1 million
         DKK. Shaded area represents 90% confidence bounds. Value added distribution from data drawn on
         right axis.



4.5.1   Growth Rate and Size

Beginning with Gibrat (1931), much emphasis has been placed on the relationship between firm

growth and firm size. Gibrat’s law is interpreted to imply that a firm’s growth rate is size inde-

pendent and a large literature has followed testing the validity of this law. See Sutton (1997) for a

survey of the literature. No real consensus seems to exist, but at least on the study of continuing

establishments, a number of researchers have found a negative relationship between firm size and

growth rate. For a recent example, see Rossi-Hansberg and Wright (2005). One can make the

argument that Gibrat’s law should not necessarily hold at the establishment level and that one

must include firm death in order to correct for survivor bias. Certainly, if the underlying discus-

sion is about issues of decreasing returns to scale in production, it is more likely to be relevant

at the establishment level than at the firm level. However, as can be seen from Figure 5, in the

current sample of firms where the growth rate – size regression includes firm exits, one still obtains

a negative relationship.



                                                     29
               Table 6: Firm Size and Growth Moments. Estimate and Counterfactuals
                                                                                   σ 2Z = 0
                                                          Point   σ 2Y = 0         σ 2Y = 0
                                              Data       Estimate σ 2W = 0         σ 2W = 0
                        E [∆Y /Y ]            -0.029       0.011      -0.001           -0.034
                        Std [∆Y /Y ]           0.550       0.844       0.083            0.300
                        Cor [∆Y /Y, Y ]       -0.061      -0.029      -0.022            0.016

    At a theoretical level, the model satisfies Gibrat’s law; A firm’s net innovation rate is size in-

dependent. But two opposing effects will impact the unconditional size–growth relationship: First,

due to selection, larger firms will tend to over-represent higher creation rate types and in isolation

the selection effect will make for a positive relationship between size and and the unconditional

firm growth rate. Second, the mean reversion in demand shocks, measurement error, and to a

smaller extend in supply shocks introduces an opposite effect: The group of small firms today will

tend to over-represent firms with negative demand and measurement error shocks. Chances are

that the demand realization of the next innovation will reverse the fortunes of these firms and they

will experience relatively large growth rates. On a period-by-period basis, the same is true for the

measurement error processes that are assumed to be iid over time. Large firms have many products

and experience less overall demand variance. The demand shock and measurement error effects

dominate in the estimated model as can be seen in Figure 5.8 Note that the growth statistics

include firm death. If firm deaths are excluded and the statistic is calculated only on survivors, the

survival bias will steepen the negative relationship between firm size and firm growth both for the

data and for the model since the model reproduces the higher exit hazard rate for small firms that

is also found in data.

    Thus, in our interpretation the model satisfies Gibrat’s law by design, but it nevertheless ex-

hibits a negative relationship between observed firm size and growth rate. As shown in Table

6, the model explains the negative relationship found in data through demand fluctuations and

measurement error.9 Gibrat’s law may at one level simply be a statement about the observed
   8
     Figure 5 uses value added as the firm size measure. Using labor force size as the size measure instead results in
a very similar looking figure and no significant change in the correlation between size and growth.
   9
     It is important to note that identification of the demand shock and measurement error processes comes from other
aspects of the data as well such as dispersion in the size distribution and a number of the dynamic moments. If the
Gibrat related moments are excluded from the estimation, the estimated model still exhibits a negative relationship
between observed firm size and growth rate.


                                                         30
relationship between firm size and growth, and its validity is in this sense an issue that can be

settled through observations such as the one in Figure 5. However, we have interpreted Gibrat’s

law to be a statement about a more fundamental proportionality between size and the firm’s growth

process, specifically innovation. In this case, the structural estimation shows that observation of

the relationship between firm growth and firm size is not enough to falsify the statement.

4.5.2   Y /N Growth Decomposition

With the introduction of longitudinal micro-level data sets, a large literature has emerged with

the focus on firm level determinants of aggregate productivity growth. See Bartelsman and Doms

(2000) for a review of the literature. Given the observation of extensive firm level productivity

dispersion, one particular area of interest has been the contribution to aggregate productivity

growth from resource reallocation. The discussion has been quantified through decompositions

such as (19), where productivity has been defined either as value added per worker or firm TFP.

In the estimation in this paper, we have used the value added per worker measure. It should be

immediately clear that value added per worker is only loosely related to actual productivity growth

in our model, so we should at the outset expect some level of divergence between the reduced form

decomposition in (19) and the structural decomposition that we present in the following section.

   In the estimation and in the data sample, entry is excluded and the decomposition consequently

has no value added per worker growth contribution from entry. The first two columns of Table

7, presents the decomposition results from the data and the simulated steady state that excludes

entry. The remaining three columns in the table presents the simulated steady state with entry

for the actual point estimate and for the two counterfactuals where measurement error noise and

demand shocks have been eliminated.

   The steady state with entry simulates not only the dynamic evolution of the sample of incum-

bents, which is the sample that the estimation is based on, it also simulates the entry process

implied by the steady state general equilibrium. The entry process is described in section 3.3. For

the estimated model, the size of the potential entrant pool is 4, 872m/M = 8, 400. At any point

in time, each of these entrants will enter according to entry rate γ 0 = η/m = 0.0369. The entry

process is simulated to fit the one year observation frequency in the data. Thus, for each entrant


                                                31
who starts the year in the potential entrant pool, we calculate the transition probability that after

1 year the potential entrant has k products, Pr (ke = k|π), where the type conditioning refers to the

firm type realization at entry. The type realization is obviously unknown to the potential entrant

prior to entry, but is subsequently of importance in terms of determining the birth-death process

of product lines in the remainder of the year after entry. If ke > 0 the firm is registered as an

entrant with ke products and the subsequent life of the entrant is simulated through the incumbent

transition probability described in section 4.3.

   The type π conditional potential entrant transition probability, Pr (ke = k|π), is calculated in

a similar fashion to the incumbent transition probability as described in section 4.3. However, in

this case, the differential equation system that describes the probability that the potential entrant

has product size n at time t, takes the form,


         ṗe (t) = −γ 0 pe (t)

       ṗπ,1 (t) = γ 0 pe (t) − (δ + γ (π)) pπ,1 (t)

       ṗπ,n (t) = (n − 1) γ (π) pπ,n−1 (t) + (n + 1) δpπ,n+1 (t) − (δ + γ (π)) pπ,n (t) , ∀n ≥ 2

       ṗπ,0 (t) = δpπ,1 (t) ,


where the notation follows the notation in section 4.3 with the addition that p e (t) refers to the

probability that the potential entrant is still a potential entrant at time t (and obviously has product

size 0). Given the initial condition pe (0) = 1, the potential entrant transition probability is found

by solving the above differential equation system for pe (1) and pπ,k (1). Thus, the probability that

the potential entrant will not have entered after one year is pe (1) + pπ,0 (1). The latter term reflects

the event that a firm enters but exits again before the year’s end, in which case the firm is not

included in the pool of entrants. It is also seen that the discrete observation frequency implies that

entry with more than one product is a positive likelihood event.

   The decomposition results on the data suggest a significant contribution to productivity growth

from reallocation, roughly 45%, which is a bit higher than results in Foster, Haltiwanger, and

Krizan (2001), but still within the general range of their results. Part of this could have been

interpreted to be a result of a missing entry component. The model does reasonably well in


                                                       32
               Table 7: Y /N Growth Decomposition. Estimate and Counterfactuals
                                                     Steady State with Entry
                                                                        σ 2Z = 0
                                         Point    Point      σ 2Y = 0   σ 2Y = 0
                               Data                           2
                                        Estimate Estimate σ W = 0       σ 2W = 0
                  Within        1.015     0.939      1.108        0.796      0.820
                  Between       0.453     0.350      0.301        0.037      0.053
                  Cross        -0.551    -0.429     -0.612       -0.065     -0.104
                  Exit          0.084     0.140      0.160        0.161      0.160
                  Entry             –         –      0.069        0.072      0.072

capturing the decomposition. The third column introduces the model implied steady state entry

to the decomposition and does confirm the idea that the somewhat high reallocation contribution

could be a result of missing entry observations.

   The fourth column in Table 7 shows the model decomposition results without the measurement

error. Both the cross-term and reallocation contribution components drop to close to zero mag-

nitude and measurement error is in this case shown to be a very important issue for the form in

(19). Obviously, true productivity growth is unaffected by measurement error. We quantify true

productivity growth and a structural decomposition in section 5.

   Foster, Haltiwanger, and Krizan (2001) note the potential importance of measurement error

and present alternative forms that may be less sensitive to measurement error. But it is doubtful

that these alternative measures will be better reflections of productivity growth for the structure

in this paper given the loose connection between value added per worker and TFP to the actual

productivity contribution of a firm. This issue is related to points raised in Klette and Griliches

(1996) where unobserved endogenous pricing at the firm level is discussed. It is an interesting issue

whether one can obtain a simple reduced form that can approximate the true decomposition for

this paper’s model.

   In terms of identification, the cross-term component turns out to be of particular importance

for the input measurement error parameter. If the model is estimated subject to σ 2W = 0, the

remaining model parameters change a little towards a bit more estimated type dispersion, but

leaves the estimated cross term component close to zero. Allowing for input measurement error

results in the fairly good fit of the cross-term component as shown in Table 7. In isolation, the input


                                                   33
                                Table 8: Data Moments by Industry
                         Manufacturing            Wholesale    and retail         Construction
                        1992       1997             1992           1997         1992        1997
  Survivors           2,051.000  1,536.000        1,584.000      1,189.000      651.000     480.000
  E [Y ]             30,149.460 35,803.473       22,952.920     28,386.719   15,191.354 16,869.550
  M ed [Y ]          15,117.552 18,855.682       12,740.250     15,288.949    8,688.501 10,691.434
  E [W ]             15,047.636 17,318.195       10,696.683     12,712.899    9,973.166 10,594.737
  M ed [W ]           8,031.273  9,530.273        6,417.403      7,650.565    5,785.053   6,832.554
  Std [Y ]           56,095.672 69,597.651       33,410.862     41,426.484   31,311.623 22,478.083
  Std
    £ [W¤]           24,673.900 27,168.284       15,365.073     16,809.785   24,545.298 14,195.942
  E N£Y∗ ¤              379.047    422.471          410.234        466.591      305.075     342.273
  Std hNY∗      i       163.214    226.934          171.716        278.613      133.213     174.052
        Y    Y+1
  Cor     ∗,               0.650        0.728         0.325         0.674        0.428        0.345
     £ NY N+1Y ¤
              ∗

  Cor N ∗ , ∆ N ∗         -0.024        -0.195        -0.195        -0.259       -0.327      -0.560
  Cor [Y,
       £ W] ¤              0.889         0.855         0.922         0.914        0.967       0.922
  Cor £ NY∗ , Y ¤          0.236         0.200         0.252         0.188        0.131       0.174
  Cor NY∗ , N ∗            0.011        -0.003        -0.028        -0.039       -0.040      -0.093
  E [∆Y /Y ]              -0.035             –        -0.042             –       -0.025           –
  Std [∆Y /Y ]             0.474             –         0.425             –        0.448           –
  Cor [∆Y /Y, Y ]         -0.073             –        -0.090             –       -0.122           –
  Growth decomp.
   – Within                0.863             –         1.176            –         0.986           –
   – Between               0.365             –         0.618            –         0.635           –
   – Cross                -0.297             –        -0.826            –        -0.870           –
   – Exit                  0.068             –         0.032            –         0.249           –

measurement error implies some Y /N dispersion and the estimation responds by lowering the type

dispersion estimate a little to fit the actual Y /N dispersion. It is interesting that the measurement

error estimate is very moderate, and has little effect on the remaining model parameter estimates,

but it has a very significant impact on the decomposition results.

4.6     Estimation by Industry

It is of course possible that the correlations and other data moments in Table 2 are a result of

firm heterogeneity across industries and does not reflect the true picture within more homogenous

subgroups of firms. This turns out not to be the case. Data moments by industry reveal the

same qualitative picture as in Table 2 for each industry. Table 8 presents data moments for the

3 largest industries (by firm count). All industries show evidence of significant firm productivity

dispersion, a roughly zero correlation between productivity and firm input size and a positive



                                                 34
                               Table 9: Point Estimate by Industry
                                               Manu-        Wholesale     Construction
                                              facturing     and retail
                           c0                   821.1786       639.0215        93.0344
                           c1                     4.2496         3.7907         3.2079
                           κ                      0.4515         0.5000         0.3163
                           Z                 19,588.1611    17,962.8955    10,717.1519
                            δ                     0.0687         0.0584         0.0704
                          σ 2z                    0.8291         0.7748         0.5938
                          σ π2e                   1.6388         0.2173         0.0012
                          µπ                     -6.1584        -7.3303        -5.2908
                          σ 2π                    8.1522        13.0962         6.1584
                           gb                     0.0194         0.0211         0.0131
                          σ 2Y                    0.0140         0.0151         0.0188
                          σ 2W                    0.0215         0.0194         0.0301
                  Inferred Estimates
                           η                      0.0483         0.0465         0.0556
                           m                      1.8490         2.5405         2.8637
                          M                       0.8139         0.8765         0.8777
                           L                     53.0892        45.3600        36.3381
                           γ̄                     0.0205         0.0120         0.0149
                 Entry q-distribution
                    10th percentile               1.0000         1.0000         1.0002
                         Median                   1.0016         1.0005         1.0042
                    90th percentile               1.0500         1.0384         1.0869
              Steady state q-distribution
                    10th percentile               1.0001         1.0000         1.0002
                         Median                   1.0021         1.0007         1.0050
                       th
                    90 percentile                 1.0821         1.0677         1.1212

correlation between productivity and firm output size (roughly 0.2). All industries also display a

fair amount of productivity persistence and mean reversion. Finally, both the value added and

wage bill distributions are characterized by a strong right shift over time across industries.

   The estimates by industry are reported in Table 9. The model estimates by industry are not

qualitatively different from the full sample estimate but it is worth noting a consistent drop in the

estimated type dispersion in the industry estimates. This is likely a result of effectively allowing

for more heterogeneity in other model parameters.




                                                 35
5    Reallocation and Growth

If more profitable firms grow faster, then workers move from less to more profitable surviving firms

as well as from exiting to entering firms. This selection effect can be demonstrated by noting that

more profitable firms are over represented (relative to their fraction at entry) among those that

produce more than one product and that this ”selection bias” increases with the number of products

produced. Namely, by equation (13), the difference between the relative fraction of a given firm

type in the surviving population with k products and relative the fraction in its entry cohort,
                                                      "µ        ¶      #
                          Mk (π 0 ) φ(π 0 )   φ(π 0 )    γ(π 0 ) k−1
                                   −        =                        −1 ,                       (34)
                           Mk (π)    φ(π)     φ(π)       γ(π)

is positive and increasing in k when π 0 > π.

    From equation (5), the equilibrium rate of growth in consumption is

             Ċ
                  = g = δE ln q
             C        µZ                        Z                P               ¶
                                       ηφ(π)dπ               γ(π) ∞k=1 kMk (π)dπ
                  = δ      E [ln q(π)]         + E [ln q(π)]
                         π                δ       π                   δ
                      Z                       Z               ∞
                                                              X
                  = η E [ln q(π)] φ(π)dπ + γ(π)E [ln q(π)]       kMk (π)dπ
                          π                      π               k=1

where q(π) = (1 − κ) /(1 − π − κ) is the quality of the products of a type π firm and δ is the

aggregate rate of creative destruction as defined in equation (18). The decomposition of the rate

of productivity growth,
                               Z                          Z
                       g = η     E [ln q(π)] φ(π)dπ + γ(π)E [ln q(π)] φ(π)dπ                     (35)
                                 Zπ              ·      π
                                                               ¸
                                                      η
                              + γ(π)E [ln q(π)]             − 1 φ(π)dπ
                                π                  δ − γ(π)
       ηφ(π)      P∞
where δ−γ(π) =     k=1 kMk (π)   from equation (13), highlights the role of worker reallocation from

exiting to entering firms as well as from less to more productive firms as sources of productivity
                           R
growth. The first term η π E [ln q(π)] φ(π)dπ is the net effect of entry and exit on productivity
                           R
growth. The second term π γ(π)E [ln q(π)] φ(π)dπ is the average contribution of continuing firms
                                                         R                  £P ∞               ¤
to growth were there no selection. Finally, the last term π γ(π)E [ln q(π)]    k=1 kMk (π)−φ(π) dπ

represents the contribution of worker reallocation from firms with products of lesser quality to firms

that produce higher quality products.

                                                     36
                           Table 10: Labor Productivity Growth Rate Estimates.
                                           Point Estimate      Bootstrap Estimate         Std Deviation
             Growth rate g                         0.0213                  0.0232               0.0034
             Decomposition shares:
             – Entry                                 0.1436                    0.1301              0.0138
             – Continuing                            0.1765                    0.1662              0.0250
             – Reallocation                          0.6800                    0.7032              0.1120

                                                ¡R P                  ¢
    Since the total measure of products is unity π ∞ k=1 kMk (π)dπ = 1 and φ(π)dπ is the fraction
                      ¡R              ¢
of entrants of type π, π φ(π)dπ = 1 , it follows that
                       Z "X ∞
                                               #     Z µ             ¶
                                                             η
                    0=          kMk (π) − φ(π) dπ =               − 1 φ(π)dπ.
                        π        k=1                  π δ − γ(π)


Hence, the fact that γ(π) is strictly increasing in π implies that the contribution to growth of the

reallocation of workers among continuing firms, the last term in (35), is positive. Equivalently, it

is positive because γ(π)E [ln q(π)] is strictly increasing in π and the steady state distribution of

types stochastically dominates the distribution of types at entry as a consequence of the firm size

selection process.

      Given the parameter estimates reported in the previous section, the implied aggregate growth

rate and its components are those reported in in table 10. These calculations raise several interesting

issues. First, they imply an over all growth rate in productivity somewhat higher than the typical

estimate. This fact provides indirect support for arguments that the measurement methodologies

currently in use fail to fully separate quality improvements from price increases. 10 In addition, the

estimates imply that worker reallocation from both exiting to entering firms and among surviving

firms account for 13% and 70% respectively of the aggregate rate of growth. These numbers suggest

a very important role to both forms of reallocation.

      It is seen that the reduced form growth decomposition in (19) discussed in section 4.5.2 is not

a useful reflection of the actual structural decomposition as it has been presented in this section.

This is in large part because the empirical measure of labor productivity Y /N is not a direct

reflection of the productivity contribution of a given firm in the model. This is partly because

the product of the labor engaged in innovation is not measured in Y . Furthermore, while there
 10
      In the U.S., this argument is fully articulated in Boskin, Dulberger, Gordon, Griliches, and Jorgenson (1996).



                                                          37
will be a monotonic relationship between value added per manufacturing labor and the quality

improvement of the innovation, value added per manufacturing labor will not necessarily correctly

reflect the exact labor productivity growth contribution. The problem is unfortunately not solved

by looking at TFP rather than Y /N since exactly the same problems apply. Thus, the reduced form

decomposition in (19) will not be very informative about sources of aggregate productivity growth

for a structure like the one in this paper. It is an interesting question whether a simple reduced

form measure on standard observable statistics exists that will provide a good approximation of

the growth decomposition for the model in this paper.


6    Concluding Remarks

Large and persistent differences in firm productivity and firm size exist. Evidence suggests that

the reallocation of workers across firms and establishments is an important source of aggregate

economic growth. In a companion paper, Lentz and Mortensen (2005), we explore a variant of the

equilibrium Schumpeterian model of firm size evolution developed by Klette and Kortum (2004)

that provided insights into these and other empirical regularities. In our version of the model,

firms that can develop products of higher quality grow larger at the expense of less profitable firms

though a process of creative destruction. Worker reallocation from less to more profitable firms

induced by the process contributes to aggregate productivity growth. Furthermore, the model is

consistent with the observation that there is no correlation between employment size and labor

productivity and a positive correlation between value added and labor productivity observed in

Danish firm data.

    In this paper, we take the model to the data. Namely, we fit its structure to Danish firm panel

data for the 1992–1997 time period. We find that the parameter estimates are sensible and that the

model provides a reasonable fit to many of the moments of the joint distribution of size as measured

by value added and employment. The model also explains the evolution of the size distribution of

firms in the panel over the observation period.

    By design, the growth rate of a firm is size independent, but the model fits the negative uncon-

ditional firm size growth relationship in data. The model also captures the reduced form growth



                                                  38
decomposition form that is standard to the literature, which suggests a strong contribution to

growth from reallocation. But the model explains a large part of the fit with a moderate amount

of measurement error and the actual determinants of productivity growth in the model are not

reflected well by the reduced form decomposition.

   Finally, the quantitative model has interesting aggregate implications for the growth process.

First, the implied rate of productivity growth, 2.1% per year, is larger than estimates based on stan-

dard accounting methods. Second, reallocation of workers from less to more productive surviving

firms is shown to account for more than 2/3 of aggregate productivity growth.




                                                 39
A     Appendix

In this section, we present the algorithm used to compute the values of model parameters implied

by the estimates and the equilibrium and optimal growth rates, all reported in the text. To do

so, one must account for the two parameters not explicitly used in the initial presentation of the

model, the average demand per product, Z, which was normalized to unity in the model, and the

cost of capital per product line, denoted κZ. Hence, profit per product line can be represented as

πZ for a firm of type π where

                                              π = (1 − κ)(1 − q −1 )                                                 (36)

is now profit express as a fraction of value average sales.

    Since the parametric form of the steady state distribution of firms over profit, denoted p(π)

in the text, is specified in the model estimated, one needs to derive its relationship to the initial

density of entering firms over profit, φ(π), by inverting the steady state relationship implied by the

model. Specifically,

                                               p (π) = M (π) /M
                                                                                     R
where M (π) is the steady state mass of firms of type π and M =                          π   M (π)dπ is the total mass of

firms. Since
                                      ∞
                                      X                       µ                 ¶
                                                                        δ           ηφ(π)
                            M (π) =            Mk (π) = ln
                                                                     δ − γ(π)        γ(π)
                                      k=1
from equation (13), it follows that

                                                γ(π)M (π)   γ(π)p (π) M
                                ηφ(π) =           ³      ´=   ³       ´,
                                                     δ             δ
                                               ln δ−γ(π)    ln δ−γ(π)

At this stage, the aggregate entry rate η and the total mass of firms M have yet to be separately
                   R
identified. But by π φ (π) dπ = 1, it follows that,
                                      Z                      Z
                                                                      γ(π)p (π)
                              η=η             φ(π)dπ = M               ³       ´ dπ.                                 (37)
                                                                           δ
                                          π                      π   ln δ−γ(π)

Consequently, the profit density at entry is
                                                         γ(π)p(π)
                                                         ³        ´
                                                               δ
                                                        ln   δ−γ(π)
                                          φ(π) = R        γ(x)p(x)
                                                                           .                                         (38)
                                                           ³        ´ dx
                                                      x ln     δ
                                                             δ−γ(x)



                                                        40
Equation (15) and the assumption that the measure of products is unity, the steady state measure

of continuing firms in the market solves
                      Z X
                        ∞                       Z                    ∞
                                                                     X kMk (π)
              1 =                 kMk (π)dπ =           M (π)                       dπ                       (39)
                          π k=1                     π                      M (π)
                                                                     k=1
                      Z                                                    Z
                                    γ(π)M (π)                                         γ(π)p (π)
                  =                        ³       ´ dπ = M                                  ³       ´ dπ.
                                              δ                                                 δ
                          π   (δ − γ(π)) ln δ−γ(π)                          π   (δ − γ(π)) ln δ−γ(π)

Hence,
                                                    R       γ(π)p(π)
                                                             ³        ´ dπ
                                                        π ln     δ
                                                               δ−γ(π)
                                        η=R            γ(π)p(π)
                                                                                    .                        (40)
                                                              ³        ´ dπ
                                                π (δ−γ(π)) ln     δ
                                                                δ−γ(π)

from by equations (37) and (39).

   To solve the planner’s problem, one also needs the size of the aggregate labor force, L, and the

measure of potential entrants, m. Because one can show that the limit price charged by the current

supplier of each product solves p(1 − κ) = wq when a capital cost exists, the demand for production

workers is Zx(π) = 1/p = Z(1 − κ)/wq = Z(1 − κ − π)/w from (36). Hence, equations (12) and

(13) imply
                                ·Z µ                                   ¶                          ¸
                                       1−κ−π                               ηφ(π)dπ
                      L=Z                    +b
                                              c(γ(π))                               + mb
                                                                                       c(η/m)                (41)
                                   π     w                                 δ − γ(π)

                                 c(x) = c0 x1+c1 . Finally, one can obtain the value of m by using
where, as specified in the text, b

the fact that the marginal cost of entry must equal the expected marginal cost of innovation by

incumbents. Specifically, equations (11) and (10) imply require that m solves

                                            ³η´         Z
                                        0
                                       c
                                       b          =             c0 (γ(π)) φ(π)dπ
                                                                b                                            (42)
                                            m               π


   Finally, the parametric specification of heterogeneity in product quality is


                                             q(z) = 1 + eµπ +σπ z                                            (43)


where z is the standard normal random variable. Hence, one can use the fact that f (z)dz =

p(π(z))dπ(z), where f (z) is the standard normal pdf and π(z) = (1 − κ)(1 − q(z) −1 ) by (36), to

compute all the necessary integrals in the equations above and those that define the components

of the growth rate found in the text.



                                                                41
References

 Altonji, J. G. and L. M. Segal (1996). Small-sample bias in GMM estimation of covariance

    structures. Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 14: 353–366.

 Alvarez, Javier, Martin Browning, and Mette Ejrnæs (2001). Modelling income processes with

    lots of heterogeneity. Working Paper .

 Baily, Martin Neil, Eric J. Bartelsman, and John Haltiwanger (1996). Downsizing and produc-

    tivity growth: Myth or reality? Small Business Economics 8, no. 4: 259–78.

 Bartelsman, Eric J. and Mark Doms (2000). Understanding productivity: Lessons from longitu-

    dinal microdata. Journal of Economic Literature 38, no. 3: 569–594.

 Boskin, Michael J., Eller R. Dulberger, Robert J. Gordon, Zvi Griliches, and Dale Jorgenson

    (1996). Toward a More Accurate Measure of the Cost of Living. Final Report to the Sen-

    ate Finance Comittee from the Advisory Commisson to Study the Consumer Price Index.

    Washington: Senate Finance Committee.

 Davis, Steven J., John C. Haltiwanger, and Scott Schuh (1996). Job Creation and Destruction.

    Cambridge and London: MIT Press.

 Fallick, Bruce C. and Charles A. Fleischman (2001). The importance of employer-to-employer

    flows in the u.s. labor market. Federal Reserve Board Finance and Economics Discussion

    Paper 2001-18.

 Foster, Lucia, John Haltiwanger, and C. J. Krizan (2001). Aggregate productivity growth:

    Lessons from microeconomic evidence. In Charles R. Hulten, Edwin R. Dean, and Michael J.

    Harper (Eds.), New Developments in Productivity Analysis, pp. 303–63. Chicago and London:

    NBER Studies in Income and Wealth, University of Chicago Press.

 Frederiksen, A. and N. Westergaard-Nielsen (2002). Where did they go? Århus School of Business

    Working Paper .

 Gibrat, Robert (1931). Les Inégalités Économiques; Applications: Aux Inégalités Des Richesses,

    À la Concentration Des Entreprises, Aux Populations Des Villes, Aux Statistiques Des


                                                42
   Familles, Etc., D’une Loi Nouvelle, la Loi de L’effet Proportionnel. Paris: Librairie du Recueil

   Sirey.

Gourieroux, Christian, Alain Monfort, and Eric Renault (1993). Indirect inference. Journal of

   Applied Econometrics 8, no. 0: S85–S118.

Grossman, Gene M. and Elhanan Helpman (1991). Innovation and Growth in the Global Econ-

   omy. Cambridge, Massachusetts and London, England: MIT Press.

Hall, George and John Rust (2003). Simulated minimum distance estimation of a model of

   optimal commodity price speculation with endogenously sampled prices. Working Paper .

Horowitz, Joel L. (1998). Bootstrap methods for covariance structures. Journal of Human Re-

   sources 33: 39–61.

Klette, Tor Jakob and Zvi Griliches (1996). The inconsistency of common scale estimators when

   output prices are unobserved and endogenous. Journal of Applied Econometrics 11, no. 4:

   343–361.

Klette, Tor Jakob and Samuel Kortum (2004). Innovating firms and aggregate innovation. Journal

   of Political Economy 112, no. 5: 986–1018.

Lentz, Rasmus and Dale T. Mortensen (2005). Productivity growth and worker reallocation.

   International Economic Review 46, no. 3: 731–751.

Rossi-Hansberg, Esteban and Mark L.J. Wright (2005). Firm size dynamics in the aggregate

   economy. NBER Working Paper Series 11261.

Stewart, Jay (2002). Recent trends in job stability and job security: Evidence from the march

   CPS. U.S. BLS Working Paper 356.

Sutton, John (1997). Gibrat’s legacy. Journal of Economic Literature 35, no. 1: 40–59.




                                              43
