                        NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              MORfiJJ   HAZARD   AND OPTIMAL COMMODITY TAXATION




                             Richard Arnott
                           Joseph   E. Stiglitz




                         Working Paper No. 115I




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge MA 02138

                                 June 1983




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Taxation. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and
not those of the National Bureau of Econonic Research.
                                                   NBER Working PapetlJll54
                                                  June 1983



                MORAL HAZARD AND OPTIMAL COMMODITY TAXATION


                             Richard Arnott
                             oseph Stiglitz
                               AB STRACT


                                                              +
     The central result of this paper is that when moral hazard is
present,   competitive equilibrium is almost always (constrained) in-

efficient. Moral hazard causes shadow prices to deviate from market

prices. To remedy this market failure, the government could intro-

duce differential commodity taxation. Moral hazard causes people to

taketoo little care to prevent accidents. The corresponding dead-

weight loss can be reduced by subsidizing (taxing) those goods the

consumption of which encourages (discourages) accident avoidance.

At the (constrained) optimum, the sum of the deadweight losses as-

sociated with moral hazard, on the one hand, and differential com-

modity taxation, on the other, is minimized.




÷
    Moral hazard is a generic phenomenon which occurs whenever the pro-
    vision of insurance, be it explicit or implicit, affects the probability(ies)
    of the insured—against event(s). The classic papers in the literature
    include Arrow[l965], Spence and Zeckhauser [1971], Pauly [1974], and
    Mirrlees [1975].




Richard Arnott                                   Joseph Stiglitz
Department of Economics                          Department of Economics
Queen's University                               Princeton University
Kingston, Ontario                                Princeton, New Jersey 08544
Canada K7L 3N6                                   U.S.A.
                 Moral Hazard and Optimal Commodity Taxation*

            There has   been increasing awareness over the past   fifteen years of
the   importance and. pervasiveness of problems of moral hazard. Risk—averse

individuals purchase insurance which affects their incentives to undertakc

accident avoidance activities. With perfect (costless) information, insurance

contracts would specify the actions to be undertaken and provide complete in-

surance.    With costly information, however, insurance contracts provide only
partial insurance, balancing at the margin the loss in reduced incentives from
providing   more insurance and the gain from risk—sharing. Moral hazard problems

arise not only in insurance markets, but also in labor, product, and capital mar-

kets, in all of which elements of implicit or explicit insurance are prevalent

in contractual relations.


            In this paper we establish that, with more than one consumer good and

costless government intervention, competitive eguilibrum is almost always

(constrained) inefficient when moral hazard is present; and to correct the

market failure, differential commodity taxation is necessary.


            The rationale for this result is as follows: Consider the extreme

moral hazard situation, in which the insurer can observe only the outcome of

an accident and has no information on either     the underlying state of nature
or   the precaution taken by the individual to prevent the accident. In this
                                                                                     -
case, the insurer can do no better than to provide insurance against the acci—

dent per se (i.e., he cannot make the payout contingent on either the insured's
actions or the state of nature). As a result, the individual will typically




*     We would like to thank the National Science Foundation and the Social
      Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada for financial support,
      Jim Gaisford for expositional criticism, and seminar participants at
      Stanford, Yale, MIT, and Tel—Aviv Universities for useful comments.
                                          —2—
take   less care than   he   would with either no insurance or perfect monitoring.
Take as the hypothetical base case, competitive equilibrium with     costless   monitor-
ing.   Relative to this base case, competitive equilibrium with costly monitor—

irig and therefore moral hazard entails a deadweight loss; because individuals'

precautions are not monitored, they take "too little" care. (This in itself

does not imply constrained inefficiency;         all it says is that the unobserva—

bility of accident—prevention activities entails a cost.). Now consider the

effect in the economy with moral hazard of subsidizing those goods that are

complementary to accident—avoidance activities, and taxing those goods that are

substitutable for them. The individual will undertake more accident—prevention

activity, which will reduce the deadweight loss associated with being insuf-

ficiently careful. However, such commodity ta<ation, by causing prices to

diverge from marginal costs, introduces a second source of deadweight loss.

Constrained efficiency obtains when the sum of the .two sources of deadweight

loss is minimized, and we establish that this does involve differential commo-

dity taxation.1


           This point is intuitively appealing. It will be desirable to subsi•-

dize fire extinguishers if the social cost of the additional fire extinguishers

bought from doing so is small relative to the expected reduction in fire damages.

Similarly, it will be desirable to tax alcohol if the direct efficiency loss

from doing so is outweighed by the fall in automobile accident damages.




1.   It appears to be the conventional wisdom that moral hazard does not cause
     constrained inefficiency. This belief is based on the results of Pauly
     [1974], Stiglitz 11974], Helpman and Laf font [1975], Marshall [1976], and
     Shavell [1979 a,b] among others, all of which assume that there is a
     single consumer good, a linear production technology, and observability
     of an individual's total insurance purchases. In Arnott and Stiglitz
     [182c] we showed that constrained efficiency obtains under these as-
     sumptions, but not when any one of ilem is relayed.
                                      —3—

            The rationale for differential commodity taxation here is different

from that in the conventional optimal tax literature (e.g., Diamond and Nirr—

lees [1971], i1irrlees [1971] and Atkinson and Stiglitz [1976]). There, the tax

authorities would like to tax individuals according to say ability, but this

is presumed to be unobservable and as a result the tax authorities must tax

observable items, which include commodities, on the basis of their correlation

with ability. If individuals were identical, it would be efficient to impose

lump sum taxation; differential commodity taxation would be harmful. Here,

however, even with identical individuals so that lump—sum taxation is possible,

one will want to impose differential commodity taxation.2


•           Thus far and in the analysis that follows, we ignore the costs of

government intervention. These may, however, be substantial and exceed any

possible efficiency gains from different commodity taxation. In this case,

even though shadow prices deviate from market prices, the market allocation,

since it cannot be improved upon, must be said to be constrained efficient.

Hence, the market failures we identify should be interpreted as potential

market   failures, becoming actual market failures only when the benefits of
government intervention exceed the costs. Furthermore, we have assumed that
the market price of each good equals its production cost. But if firms can tie
the   sale of various goods, they can replicate any allocation achievable via a

tax system. For the case where this possibility is admitted (which we ignore




2.     Viewed from another perspective, however, the conventional optimal tax
       problem and that considered here are structurally similar. Even though
       individuals in our model are identical ex ante, they differ         on
       the basis of the state of nature experienced. It is the impossibility
       of imposing differential lump—sum taxation on these ax post groups (be-
       cause of the unobservahility of • thestate of nature) that gives rise to
       the desirability of differential commodity taxation.
                                            —4—

for most of the papers), our analysis should be interpreted as indicating how

the   market responds    to moral hazard.


            We organize our discussion as follows: Section 1 presents the        general
model, while section 2 examines a variety of special cases.        In section 3, we

discuss   a few of the    policy   implications of our aialysis.


1. The General Model


            We   start   by considering a general formulation of the optimal tax


problem    with moral hazard. This will give insight into the structure of the

problem.
          Unfortunately, the first—order conditions (as in the conventional op-
timal commodity tax problem), though interpretable, are sufficiently complex
                                                    the optimal tax rates on the
that   they provide little guidance concerning

various goods. As a consequence, in the next section we treat several spe-

cial cases, each of which focuses on a different determinant of the optimal tax

structure.


             We assume    that there is a single representative risk—averse indi-
vidual    in the economy for whom there are I possible     outcomes indexed by   i.3'4
Outcomes are differentiated on the basis of which of a variety of kinds of ac-

 cidents befall the individual, and the damage associated with each of the acci-

 dents. The outcome may affect the individual either directly (giving him          pain
 or pleasure and affecting his tastes) or via his gross (of insurance premium

 and   payout) income.


 3.    Thus, we rule out problems associated with adverse selection, which are
       treated in Rothschild and Stiglitz [1976] and Spence [1978], inter alia.

 4. AlternativelY, one may interpret the model as applying to an economy with
     a large number of ax ante identical individuals whose accident outcomes
     are statistically independent.
                                                     —5—

                         In   principle, we can put any "commodity"   into   one of 30 categories

          on    the basis of
          i)      whether or not it is taxable5 (smoking in bed is not, fire extinguishers

                  are);

          ii)     if it is taxable, whether an individual's consumption of it can be taxed
                                   6
                  non—linearly         (cigarettes cannot be, water consumption can);
          iii) it is exchangeable or not (a fire extinguisher is, sleeping a sufficient
                  amount of time that one is alert is not);
          iv)     it affects utility directly or not (smoking does, a fire extinguisher
                  does    not);

         v)       it affects the accident probability directly or not; and

         vi)      it is used before or after the accident outcoie.

         The following combinations of attributes are possible, where B denotes used

         before the accident, and A after.


                              Affects Accident Probability                   'Does Not Affect Accident
                                                                                                           -
                                                                                    Probability
                                                          hoes not affect
                              Affects utility directly    tilitv directl Affects utility directly              -

                                                Non       I



                              Exchangeable Exchan eable       Exchangeable    Exchangeable Non—Exchangeable
                                 B     A      B     A            B    A          B    A       B       A     -
Taxable INon— linear
        kLinear                                                 (b)                   (a)
         Non— taxable                          (c)

                      For simplicity, we limit ourselves to three categories:

         (a) Linearly taxable exchangeable goods which affect utility but not accident

                 probabilities and are used after the accident outcome; we refer to these




         5.     Taxability is closely related to observability at reasonable cost.

         6.     Non—linear taxation of a good is typically possible if its consumption
                can be observed. If only the exchange of the good can be observed (so
                that an individual's total purchases are unobservable) taxation has to
                be linear.
                                       —6—


    as   consumer goods, index them by k, and let c be the quantity of consuner

    good k purchased by the individual with outcone i.

(b) Linearly taxable exchangeable goods which affect accident probabilities

    but not utility and are used before the accident outcome; we refer to

    these as accident—prevention goods, index then by , and let f be the

    quantity of accident—prevention good 9 purchased by an individual.

Cc) Non—exchangeable, non—taxable goods which affect both utility and acci-

    dent probabilities directly and are used before the accident outcome;

    we refer to these as types of accident—prevention effort, and let e3 be the

    anunt of accident—prevention effort of type j expended by an individual.


             In' keeping with our assumption of linear taxation, we assume that

the insurer, since he cannot observe an individual's total purchases of a com-

modity, cannot write his insurance contingent on an individual's purchases.

Thus, the insurer can do no better than choose the net payout (payout minus

premium) for each outcome, some of which may be negative. To simplify the

analysis, we treat a linear production technology, and measure produced goods

in such a way that all producer prices are unity.


             A doubling of all consumer prices and net (of net payout) incomes

in this economy has no effect. We therefore require another normalization.

There   is   no obviously preferable one. We shall employ different norinaliza—

tions in     different parts of the paper. In this section, we normalize on the
basis   of the individual's net income if no accident befalls him.


Notation:

             I index of the outcome; i = 0 corresponds to no accident

             j   index of the type of accident—prevention effort
                                                  —7—


                 k   index of the type of consumer good

                     index of type of accident—prevention good

            x.
             1 the individual's net insurance payout with outcome I

            y.       the individual's gross income with outcome
                                                                           i; y0   1

           z. E       y.   + x. an individual's net—of—insurance
                                                                       income with Outcome I
           e quantity of accident—prevention effort of type j expended
                                                                       by
                     the individual

           ck        quantity of good k consumed with       outcome I by the individual
           f         quantity of accident—prevention good i purchased by the indivi-

                     dual

           qk consumer price of consumer good k

           p         consumer price of accident-prevention good
           TF.       probability of outcome I
           u. utility of the individual with outcome i.

            We let e, c1, f, p, q, x, y, ir and z denote vectors (since there will
be   no ambiguity, we shall not distinguish bet-een row              and column vectors).

            We now characterize            the social welfare   optimum.    The analysis proceeds
in   the same way as in the conventional optimal commodity tax problem. In the
first stage, the individual chooses e, f, and c.}, treating consumer prices
and the parameters of the insurance contract x.} as given. This gives
e = e[p,q,z],        £      f[p,q,z] and   c = c[p,q,z].7       (Throughout, we use square

7.   It is possible that the dependent variables
                                                  will change discontinuously
     with changes in p, q, and z. We ignore this problem. It can be handled,
     however, by the procedure developed in Grc'ssman and Hart [1980].
                                        —8—

brackets to enclose the argument of a function.) In the second stage, the plan-

ner chooses p, q, and z (or, more directly, x) to maximize expected utility,

subject to an economy—wide resource constraint, and taking into account how

the individual adjusts e, f, and {c.} in response to changes in p, q, and z.8


              that in this formulation, the consuier does not decide how
            Note

much insurance to buy at a price quoted by the planner; the net payout pro-
vided in each of the outcomes      is instead decided by the planner. In Arnott—


 Stiglitz   [1982b] we   showed that if an insured's total purchases of insurance
 are   observable, insurance contracts specify net incomes for each outcome and
                                               much insurance as he wants at the
 do not allow the individual to purchase as

 quoted price; if, however, an individual's total insurance purchases are un-

 observable, then contracts which (essentially) allow the individual to pur-

 chase as much insurance as he wishes at a parametric price, will prevail. Thus,

 the way we have formulated the problem assumes that the government

 or an insurer can monitor individuals' total insurance purchases. We could
                                                for taxes and subsidies would be
 have treated the other case; the argument

 even stronger.


             The first stage of the analysis, the consumer maximization problem,

 is now presented.


             The probability of outcome i is




  8. Since this maximization problem is not necessarily convex, random in-
      surance policies and random taxation may be desirable. The former is
      discussed in Arnott and Stiglitz [1982b]; the latter in Weiss [1976]
      and Stiglitz [1982a]. We ignore these possibilities in this paper.
                                                                        —9—

                ir.
                    1
                        =   ir.[e,f],
                              1 e                                                                                   (1)

 while    utility with outcome I is


                u.          u.[c.,ej,                                                                               (2)



 where
          au.
                >
                            a
                                2
                                    .     2
                                              <   0,
                                                          au.
                                                       and —4 < 0.                ote that we   allow   tastes to depend
          ac.               a(c.)
            1                  1
 on the outcome. Expected utility is


                EU =        Thr.[e,f]u.[c.,eJ.                                                                     (3)




With outcome i, the individual's b.get constraint is9


                z.          qc. +         pf.                                                                      (4)


                Where c.Tr1 is the Lagrange multiplier on the individual's budget

 constraint with outcome i, the first—order conditions of his maximization

 problem   are:


                 e31
                      .1
                        E—j-
                         iae
                                /
                                    a.1
                                          U1
                                                  -
                                                  •
                                                      i   3e
                                                            1
                                                               1
                                                                        U    and
                                                                                  -
                                                                                      e1...o.                        -
                                                                                                                  (5a)


 Z —4 u.    is the expected marginal benefit in utiles associated with a unit
 i. ae3                                                                     au.
 increase   in effort of type j, and Eir1—# is the corresponding marginal cost.
                                                                   i.




                 fZ ((-                   U.      —
                                                      11T               0 and f 0.                                (5b)




9.    We ignore the possibility of bankruptcy.
                                                  — 10 —


                                                                            10
This        equation has an interpretation analogous to (5a).

                            u.1
    c.:
        k
        1
                       kI
                      C.
                         /

                       i '1 K¶.(
                            c.1    1
                                      kI
                                — cx.q )1
                                        I
                                         I
                                               0 and c
                                                        k
                                                        1
                                                             0.                             (5c)



 (5c)       states that with each outcome, the individual will choose the bundle of

goods that maximizes his (ex post) utility.


                   (4), along with (5a) —       (5c),   yield


                  é =e[p,q,z], £ =         f[p,q,z],. and   c. =
                                                                   c[p,q,z].          (6a,6b,6c)


And substituting these equations into (3) gives


                  EU = E
                             ii[p,q,zJv.[p,q,z],


where V. is the indirect utility function with outcome i.


                  We now turn to the second—stage of the planning problem in which the

planner chooses p, q, and x so as to maximize expected utility, taking into

account how individuals respond to changes in these variables, and subject to

the economy's resource constraint.


                  The economy—wide resource constraint facing the planner (recall

footnote 4) is



                  1
                     1       11
                  Z ir.(y.—c.—f)      0.                                                    (8)



Using       the   individual's     budget constraint, we nay        write   (8) alternatively as




10. Note that we have assumed here that if an individual purchases an accident—
     prevention good he always uses it. Complications which arise when this
     assumption is relaxed are treated in section 2.2.
                                                           — 11 —



                            =
                                     7r1((q_1)c+(p_1)f),                                              (8')


which states that (expected) net insurance payouts must equal (expected) tax

revenues.



                The planner's problem may therefore be written as


             max        = E
                            .V.-A(Z7r.(x.—(q-1)c.-(p-1)f)),                                           (9)
            q,p,x         1        1

where ) is the Lagrange multiplier on (8'). We let X denote any element of

{qk} or {p}, and s.                  c.+f—y. =         x.—(q--1)c.—(p-1)f be the net social subsidy to
an individual who experiences outcome i. We distinguish between subscripts or


superscripts by using 's, e.g.        denotes the change in accident—prevention
       —
good   £ with respect to a change in the price of accident—prevention good £.

Finally,   it turns out that the relevant "compensated" derivatives entail com-

pensation such that, after the change, the individual is able to purchase his

pre—change (outcome—contingent) bundles of goods and no more, which preserves

expected utiiity;Oa thus, where subscript 0 indicates such compensation,



                /i\
                iac.
            i—i
            I      ii — c.1
                     k c.
                 =—+c.—,                           1
              ki   k iX.
                \aq/o       aq                     1


            /k\ii
            i c.            ac.
                                k
                                 1            c.1
                                                   k

            '\ap/e
            I


              £1 - ap   —               9..

                                              ax.'
                                               1




lOa.   For example, (—)                 = EU
                                          — ÷ E c.kaEU
                                                    —--             =—!   a.i       k       k
                                                                                r. c. + Z c. a. ii. = 0.
                     k
                                aqe           aq
                                                   k
                                                       i   ix.1       .
                                                                      1
                                                                                 1 1
                                                                                        1
                                                                                         •  111
                                               — 12 —



                -         k
          1—.I =—+Eir.c.--——
                  k     iix.




                      ir             ir


          q 0 q 1                        1


                                     r


After some algebraic manipulation which is given in the Appendix, we obtain1'
                                 k
                                                        2,

          {E •••(qk_l)(__l) + E(p2,—1)(----)
                                          )}
           1     k
                     7r.
                —{z(---) (x._E(qk_1)ck_E(pi_1)f2,)) = 0                             (10)
                                                12,

for all X. Now let
                                 fa\           and s denote vectors, and
                       tax)
                       'I            \   --,


            1          2
          c1         3c1    --
      -
                              ) , etc.          Then we can write (10) alternatively as
            1

          (2)



                           + r()0(p—].))—(-)0
                                        j.    a) =            0                     (10')




11. For situations In which thesefirst—order conditions do not characterize
     the optimum, see section 2.2.
                                        — 13 —


    Equation (10') has tWo intuitively appealing interpretations. First, it

    states that at the optimum, the change in net government revenue from a "com-

    pensated" unit increase in     is zero. To obtain an alternative interpreta-

    tion, take         s over to the right—hand side of (10'). The term remaining

    on the left—hand side gives the marginal excess burden associated with con—
                                                                       7r
    sumer prices diverging from marginal costs,    fixed. Meanwhile,        s is

    the marginal excess burden associated with moral hazard —   the increase in
    expected net social subsidy due to changes in r.   Thus, (10') confirms our

    claim in the introduction that, with the optinal set of taxes, the marginal

    excess burden associated with consumer prices diverging from marginal cost

    equals the marginal excess burden associated with moral hazard. The optimal

    tax system therefore entails some average of Ramsey pricing and pricing to

    reduce accident probabilities.


              When there is no moral hazard, it can be shown that p=q=1 and full

    insurance are optimal.


             We bring these results together in

-
    Proposition   1: With an interior solution, the optimal tax cum insurance struc-

              ture may be characterized in two waYs. First, the change in net

             government revenue from a "compensated" unit increase in any tax

             rate must be zero. Second, for each tax rate, the marginal excess

             burden associated with moral hazard must equal that associated with

             the wedges between consumer and producer prices.


             Since (9) is not necessarily a conve: problem, equation (10) may
                                    — 14   —



characterize   saddlepqints and minima, as well as 'axima, and there may be mul-

tiple local maxima.


          Let us briefly consider competitive attainability and decentraliza—

bility of the above optimum. We have assumed that an individual's total in-

surance purchases are observable, but that his total purchases of goods are not.

Competitive decentralizability of the (constrained) optimum, in the strong sense

that all agents respond only to parametric prices, with no government inter-

vention, is impossible. The most decentralized institutional mechanism con-

sistent with attainability of the optimum is as follows: The government taxes

and subsidizes goods, using this revenue to provide lump—sum subsidies to indi-

viduals or insurance companies. Each insurance company, meanwhile, insists on

being its clients' exclusive agent for all types of insurance; competition,

subject to this government intervention, occurs in both goods and insurance

markets. With p and q fixed at their optimal levels, insurance companies face

the same (actually the dual) maximization problem as the planner. Depending

on the way in which competitive insurance companies adjust their policies out

of equilibrium and on the characteristics of the nonconvexities in the maximiza-

tion problem, the resulting equilibrium might be only locally optimal. In this

event, to achieve the global optimum, the government would have to take over

the provision of insurance, as well as tax     and subsidize goods. We have shown

elsewhere (Arnott and Stiglitz r1982c]) that it is generally necessary for ef-

ficiency that an individual purchase all types of insurance from a single

insurer. If this were not the case, there would be uninternalized externali-

ties. For example, the firm providing fire insurance would neglect in its

calculations that the terms of the contract it provided would affect its

clients' efforts to avoid automobile accidents and hence the profits of firms
                                     — 15 —


 providing   automobile,accident insurance. For similar reasons, it would be in-

 efficient to have an individual obtain insurance against a particular accident

 from more than one insurer.'


             The next section examines a few simple situations, so as to provide

 some insight into the optimal tax structure.


 2. Some Simple Cases


2.1 Accident—prevention effort and equipment, and separable, event—independent
     utility

             In this subsection, we consider an economy in which there is a single

consumer good, a single accident—prevention good, and a single kind of effort,

and   in which there are only two possible outcomes:   either a fixed—damage
accident occurs or it does not.

           As in the previous section, we assume that the individual's accident—
prevention effort and his purchases of the consumer and accident—prevention
goods are unobservable. As a result, insurance is provided against the acci-
dent and taxation is linear. We retain the assumption that both goods are pro-

duced at constant cost. And we normalize and choose units of measurement such

that the producer price of each is unity. Since expected utility is homogeneous




12    We have implicitly assumed that an individual is perfectly informed con-
      cerning all insurance contracts offered. Such an assumption is t)plcally
      justified on the basis of the consumer's shopping around. here, however,
      shopping around is inconsistent with exclusivity. It might therefore be
      more realistic to assume that consumers have imperfect information about
      the avaiable menu of contracts, in which case market equilibrium would
      entail a form of monopolistic competition.
                                                — 16   —




 of degree zero in consumer prices and income, we are allowed an additional nor-
malization, and assume the consumer price of the consumer good to be unity.'3
Note that, with this normalization, either the accident—prevention good will
be taxed and insurance subsidized or vice versa. We employ the same notation
as in   the previous    section, except that, since we now          have   only one kind of
each   commodity, we drop.superscripts j, k, and Z. We adopt the convention that

y0 >   y1.   Thus, the size of the fixed—damage accident is y0—y1. Finally, we

assume that utility is separable and outcome—independent, by which we mean that

EU =
       (1—ir)u[c0]+rru[c1]—e;        thus, u0      u[c0]—e and u1   u[c1]—e.


             Where ir is the probability of accident, expected utility is


             EU =
                    (1—rrte,f])u[y0+x0—pf]+rr[e,f]u[v,+x,_pf].e,                       (11)


 and the economy's resource constraint is


             (1—lr[e,f])x0+1T[e,f]x1_(p...1)f =        0.                               (12)

                                                14
Applying (10 ) to this problem gives


                           =    7r
                                        (X1_XO).                                        (13a)


Since utility is outcome—independent, the individual will receive a larger

net payout if the accident occurs than if it does not, i.e. x1 >
                                                                                x.   Ordi-

narily, one would expect (-F-)0          < 0 and ()0 > 0;       raising the price of the




13. Note that this is different from the normalization employed in the pre-
     vious section.

14. If utility were not outcome—independent, (13) would not necessarily charac-
     terize the optimum. See section 2.2.
                                                   — 17 —


 accident—prevention good will typically decrease the "compensated" demand for
 it,   and increase the probability of accident. In this case, the accident—

 prevention good should be subsidized. It seeis plausible, however, that

 there are situations where the accident—prevention good should be taxed;

 for example -—)         < 0 and      Dir                        .. .
                                                < 0 may be a possloility —    driving   a safer

 car may make an individual so much more complacent at the wheel that the pro-

 bability of accident increases. Let us investigate this possibility further.


            It can be shown that (-)0               <   0. Cornbining the result with x1 >

 gives


                                            Dir
            sign   (p—i) =     sign                                                           (13b)


The individual's choices of effort and the quantity of accident—prevention

goods to purchase are characterized by


            ir(u1—u0) — 1 = 0         (where it -             , etc.)   and                   (14a)


                          -                         =   0.
            lrf(u1-u0)        p((1-)u0+itu)                                                   (14b)


From total differentiation of the (14a) and (14b),one obtains
                                                                                 that ()0 has
the same sign as

                                      ,     I
          TnT                      u—u
           fee                  1 0
                   —Tn
                     ef   +pireu—u                                                            (13c)
            iT
              e                 10
We know that       < 0, lTf < 0, u0 > u1, u1 > u0 (since utility is separable and

outcome—independent and only partial insurance is provided) and iree > 0 (from

the second—order conditions of the individual's choice problem). Thus, the

expression in (13c) and therefore                       are   negative only if 1Tef is much

greater than the zero, i.e. if the accident prevention good substantially
                                         — 18 —


 reduces the marginal, efficiency of effort (—).          We   say that an accident pre-
 vention good for which this holds is very effort—retarding. Note that this

 property can be consistent with the second—order conditions of the Indivi-

 dual's maximization problem.


            The   sign of     —
                                  ef:)   depends on the   "normality"   of accident—
 prevention equipment in    the probability—of_accident_function; viz., if a de-

 crease in the probability of accident, holding the "relative price" of effort

 and accident—prevention equipment fixed, is most efficiently achieved with

 an increase (decrease) in accident—prevention equirnent, then such equipment

 is normal (inferior). Inferiority is necessary but not sufficient for an

 accident—prevention good to be very effort—retarding. 14a Figure 1 portrays

a   normal and an inferior accident—prevention good.

           We   present the result of this subsection in:


Proposition 2: In the economy treated in this subsection (two outcomes; se-

           parable, outcome—independent utility; a single consumer good;           a
           single accident—prevention good which can be taxed linearly; and

           accident—prevention effort which is untaxable), the accident—prevention

           good should be taxed if it is very effort—retarding and subsidized

           otherwise.15




14a.   A very   effort—retarding good is roughly analogous to a Ciffen good.

 15. The   Proposition can be extended straightforwardly to an arbitrary number
       of outcomes, accident—prevention goods, consumer goods, and effort types.
                                         — 19        —




 e                                                          e




                    fo >                                                   fi <
                       >




                                                                                    71 =
                                                                                           ITO

                                     = 710

                                71   =
                                         1
                                                 f                                               f
             fi o                                                       fofi
     Normal accident—prevention good                            Inferior accident—prevention good


                    Figure 1: Normal and inferior accident—prevention goods


2.2 Accident—preventiOn equipment

           In this subsection, we treat an economy that differs from that of the

previous subsection in two respects: i) there is no accident—prevention effort;

and ii) the utility function is not necessarily outcome—independent.


                                                                          in which the planner
           For this case, the symmetric information optimum,

can directly control the individual's purchases, is the solution to


                                                                                    (15)
             max      (1_ir[f])u0[c0]111[f]U1[C1]
           f ,c1,

                      st. i) (1_1T[f])c0+1r[f]c1+f


                                             =
                                                 (1—'ir[f])y0+n[f]y1,

and is characterized by the      resource        constraint ((15)i), and
                                      — 20   —




          U0 = U1 = U, and                                                (16a)


          7Tf((U1—Uo)—U((Cl—Yl)_(Co_yO))) =      u'.                      (16b)



          We now examine the asymmetric information optimum, in which the

planner can only indirectly influence the individual's purchase of f by setting

x0, x1, and p. For reasons that will shortly be apparent, we first treat the

case in which u0 > u for all c0, c1 such that u0 =
                                                       u1. We say   that in this

case, the accident is relatively—utility—dereasin;)6 As in the previous sub-

 section, we set the producer price of the consumption and accident—prevention

goods and the consumer price of the consumption good equal to unity.


          (13') reduces to


          p—i =
                  'fff(X1_x0).                                           (17)


The equation characterizing the individual's choice of how many units of the
accident—prevention good to buy is

                                      = 0.
         7Tf(u1-u0)-P(1Tu1+(i-7)u0)                                      (18)



16. We say that an accident is absolutely-utility—decreasing or simply
    utility—decreasing if u([J>u1[], for all >O and marginal—uzility-.
    decreasing if u0[]>u;C] for all >0.
        The assumption that a accident is relatively—utility—decreasin..
    implies, for instance, that an individual who has a limb severed and
    has it replaced by an artificial limb, and is compensated to the point
    where his marginal utility of income is the same as if his limb had
    not been severed, would still have preferred not to have the limb
    severed.
                                                — 2Oa —



 The resource constraint is


             (p—1)f =
                            (1—iT[f])x0+71[f]x1   .
                                                                                            (19)

And if one solves for the optimal values of x0 and x1, one obtains


                  =
             U0       u1.                                                                   (20)


Let *    denote   values of variables at the symmetric information optimum. It may

easily   be checked that if the government sets p =              (u—u)7r =    ..       *   *
                                                                     (u)*    'flf(X1       X0) + 1

(from (17) and (18)), x0=x and x1=x, then the individual will choose f*, and

the symmetric information optimum will be attained. This optimum may also be

attained if the government sets only p*_1 =
                                                          71f(X1—x), distributes the revenue
(typically negative) collected in lump—sum fashion to insurance companies, and

allows these companies to choose
                                             x0 and x1.'7




17. An insurance company then faces the (dual of the)' problem

    max                         s.t.    i) f =
            (1—lr)u0+7ru1                         f[p*,x0,x1]
    x0,x1
                                       ii)
                                       ..
                                             (p*_1)f
                                                            —   -;
                                                        (1—.)x0+x1.
    Where         is the Lagrange multiplier on ii), the first—order conditions are:

    x0: (1-7T)u0-A((7rf(x1_xQ)_(p*_1)).L + (1-)) = 0


    x1: 7ru1—X((7rf(x1_x0)_(p*_1))_ + 71) = 0.

                                                                                   *               *
    When p*_1=Trf(x1_x0), this pair of equations is solved by
                                                                            x0x0 and x1=x1.
    Because of possible nonconvexities, there may be other (x0,x1) pairs which
    solve the pair of equations, in which case the economy could settle down
    at an inferior local optimum.
                                                — 21   —




             Upon reflection, this result is not surprising. Competitive equi-

librium without government intervention fails to achieve the symmetric infor-

mation optimum only because individuals, if they were provided with full in-

surance, would purchase an inefficient quantity of accident—prevention goods.

This can be remedied directly by subsidizing or taxing these goods. If, with

full insurance, the individual has an incentive both to purchase and to use the acci-

dent—prevention      goods, then the government can achieve the symmetric information
optimum by providing full insurance and adjusting the price of the accident—
prevention goods so that the individual purchases                   the optimal amount. Acci-

dent—prevention effort, however, is             different. Since it              is untaxable,     one can
stimulate   it only indirectly, by taxing substitutes and subsidizing complements,

which causes an efficiency loss relative to the synmetric information optimum.


            When the accident is relatively—utility—decreasing, the accident—

prevention    good will typically be subsidized. There is one circumstance in
which the accident—prevention good should be                 taxed.        If the accident is so
relatively—utility—decreasing           that when u,=u1, x0 >         x,    then from (17) it

follows that pk> 1. Loosely, individuals are apt to be excessively careful

to prevent accidents that severely reduce the ability to experience pleasure.


            Now let us turn to the case of relatively—utility—increasing acci—
                                                                I      I
dents;                 u1 for all c0, C1 such that u0 =               U1. In
         i.e. u <                                                                 this case, if full
                                                                           (u—u)Tr
insurance is provided and if the government sets p =                                       the   price of
                                                                             (u')*     ,



the accident—prevention good is negative. The individual would "buy" as many

units of the good as possible, since doing so, with a negative price, would

increase his income. But he would not use them since his utility is higher

when an accident occurs. Thus, with relatively—utility—increasing accidents,
                                       — 22 —


the symmetric information optimum is not attainable under conditions of asym-

metric information. The symmetric information optimum could be attained if

individuals were compelled to use all the accident—prevention goods they pur—

chased.'8 The tax system, however, while a form of compulsion, cannot by it-

self force individuals to use what they purchase. To give individuals the

incentive to use accident—prevention goods, it is necessary that u0 > U1.

With relatively—utility—decreasing accidents, the asymmetric information

optimum is the solution to


            max
                    (1—r[f])u0[c0]+T[f]u1[c1]
          f,c1,c0


                    s.t. 1)   (1—ir[f])c0+iT[f]c1+f


                                   =                                       (21)
                                       (1—ir[fJ)y0±ir[f]y1,

                        ii) u0 > U1,

where constraint ii), which was absent from the syetric information optimum

problem (see (15)), is binding. The asymmetric information optimum can be de-

centralized by having the government set the price of the accident—prevention

good arbitrarily low but positive, financing the subsidy from a lump—sum tax

on firms, and allowing firms to choose what exclusive contract to offe. Where

denotes the value of a variable at the asymmetric information optimum, firms

will choose x0 and x1 so that with the          set by the government, the individual

will (via (18)) choose f=f and the individual's expected utility is maximized.




18. With enforcerent costs) the most efficient method of compusision would be
     to apply an infinitely large fine for non—compliance and to inspect for
     non—compliance with an infinitesmal but strictly positive probability.
                                           — 23   —




          If    utilityis outcome—independent, so that
                                                                   u0    u1 for all c0, c1
such that u0 =
                  u1,                                 **
                        a different problem arises. If full insurance is pro—
                                                  *
                                             (u1—u0)Tt
vided and if the government sets p                         , the   price of the accident—

prevention good is zero, the individual's purchases of the good are indeter—

minate (from (18)), urn         = — co).    In    this case, by setting the price of the
                        p-'.0
accident—prevention good arbitrarily low but positive, the planner can move the

economy arbitrarily close to the symmetric information optimum but not all the

way to it. Firms will then have an incentive to provide just short of full in—

surance, choosingx1 andx0 so that individuals will choose arbitrarily close
                                                                   18a
to the optimal quantity of accident—prevention goods


          We summarize the above results in


Proposition 3: In an economy with two outcomes, a single accident—prevention

          good which can be taxed linearly, no accident—prevention effort,

          and a single consumption good:

          1)      if the accident  is relatively—utility—decreasing, the symmetric
                  information optimum can be achieved by the government setting p
                  optimally, and insurance companies choosing x0 and x1.
          ii)    if utility     is outcome—independent, the symmetric information op-
                 timum can almost (arbitrarily closely)    be achieved by the govern-
                 ment providing the accident—prevention good at an arbitrarily low
                 but positive price, allowing insurance companies to choose what
                 contract to offer, and financing the subsidy via a lump—sum tax.

          iii) if the accident is strongly relatively—utility—increasing, the
               symmetric information optimum cannot be achieved. The asymmetric
               information is achieved by the government providing the accident—
               prevention good at an arbitrarily low price, allowing insurance
               companies to choose what contract to offer, and financing the sub-
               sidy via a lump—sum tax.



18a. This case is examined, in a specific context, in Diamond and Mirrlees
    [197 8].
                                  — 24 —


          The Proposition extends to the case where there is more than one con—

sunier good. If the accident is relatively—utility—decreasing, the symmetric

information optimum can be achieved by taxing only :he accident—prevention

good at the optimal rate; no tax should be applied to the consumer goods.

If, however, the accident is relatively—utility--decreasing, then differential

consumer good taxation is desirable. The Proposition also extends straight-

forwardly to the case where there are several accident—prevention goods. When

the accident has multiple outcomes, the analog to whether the accident is rela-

tively—utility—decreasing is whether the individual, when he is provided with

full insurance and charged an arbitrarily small positive price for the accident—

prevention good, will purchase it. When the accident has multiple outcomes and

there are several accident—prevention goods, the analysis becomes more difficult

since there may be multiple local optima; as fuller insurance is provided, the

individual will discontinue the use of the first one accident—prevention good,

then another, and for each set of accident—prevention goods employed, there will

be a local optimum.


          The complication pointed out in this section, that the interior

first—order conditions of the two—tier maximization problem need not charac-

terize the optimum, was first pointed out in Nirrlees [1975] and applies to

all the optimal tax problems treated in this paper. To simplify, we ignored

the complication in section 1, circumvented it by assumption in section

2.1, and shall assume it away for the rest of the paper.


          In this subsection we framed the discussion in terms of the

taxation and subsidization of accident—prevention goods. In so doing, we

implicitly treated the other side of the resource constraint (19) which per-

tains to insurance. When the net revenue raised from taxation is positive
                                              — 25 —



(negative),   insurance companies should be subsidized (taxed) in lump—sum fashion.


2.3 Accident—prevention effort and more than one consumer good

          The economy to be treated in this subsection is like that of sub-

section 2.1 except that instead of one consumer good and one accident—preven-

tion good there are two consumer goods. To simplify the analysis, we treat a

special case in which one of the goods (good a) is separable from effort in

the utility function, while the other (good b) is not. Having set all producer

prices equal to one, we choose good a as the numraire. Utility in state i is then


                  a        b



or, since y+x =                       from an individual's budget constraint,


                     bb   b
          u.[y.+x.—q
           1 1 1 c.]+v.[c.,e].
                      1 1 1

Expected utility is therefore


          EU = (1—ir[e])


                                                                                (22)
                  +.rr[e](u1[y1+x1_qbc]+v1[c,e]),


and the economy's resource constraint is


                                                                 =   0.         (23)



In this case, (10) becomes



                      1        sir.


              b       i0 (—)
                          g 0(x_(qb_l)c)                                          4
          q—1          1
                      z    'rr.(—)
                               ib
                      i0
                                             — 26   —




where     = 1—rr, and        =   'ii.   Upon rearrangement and simplification, (24) may

be rewritten as



                             (—) (x 1 -x     )

           qb_1 =
                              qb                                                (24')


                    (—)            q 0+(1—7)()
                     q 0 (c—c)+IT(——--)    q 0

Letting     denote the expected value of b i.e.


              =
                  (1—7r)c+1rc,

(24') may be further simplified to give



                    (—) (x         -x )

           q —1
                        acb
                                                                                (24")


                        ac       0


which states that qb should be set so that the "compensated" change in tax

revenue from a unit increase in qb equals the "compensated" change in insurance

payouts. Unfortunately, while this interpretation is clear, the implications

of (24") concerning the determinants of the sign and magnitude of qb_1 are

far from straightforward.


          Table 1 categorizes the circumstances under which good b should be

taxed or subsidized, the entries in the table indicating the sign of qb_1• To

make the analysis more concrete, we treat the example of a painful car acci-

dent in which the issue is whether pain—killers should be taxed or subsidized.

Suppose, for example that: i) effort and pain-killers are substitutes
                                          — 27 —


                                         Table   1



                                   xl > xO
                                                                          ,___


                        (_2) >0              (--) <0                             0         (1!) < 0
                         q 0                         0                                         q 0

           >0                 +                      -                     -                     +
 q 0
                              -                      +                     +                       -
           <0
 q e


                                  ii() < 0; ii) the "compensated"                    ex—
in the sense that
                        q 0         q 0
                                                                                                 < 0
                                                       their price, (—k)
pected demand for pain—killers is inversely related to
                                                                                           q 0
                                                           < 0, (—a)      < 0, and c > c ——
(one scenario consistent with this is
                                                 aqo                aqO
                                                                     in both
the "compensated" taxation of pain—killers reduces their consumption
                                          consumed in the event of accident;               these
events, and more pain—killers are
                                         < 0 imply (—)          <   0); and iii) the accident
conditions combined with (—-)
                                  aq 0                   aq 0
is not so severe as to destroy the individual's capacity for pleasure, so
                                                        -b
                                        au
                                             < 0, and (—s) < 0) pain—killers
that x1 > x0. In this case (x1 > x0, aq (—)
                                           0           3q 0
should be taxed
                                                 -b
                                             ,           are not primitive characteristics
                The signs of x1—x0, (--)
                                         aq 0 aq
                                                         functions. To convert (24") into a
of the utility or probability_of—accident
                                                                   in which
more primitive form, we employ the expected utility function (22),

case (24") may be written as


 qLJ_1 =
                              —7t (u0AE+U1BD)(X11C0)
                                                                                     —     ,    (24")
                              b
                           (c1_c0)+uT(u1(FBA )+u0AD)+(1             )(u0(FE—D )+u1AD)
                                               — 28   —




                             2                                        2

    where      A = (1—ri)                                 D =   iT
                                 °b                                       b


                                      2                                           2
                     b 2 "                                           b 2 "            V1
                B=(q)u0+                  b2              E=(q)u1+ b2
                                                                                  (c1)

                                                                              2              2
               F _iTeeu0+v0)_ii_2iTe — -——)+(1—ii)                                2
                                                                                      + iT
                                                                                                 2



    This equation has one interesting implication: when effort is separable from

    good b as well as good a in the utility function, good b should be neither

    taxed nor subsidized. Thus, the substitutability or complementarity between

    effort and good b is an essential determinant of how good b should be taxed.

    Unfortunately, it appears that other neat results are not to be had.19

    Thus, with moral hazard, the determinants of optimal tax rates

    in realistic situations will be complex, and the determination of these rates

    will require numerical solution. Nevertheless, the insight that the optimal

    tax systems reflects two factors — Ramsey—pricing t.o.reduce the deadweight

    loss associated with prices not reflecting production costs, and pricing to

-
    reduce accident probabilities and hence the deadweight loss associated with

    moral hazard —   is   useful.


                In interpreting the models of this subsection we have treated out-
    come 0   as "no accident" and outcome 1 as "accident". We could just as well,
    however, have assumed that an accident always occurs, and that the amount of
    effort   affects the damage caused by the accident. In this case, instead of




    19. The difficulty stems from the fact that (24) contains terms that reflect
         global rather than local properties of the utility function.
                                       — 29 —


speaking of accident—yrevention goods and effort, one would want to speak of

damage—reducing goods and effort. Fire extinguishers and seat belts are two

obvious examples of damage—reducing goods. Thus, one wants to subsidize fire

extinguishers as long as doing so does not make the individual much more care-

less.


             To   say that a good should be taxed is equivalent to saying that the
shadow price of the good exceeds its market price. Put this way, however,
this    result points to an interesting   implication of our analysis: In an economy
with    moral hazard, pecuniary externalities "matter";2°    by "matter" we mean

that government intervention is justified to internalize the externality. In

a classic competitive economy, pecuniary externalities do not matter since

the social benefit associated with the marginal unit equals the social cost.

The purchase of the marginal unit causes prices to change throughout the

economy, which induces a string of marginal reallocations. But since the so—

cialbenefit of each of these marginal reallocations equals the social cost,

the pecuniary externality creates no deadweight loss. In an economy with

moral hazard, however, since the social benefit of the marginal realloca-

tions is not in general equal to the corresponding social cost, pecuniary

externalities alter the aggregate deadweight loss in the economy and thus

matter. This result implies that the welfare properties of economies wih

moral hazard are markedly different from those of Arrow—Debreu economies.

For one, the Invisible Hand Theorem usually fails to hold in economies with

moral hazard; other differences are examined at some length in Arnott and




20. This statement needs to be qualified. When the allocation in an economy
     with moral hazard coincides with the corresponding syrme:ric information
     optimum, pecuniary externalities do not matter.
                                        30 —


 Stigiitz   [1983c].


            In the previous analysis, we assumed that an individual's total pur-

 chases of consumption and accident—prevention goods were unobservable. As a

 result, firms could not make (and enforce) the terms of the insurance they of-

 fer contingent on individuals' total purchases of these goods. Furthermore,

 competitive firms had no choice but to price goods and insurance at cost; any

 firm which tried to do what the tax system does, taxing some goods and subsidiz-

ing others, would make a loss since individuals would purchase the subsidized

but not the taxed goods.21 In addition, the government could apply only linear

taxation. What happens if, instead, individuals' total purchases of Consumption

and accident—prevention goods are observable? Firms could then sell total pack-

ages to individuals, tieing their purchases of insurance, accident—prevention

goods, and consumption goods, in which case government intervention would be

unnecessary since there is no allocation governments could achieve which firms

could not also.    If this possibility is ruled out, then observability of total

purchases allows the governmei-it to apply non—linear taxation.   ilow does this al-

ter the previous analysis? First, the problem identified in subsection 2.2,

that taxation cannot by itself coerce an individual to use the accident—preven-

tion goods he purchases (nor, for that matter, can packaging by firms), arises

whether taxation is linear or non—linear. Second, linear taxation along with

lump—sum transfers, which is what we treated, can be used to sustain any alloca-

tion that is sustainable using general non—linear taxation. And third, non—




21. Firms might, however, be able to sell bundles in which the ratios of the
     various goods in each bundle are those characterizing the asymmetric in-
     formation optimum.
                                      — 31 —


linear   taxation can 1e designed to circumvent the possible non—uniqueness of

competitive equilibrium (the tax system fixed) while linear taxation with

lump—sum transfers cannot. Thus, the use of non—linear taxation by govern-

ments or packaging by firms, where possible, ay inprove social welfare, but

does not eliminate the deadweight loss caused by the unobservability of effort.


3. Policy Applications

             We start out with a fairly lengthy discussion of one application,

optimal taxation vis——vis automobile accidents, and then touch on a variety

of others.


             In this paper, we have assumed that individuals are identical in

order to circumvent problems associated with adverse selection. In fact, of

course, almost all insurance is characterized by both moral hazard and ad-

verse selection. The presence of adverse selection will generally affect

the optimal tax structure and in interesting ways. The taxation of commodi-

ties will alter the self—selection constraints and therefore the deadweight
                                          22
loss associated with adverse selection.         The reader should keep in mind




22. This is analogous to commodity taxation in an economy with an income tax.
     See Atkinson and Stiglitz {1976J and Stiglitz [1982b].
         Consider, for instance, a simple faming economy in which everyone
     owns his own plot of land. All plots are identical, output is either zero
     or one, depending on farming ability and the state of nature. The in-
     surer can observe a farmer's output, but neither his ability nor the
     state of nature he experiences. There are high and low abiliy farmers
     and farmers know their own ability. The insurer will offer two packages
     of insurance, one low—price, low—quantity for high—ability farmers, the
     other higher—price, higher—quantity for low—ability farmers. Nigh abi—
     lity farmers would like to purchase more insurance, but if the insurer
     offers a low—price policy with more insurance, low ability farmers will
                                    — 32 —


that   the discussion which follows, by treating an economy of identical mdi—

viduals, ignores these considerations.


3.1 Automobile accidents

           Because of moral hazard, the provision of automobile accident in-

surance will increase both the probability of accident and the average size

of damage, conditional on an accident occurring. People will tend to drive

too much and too carelessly, and to be insufficiently careful in the main-

tenance of their cars (all of which cause the probability of accident to be

too high). And they will tend to drive too last, to purchase cars that are

insufficiently safe and excessively expensive, to take inadequate precaution

to be alert, and to neglect wearing seat belts when they should (all of which

cause average damage, conditional on an accident occurring, to be too high).


           We have seen that the structure of optimal taxation is complicated

by interdependencies between and within the probability—of—outcome function

and the outcome—contingent utility functions. In the discussion which follows,

we ignore these complications. Then the optimal tax structure will involve:

taxing gasoline (to encourage people to drive less), taxing alcohol (to en-

courage people to drive more carefully), imposing penalties on careless driv-

ing, subsidizing maintenance, taxing cars, with a higher tax on less safe and




    purchase it in preference to the policy designed for them. Thus, the
    presence of low—ability farmers constrains the set of (separating) con-
    tracts that can be offered high—ability farmers. This adverse selec-
    tion externality entails a deadweight loss. Now suppose that the
    government taxes those goods whose consumption makes people less risk—
    averse (alcohol, cigarettes?). This will cause farmers to become more
    risk—averse and will alter the pairof equilibrium insurance contracts,
    thereby altering the deadweight loss associated with the adverse selec-
    tion externality.
                                   — 33 —

                     4.

more expensive cars, subsidizing coffee breaks (to encourage people to be

more alert when driving),23 and imposing penalties for not wearing seat belts.

One might also want to tax complements and subsidizc substitutes. This could

involve subsidizing alternative modes of transport. Accidents on these al-

ternative modes are insured against, and this insurance too is characterized

by moral hazard. But one suspects that, per passenger—mile, the deadweight

loss associated with moral hazard is higher for private cars than for other

forms of transportation..


          We now turn to some other issues. First, we have not yet stated what

normalization we have made;   we have adopted the nost intuitive, and norma-

lized on those goods the level of consumption of which has no effect on the

probability of accident. Second, if an insurance company can effectively regu-

late its clients' total purchases of insurance,24 the government does not ne-

cessarily want to tax automobile insurance. If it does, it reduces the proba-

bility of accident, but it also exposes the individual to more risk and there

is a welfare cost associated with this. The government through its taxation

wants to increase the level of precaution at every level of insurance, rather

than alter the level of insurance per Se. With the normalization we have made,

whether the government taxes or subsidizes insurance is a residual. It Jim-

poses the appropriate taxes and subsidies on goods; if doing so raises negative

revenue, it imposes lump—sum taxes on insurance coipanies a'id otherwise it pro—




23. This has been done on some highways in Pennsylvania.

24. Insurance companies do this by stating that they will pay a client in
     the event of an accident only if he clais from no other company.
                                      —34—

vides them with lump—sum subsidies. Third, there is an important qualifica-

tion to this line of reasoning. We have treated automobile accidents as if

they involve only the insured. But many car accidents involve at least two

cars. A private insurance company, in deciding on the contract to offer a

client, will neglect to consider that by offering its client more insurance

and hence increasing his probability of accident, it also increases the acci-

dent probability of other firms' clients and hence these firms' profitability.

This reciprocal negative externality, which results in over—insurance, would

be internalized if there were only one insurance firm providing insurance

against car accidents. This provides an argument in favor of the socializa-

tion of automobile insurance, or alternatively a higher tax rate on insurance.

Fourth,   any outcome the government can achieve via the taxation (not neces-
sarily linear)   of body—work or, more generally, accident damage repair, it can

also achieve via the differential taxation of payouts. Both are essentially

outcome—contingent taxes. Thus, arguments in favor of the taxation of acci-

dent damage repair are neither stronger nor weaker than arguments in favor of
                             25
the taxation of insurance.        Fifth, it has been noted elsewhere in the

literature that experience—rating is a means of reducing the social loss at-

tributable to moral hazard.


3.2 Other policy applications

           We shall not attempt an exhaustive survey of policy applications,




25.   There is another important moral hazard phenomenon in this context.
      Both the accident victim and the repair company have an incen-
      tive to inflate the repair bill (splitting the excess of claimed over
      actual repair costs).
                                     — 35 —


but   rather choose a few, each of which illustrates a point of interest.

i) social security

            Diamond and Mirrlees [1978] consider an economy in which mdi—

duals are ex ante identical, but some, as they age, develop disabilities which.

make early retirement more attractive. The problem faced by the government is

how to design social security when it cannot ascertain the extent to which a

particular individual is disabled. The more attractive are provisions for

early   retirement, the more insurance is provided the disabled, but at the same
time, the more attractive it becomes for able individuals to retire "too early".

            The probability distribution of retirement ages is analogous to the
probability distribution of accident damages in our model (with earlier re-
tireinent corresponding to higher damage). Consumption in different periods
is analogous to different goods in our model, which are, at the same time, con-
sumer goods and accident—prevention goods. Consumption in earlier periods is
damage—reduci:; since it causes the individual to save less, which makes re-
tiring less attractive; and similarly, consumption in later periods is damage—
increasing. Relative to the symmetric information optimum, the provision of
social   security causes too many people to retire at too early an age. . The

deadweight loss associated with this can be reduced by subsidizing consumption

when young and taxing consumption when old, or more straightforwardly by taxing

savings. This discourages saving, which makes an individual less inclined to

retire. Depending on how increasing disability affects the utility function,

since there is no analog to accident—prevention effort, the symmetric informa-

tion optimum may or may not be achievable.

            One could enrich the D—N model to allow for different types of goods.

In such an economy one might want to subsfdize those goods that encourage later
                                      — 36 —


retirement   of the able, and tax those that encourage earlier retirement. One

might therefore want to subsidize companies' attenpts to improve working con-

ditions, and tax goods that are complementary to retirement interests. To re-

duce the number of early retirees, one might also want to subsidize medical

expenses.

ii) informal insurance

            In Arnott and Stiglitz [1982c], we   argued   that the provision of in-

formal insurance —   mutual assistance among friends and family members in
times of need —   that   is supplementary to market insurance may result in in-

efficiency, relative to the case where all insurance is provided through the

market. For example, unemployment is likely to be a less unhappy state if an

individual is helped out by family and friends; such support dampens the in-

dividual's incentive to search for a new job. The amount of informal insurance

provided can be influenced by the government through the taxation of comple-

ments and subsidization of substitutes, through regulation, or by direct pro-

hibition. In many contexts, however, the costs of uch government interven-

tion, on both economic and moral grounds, are likely to exceed the benefits.

In these cases there is potential but not actual market failure. The "market"

(i.e., spontaneous economic activity, including markets and spontaneous non—

market institutions) is efficient in the sense that it cannot be improved upon

by government intervention, though not in the sense employed by the naive func-

tionalists who argue that where markets are deficient, the non—market insti-

tutions which arise will correct all potential "market" failures.
                                   —37—

iii) unemployment insurance

          The optimal provision of unemployment insurance trades off the dead-

weight losses associated with search and matching externalities, the incom-

plete provision of insurance, and moral hazard. The deadweight loss asso-

ciated with this form of moral hazard (on the one hand, the provision of un-

employment insurance encourages quitting, decreases the costs of poor job

performance resulting in dismissal, reduces search intensity, and increases

the reservation wage; on the other, it nay give rise to better matching) can

be reduced by taxing goods that makes unemployment more enjoyable, and subsi-

dizing those goods that make search and employment more attractive. To make

employment more pleasant, the government could subsidize firms' attempts to

improve working conditions. And to make search more pleasant, the government

could subsidize the operation of employment agencies. One could also argue

that beer should be taxed if it is found that the unemployed drink it in dis-

proportionately large quantities; one suspects, however, that this too is a

case of potential rather than actual market failure.

iv) medical insurance                                                         -




          Here the policy prescription is obvious. The government should tax

those goods and activities that are conducive to ill health, and subsidize

those associated with good health. Some such measures are already in effect

in most developed countries. The taxation of alcohol and cigarettes is an

example, though it is doubtful whether the principal aim of these taxes was

the reduction in the deadweight loss from the moral hazard associated with the

provision of medical insurance.


          It is not clear whether moral hazard considerations support the
                                        —    —




 taxation   or subsidization of non—preventive medical treatment' (tais is analo—

gous to body work in the case of automobile accidents).

v) sharecropping and other      principal—agent   problens

            Most economists have a good understanding of what moral hazard is,

but it is our feeling that the importance and pervasiveness of moral hazard

tends to be underestimated. For almost all risks, the probability of acident

or the size of damage conditional on the accident occurring is affected by the

tim's actions, which are only imperfectly observable. As a result, insurance

markets against virtually every risk will be incomplete or absent. And when

an insurance market is incomplete, institutions will develop that provide nc'n—

market insurance, perhaps explicit, perhaps implicit, perhaps formal, perhaps

informal. Thus, moral hazard is present not only in insurance markets, but

in these numerous social institutions as well.


            We have given examples of market insurance, informal insurance, and -

government—provided insurance. There is another large class of institutions

which provide (implicit) insurance——principal—agent relationships. An example

which has been extensively discussed is the landlord—tenant contract (Stiglitz

[1974], e.g.).     The basic problem is that the provision of implicit insurance

to the agricultural laborer discourages effort. The deadweight loss asso-

ciated with this can be reduced by subsidizing complements to effort. Thus,

if a happy worker is a good worker, it might benefit the landlord to construct

entertainment facilities. And     if   there is a problem with workers spending too

much time at the local cafe, he should raise its prices. Since indebtedness

and purchases of inputs may both affect effort, they too should be taxed or

subsidized. The    attempt   to internalize these "externalities" leads to in—
                                     — 39 —



terlinkage   of land, l'abor, credit, and commodity markets (Braverman and Stig—

litz [1982] and Mitra [1982]). Other familiar principal—agent relationships

are those between employer and employee (e.g. Arnott and Stiglitz [1981], and

Arnott, Hosios, and Stiglitz [1983]), borrower and lender (e.g. Stiglitz and

Weiss [1981]), and physician and patient (e.g. Arrow [1965]).


3.3 Some comments

             The reader will no doubt have asked himself: i) how significant

is the deadweight loss associated with the various forms of moral hazard we

have discussed; ii) what is the approximate magnitude of taxes and subsidies

based on these considerations; iii) how are the optimal tax and subsidy rates

to be computed; iv) and may not the administrative and other costs of impos-

ing a complex system of taxes and subsidies to reduce the deadweight loss as-

sociated with moral hazard exceed the benefits? The simple answer is that

neither the theoretical nor the empirical work that would be required to an-

swer these questions has been done. Insurance actuaries probably have a good

idea of how responsive the probability of a particular accident is to the

parameters of the insurance contract. But this datum reflects not only moral

hazard, but also adverse selection; as the contract is modified, not only

may each client alter his accident—prevention behavior, but also the client

population may change. Since the welfare properties of economies with both moral

hazard and adverse selection have not yet been investigated, we do not know

what actuarial data would be necessary to compute the deadweight loss asso-

ciated with moral hazard cum adverse selection nor how to undertake the com-

putation.


             Our intuition is that the deadweight loss due to moral hazard is
                                      — 40 —


 important   enough in s'ome contexts, most notably health, theft, fire, automo-

bile accidents, social security, and unemploynent insurance, to warrant cor-

rective taxation.



4. Concluding Comments

             This paper complements three others we have written dealing with

the pure theory of moral hazard. While each treated different topics, there

was a common theme: The properties of economies with asvretric information

are very different from those of the classic, competitive, Arrow—Debreu economy.

Within this theme, there were several sub—theies:

1.   In the analysis of economies with asymmetric information, one must guard

against making assumptions that are not primitive, but are rather charac-

teristics of the classic, competitive economy. For example, in Arnott and

Stiglitz [1982aJ we showed that moral hazard ay give rise to intrinsic non—

convexities in the relevant parameter space; it would be a mistake to blindly

assume convexity. And in Arnott Sand Stiglitz [19S2b] we demonstrated that

the form of the insurance contract depends on who has what information — con-

tracts may specify not only price, but also the quantity of insurance to be

purchased, and may furthermore be characterized by random premia and payouts;

thus, it would be a mistake to assume the forrn of the insurance contract.

2. The basic theorems of classic welfare economics no longer hold in econo—

mies with asymmetric information. Efficiency is not in general consistent

with decentralized, atomistic behavior, and ay entail large firms (even with

constant returns in the production technology) and/or extensive government

intervention. One of the sources of potential market failure, that shadow

prices generally differ from market prices, was the focus of this paper. Other
                                   — 41 —


sources of market faflure are discussed in Arnott and Stiglitz [1983].
3. Relatedly, considerable care must be taken to ensure that the appropriate

efficiency concept is employed. Efficiency should be defined not only con-

tingent on the information acquisition technology, or more restrictively on

what information is and is not available to whom, but also treating market

structure as endogenous and taking into account the technology of government

intervention. The latter are particularly difficult. In the paper, we pointed

out potential market failures on the assumption that the private sec-

tor price goods at production cost. This assumption is appropriate if, as we

assumed, the individual's total purchases of each commodity are unobservable.

But if all an individuals' purchases could be costlessly monitored, there is

nothing in our model per se to rule out the emergence of a super—firm which

produces all goods and sells all insurance. If the market were, contestable,

this super—firm would act efficiently; there is nothing the goverment could

do which it could not. This result in turn is predicated on the assumption

that individuals are perfectly informed concerning all contracts and prices. If

this rather unpalatable assumption were relaxed, one would expect a monopolis—

tically competitive equilibrium to emerge.


          The above discussion points to the importance of giving careful

consideration to the information available to firms and to how this affects

the feasible scope of their actions, and to relating government intervention

to those characteristics of governments, notably their coercive powers, that

permit them a broader range of actions than firms.


          A final problem is that the cots of government intervention should
                                       — 42 —


include   not only information acquisition and administration costs, but also

the efficiency losses associated with internal incentive problems. Effi-

ciency should be defined contingent on all these, and other, considerations.


             In this paper, we have made a simple yet, we believe, important

point. In particular, in competitive equilibrium (with no government inter-

vention) in an economy with asymmetric information, shadow prices will generally

deviate from market prices. There is a welfare loss associated with the in-

formational asymmetries, the size of which depends on individuals' consumption

patterns. If increased consumption of a good reduces this welfare loss, the

good should be subsidized whenever the reduction in welfare loss exceeds the

costs of government intervention.


           We investigated a particular case of this general proposition.L&

We   considered an economy with identical individuals, in which    the presence of

asymmetric   information gave rise to moral hazard. And we considered the de—
terminants of the optimal tax structure in such an 'economy. Broadly speaking,
our   records accorded with intuition. The      moral hazard arising from the provi-
sion of insurance causes people to self—protect too little, so       those goods whose

consumption    encourage an individual to self—protect more/less should be sub-
sidized/taxed. Thus, fire extinguishers should be subsidized if having a fire
extinguisher   reduces accident damage, while alcohol should be taxed if    its con—
sumption causes individuals to drive more recklessly. Some of our results, how-
ever, are not immediately obvious. First, we demonstrated that there are cir—


26. The general proposition itself is examined in greater generality in
      Creenwald and Stiglitz [1982].
                                       — 43 —


cumstances, albeit i4robable, in which accident-prevention goods should be
taxed.    Second, we showed that, as in the optiial commodity tax problem, the
determination of the optimal tax structure is far from straigh..forward. And
third, we argued that if the probability of accident is dependent on an in-
dividual's (anonymous) purchases of accident—prevention goods and not at all
on his accident—prevention effort, that optimal taxation may lead the economy
to the symmetric information optimum.

            There are two obviously   worthwhile extensions to our   analysis. We
treated   information as if it were either costless or infinitely costly to

acquire; as a result, something was either perfectly observable or unob-

servable. One would like to treat explicitly the costs of acquiring insurance—

relevant information,27 particularly since one could then determine the cir-

cumstances under which such information acquisition should be subsidized. The

analysis should also be extended to treat adverse selection and moral hazard

simultaneously. Not only would this alter the optimal tax structure in in-

teresting ways, but also the development of such a model is a necessary condi-

tion for both sound, qualitative policy advice, and for the empirical estima-

tion necessary to compute optimal tax rates.28




27. The collection of information has been studied by Holmstrom [1979] and
     Shavell [1979a] but for simple economies with moral hazard in which com-
     petitive equilibrium is constrained efficient.
         The transmission of information, in particular whether firms have an
     incentive to share information on their common clients is the focus of
     current work by Heliwig [1982].

28. We assumed that it is prohibitively costly to monitor an individual's pur-
     chases of commodities. With this assumption, one cannot improve on linear
     taxation. There are some commodities, however, for which individual con—
     sumption can be monitored. It would be interesting to investigate the op—
     timal non—linear taxation (or linear taxation cum rationing) of these com-
     modities.
                                   — 44 —


          The belief 'that an unregulated market (and spontaneous non—market

institutions) would provide many forms of insurance in an inefficient manner

is widespread, at least among policy makers and the lay public, and has given

rise to extensive government intervention vis---vis insurance. This paper

and Arnott and Stiglitz [1983] have provided a theoretical basis for this

belief, and have indicated at least some of the factors that should be con-

sidered in determining apprppriate corrective action by the government.
                                                              — 45 —



                                                             Appendix
                                      Derivation               of Equation (10)


           Rewrite        (9) as


           rkrir    max
            j,i.p ;,ix.j
           tq
                                          =
                                               j                              I              k

                                       -
                                               Z(p-1)f).                                                                    (1)
                                              £

                      v.
          axin
               = Zir. —i + E —i v.—Air
                         .iax
                            .ax 1 in                             +)in ((k1)               in

                 1               in   i         in                        k
                                                                                        axin


                 + E(p—1) f-)_X(E                                                                            =   0.         (ii)

                                                                                  av.            air.
From the individual's maximization probleni, Err.                                       +               V.       ii ci. .
                                                                          1
                                                                              iaxin            .axin     i                    Thus,


          E   c -
                = Eir c3cx -X(Eir c3)
          m maxm m mmm

                                       •                      ac k
                          +   X                                      +


                          - A(Ec3E
                                                                                                        0.              (iii)



Also,

                                              air
         -=Zir   —+E—--v +A(rc3)
          3
         aq
              in  3 in        aq mq
                             mm                         in
                                                                     in


                                                    k
                + A(Eir (E(q —1)
                         mink
                                              —
                                              aq3
                                                  + Z(p —1)---))
                                                    £     aq3

                          air.
                -   X(E   —4 (x._E(qk_1)c_E(_j)f))                                 =    0.
                         iaq3         'k                                                                                (iv)
                                                                                        — 46 —

Again from the                 individual's maximization problem,   in
                                                                          — + Z —s
                                                                          j moq                                                  in
                                                                                                                                      =


     r
                                                                  m    aq
—
         in
              cct .
              mm            Thus, we obtain from (iii) and (iv) that
    in



                                                                                               ak
                                                                                               —              C
                      Ecj              +                  =                                               +
                                                                                              max
                      in
                           max       in qj                          in          k                    in       oq


                                + E(p-1)(ir c
                                           in in ax
                                                                                    + ))                                                  (v)
                                         m         in



                                                  air.
                                      mm
                                - X(E((E
                                                  ax               m
                                                                         3q
                                                                            j   k
                                                                                         I
                                                                       + )(x _E(qk_l)Ck_E(p_l)f)))                          0.



Applying the notation that
                                k             k                             k
                           ac
                                             m                           in
                      (—-) —                —-        +                                                                                   (vi)
                                in    —                       .j
                                                              c i—              ,
                                             q


                           af)                                  irc j
                                                                 mmax —,and                                                               (vii)
                                     0 a3
                                        q                  in          Ifl



                      (—4) = — +
                                            arr
                                                                   —
                                                                   ax
                                                                      13cin                                                               (viii)
                           aq3                j
                                            aq.            in          in



to       (v) gives
                                                                                                 k
                           --- +
                       E cmax                                 = X{Thr (Z(qk_1)(_)
                                      in a
                                                                                                                        )
                                                      j              in
                      in                                               m            k                                   0


                                     E()
                                      air
                                -                      (x _E(qk_l)ck                             1)f)} =           0.                     ()
                                     iaq3         0

Thus,
                                        k
                                ((qk1)() +z(p_1)(t)
                      i1k ae aqo
                                -    E()    _E(qk_1)c_E(pt1)f)
                                     iaq3e 1k
                                                      (x                                                      0,                          (x)

which          is equivalent to (10) for                                                     The proof for >=fZ is analogous.
                                   — 47


                                BIBLIOGRA1.


Arnott, R.J., and J.E. Stiglitz, "Labor Turnover, Uage Structures and Moral
          Hazard: The Inefficiency of Competitive Markcts," September 1981
                                                              research memo-
          Econometric Research Program, Princeton University,
          randum 289.

Arnott, R.J., and J.E. Stiglitz, "EquilibiUifl in Competitive Insurance Markets:
           The Welfare Economics of Moral Hazard Part I: Basic Analytics and
          Part II: Existence and Nature of Equilibrium,"Ifl
          stitute for Economic Research, Queen's University, discussion papers
          465 (1982a) and 483 (1982b).

Arnott, R.J., and J.E. Stiglitz, "Equilibrium in Competitive Insurance Markets:
          The Welfare Economics of Moral Hazard. Part III. Some Welfare Im-
          plications of the Analysis," mimeo, 1983.
                                            "Implicit Contracts, Labor Mobi-
Arnott, R.J., A. Hosios, and J.E. Stiglitz,
          lity, and Unemployment," June 1983, mimeo.

Atkinson, A.B., and J.E. Stiglitz, "The Design of Tax Structure," Journal of
          Public EconomicS, 6, 1976, 55—75.
                                                                  Jahnssnin
Arrow, K., Aspects of the Theory of Risk-Beariflg (Helsinki: Yrjo
           Stio, 1965).
                                  "Sharecropping and the Interlinking of
 Braverman, A.,and J.E. Stiglitz,
           Agrarian Markets", American Economic Review, 72, 1982, 695—715.

 Debreu, G., Theory of Value (New York: John Wiley and Sons, Inc., 1959).
                                            Taxation and Public Production I:
 Diamond, P.A., and J.A. Mirrlees, "Optimal
           Production Efficiency, and II: Tax Rules," American Economic
           view, 61, 1971, 8—27 and 261—278.
                                                                     Variable
 Diamond, P.A., and J.A. Mirrlees, "A Model of Social Insurance with
           Retirement," Journal of Public Economics, 10, 1978, 295—336.

                                             readings, UncertaintY fl
 Diamond, P., and M. Rothschild, comments on
           nomics (New York: Academic Press, Inc., 1978).
                                                                  Journal of
 Dionne, G., "Moral Hazard and State—Dependent Utility Function",
           Risk and Insurance, XLIX, 1982, 405—422.
                                        Welfare Economics of Imperfect Inf or—
 Greenwald, B., and J.E. Stiglitz, "The
           ination and Incomplete Markets", Bell Labs., mimeo., 1982.

 Grossman, S. and 0. Hart, "An Analysis of the Principal—Agent Problem,"
           CARESS Working Paper #80—17, University of Pennsylvania.
                                       — 48 —


1-leliwig, M., "Moral Hazard and Monopolistically Competitive Insurance Mar-
            kets," 1982, mimeo.

Helpman, E., and J.—J. Laffont, "On Moral Hazard in General Equilibrium,"
          Journal of Economic Theory, 10, 1975, 8—23.


 Holmstr3m, B., "Moral Hazard and Observability," Bell Journal of
                                                                  Economics,
           10, 1979, 74—91.

Marshall, J.M., "Moral Hazard," American Economic Review, 66, 1976, 880—890.

Mirrlees,   J.A., "An Exploration in the Theory of Optimum Income Taxation,"
            Review of Economic Studies, 38, 1971, 175—208.
Mirrlees, J.A., "The Theory of Moral Hazard with Unobservable Behaviour,
           Part I," October 1975, mimeo.
Mirrlees, JA., "The Implications of Moral Hazard for Optimal Insurance",
          April 1979, mimeo.
Mirrlees, J.A., "Lecture Notes on the Economics of Uncertainty," August 1980, lnimeo.
Mitra,   P., "A   Theory of Interlinked Rural Transactions", Journal of Public
            Economics, 20, 1983, 167—192.

Pauly, N., "Overprovision and Public Provision of    Insurance," Quarterly
          Journal of Economics, 88, 1974, 44—62.

Rothschild, H., and .3.  Stiglitz,. "Equilibrium in Competitive Insurance Markets:
            An Essay on the Economics of Imperfect Information," Quarterly
            Journal of Economics, 90, 1976, 629—649.

Shavell, S., "On Moral Hazard and Insurance," Quarterly Journal of Economics,
          93, 1979a, 541—562.

Shavell, S., "Risk Sharing and Incentives in the Principal and Agent Relation-
          ship," Bell Journal of Economics, 10, 1979b, 55—73.

Spence, H., "Product Differentiation and Performance in Insurance Markets,"
          Journal of Public Economics, 10, 1978, 427—447.

Spence, M., and R. Zeckhauser, "Insurance, Information, and Individual Ac-
          tion," American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, 61, 1971,
          380—387.

Stiglitz, J.E., "Incentives and Risk Sharing in Sharecropping," Review of
          Economic Studies, 1974, 219—255.
                                    — 49   —




Stiglitz,   J.E., "Utilitarianism and Horizontal Equity: The Case for Random
            Taxation," Journal of Public Economics, 18, 1982, 1—34.

Stiglitz, J.E., "Self—Selection and Pareto Efficient Taxation," Journal of
          Public Economics, 17, 19o2, 213—240.

Stiglitz, J.E., and A. Weiss, "Credit Rationing in Markets with Imperfect
          Information," American Economic Review, 71, 1981, 393—410.

Weiss, L., "The Desirability of Cheating, Incentives and Randomness in
           the Optimal Income Tax," Journal of Political Economy,
          1976 , 1343—1352.
