                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           IS THE U.S. CURRENT ACCOUNT DEFICIT
                          SUSTAINABLE? AND IF NOT, HOW COSTLY
                               IS ADJUSTMENT LIKELY TO BE?

                                           Sebastian Edwards

                                         Working Paper 11541
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w11541


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 2005




This is a revised version of a paper presented at the Spring 2005 meeting of the Brookings Panel on
Economic Activity. I thank Ed Leamer for helpful discussions, and Roberto Alvarez for his assistance. I am
grateful to the editors and to my discussants Katharine Dominguez and Pierre-Olivier Gorinchas for their
comments. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by Sebastian Edwards. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Is the U.S. Current Account Deficit Sustainable? And If Not, How Costly is Adjustment Likely
To Be?
Sebastian Edwards
NBER Working Paper No. 11541
August 2005
JEL No. F02, F43, O11

                                            ABSTRACT




In this paper I analyze the relationship between the U.S. dollar and the U.S. current account. I deal

with issues of sustainability, and I discuss the mechanics of current account adjustment. The analysis

presented in this paper differs from other work in several respects: First, I emphasis the dynamics

of the current account adjustment, going beyond computations of the "required" real depreciation

of the dollar to achieve sustainability. I show that even if foreigners' (net) demand for U.S. assets

continues to increase significantly, the current account deficit is likely to experience a large decline

in the (not too distant) future. Second, I rely on international evidence to explore the likelihood of

an abrupt decline in capital flows into the U.S. And third, I analyze the international evidence on

current account reversals, to investigate the potential consequences of a (possible) sudden stop of

capital flows into the U.S. This analysis suggests that the future adjustment of the U.S. external

accounts is likely to result in a significant reduction in growth.



Sebastian Edwards
UCLA Anderson Graduate School of Business
110 Westwood Plaza, Suite C508
Box 951481
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481
and NBER
sebastian.edwards@anderson.ucla.edu
    I.       Introduction
         During the last few years a large number of analysts in academia, the private
sector and applied research institutions have expressed increasing concerns regarding the
growing U.S. current account deficit. There is a generalized sense that the current
situation of global imbalances is unsustainable and that adjustment will have to take place
sooner rather than later. The unprecedented magnitude of the U.S. current account deficit
and the growing net indebtedness of the U.S. have fueled analysts’ worries, with many
arguing that unless something is done, the world will move toward a major financial
crisis.1 Some authors have gone as far as suggesting an imminent collapse of the U.S.
dollar, and a global financial meltdown.2 The main idea behind this view is that if the
U.S. current account deficit is maintained at its current level, U.S. net international
liabilities will reach 100% of GDP, a figure considered to be excessively large.3 In a
recent paper, Mussa (2004) has said:


         “[T]here is probably a practical upper limit for the US net external liabilities at
         something less than 100 percent of US GDP and, accordingly...current account
         deficits of 5 percent or more of US GDP are not indefinitely sustainable.” (Mussa
         2004, p 114).


         The source of financing of the U.S. current account deficit has also become a
source of concern. A number of authors have argued that by relying on foreign -- and
particularly Asian -- central banks’ purchases of Treasury securities, the U.S. has become
particularly vulnerable to sudden changes in expectations and economic sentiments.4
         Robert Skidelsky has recently argued in The New York Times that the value of the
dollar is one of the most important sources of political tension between the United States
and Europe. According to him, “[U]nilateralism is not more acceptable in currency
matters than in foreign policy.” More specifically, Skidelsky has pointed out that,
1
   Although most of the alarmist discussions have come in the form of Op-Ed pieces, there have also been
a few policy papers on the subject. See, for example, Roubini and Setser (2004).
2
   See, for example, Roubini and Setser (2004). For an excellent set of papers on the subject see Bergsten
and Williamson (2004).
3
   See Mussa (2004) for a very clear discussion of this issue.
4
  See, for example, Martin Wolf’s October 1st, 2003 article in the Financial Times, “Funding America’s
recovery is a very dangerous game,” (page 15).


                                                                                                             2
           “The United States is the only major country proclaiming itself indifferent to its
currency value. In countries running persistent current account deficits, governments
normally -- indeed must – reduce domestic consumption. But so far, the United States
has relied on other countries to adjust their economies to profligate American spending…
(The New York Times, February 20th, 2005, p.9)


          There is, however, an alternative view. Some authors have argued that in an era
of increasing financial globalization and rapid U.S. productivity gains, it is possible –
even logical and desirable -- for the U.S. to run (very) large current account deficits for a
very long period of time (say, a quarter of a century). According to this view, growing
international portfolio diversification implies that the “rest of the world” will be willing
to accumulate large U.S. liabilities during the next few years; maybe even in excess of
100% of U.S. GDP. According to this perspective, since the U.S. current account deficit
does not pose a threat, there are no fundamental reasons to justify a significant fall in the
value of the U.S. dollar (Dooley, Folkerts-Landau and Garber 2004a, 2004b). 5
          The purpose of this paper is to analyze the relationship between the U.S. dollar
and the U.S. current account. In particular, I deal with issues of sustainability and I
discuss the mechanics of current account adjustment. I develop a portfolio model of the
current account and I show that even under a very positive scenario, where foreigners’
(net) demand for U.S. assets doubles relative to its current level, the U.S. current account
will have to go through a significant adjustment in the (not too distant) future. Indeed, it
is not possible to rule out a scenario where the U.S. current account deficit would shrink
abruptly by 3 to 6 percent of GDP. In order to have an idea of the possible consequences
of this type of adjustment, I analyze the international evidence on current account
reversals. The results from this empirical investigation indicate that significant current
account reversals have tended to result in large declines in GDP growth.
          The rest of the paper is organized as follows: In section II I provide some
background information and data. I discuss the evolution of the U.S. real exchange rate
(RER) and current account during the last three decades, and I analyze some of the
statistical properties of the RER. I discuss the sources of deficit financing and I analyze

5
    See, also, Cooper (2004), and Caballero, Farhi and Hammour (2004).


                                                                                                3
the evolution of the U.S. net international assets position. In this section I also provide
international comparisons, and I put the current U.S. situation in a global comparative
context. In Section III I deal with the analytics of current account and real exchange rate
adjustment. The analysis presented in this section focuses on transitional dynamics, and
goes beyond computations of the “required” real depreciation of the dollar to achieve
current account sustainability. I develop a portfolio model of current account behavior,
and I discuss the response of the current account to changes in international portfolio
choices. The model is quite general and allows for valuation effects stemming from
exchange rate changes, and for changes in the international terms of trade. I show that
under plausible parameters, an increase in the demand for U.S. assets by foreign investors
results in an “overshooting” of the current account deficit. According to the model the
current account deficit will increase until, at some point, it will experience a reversal.
The reversal may, indeed, be quite abrupt and significant. In Section IV I use a large
cross-country data set to investigate the international evidence on current account
reversals. In particular, I investigate whether countries that have experienced significant
and rapid reversals have faced real costs in the form of a decline in the rate of GDP
growth. I argue that in spite of the uniqueness of the U.S., as a large country whose
currency is at the center of the global financial system, this comparative analysis provides
useful information on the likely costs an eventual U.S. current account adjustment. The
paper closes with Section V, where I discuss some global policy challenges and I offer
some concluding remarks.
    II.      The U.S. Dollar and the Current Account: A Thirty Years Perspective
          In this section I analyze the evolution of the U.S. real exchange rate and current
account since the adoption of floating exchange rates in the early 1970s. The section is
divided in three parts: 6 First, I discuss the evolution of the U.S. real exchange rate
(RER) and current account during the last three decades, and I deal with the changing

6
   Due to space considerations I have not discussed in detail some important issues, such as the stationarity
of the RER and its (changing) volatility through time. Most recent analyses based on panel data have found
that the RER is stationary and that its half-life cycle is lower than the 3 to 5 years traditionally considered
as the “consensus view.” See Choi, Mark and Sul (2005). An analysis of U.S. RER volatility indicates that
for the complete period (1975-2004) the U.S. real exchange rate index exhibited one of the highest
volatilities in the sample. Only the British pound, the Japanese yen, and the euro have higher volatilities.
Second, RER volatility for the U.S. dollar was highest in 1985-1989. This period corresponds, mostly, to
the rapidly depreciating Phase III in Figure 2.


                                                                                                             4
nature of the U.S. trade-weighted RER index. I argue that it is possible to divide the last
thirty years of RER behavior into six distinct phases. Second, I discuss the most recent
data on the U.S. current account, including its sources of financing. And third, I provide
some international evidence on current account imbalances during the last three decades.
This comparative analysis allows to place the U.S. recent experience in a historical
context.
II.1   Six Phases of Real Exchange Rate Behavior
       In Figure 1 I present quarterly data for the U.S. current account balance as
percentage of GDP, as well as on the evolution of the Federal Reserve trade-weighted
index of the U.S. dollar real exchange rate for the period 1973-2004; in this Figure – as in
the rest of this paper --, an increase in the RER index represents a real exchange rate
appreciation. Several interesting features emerge from Figure 1: First, it shows that
deficits have become increasingly large since 1992. Second, Figure 1 shows that for the
first decade of floating exchange rates (1973-1982), the US ran, on average, a small
current account surplus of 0.04% of GDP. In contrast, for the period 1983-2004 the
average current account balance has been a deficit of 2.4% of GDP. Figure 1 also shows
that during the period under consideration the RER index experienced significant
movements: its mean was 105.3, its minimum 91.2, and its maximum was 136.3. Finally,
Figure 1 shows a pattern of negative correlation between the trade-weighted real value of
the dollar and the current account balance. Periods of strong dollar have tended to
coincide with periods of (larger) current account deficits. Although the relation is not
one-to-one, the degree of synchronicity between the two variables is quite high: the
contemporaneous coefficient of correlation between the (log of the) RER index and the
current account balance is –0.53; the highest correlation of coefficient is obtained when
the log of the RER is lagged three quarters (-0.60).
       Recent policy debates on the value of the U.S. dollar illustrate the massive
changes that have occurred in U.S. trade relations during the last three decades. While in
the early 1970’s dollar-related discussions dealt almost exclusively with bilateral
exchange rates – both nominal and real -- with respect to the industrial countries, more
recent debates have increasingly focused on the behavior of emerging countries’
currencies, including the Chinese renminbi, the Korean won, and the Malaysian ringgit.



                                                                                              5
During the last few years the Mexican peso has also become an important currency in
determining the trade-weighted value of the U.S. dollar; this was not the case in 1973,
when the Smithsonian Agreement was abandoned. Between 1995 and 2005 China’s
weight in the Federal Reserve trade-weighted real exchange rate index has gone from
5.67% to 11.35%; Mexico’s weight has increased from 6.95% to 10.04%. On the other
hand, during the same period, Japan’s weight has declined from 16.54% to 10.58%.
Overall, today’s trade-weighted U.S. RER is dominated by the Asian nations – as a
group, the Asian countries (excluding India) have a weight in the index of 38.8%.
Commodity currencies, as a group, are also very important, with a weight of 24.6%.
Finally, the launching of the Euro in 1999 has marginalized the British pound. Although
a weight of 5.2% is still quite “respectable,” the pound is not any longer among the top 5
currencies in the index. The situation was quite different in 1998, when the weight of the
British pound was higher than that of all, but one, of the currencies that eventually would
conform the euro (in 1998 the German mark had a weight of 6.4% and the British pound
had a weight of 5.9%).7
        As may be seen from Figure 1, it is possible to distinguish six distinct phases in
U.S. dollar real exchange rate behavior for the thirty-year period 1975-2004. A brief
analysis of these six phases provides a summary of the history of the international
financial system since the inception of floating:8
        •    Phase I: 1973Q1-1978Q4. This period includes the early years of floating,
             and was characterized by a depreciating trend of the U.S. RER. The
             accumulated depreciation amounted to 18.1% during 24 quarters. During this
             period the standard deviation of the monthly log differences of the RER index
             was 0.0205. During the early part of this phase (1973-76) the current account
             was in surplus. This, however, turned into a small deficit in the years 1977
             and 1978.
        •    Phase II: 1979Q1-1985Q1. During these 26 quarters the U.S. dollar RER
             experienced a 49.3% appreciation. During this phase the current account

7
  In 2005 the euro has a weight of 18.80%; in 1995 the currencies that conformed the euro had a combined
weight of 17.30%.
8
  Figure 1 presents the Fed broad RER index. The same six phases are observed if alternative indexes are
used.


                                                                                                      6
               went into deficit, reaching 2.9% of GDP in the third quarter of 1984. The
               standard deviation of the monthly log differences of the RER index was 0.022,
               slightly higher than that of Phase I. In view of the substantial strengthening of
               the dollar and the related increase in the U.S. current account deficit, on
               September 25th 1985 the members of the G-5 (The United Sates, Japan, the
               United Kingdom, France, and Germany) decided to implement concerted and
               coordinated interventions in the foreign exchange market. As part of this
               agreement – known as the Plaza Accord – the G-5 countries committed
               themselves to put in place coordinated macroeconomic policies that would
               reduce the costs of the global adjustment process.9
          •    Phase III: 1985Q2-1988Q4. During this period the dollar real exchange rate
               experienced a rapidly depreciating trend. The peak-to-trough change in the
               index was -28.7%. Real exchange rate volatility increased substantially
               during this 16 quarter period; the standard deviation of the monthly log
               differences of the RER index was 0.0268, substantially higher than in the
               previous two phases. The current account deficit continued to grow, until in
               mid 1987 it stabilized at around 3.6% of GDP. From that point onward the
               current account began to improve, and by the fourth quarter of 1988 the deficit
               had declined to 2.4% of GDP. On February 22, 1987 the Ministers of Finance
               and Central Bank Governors of the G-6 (G-5 plus Canada) released a
               communiqué – known as the Louvre Accord -- informing the public that
               significant progress had been made in achieving global adjustment, and that
               “further substantial exchange rate shifts among their currencies could damage
               growth and adjustment prospects in their countries…” The Louvre Accord
               communiqué went on to say that the G-6 countries “agreed to cooperate
               closely to foster stability of exchange rates around current levels.”10
          •    Phase IV: 1989Q1-1995Q2. During this Phase the real value of the dollar
               continued to depreciate, but at a much lower rate than in the preceding Phase;
               during these 27 quarters the dollar depreciated in real terms by 10%. During

9
     For the text of the Plaza Accord communiqué, see http://www.g8.utoronto.ca/finance/fm850922.htm.
10
      See the text of the Louvre Accord at http://www.g8.utoronto.ca/finance/fm870222.htm.



                                                                                                        7
           this period the standard deviation of the monthly log differences of the RER
           index was 0.0232. During this phase the current account balance continued to
           improve, until in the first quarter of 1991 the U.S. posted its first current
           account surplus in many years. During Phase IV the average current account
           balance was -1.15% of GDP.
       •    Phase V: 1995Q3-2002Q1. This is phase is characterized by a trough-to-
           peak real exchange rate appreciation of 33.4% (notice from Figure 1 that
           between the fourth quarter of 1998 and the fourth quarter of 1999 there was a
           short lived period of real depreciation). Interestingly, during this phase real
           exchange rate volatility declined significantly; the standard deviation of the
           monthly log differences of the RER index was 0.0196. This phase was
           characterized by an increasingly larger current account deficit. While in late
           1995 early 1996 the deficit was in the order of 1.5% of GDP, by early 2002 it
           was hovering just below 4% of GDP. In 1999, and for the first time in many
           years, the U.S. federal government posted a surplus.
       •   Phase VI: 2002Q2-2004Q4. This phase is continuing at the time of this
           writing. Between the second quarter of 2002 and the fourth quarter of 2004
           the real value of the dollar experienced a 14% accumulated depreciation. The
           current account deficit continued to widen, exceeding 5% of GDP towards the
           end of the sample. Real exchange rate volatility increased slightly during this
           period; the standard deviation of the log differences of the RER index was
           0.0212. Other important macroeconomic developments during this phase
           include the worsening of the U.S. fiscal position, and the stiff increases in the
           price of oil and other commodities.


       In Figure 2 I go beyond the current account, and I present data from 1973 through
2004 for: (a) the balance of trade of goods and services as a percentage of GDP; (c) the
balance of trade in (non financial) services as a percentage of GDP; (c) the income
account, also as a percentage of GDP and (d) the transfers account as a percentage of
GDP. A number of important facts emerge from these figures. First, as Panel A shows,
large and persistent trade deficits have preceded in time the era of large current account


                                                                                               8
deficits. Already in the late 1970s the trade account was negative, and since mid 1976 it
has had only one surplus quarter (1992Q2).11 Second, since 1996 the trade surplus in non
financial services has declined steadily; in 2004 it was only 0.3 percent of GDP. Third,
Panel C shows that the income account continues to be positive. Since for quite some
years now the U.S. international investment position has been negative – that is, the U.S.
has been a net debtor --, the fact that the income account is still positive may seem
surprising. The reason for this is that the return on U.S. assets held by foreigners has
been systematically lower than the return on foreign assets in hands of U.S. nationals.
Finally, Panel D shows that the transfers account has been negative since 1946. During
the last few years transfers account deficit has been stable at approximately 0.7% of
GDP.
II.2    Recent Current Account Imbalances
        In Table 1 I present data on the current account as a percentage of GDP, and its
financing for the period 1990-2004. As may be seen, during the last few years the nature
of external financing has changed significantly. In particular, since 2002 net FDI flows
have been negative. This contrasts with the 1997-2001 period when FDI flow
contributed in an increasingly important way to deficit financing. Also, after four years
on net positive equity flows (1998-2002), these became negative in 2003-04. As the
figures in Table 1 show, during 2003 and 2004 the U.S. current account deficit was fully
financed through net fixed income flows. Official foreign purchases of government
securities (Reserves (net), in Table 1) have played a particularly important role in the
financing of the 2003 and 2004 current account deficits. A number of analysts have
argued that by relying on foreign central banks’ purchases of Treasury securities, the U.S.
has become particularly vulnerable to sudden changes in expectations and economic
sentiments.12
        Current account imbalances are reflected in changes in a country’s net
international investment position (NIIP): deficits result in a deterioration of the NIIP, and
surpluses result in an improvement in the U.S. NIIP. In Figure 3 I present the evolution


11
    Mann (2004) shows that most of the U.S. trade deficit is explained by a deficit in automobiles and
consumer goods.
12
   See, for example, Martin Wolf’s October 1st, 2003 article in the Financial Times, “Funding America’s
recovery is a very dangerous game,” (page 15).


                                                                                                          9
of the U.S. NIIP as percentage of GDP. As may be seen, this has become increasingly
negative: in 2004 U.S. net international liabilities reached 29 percent of GDP. An
important feature of the NIIP is that gross U.S. international assets and gross U.S.
international liabilities are held in different currencies. While more than 70% of gross
foreign assets held by U.S. nationals are denominated in foreign currency, approximately
95% of gross U.S. liabilities in hands of foreigners are denominated in U.S. dollars. This
means that the net liabilities as a percentage of GDP are subject to “valuation effects”
stemming from changes in the value of the dollar. A dollar depreciation reduces the
value of net liabilities. As a result of this valuation effect, the deterioration of the U.S.
NIIP during 2002-2004 was significantly smaller than the accumulated current account
deficit during those two years; see Table 2 for details.
          A key question in current account sustainability analyses – and one I discuss in
detail below – refers to the “reasonable” long run equilibrium value the ratio of U.S. net
international liabilities; the higher this ratio is, the higher will be the “sustainable” current
account deficit. According to some authors the current ratio of almost 30% of GDP is
excessive, while others believe that a NIIP to GDP ratio of up to 50% would be
reasonable.13
          One of the first things undergraduate students of open economy macroeconomics
learn is that the current account is the difference between savings and investment.
Through time a number of authors have argued that a worsening of a current account
balance that stems from an increase in investment is very different from one that results
from a decline in national savings. Some have gone as far as arguing that very large
deficits in the current account “don’t matter,” as long as they are the result of higher
(private sector) investment (Corden, 1994). As Figure 4 shows, the recent deterioration
of the U.S. current account has largely been the result of a decline in national savings,
and in particular of public and household savings. A simple implication of this trend –
and one that is emphasized by most authors – is that an improvement in the U.S. current
account situation will not only imply a RER adjustment; it will also require an increase in
the national savings ratio, and in particular in household savings. Symmetrically, a



13
     See Obstfeld and Rogoff (2004) and Mussa (2004).


                                                                                                10
correction of current global imbalances will also require a decline in Europe’s and
Japan’s savings rates and/or an increase in their investment rates.
II.3     The U.S. Current Account Deficit in International Perspective
         How large is the U.S. recent current account deficits, from a comparative point of
view? And, how large is the U.S. net international liabilities position when compared,
from a historical vantage, to that of other advanced countries? In Table 3 I present data
on the distribution of current account balances in the world economy, as well as in six
groups of nations – Industrial, Latin America, Asia, Middle East, Africa and Eastern
Europe – for the period 1971-2001. As may be seen, at almost 6% of GDP the U.S.
deficit is very large from a historical and comparative perspective. It is in the top decile
of deficits distribution for all industrial countries in the first thirty years of floating. As
the data in Table 3 suggest the U.S. looks more like a Latin American or Asian country,
than like an industrial nation.
         Since 1971 the U.S. has been the only large industrial country that has run current
account deficits in excess of 5%. This reflects the unique position that the U.S. has in the
international financial system, where its assets have been in high demand, allowing it to
run high and persistent deficits. On the other hand, this fact also suggests that the U.S. is
moving into uncharted waters. As Obstfeld and Rogoff (2004), among others, have
pointed out, if the deficit continues at its current level, in twenty five years the U.S. net
international liabilities will surpass the levels observed by any country in modern times.
         During the last 30 years only small industrial countries have had current account
deficits in excess of 5% of GDP: Australia, Austria, Denmark, Finland, Greece, Iceland,
Ireland, Malta, New Zealand, Norway and Portugal. What is even more striking is that
very few countries – either industrial or emerging -- have had high current account
deficits that last for more than five years. In Table 4 I present a list of countries with
persistently high current account deficits for 1970-2001. In constructing this table I
define a country as having a “High Deficit” if, in a particular year, its current account
deficit is higher than its region’s ninth decile.14 I then defined a persistently high deficit
country, as a country with a “High Deficit” (as defined above) for at least 5 consecutive


14
    Notice that the thresholds for defining High deficits are year and region-specific. That is, for every year
there is a different threshold for each region.


                                                                                                            11
years.15 As may be seen in Table 4 the list of persistently high deficit countries is
extremely short, and none of these countries is large. This illustrates the fact that,
historically, periods of high current account imbalances have tended to be short lived, and
have been followed by periods of current account adjustments.
         In Table 5 I present data on net international liabilities as a percentage of GDP for
a group of advanced countries that have historically had a large negative NIIP position.16
As may be seen, the picture that emerges from this table is different than that in Table 4
on current account deficits. Indeed, a number of advanced nations have had – and
continue to have – a significantly larger net international liabilities position than the U.S.
This suggests that, at least in principle, the U.S. NIIP could continue to deteriorate for
some time into the future. But even if this does happen, at some point this process would
have to come to an end, and the U.S. net international liabilities position as percentage of
GDP would have to stabilize. It makes a big difference, however, at what level U.S. net
international liabilities do stabilize. For example, if in the steady state foreigners are
willing to hold the equivalent of 35% of U.S. GDP in the form of net U.S. assets, the U.S.
could sustain a current account deficit of (only) 2.1% of GDP.17 If, on the other hand,
foreigners’ net demand for U.S. assets grows to 60% of GDP – which, as shown in Table
5, is approximately the level of (net) foreign holdings of Australian assets --, the U.S.
sustainable current account deficit is 3.6% of GDP. And if foreigners’ are willing to hold
(net) U.S. assets for the equivalent of 100% of GDP – a figure that Mussa (2004)
considers to be implausible – the sustainable U.S. current account deficit can be as high
as 6% of GDP – approximately its current level.
         Since there are no historical precedents for a large advanced nation running
persistently large deficits, it is extremely difficult to have a clear idea on what will be the
actual evolution of foreigners’ demand for U.S. assets. Give this lack of historical
precedent, a reasonable strategy is to ask what would happen to the current account and

15
    For an econometric analysis of current account deficits persistence see Edwards (2004). See also
Taylor (2002).
16
    For the U.S. the data are from the Bureau of Economic Analysis. For the other countries the data are,
until 1997, from the Lane and Milessi-Ferreti data set. I have updated them using current account balance
data. Notice that the updated figures should be interpreted with a grain of salt, as I have not corrected them
for valuation effects.
17
    This calculation assumes a 6% rate of growth of nominal GDP going forward. See subsection III for an
analytical discussion and for the relevant equations.


                                                                                                           12
real exchange rate dynamics if, as posited by Dooley et al (2004a) among others,
foreigners’ demand for U.S. assets continues to increase. This is precisely approached I
follow in Section III of this paper.
     III.      The Analytics of Current Account and Real Exchange Rate Adjustment
            The current account and the (real) exchange rate are endogenous variables jointly
determined in a general equilibrium context. This means that from a policy point of view
the key question is how will these two variables move as a result of a given exogenous
shock – a decline in capital inflows, say --, under the assumption that other variables,
including growth and the rate of unemployment, do not deviate significantly from their
long term equilibrium paths. A number of authors have recently addressed this issue
using a variety of simulation and econometric models. Most of these studies have asked
what is the real exchange rate adjustment “required” to achieve a certain current account
balance. Some authors, such as Obstfeld and Rogoff (2000, 2004) and Blanchard,
Giavazzi and Sa (2005), have considered the case where the deficit is competently
eliminated. Others, including Mussa (2004) and Roubini and Setser (2004), have
considered the reduction of the deficit to a positive, but smaller than current, level. In
Table 6 I provide a summary of selected studies on the subject. As may be seen, these
works use different methodologies, and reach different conclusions.18 What they do have
in common, however, is that they find “required” adjustments in the trade-weighted value
of the U.S. dollar is quite high – according to Blanchard, Giavazzi and Sa (2005) as high
as 90%. Interestingly, the estimated figures for “required” dollar depreciation
summarized in Table 6 are much higher than the figures discussed in most investment
banks’ newsletters and in the media.19




III.1 A Portfolio Model of the Current Account and the Real Exchange Rate
            From an analytical perspective the process of current account adjustment may be
deconstructed into two components: (a) The dynamics of net international foreign assets;
and (b) the “transfer” associated with changes in a country’s net foreign assets position.

18
   See also the studies by Mann (2003, 2004), where she extends her pioneering 1999 model.
19
   While practitioners’ do believe that the dollar will weaken, they tend to consider more moderate
adjustments. See, for example, the forex publications of major investment banks.


                                                                                                      13
Changes in international investors’ willingness to hold U.S. assets will affect total
absorption and relative prices, including the real exchange rate. An increase in
foreigner’s rate of accumulation of domestic assets will allow the country to increase
absorption, generating a current account deficit and a RER appreciation. In a similar
way, a reduction in the rate at which foreigners accumulate the country’s assets – or,
worse yet, a reduction in their holdings of domestic assets -- will result in a drop in
absorption and a decline in the relative price of nontradables, or RER depreciation.
These changes in absorption, and the concomitant adjustment in relative prices, are
reminiscent of discussions on the “transfer problem” that go back, at least, to the debates
between Keynes and Ohlin during the 1920s. In large countries such as the U.S.,
however, this story is more complex. First, changes in relative prices have valuation
effects on net foreign assets holdings that will feed back into the dynamics of net foreign
assets accumulation or de-accumulation.20 Second, in a large country changes in
aggregate expenditure are likely to affect the international terms of trade, and thus the
general equilibrium outcome of the original shock.
III.1.1 The Basic Model
         Consider the following bare bones portfolio model of the current account:21
Equation (1) is the basic external sector equation (in domestic currency) and states that
the current account deficit (CAD) is equal to the trade deficit (TD), plus the income
account (net income payments to the rest of the world) ( ia t ), plus net transfers to the rest
of the world (NT).22
 (1)              CADt = TDt + ia t + NTt ,
The income account, in turn is equal to:
                  ia t = iDt f − i * Ft d ,



20
    This effect has been emphasized by Lane and Milessi-Ferreti (2002, 2004a, 2004b), Tille (2003) and
Gourinchas and Rey (2005), among others. For a discussion of valuation effects in the context of emerging
markets’ current account sustainability, see Edwards (2003).
21
    In order to concentrate on the problem at hand and to keep the analysis tractable, I have made a number
of simplifications; I have made no attempt to construct a full general equilibrium model. Recent papers
that have constructed portfolio models of the current account include, Blanchard, Giavazzi and Sa (2005),
Edwards (1999, 2002), Gourinchas and Rey (2005) and Kraay and Ventura (2002).
22
    Notice that I have defined the deficit as a positive number. In equation (1), then, negative numbers refer
to a surplus.


                                                                                                           14
where i is the interest rate paid on (gross) domestic assets in hand of foreigners Dt f ,

and i * is the interest rate on (gross) foreign assets held by domestic residents Ft d . Since
equation (1) is expressed in domestic currency,
                Ft d = E t Ft d * .
Where E is the nominal exchange rate defined as units of domestic currency (U.S.
dollars) per unit of foreign currency, and Ft d * denotes (gross) foreign assets held by
domestic residents, expressed in foreign currency. Equation (1) can then be rewritten as
follows:
(1’)            CADt = TDt + iδ t + (i − i * ) F d + NTt .

Where δ are net domestic assets in hands of foreigners (δ t = D f − F d ) . The terms

iδ t and (i − i * ) F d capture the effect of valuation effects on the current account, recently
emphasized by a number of authors including Lane and Milesi-Ferreti (2004), and
Gourinchas and Rey (2005), among others.
        Equation (2) is a portfolio equation that summarizes the net international demand
for the country’s assets δ t . Domestic and foreign assets are assumed to be imperfect

substitutes. α is the percentage of foreigners’ wealth that international investors are
willing to hold in the form of the domestic country’s assets; W is world’s wealth and W c
is the domestic country’s wealth. α jj is the domestic country’s asset allocation on its

own assets. I assume that there is “home-bias” in portfolio decisions; this is reflected in
the fact that α j and (1 − α jj ) are below international market shares of domestic and

foreign wealth. There is no need, however, to assume that foreign and domestic investors
have the same degree of home bias.
(2)             δ t = α (Wt − Wt c ) − (1 − α jj )Wt c ,




An important question is what determines the asset allocation shares α and α jj . Under

standard portfolio theory, α and α jj will depend on expected real returns (i and i*),




                                                                                                   15
perceived risk ( µ , µ * ), and the degree of segmentation of international financial markets
(Equation (3)).
(3)               α = α (i, µ ) ; α jj = α jj (i * , µ * ) .
In this paper, however, I make the simplifying assumption that foreign and domestic
assets have zero substitutability. This is equivalent to assuming that α and α jj are

exogenously determined, and not affected by i or i * . This assumption allows me to
focus on the effects of exogenous changes in portfolio allocation on net assets dynamics
and the current account. However, in subsection III.2.2 I discuss the way in which the
results will be altered if some degree of substitutability between domestic and foreign
assets is allowed.
          World wealth in foreign currency W * and in domestic currency W are related by
         Wt
Wt * =      . Domestic and foreign interest rates are related through the following
         Et

                      dE e                          dE e
equation: i = i * +        + ( µ − µ *) + k , where      is the expected rate of depreciation of
                       E                             E
the domestic currency, and k is a term that captures the effect of capital controls; in a
world of full capital mobility, k = 0 . It is important to notice that in this model the term
“investors’” refers both to private and public investors, and include foreign central banks.
Indeed, and as pointed out in the preceding section, recent discussions on the U.S. current
account deficit have emphasized the key role played by foreign (and especially Asian)
central banks in helping finance the deficit.
          The counterpart of a current account deficit CAD is the change in the country’s
(net) assets in hand of foreigners:
(4)               CADt = ∆δ t .
Equation (5) defines the trade deficit.
(5)               TDt =        p im mi −      p ix x i .

p im and p ix are prices of importable and exportables in domestic currency. m i is the

demand for importables, which is assumed to depend on the real exchange rate (e), the
international price of importable goods, the country’s real income (y), and other factors,



                                                                                               16
including the degree of protectionism (v). Exports, on the other hand, depend on the real
exchange rate, the international price of exportables, the rest of the world real income
(y*) and other factors (u).
(6)                mi = m i (e, y, v) ; x i = x i (e, y*, u ) .

m i and x i , in turn, may be interpreted as excess demand (supply) for importable
(exportables), in the domestic country. In the basic version of the model it is assumed
that the law of one price holds for importables and exportables: p im = Ep im* ; p ix = Ep ix* .
In the simulation exercises alternative assumptions can be made, however, including that
exporters and importers price to market. Equation (7) is the equilibrium condition for the
nontradable goods market in the home country, where S tN is the supply of nontradables in

period t, assumed to depend on the real exchange rate and other factors z, and DtN is the
demand for nontradables:
(7)                S tN (e t , z t ) = DtN (e t , y t ) .

The domestic price level P is assumed to be a geometric average of the nominal prices of
tradable goods (importables and exportables) and nontradables:
Pt = ( p tm ) a ( p tx ) b ( p tN ) (1− a − b ) . Equation (8) is the real exchange rate.

                            Pt
(8)                et =             ,
                          E t Pt*

where, Pt* is the foreign country price level. As before, an increase in e represents a real
appreciation; a decrease in e is a real depreciation.
         The working of this model is simple. The domestic country can only run a current
account deficit to the extent that foreign investors are willing to increase their net
holdings of domestic assets – that is, to the extent that ∆δ t > 0. Once ∆δ t is known, and
for given values of other key variables, it is possible to derive the real exchange rate (e)
consistent with the prevailing current account deficit (surplus). A particularly interesting
exercise, given the current U.S. situation, is to analyze how changes in portfolio
preferences – that is, changes in α and/or α jj --, will affect the current account and the

real exchange rate.



                                                                                               17
            In order to close the model, it is necessary to specify a number of clearing
conditions, including the savings and investment equations in the world economy; and
the world clearing conditions for each importable and exportable good. These
equilibrium conditions determine endogenously interest rates, and all relevant tradable
goods’ prices. Doing this, however, would make the model significantly more complex
than what is required for dealing with the problem at hand. For this reason, instead of
solving the full model, I work with a partial equilibrium version of it; in the simulations
that follow I make different assumptions regarding these variables’ behavior.23
            Before continuing, however, it is important to emphasize that current account
adjustments will not only imply changes in the real exchange rate; they will also require
changes in savings and investments in the home country (the U.S.) and the rest of the
world. From a policy perspective these adjustments in domestic savings would be greatly
facilitated by an increase in public sector savings.
III.1.2 Portfolio Equilibrium, Dynamics and Current Account Sustainability
            External sustainability requires that a country’s net external liabilities stabilize at
a level compatible with foreigners’ net demand for these claims, as specified by equation
(2). Assuming that the home country’s wealth is a multiple λ of its (potential or full
employment) GDP, and that its wealth is a fraction β of world’s wealth W, it is possible
to rewrite the (international) net demand for the country’s assets as
                                                                           (1 − β )       EW f *
δ = (αθ − (1 − α jj ))λY , where, Y is (potential) GDP, and, θ =                      =          , where
                                                                              β            Wc
     f*
W         is “rest of the world” wealth expressed in foreign currency.
            Denoting γ * = (αθ − (1 − α jj ))λ , then, δ = γ *Y . This means that in long run

equilibrium the net international demand for the home country’s assets can be expressed
as a proportion γ * of its (potential or sustainable) GDP. The determinants of this factor

of proportionality γ * depend on relative returns and perceived risk of country j and the

rest of the world, as well as on the degree of integration of international financial
markets.

23
   Most recent models on global imbalances and the U.S. current account have used a partial equilibrium
framework in the simulation phase.


                                                                                                       18
        Assuming that g is the country’s sustainable rate of growth, and π is the
country’s (long term) rate of inflation, the “sustainable” current account deficit to GDP
ratio is given by:
                  CAD
(9)                   = ( g + π )(αθ − (1 − α jj ))λ = γ * ( g + π ) .
                   Y
Notice that if αθ − (1 − α jj ) < 0 , domestic residents’ demand for foreign assets exceeds

foreigners’ demand for home country assets. Under these circumstances the country will
have to run a current account surplus in order to maintain a stable net external assets’ to
GDP ratio. Most authors that have studied the sustainability of the U.S. current account
have used equations of the type of (9) in their analyses. Mussa (2004), for example,
argues that in long term equilibrium γ * is likely to be around 0.50. 24 In long run

                                                                          TD
equilibrium the sustainable trade balance will be given by                   = (g − r) γ * .
                                                                           Y
        In this model, as in the models by Edwards (1999) and Kraay and Ventura (2002),
additional savings will be allocated in a way that maintains domestic and foreign assets in
the same proportion as in the original portfolio. Kraay and Ventura (2002) have shown
that models that combine this assumption with the assumption of transaction costs in
investment go a long way in explaining international current account behavior in a large
number of countries.
        If the degree of riskiness of the home country declines, there will be an increase in
α and, thus, in γ * . As a result, the sustainable current account deficit will increase, or the
sustainable surplus will decline (see equation 10). Equally important, changes in
portfolio allocation, generated by changes in α or α jj , will generate a dynamic

adjustment process, during which the current account will differ from its long run
sustainable level. This transitional dynamics can be incorporated into the model through
the following equation:

                   CAD                                                    CAD
(10)                           = ( g + π )γ t* + ψ (γ t* − γ t −1 ) − κ                − ( g + π )γ t* .
                    Y      t                                               Y    t −1




24
   See, also, Edwards (1995), Ades and Kaune (1997), and O’Neill and Hatzius (2004) for this type of
current account sustainability analyses.


                                                                                                           19
According to equation (1) short term deviations of the current account from its long run
level can result from two forces. The first is a traditional stock adjustment term
(γ t* − γ t −1 ) that captures deviations between the demanded and the actual stock of the

country’s assets in hands of foreign investors. ψ is the speed of adjustment, which will
depend on a number of factors, including the degree of capital mobility in the country in
question. The second force affecting this dynamic process, which is captured by -

     CAD
κ                    − ( g + π )γ t* in equation (10), is a self-correcting term. This term plays the
      Y       t −1


role of making sure that in this economy there is some form of “consumption
smoothing”. The importance of this self correcting term will depend on the value of κ . 25
Whether the dynamic representation in equation (10) is appropriate is, in the final
analysis, an empirical matter. As I show in subsection III.2, below, under certain
parametrization this model does a (very) good job in tracking the current account
behavior in the U.S. during the last few years. The dynamic behavior for the net stock of
the home country’s assets in hands of foreigners, as a percentage of GDP, will be given
                        CAD
by γ t* = [γ t*−1 + (       ) t −1 ](1 + g + π ) −1 .
                         Y
          Consider the case where for some reason the home bias in the rest of the world is
reduced – that is, α in the portfolio equation (3) increases. This will result in an increase
in the sustainable current account deficit (see equation 9). It will also unleash a dynamic
adjustment process captured by equation (10). During this transitional period the current
account deficit will exceed its new long run (higher) sustainable equilibrium; that is,
during the transition the current account deficit will overshoot its new sustainable level.
During the transition the trade account will move according to the following equation:

     TD              CAD                                      Fd    NT
∆             =∆                 − ∆(iγ t* ) − ∆ (i − i * )      −∆    . From equations (5) through
      Y   t           Y      t                                Y     Y

(7) -- and after making some assumptions regarding the behavior of other key variables’
such as the international term of trade --, the following equation for the current account

25
   If ψ = κ = 0 , the current account will jump from one sustainable level to the next. There are many
reasons to assume that both ψ and κ are different from zero, including the existence of adjustment costs in
consumption.


                                                                                                        20
may be derived (in order to simplify the notation, the m i and x i have been aggregated into
broad imports and exports categories):


             CAD                                       Fd        NT
         ∆               = ∆ (iγ t* ) + ∆ (i − i * )        +∆        + {σ x (1 + ε e ) − σ m (1 + η e )}eˆ
(11)          Y      t                                 Y         Y
         + (σ m − σ x )(π − π * ) + σ mη y g − σ x ε y * g * + σ m pˆ m* − σ x pˆ *x − (σ m − σ x )( g + π ).



Where σ m and σ x are imports and exports to GDP ratios; η e , ε e are the price elasticities

of imports and exports, respectively ( η e < 0, ε e > 0 ). η y , ε y * are the elasticities of

imports and exports with respect to domestic and foreign income, respectively.
g , g * represent real GDP growth at home and in the rest of the world; π , π * is domestic

and world inflation; pˆ m* , pˆ *x are the rates of changes in international prices of imports and

exports, and ê is the rate of change of the real exchange rate. From this equation it
follows that in order for a real devaluation to improve the trade balance (and, with other
things given, the current account) it is required that {σ x (1 + ε e ) − σ m (1 + η e )} >0.26
         Although equation (11) is not a reduced form equation, this model is useful for
undertaking a number of simulation exercises. For example, form equations (2), (4), (10)
and (11) -- and under assumed values of growth, inflation, interest rates and international
terms of trade changes --, it is possible to analyze the way in which changes in portfolio
preferences will affect the current account and real exchange rate trajectories.
III.2 Simulation Results
         The bare bones model developed above may be used to compute the current
account and real exchange rate adjustments consistent with shifts in portfolio preferences
by foreign and domestic investors, including a reduction in the extent of home bias in
portfolio investment decision.27 A first step in this analysis is the calibration of the
model. In Table 7 I present the parameter values used in the base-case simulation; most


26
   Under balanced initial trade, this expression becomes the traditional Marshall-Lerner condition.
27
   In fact, there are indications that the process of international capital markets integration will continue in
the future, as some of the largest emerging countries – including China – are increasingly allowing their
nationals to invest abroad. See, for example, the Financial Times, February 28, 2005 (p.6): “China to Seek
Full Currency Conversion.”


                                                                                                                21
of these values are taken form existing studies of the U.S. and world economy. In the
calibration I selected the values of ψ and κ that best tracked the actual dynamics of the
current account between 1996 and 2004; the best results are obtained for
ψ = 0.30 and κ = 0.20 . I also assumed that foreigners’ demand for U.S. assets α has
increased gradually from 0.205 to 0.30 between 1996 and 2004 (see the values for
α Historical , and α jjInitial in Table 7). As may be seen from Figure 5.A, for the assumed
parameter values the model tracks actual current account behavior for 1996-2004 quite
closely.
        One of the limitations of this type of simulation exercise is that it is difficult to
forecast how foreign investors’ net demand for U.S. assets will behave in the future. It is
precisely for this reason that a number of authors have eschewed the issue, and have
computed the RER adjustment “required” to eliminate completely the current account
deficit.28 In this section I take a different approach: instead of assuming that the current
account deficit has to be reduced to zero – or to any other arbitrary number --, I analyze
the dynamic of the current account under alternative assumptions regarding foreigner’s
net demand for U.S. assets. I am particularly interested in understanding what is likely to
happen under an optimistic scenario, where foreigners’ demand for U.S. assets continues
to grow in the future. What makes this approach particularly interesting is that even
under this optimistic scenario, it is highly likely that in the not too distant future the U.S.
current account will undergo a significant reversal.
        As may be seen in Table 7.A, in these simulation exercises I assume a gradual
portfolio in the next five years: More specifically, I assume that α increases from its
current value of 0.30 to 0.40 by 2010; I also assume that α jj goes from 0.73 to 0.71

during the same period. This adjustment implies a reduction in the extent of home bias
both in the rest of the world and in the U.S. In the base-case scenario the assumed
portfolio adjustment is equivalent to foreigners’ doubling their net demand for U.S. assets
to the equivalent of 60% of U.S. GDP. This is a very large number. Indeed, it implies




28
   Obstfeld and Rogoff (2000, 2004). For similar approaches see Mussa (2004) and Blanchard, Giavazzi
and Sa (2005).


                                                                                                   22
that, under the assumptions of g = 0.03, π = 0.023 , during the next five years (2005-2010)
the U.S. NIIP would deteriorate by a further $5.72 trillion.
         Before proceeding, the following assumptions made in the base-case scenario
deserve some comments (See Table 7 for details): (a) I have assumed that the U.S. and
the rest of the world grow at the same rate ( g = g * ) . Implicit in this assumption is the
idea that while the U.S. will grow faster than Europe and Japan, the rest of the world –
including China and India – will continue to grow at very rapid rates. In a number of
alternative simulations I considered different values for growth. (b) The values of the
key elasticities have been taken from existing studies on the U.S. and global economies.29
These values reflect two important characteristics about these elasticities: the income
elasticity for U.S. imports is higher than that for rest of the world imports (the so-called
Houthakker-Magee effect), and the real exchange rate elasticity of U.S. imports exceeds
(in absolute terms) the real exchange rate elasticity of exports by a magnitude of 3.
Finally, it is worth noting that in the base case scenario I assumed that the adjustment had
no effect on the international terms of trade ( pˆ m* = pˆ *x = 0) ; in alternative simulations,
however, I considered that case where there are changes in the terms of trade.
         The results obtained from this base-case exercise are presented in Figure 5. In
these simulations period 8 should be interpreted as “the initial period”; the shaded area
represents recent history. Panel A depicts the current account deficit (for the first few
years the actual deficit is also presented); Panel B presents the trade deficit; Panel C
presents the evolution of net U.S. assets in hands of foreigners, as a percentage of U.S.
GDP; and Panel D contains the simulation for the trade-weighted U.S. RER index. The
most salient features of the base-case simulation may be summarized as follows:


               •   Under the (deliberately) optimistic assumption of a further increase in
                   foreigners’ net demand for U.S. assets, the deficit continues to increase
                   during the next four years, until it peaks at 7.3% of GDP. From that
                   point onwards the deficit declines towards its new steady state of 3.18%
                   of GDP.


29
     See Hooper, Johnson and Marquez (2001).


                                                                                                   23
             •   Once the deficit reaches its peak, the current account reversal is quite
                 sharp. According to the base-case scenario, during the first three years
                 of adjustment the current account is reduced by 3.2% of GDP. The
                 reversal of the trade deficit is even sharper. The reason for this is that
                 with a higher net debtor position, net payments (interest and dividends)
                 to foreign investors increase significantly, relative to GDP.
             •   As may be seen from Panel D, once the process of current account
                 reversal begins, the trade-weighted RER index experiences a rapid (real)
                 depreciation. During the first three first yeas of the adjustment the
                 accumulated real depreciation is 21.3%. By the time the new sustainable
                 current account deficit is reached, the accumulated depreciation of the
                 trade-weighted RER index amounts to 28%. This result is roughly in
                 line with other studies on the subject (See Table 6 for details on other
                 studies). It should be noted that these simulations incorporate the
                 valuation effect of dollar depreciation on the U.S. net foreign asset
                 position. If the valuation effect is ignored, the resulting real depreciation
                 is larger. For example, in the first three years of the adjustment the
                 accumulated depreciation is 28.3%.


        Naturally, these simulation results depend on the assumptions summarized in
Table 7. Alternative assumptions regarding growth, inflation, interest rates, terms of
trade, elasticities and other key parameters will affect the quantitative aspect of the
simulations. To the extent that the changes in the assumptions are not extreme, however,
the main qualitative result holds: even under a (very) optimistic assumption regarding
foreigners’ net demand for U.S. assets, the current account deficit is likely to go through
a large reversal in the not too distant future.
        An important question is how sensitive are these results to portfolio choices. In
order to explore this issue, in Figure 6 I report results from a simulation exercise
(Simulation B) that assumes that after increasing their net holdings of U.S. assets to 60%
of U.S. GDP by the year 2010, foreign investors make a new portfolio adjustment, and
gradually reduce their desired holdings of U.S. assets to “only” 50% of GDP by 2010.


                                                                                              24
As may be seen from Figure 6, in this case the current account reversal is significantly
more abrupt, as is the depreciation of the trade-weighted RER index. In the first three
years of the adjustment the current account deficit declines by 5.3% of GDP, and the
accumulated depreciation is 28.8%. Moreover, as may be seen in Figure 6.D, by the third
year of the adjustment (period 15 in the simulation) the trade balance has turned into a
trade surplus. It is important to keep in mind that this simulation still assumes that the
long run net demand by foreigners for U.S. assets is still significantly higher – 20% of
GDP higher, to be more precise – than its current level. Due to space considerations, I
have not presented the results from “pessimistic” scenarios, where foreigners’ reduce
their net demand for U.S. assets below the current level. Suffice is to say that under that
scenario the current account reversal is even more pronounced, as is the concomitant real
depreciation.
        The results in Figures 5 and 6, -- and in particular the abrupt current account
reversal that takes place after a peak deficit is reached -- depend on the assumptions made
on parameters ψ and κ ; different values of these parameters would result in different
dynamics. More specifically, a very large value of ψ , coupled with a very low value of
κ would result in a more gradual convergence of the current account deficit to its new
sustainable level. It should be noticed, however, that in this case the build-up of the
deficit is also very gradual, and does not track the actual experience of the U.S. since the
mid-1990s. Indeed, the values of ψ and κ used in the simulations are those that provide a
better representation of the U.S. recent history.
        The simulations discussed above have assumed an exogenously given rate of
growth of GDP. This, of course, needs not be the case. It is likely, in fact, that current
account reversals of the type and magnitude suggested by the simulation results will have
an effect on real economic activity, including growth.30 In Section IV of this paper I use
a new comparative cross country data set to investigate the real consequences of current
account reversals in the world economy since 1971. This comparative analysis will be
useful to get some idea on the possible effects of a potential U.S. current account
reversal, similar to that in the simulations in Figures 5 and 6.

30
  See the pioneering study on current account reversals by Milesi-Ferreti and Razin (2000). See, also,
Edwards (2004).


                                                                                                         25
     IV.      How Costly are Current Account Reversals? An International
              Comparative Analysis
           The main message from the simulation exercises presented in the preceding
section is that, even under very optimistic scenarios where foreigners’ demand for U.S.
assets increases significantly, it is very likely that the U.S. current account will
experience a significant reversal in the not too distant future. A key question is what will
be the nature of this adjustment process? In this section I address this issue by analyzing
the international experience with current account reversals in the period 1971-2001.
Although the U.S. case is unique – both because of the size of its economy and because
the dollar is the main vehicle currency in the world –, an analysis of the international
experience will provide some light on the likely nature of the adjustment. A particularly
important question is whether this adjustment will entail real costs in the form of lower
growth and higher unemployment. Previous studies on the subject have generated
conflicting results: after analyzing the evidence from a large number of countries, Milesi-
Ferreti and Razin (2000) concluded that major current account reversals have not been
costly. According to them, “reversals… are not systematically associated with a growth
slowdown (p. 303).” Frankel and Cavallo (2004), on the other hand, concluded that
sudden stops of capital inflows (a phenomenon closely related to reversals) have resulted
in growth slowdown.
           In what follows I analyze several aspects of current account reversals, including:31
              •   Incidence of current account reversals.
              •   Relationship between reversals and sudden stops of capital inflows.
              •   The relation between current account reversals and exchange rate
                  depreciation.
              •   The factors determining the probability of a country experiencing a current
                  account reversal.
              •   The costs – in terms of growth slowdown – of current account reversals.



31
  In Edwards (2004) I used a smaller data set to investigate reversals in emerging countries. In that paper,
however, I did not consider the experience of large or industrial countries with reversals. Also, in that
paper I used very simple framework for analyzing growth. In contrast, in this section I use a two steps
dynamic of growth approach.


                                                                                                         26
         In analyzing these issues I rely on two complementary statistical approaches:
First, I use non-parametric tests to analyze the incidence and main characteristics of
current account reversals. And second, I use panel regression-based analyses to estimate
the probability of experiencing a current account reversal, and the cost of such reversal,
in terms of short-term declines in output growth. Although the data set covers all regions
in the world, in the discussion presented in this section, and in an effort to shed light on
the U.S. case, I emphasize the experience of large countries.
IV.1 Current Account Reversals during 1971-2001: The International Evidence
         I use two definitions of current account reversals: (a) Reversal I is defined as a
reduction in the current account deficit of at least 6% of GDP in a three-year period. (b)
Reversal II is defined as a reduction in the current account deficit of at least 4% of GDP
in one year. 32 In Reversal I the magnitude of the adjustment is more pronounced, but is
distributed over a longer number of years than under the Reversal I definition.33 In Table
8 I present data on the incidence for both definitions of current account reversals for the
complete sample as well as for the six groups of countries considered in Section III. As
may be seen, for the overall sample the incidence of reversals is 9.2% and 11.8%, for
Reversals I and II, respectively. The incidence of reversals among the industrial
countries is much smaller however, at 2.7% and 2.0% for Reversals I and II. Indeed, the
            2
Pearson-        and F-tests reported in Table 8 indicate that the hypothesis of equal incidence
of reversals across regions is rejected strongly.
         The advanced countries that have experienced current account Reversals I are:
Finland (1978, 1994), Greece (1988), Ireland (1984), New Zealand (1977-78, 1988-89),
Norway (1979-80, 1989, 2000) and Portugal (1979, 1984-85). The advanced countries
that have experienced current account Reversals II are: Austria (1982), Canada (1982),
Greece (1986), Iceland (1983, 1986), Ireland (1975), Italy (1975), Malta (1997), New
Zealand (1978), Norway (1989), and Portugal (1982-83, 1985). With the exception of

32
   In both cases the timing of the reversal is recorded as the year when the episode ends. That is if a
country reduces its current account deficit by 7% of GDP between 1980 and 1982, the episode is recorded
has having taken place in 1982. Also, for a particular episode to classify as a current account deficit
reversal, the initial balance has to be indeed a deficit. Notice that these definitions are somewhat different
from those used in other studies, including Freund (2000), Milesi-Ferreti and Razin (2000), Edwards (2002)
and Guidotti et al (2003).
33
   Notice that it is possible for a country to have experienced both a Reversal I and II during a same
historical episode.


                                                                                                          27
Italy and Canada, all of these countries are very small, underlying the point that there are
no historical precedents of large countries undergoing profound current account
adjustments. As pointed out above, this implies that the results reported here on current
account reversals should be interpreted with a grain of salt, and should not be
mechanically extended to the case of the U.S.
          The analysis presented above has distinguished countries by their stage of
development and geographical location. An alternative way of dividing the sample – and
one that is particularly relevant for the discussion of possible lessons for the U.S. – is by
country size. I define “large countries” as those having a GDP in the top 25% of the
distribution (according to this criterion there are 44 “large” countries in the sample). The
incidence of Reversals I among “large” countries is 3.6% for 1971-2001; the incidence of
Reversals II among “large” countries is 5.9%.


IV.1.1 Current Account Reversals and Sudden Stops of Capital Inflows
          In the last few years a number of authors have analyzed episodes of sudden stops
of capital inflows into a country.34 From an analytical perspective sudden stops and
current account reversals should be highly related phenomena. There is no reason,
however, for their relationship to be one-to-one. Indeed, because of changes in
international reserves, it is perfectly possible that a country that suffers a sudden stop
does not experience, at the same time, a current account reversal. However, in countries
with floating exchange rates changes in international reserves tend to be relatively small
and, at least in principle, the relation between sudden stops and reversals should be
stronger.
          In order to investigate formally the relation between these two phenomena I
defined a “sudden stop” episode as an abrupt and major reduction in capital inflows to a
country that up to that time had been receiving large volumes of foreign capital. More
specifically, I imposed the following requirements for an episode to qualify as a “sudden
stop”: (1) the country in question must have received an inflow of capital (relative to
GDP) larger than its region’s third quartile during the two years prior to the “sudden



34
     See Calvo et al (2004), Edwards (2004b).


                                                                                             28
stop.” And (2), net capital inflows must have declined by at least 5% of GDP in one
year.35
          In Table 9 I present a table for the “sudden stops” and the current account deficit
reversal (I use both definitions of reversal), for three samples: (a) large countries, defined
as those countries that whose GDP is in the top quartile of the distribution; (b) industrial
countries; and (c) the complete sample. Table 9 shows that for the complete sample,
21.1% of countries subject to a sudden stop also faced a Type I current account reversal.
At the same time, 15.0% of those with Reversals I also experienced (in the same year) a
sudden stop of capital inflows. Panel C shows that 51% of countries subject to a sudden
stop faced a current account reversal II. Also, 26.7% of those with Reversals II
                                                                                       2
experienced (in the same year) a sudden stop of capital inflows. The                       tests indicate that
in both cases the hypothesis of independence between reversals and sudden stops is
rejected. The data for the industrial countries show that the joint incidence of Reversals I
                                                                        2
and Sudden Stops is rather low. In fact, according to the                   test the null hypothesis of
independence between the two phenomena cannot be rejected. The relation between
sudden stops and Reversals II is somewhat higher for industrial countries: the hypothesis
of independence is rejected ( 2=23.6; p=0.00). The results for “large countries” are
similar to that for industrial countries.
          An analysis of the lead-lag structure of reversals and sudden stops suggest that
sudden stops tend to occur either before or at the same time – that is, during the same
                                                                                                          2
year – as current account reversals. Indeed, according to a series of non-parametric
tests it is possible to reject the hypothesis that current account reversals precede sudden
stops.
          IV.2 Current Account Reversals and the Exchange Rate
          An important policy question – and one that is particularly relevant within the
context of current policy debate in the U.S. – is whether current account reversals have
historically been associated with unusually large exchange rate depreciations. The
starting point for this analysis is the construction of an index of “external pressures”
along the lines suggested by Eichengreen et al (1996):

35
  In order to check for the robustness of the results, I also used two alternative definitions of sudden stops,
which considered a reduction in inflows of 3 and 7 of GDP in one year. Due to space considerations,
however, I don’t report detailed results using these definitions.


                                                                                                              29
(12)              I t = ∆E / E − (σ E / σ R ) * (∆R / R) .

Where ( ∆E / E ) is the rate of change of the nominal exchange rate, and ( ∆R / R ) is the
rate of change of international reserves. σ E is the standard deviation of changes in
exchange rates, and σ R is the standard deviation of changes in international reserves.
Traditional analyses define a crisis ( C t ) to have taken place when the index in equation

(12) exceeds the mean of the index plus k standard deviations. The crisis indicator C t
takes a value of one (crisis) or zero (no crisis) according to the following rule:36

                          1 if     I t >= mean( I t ) + kσ I
(13)              Ct =
                          0               otherwise
Based on equation (13), I define two currency crisis indicators: (a) Currency Crisis A:
This is the traditional crises index. C t takes the value of one if I t exceeds its mean by 3
times its standard deviation (that is, k=3 in equation 13). (b) Currency Crisis B: In this
case it is the nominal exchange rate by itself that triggers the C t crisis indicator. In this
case the country experiences a large exchange rate depreciation without a major loss in
international reserves. This indicator is more relevant for the case of floating exchange
rate countries, where changes in international reserves are minimal.
         I computed a number of two-way frequency tables and both definitions of crisis
                                                               2
and of current account reversals. I also calculated                tests for independence of occurrence
of these phenomena. In Table 10 I present data on the percentage of current account
reversals that also correspond to crises. The results are for three samples: large countries,
industrial countries, and all countries. As above, I have defined “large countries” as
having a GDP in the top 25% of the distribution.37 The results obtained suggest that
historically there have been a number of cases where current account reversals and
currency crisis have occurred jointly. Consider, for example, the case of Currency Crises
A and Reversals I for the large countries sample: 34.6% of countries with reversals

36
   The pioneer work here is Eichnegreen et al (1996), who suggested that the index (12) also included
changes in domestic interest rates. The original index, however, has limited use in broad comparative
analyses; the reason for this is that most emerging and transition economies don’t have long time series on
interest rates. For this reason, most empirical analyses are based on a restricted version of the index, such
as 2.
37
   Data on the percentage of crises that also correspond to reversals are available on request. The results of
the 2 tests confirm those discussed above.


                                                                                                           30
experienced a contemporaneous currency crisis; 46.4% experienced a crisis in the second
year of the reversal episode; and 28.6% of the reversals experienced a type A currency
crisis in the third (and final) year of the reversal episode. For the case of industrial
countries the data in Table 10 shows that countries with reversals tended to experience
currency crises during the initial year of the reversal episode. As may be seen from Table
                             2
10, the p-values for the         tests indicate that, in most cases, the null hypothesis that
current account reversals and currency crises are independent from each other is rejected
at conventional levels. Even though these tests don’t imply causality, they do provide
evidence indicating that historically countries that have gone through major current
account reversals have tended to also experience currency crises.
         In Table 11 I present data on the distribution of exchange rate changes for Type I
current account reversal countries.38 Panel A contains data on the nominal exchange rate
(relative to the U.S. dollar); Panel B is for the (trade-weighted) real exchange rate. These
changes are calculated as the accumulated exchange rate change in the period comprised
between the year of the reversal and three years before the reversal. In Panel A a positive
number indicates a nominal depreciation. For comparison purposes I have also included
the distribution of three year nominal exchange rate changes for a control group of
countries that have not experienced a current account reversal. The results in Table 11.A,
indicate that reversal countries have tended to experience significantly larger nominal
depreciations than the control group of countries. Consider, for example, the case of
large countries: the average depreciation for the reversal episodes – the “treatment”
column -- is 28%; it is only 9.2 for the control group of countries. In order to test
formally whether nominal exchange rate changes behaved differently in reversal and
control group countries, I estimated a series of non parametric Kruskal-Wallis χ2 tests on
the equality of the distribution of the accumulated depreciation. The null hypothesis is
that the data from the reversal countries and from the control group have been drawn
from the same population. As may be seen from Table 11, in the vast majority of cases
the null hypothesis is rejected at conventional levels.



38
   Data on Reversal II countries are not presented due to space considerations. The results, however, are
similar to those reported here, and are available on request.


                                                                                                            31
           Table 11.B present data for the accumulated change in the RER for the reversal
countries and the control group of countries. The results indicate that large countries
experienced a rather small real depreciation (3.1%) in the period surrounding the current
account adjustment. The magnitude of the average RER depreciation is, however,
statistically larger than the average depreciation for the control group (See the p-value for
      2
the       test). The same is true for the “all countries” sample. Surprisingly, perhaps, for
the industrial countries the accumulated average change in the RER is an appreciation.
           The average accumulated depreciations (both nominal and real) in the reversal
countries reported in Table 11 are relatively small when compared with the “required”
exchange rate depreciation that has been calculated in a number of studies, including in
the simulations reported in Section III of this paper. Obstfeld and Rogoff (2004), for
example, estimate that eliminating the U.S. current account deficit would imply a (real)
depreciation of between 16 and 36 percent. Blanchard, Giavazzi and Sa (2005) have
estimated a required depreciation of the U.S. trade weighted dollar in the range of 40% to
90%. There are many possible reasons for these differences, including that the U.S is a
very large country, while the countries that have experienced reversals are much smaller.
Also, the values of elasticities and other parameters may be different in the U.S. than in
the average reversal country. Yet another possibility has to do with the level of economic
activity and aggregate demand. Most recent models on the U.S. current account assume
that the economy stays in a “full employment” path. It is possible, however, that the
countries that have historically experienced reversals have also gone through economic
slowdowns, and that a reduction in aggregate demand contributed to the adjustment
effort.
IV.3 The Probability of Experiencing Current Account Reversals
           In order to understand further the forces behind current account reversals I
estimated a number of panel equations on the probability of experiencing a reversal. The
empirical model is given by equations (14) and (15):




                                                                                               32
                                    1,            if ρ tj* > 0,

(14)                ρ tj     =

                                    0,            otherwise.

(15)                ρ tj*   =    αω tj + ε tj .

          Variable ρ jt is a dummy variable that takes a value of one if country j in period t

experienced a current account reversal, and zero if the country did not experience a
reversal. According to equation (15), whether the country experiences a current account
reversal is assumed to be the result of an unobserved latent variable ρ tj* . ρ tj* , in turn, is

assumed to depend linearly on vector ω tj . The error term ε tj is given by given by a

variance component model: ε tj = ν j + µ tj . ν j is iid with zero mean and variance σ ν2 ;

µ tj is normally distributed with zero mean and variance σ µ2 = 1 . The data set used covers
87 countries, for the 1970-2000 period; not every country has data for every year,
however. See the Data Appendix for exact data definition and data sources.
          In determining the specification of this probit model I followed the literature on
external crises, and I included the following covariates:39 (a) The ratio of the current
account deficit to GDP lagged one period. (b) A sudden stop dummy that takes the value
of one if the country in question experienced a sudden stop in the previous year. (c) An
index that measures the relative occurrence of sudden stops in the country’s region
(excluding the country itself) during that particular year. This variable captures the effect
of “regional contagion.” (d) The one-year lagged gross external debt over GDP ratio.
Ideally one would want to have the net debt; however, there most countries there are no
data on net liabilities. (e) The one-year lagged rate of growth of domestic credit. (f) The
lagged ratio of the country’s fiscal deficit relative to GDP. (g) The country’s initial GDP
per capita (in logs).

          The results obtained from the estimation of this variance-component probit model
for a sample of large countries are presented in Table 12; as before, I have defined

39
     See, for example, Frankel and Rose (1996), Milesi-Ferreti and Razin (2000) and Edwards (2002).


                                                                                                      33
“large” as having a GDP in the top 25% of its distribution. The results obtained are quite
satisfactory; the vast majority of coefficients have the expected sign, and most of them
are significant at conventional levels. The results may be summarized as follows: Larger
(lagged) current account deficits increase the probability of a reversal, as does a (lagged)
sudden stop of capital inflows. Countries with higher GDP per capita have a lower
probability of a reversal. The results do not provide strong support for the contagion
hypothesis: the variable that measures the incidence of sudden stops in the county’s
region is significant in only one of the equations (its sign is always positive, however).
There is also evidence that an increase in a country’s (gross) external debt increases the
probability of reversals. The results also indicate that higher public sector deficits result
in an increase in the probability of a Reversal II. Countries with looser monetary policy
also have had a higher probability of experiencing a reversal. Although, the U.S. is a
very special case the results reported in Table 12 provide some support to the idea that
during the last few years the probability of the U.S. experiencing a reversal has increased:
indeed, the U.S. has experienced steady increases in some important determinants of
reversals, such as its (gross) international debt, its fiscal deficit and its current account
deficit.

           IV.4 Current Account Reversals and Growth

           In this subsection I investigate the relation between current account reversals and
real economic performance. I am particularly interested in analyzing in analyzing the
following issues: (a) historically, have abrupt current account adjustments had an effect
on GDP growth? (b) Have sudden stops and current account reversals had the same
impact on growth? And (c), have the effects of reversals depend on the structural
characteristics of the country in question, including its economic size (i.e. whether it is a
large country), its degree of trade openness and the extent to which it restricts capital
mobility. In addressing these issues I emphasize the case of large countries; as a
comparison, however, I do provide results for the complete sample of large and small
countries.
           Authors that have analyzed the real effects of current account reversals have
reached different conclusions. Milesi-Ferreti and Razin (2000), for example, used both
before–and-after analyses as well as cross-country regressions to deal with this issue and


                                                                                                34
concluded that “reversal events seem to entail substantial changes in macroeconomic
performance between the period before and the period after the crisis but are not
systematically associated with a growth slowdown (p. 303, emphasis added).” Edwards
(2002), on the other hand, used dynamic panel regression analysis and concluded that
major current account reversals had a negative effect on investment, and that they had “a
negative effect on GDP per capita growth, even after controlling for investment (p.
52).”40
IV.4.1 Growth Effects of Current Account Reversals and Sudden Stops: An Econometric
          Model
          The point of departure of the empirical analysis is a two-equation formulation for
the dynamics of real GDP per capita growth of country j in period t. Equation (16) is the
long run GDP growth equation; equation (17), on the other hand, captures the growth
dynamics process.

(16)              g~t = α + x j β + r jθ + ω j .

(17)              ∆g jt = λ[ g~ j − g jt −1 ] + ϕv jt + γu jt + ε jt .

          I have used the following notation: g~ j is the long run rate of real per capita GDP

growth in country j; x j is a vector of structural, institutional and policy variables that

determine long run growth; r j is a vector of regional dummies; α, β and θ are parameters,

and ω j is an error term assumed to be heteroskedastic. In equation (17), g jt is the rate of

growth of per capita GDP in country j in period t. The terms v jt and u jt are shocks,

assumed to have zero mean, finite variance and to be uncorrelated among them. More
specifically, v jt is assumed to be an external terms of trade shock, while u jt captures

other shocks, including current account reversals and sudden stops of capital inflows. ε jt

is an error term, which is assumed to have a variance component form, and λ, ϕ, and γ
are parameters that determine the particular characteristics of the growth process.
Equation (17) has the form of an equilibrium correction model and states that the actual


40
  In a recent paper, Guidotti et al (2003) consider the role of openness in an analysis of imports and exports
behavior in the aftermath of a reversal. See also Frankel and Cavallo (2005).


                                                                                                           35
rate of growth in period t will deviate from the long run rate of growth due to the
existence of three types of shocks: v t j, u t j and ξ t j. Over time, however, the actual rate
of growth will tend to converge towards it long run value, with the rate of convergence
given by λ. Parameter ϕ , in equation (17), is expected to be positive, indicating that an
improvement in the terms of trade will result in a (temporary) acceleration in the rate of
growth, and that negative terms of trade shock are expected to have a negative effect
on g jt .41 From the perspective of the current analysis, a key issue is whether current

account reversals and sudden stops have a negative effect on growth; that is, whether
coefficient γ is significantly negative. In the actual estimation of equation (17), I used
dummy variables for sudden stops and reversals. An important question – and one that is
addressed in detail in the Subsection that follows – is whether the effects of different
shocks on growth are different for countries with different structural characteristics, such
as its degree of trade and capital account openness.
          Equations (16) - (17) were estimated using a two-step procedure. In the first step I
estimate the long run growth equation (16) using a cross-country data set. These data are
averages for 1974-2001, and the estimation makes a correction for heteroskedasticity.
These first stage estimates are then used to generate long-run predicted growth rates to
replace g~ in the equilibrium error correction model (17). In the second step, I estimated
             j


equation (17) using GLS for unbalanced panels; I used both random effects and fixed
effects estimation procedures.42 The data set used covers 157 countries, for the 1970-
2000 period; not every country has data for every year, however. See the Data Appendix
for exact data definition and data sources.
          In estimating equation (16) for long-run per capita growth, I followed the standard
literature on growth, as summarized by Barro and Sala-I-Martin (1995), Sachs and
Warner (1995) and Dollar (1992) among others. I assume that the rate of growth of GDP
( g~ ) depends on a number of structural, policy and social variables. More specifically, I
     j


include the following covariates: the log of initial GDP per capita; the investment ratio;
the coverage of secondary education, as a proxy for human capital; an index of the degree


41
     See Edwards and Levy Yeyati (2004) for details.
42
     Due to space considerations, only the random effect results are reported.


                                                                                              36
of openness of the economy; the ratio of government consumption relative to GDP; and
regional dummies. The results obtained from these first-step estimates are not reported
due to space considerations.
         In Table 13 I present the results from the second step estimation of the growth
dynamics equation (17), when random effects were used. The results are presented for
the “large countries” sample (Panel A), as well as for the “all countries” sample (Panel
B). The first two equations refer to current account reversals (Reversals I and II,
respectively). In the next equation I have included the sudden stops indicator instead of
the reversal dummy. In equations (13.4) and (13.5) I included both the sudden stops and
the reversals variables as regressors.43 The estimated coefficient of the growth gap is, as
expected, positive, significant, and smaller than one. The point estimates are on the high
side -- between 0.71 and 0.82 --, suggesting that, on average, deviations between long run
and actual growth get eliminated rather quickly. For instance, according to equation
(13.1), after 3 years approximately 85% of a unitary shock to real GDP growth per capita
will be eliminated. Also, as expected, the estimated coefficients of the terms of trade
shock are always positive, and statistically significant, indicating that an improvement
(deterioration) in the terms of trade results in an acceleration (de-acceleration) in the rate
of growth of real per capita GDP. As may be seen from equations (13.1) and (13.2), the
coefficient of the current account reversals variable is significantly negative, indicating
that reversals result in a deceleration of growth. For large countries these results suggest
that, on average, a Type I reversal has resulted in a reduction of GDP growth of 3.2%.
This effect persists through time, and gets eliminated gradually as g converges towards
g~ j . In the case of Reversal II the estimated negative effect is even larger, at -4.6%. The

results in equation (13.3) show that countries that have experienced a sudden stop of
capital inflows have also experienced a reduction in GDP growth – for large countries the
point estimate is -1.5. This is the case independently of whether the country in question
has also suffered from a current account reversal. In the last two equations in Table 13 I
included both the current account reversal and sudden stops indicators. The results
obtained suggest that the larger costs of adjustment have been associated with current

43
   In the analysis that follows, and in order to focus the discussion, I will concentrate on the effects of
current account reversals.


                                                                                                              37
account reversals. Take, for example, equation (13.4) for the large countries sample: the
coefficient of Reversal I is more than twice as large (in absolute terms) than that of
sudden stops. According to this equation, countries that have experienced both a reversal
and a sudden stop experienced, on average, a decline in GDP per capita growth of 5%. In
equation (13.5) the coefficient of the current account reversal indicator continues to be
significantly negative; the coefficient of sudden stops is negative but not significant.
       To summarize, the results presented in Table 13 are revealing, and provide some
light on the costs of an eventual current account reversal in the U.S. Historically, “large
countries that have gone through reversals have experienced deep GDP growth
reductions. These estimates indicate that, on average, and with other factors given, the
declined of GDP growth per capita has been in the range of 3.6 to 5.0 percent in the first
year of the adjustment. Three years after the initial adjustment GDP growth will still be
below its long run trend.
IV.4.2 Extensions, Endogeneity and Robustness
       In this sub-section I discuss some extensions and deal with robustness issues,
including the potential endogeneity bias of the estimates. More specifically, I address the
following issues: (a) the role of countries structural characteristics in determining the
costs of adjustment; (b) results from instrumental variables random effect GLS
estimation; and (c) the effects of terms of trade changes;
       A. Openness and the Costs of Adjustment: Recent studies on the economics of
external adjustment have emphasized the role of trade openness. Edwards (2004), Calvo
et al (2004) and Frankel and Cavallo (2004), among others, have found that countries that
are more open to international trade tend to incur in a lower cost of adjustment. These
studies, however, have not made a distinction between large and small countries, nor
have they distinguished between openness in the trade account and openness in the
capital account. In order to investigate whether openness has historically affected the
cost of external adjustment in large countries I added two interactive regressors to
equations of the type of (17). More specifically, I included the following terms: (a) a
variable that interacts the reversals indicator with trade openness (measure as exports plus
imports over GDP); and (b) a variable that interacts the reversal indicator with an index
of the degree of international capital mobility. This index was developed by Edwards



                                                                                            38
(2005), and ranges from zero to 100, with higher numbers denoting a higher degree of
capital mobility. The results obtained are presented in Table 14. As may be seen, the
coefficients of the reversal indicators continue to be significantly negative, as in Table
13. However, and in contrast with previous results obtained in other studies for broad
samples of all countries – small and large; emerging and advanced – the variable that
interacts trade openness and reversals is significantly negative, indicating that for large
countries trade openness tends to amplify, rather than reduce, the negative effect of a
current account reversal on growth. The coefficient for the variable that interacts
reversals with capital mobility is significantly positive in equation (14.1), suggesting that
large countries that have a higher degree of capital mobility experience a smaller cost of
adjustment than countries that restrict capital mobility. In equation 14.2, however, the
coefficient of this interactive variable is not significant.
        B. Endogeneity and Instrumental Variables Estimates: The results discussed
above were obtained using a random effects GLS for unbalanced panels, and under the
assumption that the reversal variable is exogenous. It is possible, however, that whether
a reversal takes place is affected by growth performance, and, thus, is endogenously
determined. In order to deal with this issue I have re-estimated equation (17) using an
instrumental variables GLS panel procedure. In the estimation the following instruments
were used: (a) the ratio of the current account deficit to GDP lagged one and two
periods. (b) A lagged sudden stop dummy that takes the value of one if the country in
question has experienced a sudden stop in the previous year. (c) An index that measures
the relative occurrence of sudden stops in the country’s region (excluding the country
itself) during that particular year. This variable captures the effect of “regional
contagion.” (d) The one-year lagged external gross debt over GDP ratio. (e) The ratio of
net international reserves to GDP, lagged one year. (f) The one-year lagged rate of
growth of domestic credit. (g) The country’s initial GDP per capita (in logs). The results
obtained are presented in Table 15. As may be seen, the coefficients of the reversal
indicators are significantly negative, confirming that historically current account reversals
have had a negative effect on growth. The absolute value of the estimated coefficients,
however, are larger than those obtained when random effects GLS were used (See Table
13A).



                                                                                              39
        C. Terms of Trade Effects: The results in Table 13 were obtained controlling for
terms of trade changes. That is, the coefficient of the Reversal I and II coefficients
capture the effect of a current account reversal maintaining terms of trade constant. As
discussed in Sections II and III, however, in large countries external adjustment is very
likely to affect the terms of trade. The exact nature of that effect will depend on a
number of factors, including the size of the relevant elasticities and the extent of home
bias in consumption. In order to have an idea of the effect of current account reversals
allowing for international price adjustments, I re-estimated equation (17) excluding the
terms of trade variable for the “large countries” sample (detailed results not reported due
to space constraints). The estimated coefficients for the reversals coefficients were
smaller (in absolute terms) than those in Table 12A. The estimated coefficient of the
Reversal I is now -2.43 (it is -3.81 in Table 13A). The new estimated coefficient of
Reversal II is now -3.63; it was -4.61 in Table 13A). This suggests that for the sample in
this paper external adjustment has been associated, on average, with an improvement in
the international terms of trade.
        D. Robustness and Other Extensions: In order to check for the robusteness of the
results I also estimated several versions of equation (17) for the large countries sample.
In one of these exercises I introduced lagged values of the reversal indicators as
additional regressors. The results obtained – available on request – show that lagged
values of these indexes were not significant at conventional levels. I also varied the
definition of “large countries;” the main message of the results, however, is not affected
by the sample.
   V.      Concluding Remarks
        In this paper I have illustrated the uniqueness of the current U.S. external
situation. Never in the history of modern economics has a large industrial country run
persistent current account deficits of the magnitude posted by the U.S. since 2000. These
developments can be explained in the context of a portfolio model of the current account,
where for a number of reasons – the end of the Cold War, the internet revolution, and the
liberalization of international capital movements in most countries -- foreign investors’
increase their (net) demand for U.S. assets. Indeed, by increasing their demand for U.S.




                                                                                             40
assets from 305 to 40% of their wealth, foreigners have provided American residents with
the needed funds to run the large deficits of the last few years.
       The future of the U.S. current account – and thus of the U.S. dollar – depend on
whether foreign investors will continue to add U.S. assets to their investment portfolios.
As a way of sharpening the discussion, in this paper I have deliberately made a (very)
optimistic assumption: I have assumed that during the last five years foreigners’ (net)
demand for U.S. assets (as a proportion of U.S. GDP) doubles relative to its current level.
The simulation model indicates that even under this optimistic assumption, in the not too
distant future the U.S. will have to go through a significant adjustment in (the not too
distant) future. Indeed, it is not possible to rule out a scenario where the U.S. current
account deficit would shrink abruptly by 3 to 6 percent of GDP. According to the
simulations, this type of adjustment would imply an accumulated real depreciation of the
trade-weighted dollar in the range of 21%-28% during the firs three years of the
adjustment.
       In order to have an idea of the possible consequences of this type of adjustment, I
analyze the international evidence on current account reversals. The results from this
empirical investigation indicate that major current account reversals have tended to result
in large declines in GDP growth. Historically, “large countries” that have gone through
major reversals have experienced deep GDP growth reductions. These estimates indicate
that, on average, and with other factors given, the declined of GDP growth per capita has
been in the range of 3.6 to 5.0 percent in the first year of the adjustment. Three years
after the initial adjustment GDP growth will still be below its long run trend.
       Although the results presented in this paper are revealing, and suggest that the
U.S. is likely to experience a painful and costly adjustment in the not too distant future,
there many questions still unresolved. These include:
           •   The behavior of foreign central banks, including their future demand for
               U.S. assets. A particularly important question is central banks’
               appropriate international reserve policy in a world where most exchange
               rates have (at least) some flexibility. A number of analysts are concerned
               that the Asian central banks would reduce their demand of U.S. assets,
               unleashing an abrupt collapse in the value of the dollar.



                                                                                              41
•   We need a better understanding of the way adjustment works in large
    countries. Although in Section IV I concentrated on the case of large
    countries, the nations in that sample that experienced current account
    reversals are much smaller than the U.S. In particular, there is need to
    analyze the potential interest rate consequences of a major U.S. current
    account adjustment.
•   Most models on the U.S. current account imbalance – including the
    portfolio model in Section III -- have focused on the RER. Estimating the
    adjustment in the nominal exchange rates is not trivial, however. The
    actual adjustment will depend on the pass through coefficient, as well as
    on exchange rate policies followed by some important U.S. trade partners,
    including China, Japan and other Asian countries.




                                                                                42
                      Figure 1: Real Exchange Rate and Current Account
                                                                                                         140
                            Phase 2                                                            Phase 6
                                                               Phase 4
                                                                                                         120

4
                                                                                                         100

0
                                                                                                         80

-4
         Phase I
                                          Phase 3                           Phase 5

-8
     73 74 75 76 77 78 79 80 81 82 83 84 85 86 87 88 89 90 91 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 00 01 02 03 04


                                       Current Account to GDP (Left Axis)
                                       Real Exchange Rate (Right Axis)




                                                                                                              43
               Figure 2: Components of Current Account Deficit, 1946-2004
                                         (Percent of GDP)
             Good and Services                                       Services
 3                                                 1.2
 2                                                 1.0
 1                                                 0.8
 0
                                                   0.6
 -1
                                                   0.4
 -2
                                                   0.2
 -3
                                                   0.0
 -4
 -5                                               -0.2

 -6                                               -0.4
      50 55 60 65 70 75 80 85 90 95 00                   50 55 60 65 70 75 80 85 90 95 00




                   Income                                            Transfers
1.4                                                0.5

1.2                                                0.0

1.0
                                                  -0.5
0.8
                                                  -1.0
0.6
                                                  -1.5
0.4

0.2                                               -2.0

0.0                                               -2.5
      50 55 60 65 70 75 80 85 90 95 00                   50 55 60 65 70 75 80 85 90 95 00


         Source: International Transactions, Economic Report of President 2005




                                                                                            44
Figure 3: U.S. Net International Investment Position, 1976-2004
                                            (Percent of GDP)
 20



 10



 0



-10



-20



-30
  1976   1978   1980       1982   1984   1986   1988   1990    1992   1994   1996       1998   2000   2002   2004

                            Source: BEA , International Investment Position




                Figure 4: U.S. Investment and Savings, 1970-2003
                                   (Percent of GDP)




                                                                                                 !
                       "                                   #   $



                                  ! %& ' ( )*          #                 +          !




                                                                                                                    45
                                                Figure 5: Base Case Simulation Results

                                 Figure 5.A                                                                   Figure 5.B
.08                                                                          .06

                                                                             .05
.06
                                                                             .04


.04                                                                          .03


                                                                             .02
.02
                                                                             .01

.00                                                                          .00
      1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26         1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26



                   Current Account Deficit to GDP                                                          Trade Deficit to GDP
                   Actual Current Account Deficit to GDP



                                 Figure 5.C                                                                   Figure 5.D
 .7                                                                          130

 .6
                                                                             120

 .5
                                                                             110
 .4
                                                                             100
 .3

                                                                              90
 .2


 .1                                                                           80
      1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26         1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26



                            Net US Assets to GDP                                                Real Exchange Rate Index: 2004=100




                                                                                                                                                          46
                                                        Figure 6: Simulation B Results
                                                          (Alternative Assumptions)

                                 Figure 6.A                                                                    Figure 6.B
.08                                                                          .06



.06                                                                          .04



.04                                                                          .02



.02                                                                          .00



.00                                                                          -.02
      1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26          1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26



                   Current Account Deficit to GDP                                                           Trade Deficit to GDP
                   Actual Current Account Deficit to GDP



                                 Figure 6.C                                                                    Figure 6.D
 .6                                                                          130


 .5                                                                          120


 .4                                                                          110


 .3                                                                          100


 .2                                                                           90


 .1                                                                           80
      1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26          1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26



                            Net US Assets to GDP                                                 Real Exchange Rate Index: 2004=100




                                                                                                                                                           47
                                                                       Table 1
                                                         U.S. Net Financial Flows: 1990-2004
                                                                      ($ Billion)

                                 1990    1991    1992    1993    1994    1995    1996    1997    1998    1999    2000    2001    2002     2003     2004


Reserves (net)                   31.8    23.2    44.4     70.4    44.9   100.1   133.4    18.0   -26.7    52.3    42.5    23.1   110.3   250.1    358.1

Foreign private purchases         -2.5   18.8    37.1     24.4    34.3    91.5   147.0   130.4    28.6   -44.5   -70.0   -14.4   100.4   113.4    108.1
of U.S. treasuries
Currency                         18.8    15.4    13.4     18.9    23.4    12.3    17.4    24.8    16.6    22.4     5.3    23.8    21.5    16.6     14.8
Securities (net)                 -27.2   -10.5   -19.1   -66.2    -6.2   -45.1   -46.0    44.6    32.1   182.6   338.0   309.2   301.4   178.6    323.2
    Debt securities                  -       -       -       -       -       -    13.0    84.2   145.5   104.2   267.7   300.3   269.8   241.8    360.1
    Equity securities               -        -       -       -       -       -   -36.8    24.7   -30.3    84.5    93.0    12.6    37.5    -63.2    -36.8
FDI (net)                        11.3    -14.7   -28.4   -32.6   -34.0   -41.0    -5.4     0.8    36.4    64.5   162.1    24.7   -62.4   -133.9   -133.0
Claims reported by non-banks     17.3     8.0    13.2     11.3   -35.0    14.4   -32.6    -5.2   -15.1   -21.5    31.9    57.6    32.6    55.1     -41.5
(net)
Claims reported by banks (net)    8.6     3.4    37.4     55.7   100.1   -44.9   -75.1     7.9     4.2   -22.0   -31.7    -7.5    66.1    65.2     -15.6


Net financing                    58.0    43.5    97.9     81.8   127.4    87.3   138.7   221.3    76.2   233.8   478.0   416.6   569.9   542.7    614.0
Current account deficit          79.0     -3.7   48.0     82.0   118.0   109.5   120.2   136.0   209.6   296.8   413.4   385.7   473.9   530.7    665.9
  Source: BEA, U.S. International Transactions and International Investment Position




                                                                                                                                                  48
                                             Table 2
        U.S. Net International Investment Position and Current Account Deficit: 1998-2004
                                            ($ Billion)

                                1998      1999       2000        2001          2002          2003    2004
 NIIP                           900.0     775.5     1388.7       1889.7      2233.0      2430.7        --
 Change in NIIP                 79.3     -124.5      613.3       500.9         343.3     197.7         --
 Current Account Deficit        209.5     296.8      413.4       385.7         473.9     530.7       617.7


 Valuation changes              130.2     421.3     -199.8       -115.2        130.6     333.0         --
 Source: Bureau of Economic Analysis

                                             Table 3
                            Distribution of Current Account Deficits
                                     By Region: 1970-2001

Region                      Mean       Median     1st Perc.     1st Quartile      3rd Quartile      9th Perc.

                                                              A: 1970-2001

Industrialized countries     0.6        0.7         -3.8           -1.6                3.0             4.8
Latin Am. and Caribbean      5.4        4.1         -2.5            1.1                8.0            16.9
Asia                         3.0        2.7         -7.1           -0.6                6.3            11.3
Africa                       6.3        5.3         -3.4            1.2                9.9            16.9
Middle East                  0.0        1.4        -18.8           -5.0                6.4            13.6
Eastern Europe               3.9        3.0         -2.4            0.3                6.1            10.7

Total                        3.9        3.3         -5.0           -0.1                7.1            13.1

                                                              A: 1984-2001

Industrialized countries     0.2        0.3         -4.7           -2.3                2.7             4.8
Latin Am. and Caribbean      5.1        3.7         -2.5            1.1                7.0            17.0
Asia                         2.2        2.4         -8.0           -1.3                5.9            10.2
Africa                       5.9        4.6         -3.5            0.9                9.1            16.2
Middle East                  2.3        1.5        -12.4           -4.0                6.3            14.9
Eastern Europe               4.0        3.1         -2.5            0.3                6.6            10.9

Total                        3.8        3.0         -4.8           -0.4                6.7            12.9

 Source: Author’s elaboration based on World Development Indicators




                                                                                                            49
                                    Table 4
       List of Countries with Persistent High Current Account Deficits
                            By Region: 1970-2001

Region/ Country                                                Period

Industrialized Countries
Ireland                                                     1978-1984
New Zealand                                                 1984-1988
Latin America and Caribbean
Guyana                                                      1979-1985
Nicaragua                                            1984-1990 & 1992-2000
Asia
Bhutan                                                      1982-1989
Africa
Guinea-Bissau                                               1982-1993
Lesotho                                                     1995-2000
Eastern Europe
Azerbaijan                                                  1995-1999
 Source: Author’s elaboration based on World Development Indicators


                                    Table 5
  Net Sock of Liabilities: U.S and other Industrial Countries: Selected Years
                              (Percent of GDP)

                    1980      1985       1990      1995      2000       2003
 Australia           --         --       47.4      55.1       65.2       59.1
 Canada             34.7      36.3       38.0      42.4       30.6       20.6
 Denmark             --         --        --       26.5       21.5       13.0
 Finland            14.6      19.0       29.2      42.3       58.2       35.9
 Iceland             --         --       48.2      49.8       55.5       66.0
 New Zealand         --         --       88.7      76.6      120.8      131.0
 Sweden              --       20.9       26.6      41.9       36.7       26.5
 United States      -12.9      -1.3      4.2        6.2       14.1       22.1
 Source: Bureau of Economic Analysis and Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2001).




                                                                                50
                                                           Table 6
                                    U.S. Current Account Adjustment and the U.S. Dollar:
                                                 Selected Studies, 1999-2005


              AUTHORS                 METHODOLOGY                           MAIN ASSUMPTIONS                            MAIN RESULTS

Mann (1999)                    Model tracks U.S. NIIP through           Income elasticity of imports (1.7)      In base case scenario the NIIP
                             time.                                    exceeds income elasticity of exports    becomes increasingly negative and
                                                                      (1.0).                                  the CA is unsustainable in the
                               Analyzes trajectory of NIIP under                                              medium run.
                             three scenarios, and asks whether         Base case scenario assumes no RER
                             these trajectories are sustainable.      adjustment for the USD.                   Under RER depreciation scenario
                                                                                                              CA is within sustainable ranges even
                              Elasticities-based adjustment            A USD adjustment scenario              in a 10 year long horizon.
                             mechanism.                               assumes a RER depreciation of 25%.
                                                                                                                Under structural adjustment, CA
                              Considers two scenarios for global        A structural adjustment scenario      deficit is 3% in a 10 year horizon, if
                             growth.                                  assumes that exports’ elasticity        the global economy has high
                                                                      increases to 1.3.                       performance.

Obstfeld and Rogoff (2000)                                              Elasticity of substitution between      Base case result indicates that an
                              Develops and calibrates optimizing      tradables and nontradables is assumed   elimination of the CA deficit will
                             model of small open economy, with        to be equal to one.                     imply a 16% RER depreciation, and a
                             two goods: tradable and nontradable.                                             12% nominal depreciation of the
                                                                       Assumes a 6% nominal interest rate,    USD.
                              Output is exogenous; prices are         and a NIIP of 20% of GDP.
                             assumed to be flexible; monetary                                                   Assuming a share of tradables equal
                             policy stabilizes the price level.        Tradables output is assumed to be      to 15%, results in a RER depreciation
                                                                      25% of GDP.                             of 20%.
                               Analyzes the effect on RER of an
                             exogenous shock that results in a         Assumes that full-employment is          The effect on the nominal value of
                             reduction of the CA deficit of 4.4% of   maintained.                             the USD could be even higher if the
                             GDP.                                                                             reduction in the CA is very rapid.
            AUTHORS                     METHODOLOGY                               MAIN ASSUMPTIONS                             MAIN RESULTS

O’Neill and Hatzious (2002)    Analyzes the trajectory of NIIP as a         Analyzes the rates of return obtained     It is unlikely that U.S. will be able to
                              percentage of GDP.                           by foreign owners of U.S. assets.        continue to attract foreign purchasing
                                                                                                                    for its assets at observed low rates of
                                Argues that at the observed levels of       Argues that with the exception of       return. Thus, the U.S. CA deficit is
                              CA deficits, the NIIP is moving              FDI these rates of return have been      clearly unsustainable.
                              towards the levels of Canada,                modest.
                              Australia and New Zealand. It is                                                       A return to sustainability would )2%
                              difficult to believe that this is possible     Shows that FDI has declined            CA deficit) will imply a depreciation
                              for a large country such as the U.S.         significantly as a source of financing   of the RER of as much as 43%.
                                                                           of the U.S. CA deficit.
                                Estimates “required” RER
                              depreciation in order to bring CA
                              deficit to 2% and NIIP not to surpass
                              40%.


Wren-Lewis (2004)               Calibrates a partial equilibrium            To determine initial conditions,         CA deficit of 2% of GDP is
                              model to obtain set of bilateral RER         author estimates “underlying” (or        consistent with a yen/dollar rate of 88,
                              consistent with attaining certain            cycle-adjusted) CA balances.             and a dollar/euro of 1.18.
                              (exogenous) current account deficits.
                                                                            Considers 3 possible long term           If there is a positive technological
                               No attempt is made to determine             scenarios: 1%, 2% and 3% CA deficit.     shock, the “sustainable” CA deficit
                              what is the sustainable level of the                                                  may be higher. This would be
                              U.S. current account.                         Three-good partial equilibrium          consistent a yen/dollar rate of 89-100,
                                                                           model (including a nontraded) of         and a dollar/euro of 1.11-1.19.
                               Considers the effect of a U.S. fiscal       small economy.
                              shock and of a U.S. technological                                                      Estimates that if China has a CA
                              shock.                                        Elasticities and other parameter        surplus of 1% of GDP the Rmb/USD
                                                                           values taken from regression analysis    would be 6.71.
                                                                           and from OECD data set.




                                                                                                                                                          52
           AUTHORS                     METHODOLOGY                            MAIN ASSUMPTIONS                             MAIN RESULTS
Benassy-Quere et al (2004)    Estimates econometrically RER path        Model estimated simultaneously for       The extent of misalignment of the
                             consistent with nontradable               15 currencies.                           different currencies depends on how
                             equilibrium.                                                                       broad is the adjustment.
                                                                         Data on NFA obtained from lane
                               The RER is assumed to depend on         and Milessi-Ferreti (2004) and            Using the USD as numeraire,
                             the country’s net foreign assets (NFA)    relative productivities obtained as      estimates that in 2003 the euro was
                             position and on relative productivity.    ratio of CPI to PPI.                     undervalued between 1.2% and 7.6%.

                                                                        No attempt is made to impose             Using the USD as numeraire,
                                                                       external equilibrium condition.          estimates that in 2001 the yen was
                                                                                                                undervalued between 14.3% and
                                                                        Rsults provided for two cases: USD      22.1%.
                                                                       as numeraire and euro as numeraire.

Mussa (2004)                  Analyzes trajectory of NIIP and            Based on results from large             Relative to its value in mid 2004,
                             argues that it is unlikely that it will   econometric models assumes that a        Mussa calculates that the RER will
                             continue to grow at current pace. If it   1% reduction of the U.S. CA deficit is   have to depreciate another 20% to
                             did it would reach 100% of GDP.           associated with a 10% depreciation of    achieve a long term CA deficit of 2%.
                                                                       the RER.
                              Argues that challenge is for RER                                                   Discusses policies that will assist the
                             adjustment to be gradual and that it                                               adjustment process: (a) Fiscal
                             does not disrupt growth.                                                           consolidation in the U.S. will help
                                                                                                                keep U.S. demand growing below the
                              Argues that fiscal adjustment in the                                              pace of output growth. (b) Monetary
                             U.S. is necessary for smooth                                                       policy in Europe and Japan should be
                             correction of imbalances.                                                          more expansive.

                               No attempt is made at calculating                                                 Concludes that “some” international
                             the “outer limit” of U.S. NIIP.                                                    policy cooperation is likely to help the
                                                                                                                adjustment process.
                              Analyzes the RER adjustment
                             compatible with a gradual reduction
                             of the CA deficit to 2% of GDP and a
                             NIIP between 40% and 50%.




                                                                                                                                                     53
            AUTHORS                    METHODOLOGY                           MAIN ASSUMPTIONS                            MAIN RESULTS

O’Neill and Hatzious (2004)     Update of O’Neill and Hatzious           Estimates a trade balance equation     A reduction of the CA deficit to 3%
                              (2002) model.                            and uses the coefficients to compute    would imply RER depreciation of the
                                                                       the “required” RER depreciation to      order of 21.6% to 23.6%.
                               Analyzes the trajectory of NIIP as a    achieve different CA adjustment
                              percentage of GDP, and finds that        targets.                                 A reduction of the CA deficit to 2%
                              path is not sustainabl.                                                          would imply RER depreciation of the
                                                                        Trade equation also includes foreign   order of 32.1% to 34.1%.
                               Introduces the role of productivity     and U.S. demand growth.
                              gains to original framework.                                                       An elimination of the CA deficit to
                                                                                                               2% would imply RER depreciation of
                                Analyzes the composition of capital                                            the order of 53% to 55%. (Notice that
                              flows into the U.S.                                                              these figures are significantly higher
                                                                                                               than those estimated by Obstfeld and
                               Incorporates the role of valuation                                              Rogoff, 2004).
                              effects.


Obstfeld and Rogoff (2004)      Extension of the Obstfeld-Rogoff        Ratio of CA deficit to tradables is      Assuming constant output, an
                              (2002) model to a two-country world.     25%; CA deficit is 5% of GDP.           elimination of the CA deficit implies
                                                                                                               RER depreciation between 14.7% and
                               Terms of trade are now endogenous.       Output is exogenously given in both    33.6%.
                                                                       countries.
                               Incorporates the effects of valuation                                             If tradables output increases by
                              effects of exchange rate changes on       NIIP is 20% of GDP.                    20%, the RER depreciation ranges
                              NIIP.                                                                            from 9.8% to 22.5%.
                                                                        Home country produces 22% of
                                Exercise assumes an elimination of     world tradables.                         If there is a permanent increase in
                              the CA deficit; that is a reduction in                                           military expenditure,the RER
                              5% of GDP.                                Simulation is done for alternative     depreciation ranges from 16.0% to
                                                                       values of elasticities, and under       36.1%.
                                                                       different assumptions regarding
                                                                       changes in tradables output and
                                                                       military spending.




                                                                                                                                                      54
            AUTHORS                       METHODOLOGY                       MAIN ASSUMPTIONS                              MAIN RESULTS

Roubini and Setser (2004)         Uses macro aggregate model to       First scenario considers a constant       In first scenario, CA deficit 13% of
                                 project the U.S. current account.   RER dollar.                                GDP in 2012.

                                  Imposes exogenous assumptions on    Second scenario considers a constant      In second scenario, CA deficit 9% of
                                 RER, and analyzes CA path           trade deficit at 5% of GDP, and a          GDP in 2012.
                                                                     RER depreciation of approximately
                                                                     7%.                                         In third scenario, the NIIP stabilizes
                                                                                                                at approximately 55% of GDP, and
                                                                       Third scenario considers a faster rate   the CA deficit declines gradually,
                                                                     of growth of exports, and substantial      reaching 4.3% of GDP in 2012.
                                                                     (50%) depreciation. This scenario
                                                                     also assumes a gradual elimination
                                                                     (by 2012) of the fiscal deficit.


Blanchard, Giavazzi, Sa (2005)    Uses portfolio model to analyze     Considers dynamics of adjustment.           Estimates range of required U.S.
                                 U.S. current account behavior.                                                 dollar real depreciation (today). After
                                                                      Considers valuation effects of            incorporating the role of valuation
                                  Assumes changes in portfolio       changes in the U.S. dollar.                effects the range is estimated to be
                                 preferences in world economy.                                                  between 40% and 90% real
                                                                      Simulates model under certain             depreciation.
                                                                     assumptions for values of key
                                                                     parameters (elasticities, portfolio
                                                                     shares and other).

                                                                       The question asked is: what is the
                                                                     required (real) depreciation of the
                                                                     U.S. dollar to eliminate the current
                                                                     account deficit?




                                                                                                                                                     55
                                       Table 7
                                Simulation Parameters


    Variables           Parameter Values     Comments and Values in Alternative
                                                       Simulations


                                A. Portfolio Adjustment

        World
      WInitial           USD 80 Trillion   World wealth in U.S. dollars in 2005.
          US
       W Initial         USD 36 Trillion   U.S. wealth in U.S. dollars in 2005.
       α Initial             0.300         Foreigners’ demand for U.S. assets in
                                           (early) 2005.
     α jj , Initial          0.730         U.S. residents’ demand for U.S. assets in
                                           (early) 2005.
       α Final               0.400         Foreigners’ portfolio allocation for U.S.
                                           assets in 2010. In Simulation B I assume
                                           that after reaching 0.40 α declines
                                           gradually to 0.365. It reaches this new
                                           value in 2014.
      α jj , Final           0.710         U.S. residents’ demand for U.S. assets in
                                           (early) 2010. In Simulation B I assume that
                                           after reaching 0.71 α jj changes to 0.72 as a
                                           final value in 2014.
     α Historical            0.205         Foreigners’ demand for U.S. assets in
                                           (early) 1996. Move to current 0.30 is
                                           assumed to have been gradual.
    α jj , Historical        0.800         U.S. residents’ demand for U.S. assets in
                                           (early) 1996.
           λ                   3           Wealth to GDP ratio.
       γ   *
           Initial
                             0.290         Gamma in (early) 2005.
        γ Final
          *                  0.600         Final gamma in 2010.
     γ Historical
       *                     0.150         Initial gamma in 1996.
Adjustment period          Five years
 for α and α jj
                          Table 7
                   Simulation Parameters
                       (Continuation)


Variables   Parameter Values     Comments and Values in Alternative
                                           Simulations

                       B. Transfer Problem

   g              0.03         Assumed to be the long-term sustainable
                               rate of growth of U.S. GDP.
   g*             0.03         Rest of the world growth (this includes the
                               emerging countries as well as Europe and
                               Japan).
   π             0.023         Long term U.S. inflation.

   π*            0.023         A slightly higher value (0.03) was used in
                               some of the simulations.
    i            0.043         Other simulations used a higher value in
                               the range 0.05 to 0.065.
   i*            0.053         Alternative values in the range 0.06 to
                               0.075.
   ηe            -1.10         This is slightly below the consensus price
                               elasticity for U.S. imports. Range of
                               values used in other simulations.
   εe             0.35         Approximate consensus value for RER
                               elasticity of U.S. exports. Sensitivity
                               analysis used range 0.2/0.6.
   ηy             1.50         Consensus value for income elasticity of
                               U.S. imports.
   εy             1.00         Consensus value for income elasticity of
                               U.S. imports.
   σm             0.14         Share of imports in U.S. GDP in 2004.
   σx             0.09         Share of exports in U.S. GDP in 2004.
   pˆ m*           0           In alternative simulations a range of -.05 to
                               -.10 was used.
   pˆ *x           0           In alternative simulations a range of .05 to
                               .07 was used.
   ψ              0.30         Partial adjustment coefficient; value chosen
                               to obtain best possible fit for 1996-2004
                               period.
   κ              0.20         Partial adjustment coefficient; value chosen
                               to obtain best possible fit for 1996-2004
                               period.



                                                                         57
                                         Table 8
                    Incidence of Current Account Reversals: 1970-2001
                                      (Percentages)

Region                                             Reversal I                    Reversal II

                                         No reversal       Reversal    No reversal         Reversal

Industrial countries                        97.3                2.7       98.0                 2.0
Latin American and Caribbean                92.0                8.0       87.7                 12.3
Asia                                        88.3                11.7      87.7                 12.3
Africa                                      88.3                11.7      83.4                 16.6
Middle East                                 86.6                13.4      85.0                 15.0
Eastern Europe                              90.7                9.3       88.9                 11.1

Total                                       90.8                9.2       88.2                 11.8

  Pearson
     Uncorrected chi2 (5)                          37.31                           67.42
     Design-based F(5, 12500)                       7.46                           13.08
     P-value                                        0.00                            0.00
Source: Author’s elaboration based on World Development Indicators




                                                                                                58
                              Table 9
Incidence of Current Account Reversals and Sudden Stops: 1970-2001
                           (Percentages)

                                       Reversal I        Reversal II

   A. Large Countries

   Reversal | Sudden                      9.3                25.5
   Sudden | Reversal                       7.0               15.6
         χ2(1)                             1.3               27.5
          P-value                         0.26               0.00

   B. Industrial Countries

   Reversal | Sudden                      5.0                18.2
   Sudden | Reversal                       7.1               28.6
         χ2(1)                             0.4               23.6
          P-value                         0.51               0.00

   C. All Countries

   Reversal | Sudden                      21.1              51.0
   Sudden | Reversal                      15.0               26.7
         χ2(1)                            26.6              262.5
          P-value                         0.00               0.00



  x| y denotes the probability of occurrence of x given the occurrence of y
  Source: Author’s elaboration based on World Development Indicators




                                                                              59
                                           Table 10
                Percentage of Reversals that also Correspond to Currency Crisis
                                 (P-Value of χ2 in parenthesis)

                           Contemporaneous        Crisis lagged one      Crisis lagged two
                            joint occurrence            period                periods
                          Crisis A   Crisis B   Crisis A    Crisis B   Crisis A    Crisis B

A. Reversal I

Large Countries             26.7       16.1        43.1       17.2       34.5        13.8
                           (0.09)     (0.01)      (0.00)     (0.00)     (0.00)      (0.05)
Industrial Countries         6.7        0.0        25.0       12.5       50.0        12.5
                           (0.49)     (0.43)      (0.16)     (0.10)     (0.00)      (0.11)
All Countries               21.2        9.1        25.6       10.3       22.2        9.8
                           (0.10)     (0.38)      (0.00)     (0.08)     (0.01)      (0.09)

B. Reversal II

Large Countries             31.2       18.2        42.9       15.6       29.5        12.8
                           (0.00)     (0.00)      (0.00)     (0.00)     (0.01)      (0.04)
Industrial Countries        28.6       14.3        35.7       0.0        26.7        6.7
                            (0.09     (0.07)      (0.01)     (0.43)     (0.11)      (0.67)
All Countries               20.2       10.0        23.8       11.5       16.7        8.2
                            (0.05     (0.03)      (0.00)     (0.00)     (0.86)      (0.47)
Source: Author’s elaboration based on World Development Indicators




                                                                                            60
                                  Table 11
       Mean Changes in Nominal and Real Exchange Rates: Reversal I
      Accumulated change between the year of reversal and three years before
                                (Percentages)

                              Treatment       Control       Kruskal-Wallis test
                                                                (p-value)*

                                           Nominal Exchange Rate

Large Countries                  33.1           9.2                0.00
Industrial Countries             18.9           3.2                0.19
All Countries                    27.5           9.5                0.00

                                            Real Exchange Rate**

Large Countries                  1.4           0.04                0.12
Industrial Countries             9.3            1.6                0.55
All Countries                    -4.0           3.6                0.00

* Null Hypothesis: Data from treatment and control countries have been drawn from
the same population.
** A positive number means real exchange rate appreciation.




                                                                                    61
                                            Table 12
      Current Account Reversals: Random Effects Probit Model – Unbalanced Panel
                                        Large Countries
Variable                                         (12.1)         (12.2)        (12.3)      (12.4)

                                                       Reversal I                Reversal II

Current-Account deficit to GDP                        0.05           0.05         0.19        0.19
                                                  (1.65)***      (1.63)***      (5.46)*     (5.53)*
Sudden stop                                           0.82           0.83         0.93        0.83
                                                   (2.06)**       (2.08)**     (2.46)** (2.24)**
Sudden stops in region                                0.78           0.80         1.42        1.64
                                                     (0.66)         (0.68)       (1.54)   (1.84)***
External debt to GDP                                  0.01           0.01        0.001       0.001
                                                    (2.81)*        (2.88)*       (0.29)      (0.32)
Domestic credit growth                               0.001          0.001       0.0002      0.0003
                                                   (2.50)**       (2.52)**    (1.65)*** (1.71)***
Fiscal deficit to GDP                                -0.004            --         0.05          --
                                                     (0.12)            --     (1.85)***         --
Initial GDP per capita                                -0.28          -0.29        -0.15       -0.16
                                                   (2.19)**       (2.23)**       (1.57)   (1.66)***
Observations                                           545            582          557         597
Countries                                               36             37           36          37
Absolute value of z statistics are reported in parentheses; explanatory variables are one-period
lagged variable; country-specific dummies are included, but not reported.
* significant at 1%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 10%




                                                                                                62
                                       Table 13
                   Current Account Reversals, Sudden Stops and Growth
                                (Random Effects GLS Estimates)
                                  (13.1)       (13.2)        (13.3)         (13.4)     (13.5)

                                                       A. Large Countries

   Growth gap                     0.67          0.72          0.68            0.66       0.71
                                (21.20)*      (25.33)*      (22.82)*       (20.54)*   (24.60)*
   Change in terms of trade       0.09          0.10          0.08            0.08       0.10
                                 (7.88)*      (10.30)*       (7.99)*        (7.34)*    (9.52)*
   Reversal I                     -2.12           --            --            -2.11        --
                                 (3.94)*          --            --          (3.89)*        --
   Reversal II                      --          -4.13           --              --       -3.74
                                    --         (9.34)*          --              --     (7.94)*
   Sudden Stop                      --            --          -2.36           -2.39      -1.37
                                    --            --         (3.99)*        (3.99)*   (2.36)**
   Constant                       -0.28         -0.21         -0.31           -0.18      -0.18
                                (2.10)**     (1.70)***      (2.36)**         (1.36)     (1.39)

   Observations                    799          846           811           764        810
   Countries                        41           41            41            41         41
   R-squared                       0.41         0.50          0.45          0.42       0.50

                                                        B. All Countries

   Growth gap                        0.82          0.82        0.81         0.82        0.82
                                   (40.26)*     (42.10)*     (40.18)*     (38.93)*   (40.76)*
   Change in terms of trade          0.07          0.08        0.07         0.07        0.08
                                   (11.77)*     (12.65)*     (11.31)*     (11.10)*   (12.18)*
   Reversal I                        -1.04           --          --         -0.73         --
                                    (3.00)*          --          --       (2.03)**        --
   Reversal II                         --          -2.01         --           --        -1.80
                                       --        (6.64)*         --           --      (5.50)*
   Sudden Stop                         --            --        -1.23        -1.02       -0.53
                                       --            --       (2.82)*     (2.28)**     (1.19)
   Constant                          -0.30         -0.15       -0.27        -0.26       -0.14
                                   (2.26)**       (1.16)      (2.62)*     (2.33)**     (1.32)
   Observations                      1723          1821        1641         1546        1635
   Countries                          90            90          81            81         81
   R-squared                         0.48          0.49        0.51         0.52        0.51
Absolute value of t statistics are reported in parentheses; country-specific dummies are included,
but not reported; *significant at 1%, **significant at 5%, *** significant at 10%.




                                                                                                 63
                                       Table 14
    Current Account Reversals, Sudden Stops and Growth: Trade and Capital Mobility
                                        Large Countries
                                (Random Effects GLS Estimates)
                                              (14.1)        (14.2)       (14.3)       (14.4)

   Growth gap                                   0.67        0.67           0.68        0.68
                                             (21.17)*     (21.12)*      (22.35)*    (22.40)*
   Change in terms of trade                     0.09        0.09           0.09        0.09
                                              (7.78)*      (7.83)*       (8.77)*     (8.79)*
   Reversal I                                   -3.48       -3.84            --          --
                                             (1.98)**      (4.42)*           --          --
   Reversal I * Trade                           0.27        0.27             --          --
                                             (2.47)**     (2.55)**           --          --
   Reversal I * Capital Mobility               -0.007         --             --          --
                                               (0.24)         --             --          --
   Reversal II                                    --          --           -1.92       -4.12
                                                  --          --          (1.38)     (7.94)*
   Reversal II * Trade                            --          --           -0.02       -0.04
                                                  --          --          (0.58)      (1.27)
   Reversal II * Capital Mobility                 --          --           -0.05         --
                                                  --          --       (1.70)***         --
   Constant                                     -0.28       -0.29          -0.16       -0.16
                                             (2.14)**     (2.19)**        (1.26)      (1.27)
   Observations                                  794         793            793         793
   Countries                                      41          41            41           41
   R-squared                                    0.38        0.38           0.43        0.43

Absolute value of t statistics are reported in parentheses; country-specific dummies are included,
but not reported.
*significant at 1%, **significant at 5%, *** significant at 10%




                                                                                               64
                                  Table 15
    Current Account Reversals, Sudden Stops and Growth: Large Countries
                                   (IV Estimates)
                                                        (15.1)           (15.2)

   Growth gap                                            0.86              0.89
                                                      (18.50)*          (20.50)*
   Change in terms of trade                              0.06              0.11
                                                       (3.87)*           (6.86)*
   Reversal I                                            -9.40              --
                                                       (4.55)*              --
   Reversal II                                             --             -12.24
                                                           --            (7.40)*
   Constant                                              0.24              0.38
                                                        (1.27)         (1.95)***
   Observations                                           514              538
   Countries                                              34                34
   R-squared                                             0.41              0.40

Absolute value of t statistics are reported in parentheses; country-specific dummies
are included, but not reported.
*significant at 1%, **significant at 5%, *** significant at 10%




                                                                                       65
                                        Appendix
                                  Description of the Data

Variable             Definition                               Source
Current-Account      Reduction in the current account Author’s elaboration based on
Reversal I           deficit of at least 6% of GDP in three data of current account deficit
                     years. Initial balance has to be a (World Development Indicators)
                     deficit

Current-Account      Reduction in the current account Author’s elaboration based on
Reversal II          deficit of at least 4% of GDP in one data of current account deficit
                     year. Initial balance has to be a deficit (World Development Indicators)

Sudden Stop          Reduction of net capital inflows of at Author’s elaboration based on
                     least 5% of GDP in one year. The data of financial account (World
                     country in question must have Development Indicators)
                     received an inflow of capital larger to
                     its region’s third quartile during the
                     previous two years prior to the
                     “sudden stop.”

Currency Crisis A    Dummy variable for occurrence of a Author’s elaboration based on
                     currency crisis: index of “external data of international reserves and
                     pressures” exceeds its mean by 3 nominal exchange rate.
                     standard deviation

Currency Crisis B    Dummy variable for occurrence of a Author’s elaboration based on
                     currency crisis: index of “external data of nominal exchange rate.
                     pressures” exceeds its mean by 3
                     standard deviation exclusively by
                     changes in the nominal exchange rate

Nominal exchange     Local currency units per dollar          International Financial Statistics,
rate                                                          IMF

Real exchange rate   Bilateral CPI based real exchange rate   Author’s elaboration based on
                                                              data of nominal exchange rate
                                                              and CPI. (International Financial
                                                              Statistics, IMF)

Terms of trade       Change in terms of trade-exports as World Development Indicators
                     capacity to import (constant LCU)

Reserves to GDP      Net international reserves over GDP      World Development Indicators

Domestic credit      Annual growth rate of domestic credit    World Development Indicators
growth




                                                                                              66
                                           Appendix
                                     Description of the Data
                                         (Continuation)

Variable                Definition                             Source

External debt to        Total external debt over GDP           World Development Indicators
GDP

Fiscal deficit to GDP   Overall budget to GDP                  World Development Indicators

GDP per capita          GDP per capita in 1995 US$ dollars     World Development Indicators

Index of capital        Index: (low mobility) to 100 (high Edwards (2005)
mobility                mobility)

Openness                Trade openness: exports plus imports World Development Indicators
                        over GDP




                                                                                          67
                                      References


Ades, A. and F. Kaune. 1997. “A New Measure of Current Account Sustainability for
   Developing Countries,” Goldman-Sachs Emerging Markets Economic Research.


Barro, R., Sala-I-Martin, X., 1995. Economic Growth. McGraw Hill, New York.


Benassy-Quere, A. Duran-Vigeron, P. Lahreche-Revil, A. and V. Mignon. 2004. “Burden
   Sharing and Exchange Rate Misalignments Within the Group of Twenty,” in
   Bergsten, C.F. and J. Williamson (Editors): Dollar Adjustment: How Far? Against
   What?, Institute for International Economics, Washington D.C., November.


Bergsten, C.F. and J. Williamson. 2003. Dollar Overvaluation and the World Economy,
   Special Report 16, Institute for International Economics, Washington D.C.,
   November.


________________ 2004. Dollar Adjustment: How Far? Against What?, Institute for
   International Economics, Washington D.C., November.


Blanchard, O., Giavazzi,F. and F. Sa. 2005. “The U.S. Current Account and the Dollar,”
   NBER Working Paper No. 11137, February.


Caballero, R., Farhi, E., and Hammour, M. 2004. “Speculative Growth: Hints from the
   U.S. Economy,” NBER Working Paper No. 10518, May.


Calvo, G. A., Izquierdo, A. and L. F. Mejia. 2004. “On the Empirics of Sudden Stops:
   The Relevance of Balance-Sheet Effects,” NBER Working Paper No. 10520, May.


Choi, C-Y., Mark, N. and D. Sul. 2004. “Unbiased Estimation of the Half-Life to PPP
   Convergence in Panel Data,” NBER Working Paper No. 10614, July.




                                                                                       68
Cooper, R. 2004.“America'
                        s Current Account Deficit Is Not Only Sustainable, It Is
   Perfectly Logical Given the World'
                                    s Hunger for Investment Returns and Dollar
   Reserves,” Financial Times, November 1st.


Croke, H. , Kamin S. B. and S. Leduc. 2005. “Financial Market Developments and
   Economic Activity during Current Account Adjustments in Industrial Economies,”
   International Finance Discussion Papers 827, Board of Governors of the Federal
   Reserve System.


Corden, W. M. 1994. Economic Policy, Exchange Rates, and the International
System. Oxford: Oxford University Press, and Chicago: The University of
Chicago Press.


Dollar, D., 1992. “Outward-Oriented Developing Economies Really Do Grow More
   Rapidly: Evidence from 95 LDCs, 1976-1985,” Economic Development and Cultural
   Change, 40(3): 523-44.


Dooley, M., D. Folkerts-Landau and P. Garber 2004a. “The Revived Bretton Woods
   System: The Effects of Periphery Intervention and Reserve Management on Interest
   Rates & Exchange Rates in Center Countries,” NBER Working Paper No. 10332,
   March.


_________ 2004b. “Direct Investment, Rising Real Wages and the Absorption of Excess
   Labor in the Periphery,” NBER Working Paper No. 10626, July.


Edwards, S. 2005. “Capital Controls, Sudden Stops and Current Account Reversals,” in
   S. Edwards (ed): International Capital Flows, forthcoming.


_________ 2004. "Thirty Years of Current Account Imbalances, Current Account
Reversals and Sudden Stops,” IMF Staff Papers, Vol. 61, Special Issue: 1-49.
   International Monetary Fund.



                                                                                    69
_________ 2003. “Debt Relief and the Current Account: An Analysis of the HIPC
    Initiative,” World Economy, 26(4): 513-31.


________ 2002. “Does the Current Account Matter?” in Preventing Currency Crises in
    Emerging Markets, S. Edwards and J. A. Frankel (editors), The University of Chicago
    Press. 21-69.


_________ 1999. “Crisis Prevention: Lessons from Mexico and East Asia,”, NBER
    Working Paper No. 7233, July.


__________ 1995. Crisis and Reform in Latin America: From Despair to Hope, Oxford
    and New York: Oxford University Press for the World Bank.


Edwards, S. and E. Levy Yeyati. 2004. “Flexible Exchange Rates as Shock Absorbers,”
    European Economic Review, forthcoming.


Eichengreen, B., A. K. Rose and Ch. Wyplosz. (1996): “Contagious Currency Crises”,
    NBER Working Paper No. 5681, July.


Frankel, J. A., and A. K. Rose (1996): “Currency Crashes in Emerging Markets: An

    Empirical Treatment,” Journal of International Economics, 41(3-4): 351-366.

Frankel, J. A. and E. A. Cavallo. 2004. “Does Openness to Trade Make Countries More
    Vulnerable to Sudden Stops, Or Less? Using Gravity to Establish Causality,” NBER
    Working Paper No. 10957, December.


Freund, Caroline (2000): “Current Account Adjustments in Industrialized Countries,”
    International Finance Discussion Papers Nº 692, Board of Governors of the Federal
    Reserve System.




                                                                                      70
Guidotti, P., Villar, A. and F. Sturzenegger. 2003 “Aftermaths of Current Account
   Reversals: Exports Growth or Import Compression,” Presented at the 8th LACEA
   Meeting, Puebla-Mexico, October.


Gourinchas P. O. and H. Rey.2005. “International Financial Adjustment,” NBER
   Working Paper 11155, February.


Hopper, P., Johnson, K. and J. Marquez (2000): “Trade Elasticities for G-7 Countries,”
   Princeton Studies in International Economics, 87, Princeton University.


Kraay, A. and J. Ventura. 2002. “Current Accounts in the Long and Short Run”, NBER
   Working Paper 9030, June.


Lane, P. R. and G. M. Milesi-Ferretti, G. M. 2004a. "International Investment Patterns,"
   CEPR Discussion Papers 4499.


_________ 2004b. "Financial Globalization and Exchange Rates," NBER
   Macroeconomics Annual, 73-115.


_________ 2001. “The External Wealth of Nations: Measures of Foreign Assets and
   Liabilities for Industrial and Developing Countries,” Journal of International
   Economics, Vol. 55 (2): 263-294.


Mann, C. 2004. “The US Current Account, New Economy Services, and Implications for
   Sustainability,” Review of International Economics, 12 (2): 262 – 276.


________. 2003. “How Long the Strong Dollar?,”, in Bergsten, C.F. and J. Williamson
   (Editors): Dollar Overvaluation and the World Economy, Special Report 16, Institute
   for International Economics, Washington D.C., November.




                                                                                         71
________. 1999. Is the U.S. Trade Deficit Sustainable?. Institute for International
   Economics, Washington D.C., September.


Milesi-Ferretti, Gian Maria and Assaf Razin. (2000), “Current Account Reversals and
   Curreency Crises: Empirical Regularities” in P. Krugman (Ed), Currency Crises, U.
   of Chicago Press.


Mussa, M. 2004.“Exchange Rate Adjustments Needed to Reduce Global Payments
   Imbalance,” in Bergsten, C.F. and J. Williamson (Editors): Dollar Adjustment: How
   Far? Against What?, Institute for International Economics, Washington D.C.,
   November.


Obstfeld, M. and K. Rogoff. 2000. "Perspectives on OECD Capital Market Integration:
   Implications for U.S. Current Account Adjustment," in Federal Reserve Bank of
   Kansas City, Global Economic Integration: Opportunities and Challenges, March,
   pp. 169-208.


_______________ 2004. “The Unsustainable US Current Account Position Revisited,”
   NBER Working Paper 10869, November.


O’Neill, J. and J. Hatzius. 2004. “US Balance of Payments. Unsustainable, But…,”
   Global Economics Papers No. 104, New York: Goldman and Sachs.


_____________ 2002. “US Balance of Payments: Still Unsustainable,” Global
   Economics Paper No. 70, New York: Goldman-Sachs.


Roubini, N. and B. Setser. 2004. “The US as a Net Debtor: The Sustainability of the US
   External Imbalances,” mimeo, Stern School of Business, August.


Sachs, J.D., Warner, A.M., 1995. “Economic Reform and the Process of Global
   Integration,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (1), 1–118.



                                                                                      72
Taylor, A. M. 2002. “A Century of Current Account Dynamics,” NBER Working Paper
   No. 8927, May.


Tille, C.. 2003. "The Impact of Exchange Rate Movements on US Foreign Debt,"
   Current Issues in Economics and Finance 9, pp.1-7, January.


Wren-Lewis, S. 2004. “The Needed Changes in Bilateral Exchange Rates”, in Bergsten,
   C.F. and J. Williamson (Editors): Dollar Adjustment: How Far? Against What?,
   Institute for International Economics, Washington D.C., November.




                                                                                  73
