                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                APPAREL PRICE 1914-93 AND THE
                                 HULTEN/BRUEGHEL PARADOX

                                             Robert J. Gordon

                                          Working Paper 11548
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w11548


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 2005




This research has been supported by the National Science Foundation. The Sears catalog prices for the
matched model indexes were collected by a succession of Northwestern undergraduates, in chronological
order Hannah Lipman, Stephanie Glenn, Katrina Katzenberger, Eileen Altman, Laura Veldkamp, Tho Kutty,
Gabe Plotkin, Philip Ordway, Jayun Kim, Jungyun Kim, and Ian Dew-Becker. I am particularly grateful to
Ian Dew-Becker for bringing the loose ends of this project together both before and after the Vancouver
conference. Helpful comments were provided by participants in the Summer 2000 NBER Summer Institute.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by Robert J. Gordon. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Apparel Prices 1914-93 and the Hulten/Brueghel Paradox
Robert J. Gordon
NBER Working Paper No. 11548
August 2005
JEL No. E31, I31, N32, N62, O47, R21, R31

                                           ABSTRACT


       Backcasting upward bias in price index over long periods of time yields levels of real
consumption two or four centuries ago that are implausibly low, raising the possibility that price
index bias for important products may have been zero or even negative at some point in the past.
This paper studies apparel prices over the long period 1914-93, developing new price indexes based
on more than 16,000 data observations from the Sears catalog for that interval.
         The basic conclusion is that hedonic price indexes for womens' dresses exhibit a rate of
increase of many orders of magnitude faster than either the Sears Matched-model index developed
from the same source data or as compared to the CPI. The results provided here offer a complement
to past research on computer prices, which also found that price changes were contemporaneous with
model changes. Just as hedonic price indexes for computers almost always drop faster than matched-
model indexes for computers, we have found the opposite relationship for apparel prices, although
presumably for the same reason.
        The Sears matched-model indexes do not exhibit a consistent negative or positive drift
relative to the CPI. For womens' apparel the drift is always negative but for mens' apparel there is
a turnaround, from negative before 1965 to positive thereafter. Both the matched- model indexes and
the CPI rise less rapidly for womens' apparel than for mens' apparel, which would be consistent with
the hypothesis that price changes accompanying model changes (and thus linked out of both the
Sears matched-model index and of the CPI but not in the hedonic index) are more frequent for
womens' apparel, since models change more frequently.


Robert J. Gordon
Department of Economics
Northwestern University
Arthur Andersen Hall Rm. 349
2003 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208-2700
and NBER
rjg@northwestern.edu
I. Introduction

       So much evidence has been produced over the years demonstrating an upward

bias in the CPI and NIPA deflators, especially for consumer and producer durable

goods of relatively recent invention, that it requires a sharp adjustment in oneʹs mind-

set to contemplate the opposite, that for major consumption components over long

intervals the CPI may have incorporated a significant downward bias. Yet the Hulten-

Bruegel paradox as interpreted here makes a convincing logical case that at some point

in the past there must have been a downward bias in the CPI for several major

components. This paper demonstrates that one of these components is apparel, one of

the three ʺnecessitiesʺ (along with food and shelter), and a companion paper (Gordon

and VanGoethem, 2004) reaches the same conclusion for rental shelter. Both papers are

unique in covering most of the twentieth century, 1914-93 in this paper on apparel and

1914-2003 in the companion paper on shelter.

       Viewed as a contribution to the price index literature, this paper joins others that

have explored differences in hedonic and matched-model indexes developed from the

same data. Several previous studies have found that computer prices tend to be

reduced upon the introduction of new models, leading hedonic price indexes to exhibit

more rapid rates of price decline than matched-model indexes from the same data.1 The



   1. Among studies that examine differences between matched-model and hedonic indexes for
personal computers and/or software are Berndt, Griliches, and Rappaport (1995), Berndt and
Rappaport (2003), Doms, Aizcorbe, and Corrado (2003), and Triplett (2004).
matching process appears to exclude price declines when new computer models are

introduced. There has long been a suspicion in the apparel price literature that price

increases occur with changes in models or styles and are missed by the matched-model

procedures of the CPI, and this paper is perhaps the first study to demonstrate this

systematic difference between hedonic and matched-model indexes from a uniform

data set for apparel over a long historical period of time.2 A striking corollary of the

results is that quality change in apparel over the long period 1914-93 has been

negligible, in the sense that the new hedonic index tracks raw unadjusted price change

relatively closely, while changes in the implied index of average quality are relatively

minor.

         This paper represents the fulfillment of a longstanding goal to extract from the

Sears catalog a new history of apparel prices over the entire history between the

beginning of the CPI in 1914 and the final year of the Sears catalog in 1993 (the catalog

itself began in 1893, two decades after the Montgomery Ward catalogʹs initiation in

1872).3 Initially the goal of this project was to duplicate the CPI matched-model

methodology with catalog data and compare CPI apparel sub-components with the


   2. For history buffs, the time period of this study, dictated solely by the starting date of the
CPI and the termination date of the Sears catalog, echoes dates signifying the start and end of the
most terrible events of the 20th century. In the words of Eric Hobsbawm (1994, p. 3), the
interval 1914-91 marks the "short twentieth century" bookmarked by the start of World War I
and the final collapse of the Soviet Union.

   3. Sears catalog data for 1893-1914 were previously analyzed by Rees (1961), as discussed
further below. A history of the Sears Roebuck and other mail-order catalogs and further
references can be found in Gordon (1990, pp. 419-23).
                                                                         Apparel Prices, Page 3



corresponding Sears matched-model indexes. Subsequently it became apparent that the

same Sears data could be used to develop hedonic price indexes for at least one

product, womensʹ dresses, where an ample number of data observations are available in

the catalogs. The resulting differences in the hedonic and matched-model indexes for

womensʹ dresses provide convincing evidence that the matched-model technique

misses a significant portion of price increases that occur when styles and models

change.


The Hulten-Bruegel Paradox

       Numerous economists have speculated about the implications for estimates of

long-term economic growth of bias in official price indexes. In an important and

influential example, Nordhaus (1997) speculated that, when plausible rates of upward

price index bias are extrapolated backwards for two centuries, the increase in real

wages from 1800 to 1992, which in the official data is by a factor of 13 to 18, might have

been by a factor of 40 with a low estimate of price index bias (0.5 percent per year) or by

a factor of 190 with a higher estimate of bias (1.4 percent per year).

       Nordhausʹ conference discussant, Charles Hulten, pointed out the implausibility

of this thought experiment; the high bias estimate implies (in my own numerical

example that makes Hultenʹs point with different numbers than his) that median
                                                                                             Apparel Prices, Page 4



household income in the year 1800 was $143 in 1992 prices, or $0.39 per day, enough to

buy a mere 1.3 pounds of potatoes per day for the household, with nothing left over for

shelter, clothing, or anything else.4

         But why stop there? The ʺHulten paradoxʺ should be renamed the ʺBruegel

paradox,ʺ after the landmark painter Pieter Bruegel the elder (1525-1569). Even if we

assume that the then-unavailable official estimates would register no increase in the real

wage from 1569 to 1800, when we extrapolate Nordhausʹ high bias estimate back to the

last year of Bruegelʹs life, we find the implication that the real wage should have

increased from 1569 to 1992 by a factor of 5482, making median annual household

income in the earlier year equal to $5.59, enough to buy exactly 0.8 ounces of potatoes

per day, with nothing left over for food or shelter.5 Yet the happy burghers in Bruegel

paintings often look overfed, content, well-clothed, and with solid-looking houses in the

background.




   4. 1992 current-dollar median household income was $30,786 and the 1992 price of a pound of white potatoes
was $0.31. Statistical Abstract of the United States, 1994, Tables 707 and 763, respectively. Extrapolating
backwards a growth rate of real wages of 2.8 percent per year yields a ratio of real wages in 1992 divided by the year
1800 of 216. ($30,786/216 = $142.50)

    5. The factor of 5482 equals the factor of 216 implied by the high-bias estimate (a bias of 1.4 percent per year
added to the official growth rate of real wages of 1.4 percent per year), multiplied by an additional factor of 25.3 to
take account of a 1.4 percent bias in the 231 years from 1569 to 1800.
                                                                        Apparel Prices, Page 5



The Application to Apparel

       In setting a research agenda to look for the possibility of negative CPI bias, one

looks first to the three traditional consumer necessities, food, apparel, and shelter;

these are the ʺbig threeʺ items of consumer expenditure and have a sufficient weight to

ʺmatterʺ in arriving at an eventual resolution of the Hulten/Bruegel paradox. While

there might be some long-term bias in the CPI for food, I have sidelined that category to

the back burner for lack of an obvious data source that would incorporate

developments over time in the increased degree of processing of food (canned food,

frozen food, delis in the supermarket, etc.) Instead, the research payoff looks more

promising for the remaining two necessities, apparel and shelter, for two reasons. First,

there is prima-facie evidence, reviewed below for apparel (and equally true for

structures) that raw (non-quality-adjusted) price data for a given type of apparel sold in

mail-order catalogs increase far more over the 1914-93 period than the CPI. Second,

apparel is one of the three main areas where critics have suggested that the CPI may

incorporate a downward bias (the others being housing and autos, see Wynne and

Sigalla 1994, pp. 10-11).

       Among the reasons suggested for the downward bias in apparel is the strong

seasonal pattern in clothing styles and prices, leading to possible inaccuracy in linking

prices for old styles sold at low close-out prices with new styles sold at high initial
                                                                       Apparel Prices, Page 6



prices. In suggesting that ʺstyleʺ goods are a souce of the bias problem, Wynne-Sigalla

cite the difference between the 1967-87 CPI inflation rate of 6.0 percent for ʺinfantsʹ and

ʺtoddlersʹʺ apparel with those for mensʹ and boysʹ apparel (3.4 percent) and womensʹ

and girlsʹ apparel (2.9 percent). A much more comprehensive study of “style” and

“fashion” goods is provided by Pashigian and co-authors (1988, 1991, 1995) and

indicates that seasonal fluctuations in the prices of womens’ apparel are greater than for

mens’ apparel, and that prices of womens’ apparel start high because of uncertainty by

retailers about what styles will be popular and prices later decline as “sales” are

necessary to clear out inventories of unpopular merchandise. Without extreme care in

linking old styles last year to new styles this year, any price index based on linking is

subject to possibly major errors.


Plan of the Paper

       Our review of the evidence begins with comparisons over the long 1914-93

period between changes in the CPI and in raw price changes for selected items from the

Sears catalog; the much faster increase in the Sears prices could be reconciled by a rapid

quality change, by an atypical rate of Sears increase relative to economywide apparel

prices, or by a downward bias in the CPI. To address the representativeness of Sears

catalog prices, we then turn to a consideration of advantages and disadvantages of the
                                                                      Apparel Prices, Page 7



catalog as a data source.

       The rest of the paper develops the matched-model (MM) for numerous apparel

product categories and the hedonic index for womensʹ dresses. The MM indexes are

based on more than 10,000 data observations, and the hedonic index on roughly 6,500

observations. The discussion of the MM indexes and a comparison with the CPI is

followed by a detailed presentation of the hedonic results. The case for a downward

bias in the CPI rests primarily on the hedonic regression study of womensʹ dresses,

which exhibits a much faster rate of price increase than either the Sears MM index for

womens’ dresses or the CPI for womensʹ dresses. The negligible rate of quality

improvement for womensʹ dresses is extrapolated to other types of apparel to reach the

general conclusion of downward bias in the CPI not just for womensʹ dresses but for all

apparel.


II. Further Motivation for a Study of Apparel Prices

       Between 1914 and 1993 the CPI implies that apparel prices on average rose by a

factor of 7.6 (an average annual growth rate of 2.6 percent per annum). However, a

quick glance at any Sears catalog in the era prior to World War I reveals prices that

seem much too low relative to 1993 to be consistent with the CPI. In 1914 cotton percale

house dresses, trimmed with braid and ruffles, could be purchased fo $0.98 and a taffeta
                                                                                       Apparel Prices, Page 8



silk jacket for $6.75. Menʹs all-wool pants were $1.35, an all-wool suit was $4.50, and an

all-wool overcoat was $7.00.

        The impression that the catalog prices have increased far more than the

1993/1914 price ratio of 7.6 for the CPI can be quantified. Taking the median dresses

(ranked from most to least expensive) sold by Sears in 1993 and the median sold in

1914, the 1993/1914 price ratio is 32.7. For the two most expensive dresses in each year

the ratio is 27.4, while for the two least expensive dresses the ratio is 59.5. It might seem

easy to dismiss this discrepancy between the CPI increase and the median increase in

catalog dress prices by arguing that quality has increased commensurately, but in fact

an inspection of the photos and specifications in the catalogs suggests that, if anything,

quality was higher in the earlier era, with higher quality fabrics (silk, cashmere) and

more decorative elements (ruffles, braids, etc.).

        Experts at the BLS have long suspected that the CPI for apparel, at least prior to

1988, might incorporate a downward bias.6 Both the CPI and Sears MM indexes may

understate the true rate of quality-adjusted price increase. If our hedonic regression

results consistently display a faster rate of price increase than the MM indexes from the

same catalog data, then this would support the view based on the raw (quality-



   6. Further discussion of possible bias in the CPI for apparel is contained in Armknecht and Weyback (1989) and
Liegey (1993). Recent experiments with hedonic price indexes for apparel are described in Liegey (1994).
                                                                       Apparel Prices, Page 9



unadjusted) comparisons cited above that the CPI may understate secular inflation in

apparel prices, thus helping to explain the Hulten/Bruegel paradox.


Other Aspects of this Research

       Part of the goal of this research is to determine if for important product groups

like apparel and shelter that there is any case to be made for a downward bias in the

CPI over any significant period of time. Another goal is simpler and more direct, to

create a complementary study of price changes to that of Rees (1961), who carried out

detailed studies of apparel prices from catalogs as well as for other products (e.g.,

shelter prices from newspaper advertisements). Rees covered the period 1890-1914, that

is, the years between the establishment of the WPI and of the CPI. The coverage in this

paper of apparel prices for the period after 1914 complements the study by Rees and

sheds new light on his results, since his study was based entirely on matched-model

methodology and did not make any use of hedonic regression techniques.

       The research in this paper is based on much more evidence on MM indexes than

on hedonic indexes. MM indexes have been created for most types of apparel covered

by the CPI over the entire period 1914-93. Our hedonic study is of necessity limited to

womensʹ dresses, because of inadequate sample sizes for other types of apparel.
                                                                        Apparel Prices, Page 10



Advantages and Disadvantages of Catalog Price Data

       In my past work on price measurement (Gordon, 1990), an important

preliminary step has been to discuss advantages and disadvantages of using mail-order

catalogs as a supplementary source of price index numbers to be compared with official

price indexes like the CPI. This comparison of advantages and disadvantages needs to

be put in perspective by two sets of factors. First, for many durable goods examined in

my book (Gordon, 1990), price indexes based on Consumer Reports were so clearly

superior in the extent of industry coverage and attention to the collection of true

transaction prices that, whenever available, Consumer Reports indexes were used in

preference to catalog indexes. For this study of apparel, the first consideration is

irrelevant, since Consumer Reports has never compiled ratings, quality evaluations, or

prices of apparel. Second, the emphasis in this paper is more on differences in

methodology to extract alternative matched model vs. hedonic indexes from the same

data than it is on differences in implied price changes between catalog indexes and the

official CPI. Thus differences in the validity of catalogs vs. the official CPI are less

important. Nevertheless, it is worthwhile to review the advantages and disadvantages

of catalog data, especially for this study of apparel that goes back to 1914.
                                                                                          Apparel Prices, Page 11



Advantages of Catalog Price Data

         Among the most important advantages of catalog price indexes are the

following:

         1. Most important, specifications and illustrations published in catalogs allow

closer control for changes in quality than in the official price indexes. The continuity of

item codes from one catalog to the next is often helpful in following a particular item,

and there is usually a long list of specifications that can be checked to insure that the

models being compared are absolutely identical. In the CPI exact specifications are not

available and accessible over any kind of long historical period. The consistency of

specification listings in catalogs also makes them preferable to newspaper

advertisements as a data source.

         2. The matched-model methodology used to compare catalog items over time

insures that price comparisons are included only for items that are absolutely identical

in every dimension reported in the catalog specification. In contrast, since 1978 the CPI

has not been based on published specifications, and even before 1978 — the time

period most relevant for this study — the CPI made direct comparisons between

nonidentical goods if both fell within the same specification description.7


    7. This statement about the CPI comes from Rees (1961b), who states "the BLS makes direct comparisons
between nonidentical goods if both fall within the same specification." Triplett (1971, p. 186, Table 6.1) quotes a
study showing that for nonfood items in the CPI in April, 1966, more than half of all product substitutions were
                                                                                      Apparel Prices, Page 12



        3. Related to the first two advantages is the fact that catalog price indexes can in

principle be replicated by anyone with access to a library containing historical catalog

volumes. In contrast, there is no way that CPI indexes at either the lower or upper level

can be replicated by anyone except BLS employees. As a practical matter, for historical

periods several decades in the past, original source data for the CPI may not be

available at all.

        4. The selection of products and individual models sold in catalogs responds

automatically to the needs of the marketplace. It has always been true that ʺspace to

items always having been allotted on the basis of salesʺ (Hendrickson 1979, p. 249).

This gives catalog price indexes two inherent advantages over the CPI, especially prior

to the introduction of the current CPI sampling framework in 1978. First, for products

sold in a large number of models or varieties, ʺit seems reasonable to assume that the

number of different detailed varieties in the catalog will be greatest where the volume

of sales is greatest, so that we probably weight the major varieties of an item in rough

proportion to their importanceʺ (Ress, 1961b, p. 141). There is no such assurance that

product indexes are sales weighted across models within a product cateogry in the CPI,

at least prior to 1978.



handled by direct comparison of prices of the old and new model, and well under one percent were handled by an
"explicit size or quality adjustment."
                                                                                            Apparel Prices, Page 13



         Also, products tend to be introduced into the catalogs soon after they become

marketable, in contrast to the CPI which often has introduced new products many years

after they become commercially important. This factor, which is crucial for durable

goods like room air conditioners (introduced into the Sears catalog in 1952 but not in the

CPI until 1964), is presumably less important for apparel. Prior to 1978 the CPI adhered

to fixed specifications over a long period of time, which could lead to a disproportionate

weight for obsolete items.8

         5. Prices printed in the catalogs are actual transaction prices. If retail and

wholesale outlets that compete with catalog firms price items at varying discounts,

catalog houses must adjust their published prices to remain competitive (occasionally in

the past few decades speciality catalogs for particular products advertising sale prices

would be mailed between the issuance of the bi-annual catalogs — since these interim

sale catalogs are not collected by libraries, we cannot use them in this research).

         6. Since postage and shipping costs, credit charges, and taxes (except for Federal

excise taxes when applicable) are not included in the published catalog prices, the

services provided with each item are held constant. In contrast, the CPI may reflect a


    8. As reported by Rees (1961b, pp. 141-2), " . . . it seems probable to us that the selection of specified-in-detail
items for the CPI is often at too low a quality level for the index population, probably because the index population
moved up to better qualities after the item was specified. In a number of cases were were unable to find any variety
of an item in the catalogs . . . whose quality was as low as that specified by the BLS." Rees further reports (p. 142)
that rigid adherence to BLS specifications would require excluding a large fraction of the observations that can be
collected from the catalogs, in one case reducing the sample by a factor of ten.
                                                                      Apparel Prices, Page 14



changing mix of services (e.g., some full-service department stores eliminated free

delivery in the 1970s under pressure from discount-store competition). CPI and catalog

indexes can differ due to the inclusion in the CPI of state and local sales taxes.


Disadvantages of Catalog Price Data

       The case against catalog price indexes takes two forms. First, there are clear

disadvantages of relying on catalogs. Second, criticisms can be offered of the

advantages listed above.

       1. The most serious problem in the use of catalog prices is the possibility of a

systematic difference in the secular growth rates of the same product sold by catalog

and non-catalog outlets, due, for instance, to differential growth in the efficiency of

catalog operations or changes in pricing policies. Regarding efficiency, for any

comparison with the CPI catalog prices include payment for warehouse and

distribution sevices and would have a slower secular rate of increase than prices of

retail competitors if the growth of efficiency in the provision of these services by catalog

houses had been relatively rapid compared to the services provided by retail stores. It

is hard to believe that such a bias could be important, since innovations in warehouse

technology are likely to have been adopted by non-catalog competitors, and indeed

Wal-Mart has outpaced Sears in warehouse and distribution efficiency over the past
                                                                       Apparel Prices, Page 15



several decades.

       In fact it seems to be the catalog merchants who were more efficient than

standard retailers in the early decades of the twentieth century and less efficient in the

later decades. Model-by-model price comparisons for consumer appliances in my book

(Gordon, 1990, pp. 422-23) between the Sears catalog and Consumer Reports indicated

that the catalog models tended to be at the lower end of the price range in the early

postwar period but drifted toward the middle of the price range over time. Such

behavior is consistent with a change in pricing strategy by Sears in the late 1960s and

early 1970s (ʺweʹre selling last yearʹs goods at next yearʹs pricesʺ). This evidence, if

applicable to apparel as well as to consumer appliances, would predict that Sears

catalog price indexes for apparel would drift upwards relative to the ʺtrueʺ universe of

prices that should be compared with the CPI. Any difference between the

representativeness of the Sears data and the CPI is, of course, not relevant to our

comparison of MM and hedonic indexes for womensʹ dresses, which is based on an

identical data base from the Sears catalog.

       Another criticism of the preceding section on advantages of catalog price indexes

concerns reproducability, where we need to distinguish two issues. First, an

unambiguous advantage of a catalog pirce index is that in principle it can reproduced by

anyone with access to the same cataloguies. Second, we would not claim that any such
                                                                      Apparel Prices, Page 16



reproduction would necessarily yield an identical index, because subjective decisions

must inevitably be made in situations where models change without an overlap period,

or when only a subset of available information is used in order to economize on

research time. The methods used to develop the catalog indexes were, however,

designed to minimize subjective decisions, since the actual data collection was carried

out by a succession of research assistants.


Weighing the Advantages and Disadvantages

       In the goal of finding alternative sources of price data to compare with official

price indexes, particularly for earlier decades when the official methodology was not as

refined as it is today, catalog price indexes are no panacea. Even if catalog prices are

fully corrected for quality change, they may not accurately reflect the unobserved true

quality-corrected price index for all suppliers, because of differences between catalog

firms and all firms in the gorwth of efficiency or in the evolution of pricing policies. In

comparisons of catalog prices with the CPI for apparel, there is the problem that the

selection of models or types of apparel sold through catalogs may be different from

those sold by other outlets, e.g., if catalogs typically sell more items which are small or

lightweight in order to minimize shipping costs. We might also expect that the product

mix sold in catalogs would be more heavily wegihted to standard utilitarian items and
                                                                     Apparel Prices, Page 17



less heavily to fashion goods. This difference could make the catalog indexes behave

differently than the closest comparable CPI strata indexes, although there is no

presumption for the direction of the drift.

       Further, catalog prices may not adequately control for all types of quality change.

Some changes may be introduced without being explicitly acknoweldged in the printed

catalog descriptions. Indeed, catalog indexes based on the matched-model method are

as vulnerable as the CPI to deleting price change that occurs when new models are

introduced. Matched model indexes based on catalog prices or in the CPI may be

biassed downward if the timing of price increases typically coincides with the

introduction of new models (in the apparel case) or biassed upward if improvements in

performance-price ratios coincide with the introduction of new models (as for

computers and other electronic goods).



III. The Methodology of The Matched-Model Research

       A close analogue to this study is the catalog price index for 36 clothing items

developed by Rees (1961a) for the period 1890-1914. Rees’s study differs from the

approach taken here, not only that he was comparing with the WPI since the CPI did

not yet exist, but also in that he did not attempt to match catalog price indexes with WPI

indexes on an item-by-item basis, but rather used catalog prices and expenditure survey
                                                                       Apparel Prices, Page 18



weights to construct a completely new index that might be compared with the overall

WPI for clothing and for home furnishings. Because Rees made no attempt to compare

identical items, his index might differ from the WPI due to a different selection of items

and the earlier introduction of new items. In contrast, the drift in the catalog/CPI ratios

recorded in this paper relates to identical items within the limits of feasibility in

matching catalog products with CPI strata indexes for apparel.

       For any given investment of research resources, there is a trade-off between the

number of different catalogs consulted for a given product and the numer of separate

products that can be included. An initial decision (in Gordon, 1990, and carried over to

this paper) was made to limit this study only to Sears, the largest catalog house, and

thus to allow time to copy data for additional varieties and products. This procedure is

supported by Rees’ conclusion (1961b) that the Sears and Wards catalogs gave similar

results in his research. Sears’ catalog sales in the 1970’s were triple Wards’ and equal to

Wards’ sales and the sales of the next three catalogs combined. To allow time to copy

prices for more products, prices were copied only from one catalog per year (spring-

summer), even though two catalogs were published annually. This decision has the

disadvantage that the resulting indexes may understate the degree of short-run

flexibility in the catalog prices.
                                                                     Apparel Prices, Page 19



Timing

       Since the primary purpose of this study is a comparison of the catalog prices

with CPI indexes for the same apparel products and time periods, a decision was

required on the choice of time periods for that comparison. The catalog data in this

study were collected from the Chicago-area edition of the Sears, Roebuck spring-

summer general catalog. According to a Sears official, however, prices are set long in

advance of catalog distribution. Since the spring-summer catalog went to press in

October of the previous year, and final price decisions were made in October, the most

closely comparable CPI indexes would be those for October of the year previous to the

date printed on the catalog. However, another interpretation is that the correct BLS

index is that of the following spring, contemporaneous with the period during which

the catalog prices are in effect, because aspects of Sears’ pricing strategy were forward

looking. For instance, in some past periods, Sears purchased futures in goods like

cotton and rubber to cover anticipated sales in the following six months. They also

owned parts of corporations supplying them with products and arranged to buy

forward at a price established for conditions of the following six months.

       While in some early stages of the research on the 1990 book, BLS prices in year

t-1 were compared with prices in the spring-summer catalog for year t , in the end, both

were compared in year t. It might have been preferable to use monthly BLS indexes for,
                                                                    Apparel Prices, Page 20



say, September or October of the year prior to the date on the catalog, but monthly data

for BLS commodity indexes were not as complete as for annual data. This choice to

adopt contemporaneous pricing is made partly because it is probably more accurate

and also to simplify the presentation of the results. Slight inaccuracies may be

introduced on the timing of major cyclical movements in prices, such as those in the

Great Depression, but there is unlikely to be any effect on the measured rate of change

of the Sears/CPI ratios over periods of a decade or more.



IV. Matched-Model Catalog Indexes for Apparel, 1914-93

          Which products are chosen for study? For the apparel matched-model (MM)

indexes the approach is straightforward. Historical CPI strata indexes are available for

broad groupings, e.g., “women’s separates and sportswear.” We turned to the Sears

catalog and selected virtually every category of apparel that corresponded to each CPI

stratum description. Table 1 lists the 39 separate apparel categories for which Sears

catalog matched-model indexes were constructed, the average number of annual price

comparisons carried out for each category, and the CPI strata with which groups of

categories were compared. The table is divided into three sections, corresponding to

the three intervals of the 1914-93 period for which research was carried out at separate

stages.
                                                                    Apparel Prices, Page 21



Method of Comparison

      Price comparisons for each pair of years are facilitated by Sears’ policy of

carrying several models in each product category. Changes in specifications usually

affect only a subset of models in any one year, so for almost every product at least a few

identical models are available for a price comparison between a pair of years. Because

model changes occur at irregular intervals, the number of price comparisons of identical

models for any given product may be on the order of seven for a series of years and

then collapse to two or three in a year of substantial model changes. Price changes for

models that are discontinued, newly introduced, or subject to quality change are

imputed to the price changes of models that remain completely unchanged in a given

comparison of prices in years t and t-1. In the subsequent comparison of prices in t+1

and t+2, a different set of models is covered, perhaps including one or more models

newly introduced in year t+1 and excluded in the previous comparison of t with t+1.

      Thus each pair of years is treated separately and the list of models is allowed to

change annually. This approach allows much more frequent model changes than in the

CPI as it was constructed prior to 1978, when CPI field agents were required to find

prices for models according to a detailed description that might well have become

obsolete. Extra models can be included that appear and disappear between major CPI

revisions. Ideally, this approach should lead to the inclusion of more models per
                                                                       Apparel Prices, Page 22



product than in the CPI.

       The matched model indexes were developed by comparing all identical models

in every pair of adjacent years. For a comparison to be made, the adjacent-year

observations had to have the same serial number (subject to qualifications below), the

photo or drawing depicting the model must have been identical, and the description of

the model must have been identical. Identical catalog numbers do not always ensure

that two models are identical, just as dissimilar catalog numbers do not necessarily

signify differences between models. Therefore the determining criterion for the direct

comparison of models relied heavily on the match of product descriptions.

Nevertheless, the model numbers are very useful for quickly spotting models that are

likely to be identical or for spotting changes in characteristics in the set of models

available for two adjacent years.

       Figure 1 presents a schematic diagram of the method of matching models for the

important example of womensʹ dresses. This method was carried out not only for

womensʹ dresses but for all apparel types in developing all the indexes reported in

Tables 2 through 7 of the paper. The criteria for matching are very tight and the

resulting MM price indexes are surely representative of apparel ʺmodelsʺ that have

almost exactly the same quality. The defect of the MM method is that these tight criteria

often exclude models which change in minor ways but for which prices increase much
                                                                     Apparel Prices, Page 23



more than for the models that are matched. The irony of the MM method is that it can

control completely for changes in quality without providing an accurate measure of

changes in price, a phenomenon that only becomes evident when comparing the MM

indexes with hedonic indexes for the same products.

       The lowest-level observation for the catalog matched-model price indexes is the

log change in price between two adjacent years for a given model that has been

determined by the above process to have remained identical across the two years. Then

these price changes are aggregated. Log price changes (e.g., for an identical dress in

two adjacent years) are aggregated into log product price changes for a product

category (e.g., ʺwomensʹ dressesʺ) by applying an equal weight to each model in any

given pair of adjacent years. The absence of model-by-model sales data necessitates the

use of equal weights for each model of a given product. Some response to market sales

is incorporated to the extent that the mix of models that Sears carries for a given

product responds to the relative volume of sales.

       Product price changes are aggregated into subgroup price indexes, where the

subgroup refers to the lowest level of aggregation available in the CPI. Equal weights

are applied to each product in forming subgroup price indexes. Then subgroup price

indexes are aggregated into groups and totals, using the apprropriate CPI weights for

each subgroup. The indexes created in this paper have the advantage that they are
                                                                     Apparel Prices, Page 24



open to public inspection and can be reproduced by anyone with access to a library that

holds back issues of the Sears catalog. As stated above, the catalog indexes are subject

to the same problem as any MM index, including those compiled by BLS. Any price

change that occurs upon the introduction of a new model is deleted. If manufacturers

typically postpone price increases during the life of a model for the occasion of a new

model introduction, then deletion causes the exclusion of major price changes and leads

to a downward secular bias in price indexes. If, on the other hand, quality

improvements in new models tend to be introduced with no change in price, the

deletion technique causes the exclusion of reductions in “true price” and leads to an

upward secular bias. We learn subsequently in the comparisons of the hedonic and

MM indexes for womensʹ dresses that the former phenomenon dominates and causes a

significant downward bias. As we will point out below in discussing the hedonic index

for womensʹ dresses, a striking aspect of the MM indexes is that they are based on so few

observations. In contrast, for many pairs of years the hedonic sample size is more than

300, or more than 150 observations per year for just a single product. This reflects the

tightness of the matching criterion used in developing the MM indexes, i.e., how hard it

is to find exactly the same item in the catalogs for two successive years.

       The new MM price indexes for apparel cover 39 types of womensʹ, mensʹ, girls’

and boys’ apparel over part or all of the period 1914-93, covering the years from the
                                                                      Apparel Prices, Page 25



beginning of the CPI in 1914 to the date when Sears discontinued publication of its

general catalog in 1993. Details on the types of apparel are shown separately for 1914-

47, 1947-65, and 1965-93 in Tables 1A, 1B, and 1C. The sum of matched-model

comparisons in these tables is 10,385, an average of 52 per year during 1914-47 (for a

total of 1,719), an average of 146 per year during 1947-65 (for a total of 4,432), and 151

per year during 1965-93 (for a total of 4,234).


Matched-Model Results, 1914-47

       For the 1914-47 period the matched-model indexes cover 37 types of womensʹ

and mensʹ apparel, as shown in Table 1A. There are an average of 1.5 model

comparisons each year for each of the 37 product groups. Separate catalog price

indexes and comparisons with the CPI are displayed in Tables 2 and 3 for womensʹ and

mensʹ apparel; the comparison for each is with the total CPI apparel index before 1935,

since the CPI began to break out separate aggregates for womensʹ and mensʹ apparel

only in that year. Figures 2 and 3 plot the numbers listed in Tables 2 and 3.

       As shown in Table 8, for womensʹ apparel the 1914-47 annual growth rate of the

Sears matched model index is 1.68 percent per year, considerably slower than the CPI

increase of 2.87 percent per year, implying growth rate of the Sears/CPI ratio of -1.19

percent per year. The difference is similar for mensʹ apparel, 1.74 percent per year for
                                                                        Apparel Prices, Page 26



Sears vs. 3.10 percent for the CPI, implying a growth rate of the Sears/CPI ratio of -1.36

percent per year.

         A striking aspect of the results is that much of the decline in the Sears/CPI ratio

occurs during a single pair of years, 1934-35; this is particularly evident in Figure 5,

which plots the Sears/CPI ratios. The most obvious explanation would be a major

mistake in transcribing the Sears prices, so we have double-checked and triple-checked

the 1934-35 comparisons. Here are some sample prices for this pair of years for

particular closing items classified as identical by our matched-model procedure:

                                       1934                  1935

Mensʹ Suits                            13.50                11.95
Mensʹ Union Suits                       0.79                 0.59
Mensʹ work socks                        0.17                 0.12
Mensʹ wool pants                        4.85                 4.45
Mensʹ ʺChieftanʺ overalls               0.88                 0.77
Womensʹ silk slips                      1.98                 1.69
Womensʹ cotton hosiery                  0.33                 0.25
Womensʹ washfast house dresses          0.95                 0.49
Womensʹ rayon glovers                   0.98                 0.59
Womensʹ rayon pajamas                   1.00                 0.59

It is possible that Sears changed its pricing policy relative to the rest of the marketplace

in 1935, but it is also possible that the CPI missed a shift in the availability of discount

outlets during the Great Depression — perhaps an early example of ʺoutlet substitution

bias.ʺ
                                                                      Apparel Prices, Page 27



Matched Model Results, 1947-93

       Tables 2 and 3 provide postwar data on the Sears MM indexes and a comparison

with the CPI for womensʹ and mensʹ apparel, and Tables 4 and 5 cover girlsʹ and boysʹ

apparel. Table 8 provides a summary of growth rates of the Sears and CPI indexes over

the entire 1947-93 period and various subperiods. Several patterns can be picked up

from the results. First, there is a consistent downward drift in the Sears/CPI ratio for

womensʹ apparel in all periods but the last, 1978-93. Second, there is a distinct

turnaround in the drift of the Sears/CPI ratio for mensʹ apparel from negative over 1914-

65 to positive during 1965-93, with a small overall negative drift over the entire period.

Third, there is a consistent tendency for the inflation rate in womenʹs apparel to be a

smaller positive rate or larger negative rate than for mensʹ apparel, and this difference is

more pronounced for the Sears indexes than for the CPI. This finding is consistent with

the view that matched-model indexes ʺlink outʺ more quality change for womensʹ

apparel which are subject to more frequent changes in styles. Averaging together

womensʹ and mensʹ apparel for 1914-93 with girlsʹ and boysʹ apparel for 1978-93, the

Sears indexes increase less than the CPI during 1914-78 and by more during 1978-93,

and the overall drift in the Sears/CPI ratio for the entire period is roughly -1.0 percent

per year. The annual data presented in Tables 2, 3, 6, and 7 are also displayed in

Figures 2-5.
                                                                         Apparel Prices, Page 28



V. Hedonic Price Indexes for Womensʹ Dresses

       This section discusses the application of standard hedonic regression techniques

to apparel. In this study we have chosen to do an intensive investigation of a single

type of apparel, womensʹ dresses, because the available data allows much larger sample

sizes in the regressions than for any other apparel product. The choice of variables is

limited to those provided in the catalogs, which differ from year to year. Womensʹ

dresses are complex products and many of their features are visible only in photos (e.g.,

decorative items, pockets, belts, etc.). Thus the large data set used in this hedonic

regression study was custom-built by several research assistants who examined the

photos as well as the detailed specifications as published in the catalog to assign values

to the quality characteristics entered into the regressions.9

Determination of Explanatory Variables and their Mean Values

       The list of variables is displayed in Table 9. Of these the most important is

weight, which proxies the quality of fabric, amount of fabric, complexity of

construction, presence of linings, etc., and would be expected to have a positive

coefficient. In addition several dummy variables are included to indicate the presence




   9. I am particularly grateful to Jayun Kim for her understanding of the nuances of womens’
dresses and acknowledge that she designed the final form of the hedonic project, including the
choice of the quality characteristics and their description.
                                                                      Apparel Prices, Page 29



or absence of higher-quality ʺorganicʺ fabrics, knit or woven fabrics, and other quality

characteristics which should raise price and thus have a positive coefficient in the

regressions, including the presence of lace, sequins, embroidery, belt, jacket, bow, tie,

zipper, and the need for dry cleaning. There is also a dummy variable for imported

dresses, when they are identified as such in the catalog, and no presumption whether

the coefficient should be positive or negative.

       The hedonic regression study for womensʹ dresses is carried out for 60 of the 79

possible pairs of adjacent years between 1914 and 1993. The exceptions are the years of

rapid inflation during World War I and its aftermath (1915-1920 are excluded), the years

of World War II price controls (1942-45 are excluded), and the years when the catalog

for unknown reasons temporarily suspended publication of weight data for each item

(1929-33). For a subset of fifteen of the included years Table 10 displays the number of

observations in that particular year, the average weight, and the percentage of dresses

having the various quality attributes designated by the zero, one dummy variables.

       The sample sizes for the hedonic study of womensʹ dresses are much larger than

the sample on which the matched model indexes for dresses is based (only 0.9 matches

during 1914-47 and only 3.3 matches during 1965-93). The number of observations

shown in Table 9 are as high as 183 per year for 1936 and as low as 42 per year for 1980.

The number of observations diminishes markedly after 1988, and for this reason the
                                                                    Apparel Prices, Page 30



hedonic study terminates in 1988 rather than 1993.

      Table 10 exhibits the mean values of price and weight through 1993 and of the

other explanatory variables through 1988. The mean price jumps around from year to

year but on average in 1993 was 13.3 times the average in 1914 ($63.52 versus $4.75).

Recall above that the ratio for the median price was 32.7, indicating that the mean of the

1914 distribution was skewed upward by relatively expensive dresses. The mean value

of weight was by coincidence almost exactly the same in 1914 and 1993 at about 1.5

pounds, but there were “long waves” in the behavior of the mean weight. During the

entire 1928-48 period, weight was at 3.0 pounds or higher, and weight fell to as low as

0.9 pounds in 1983-84. A ten-year moving average of the mean weight from the hedonic

sample is displayed in Figure 6. To the extent that weight is the most important

explanatory variable and contributes positively to quality, then there was no net change

in quality between 1914 and 1993, and substantial fluctuations in quality in the

intervening years.

      For the other quality variables as summarized in Table 10, a surprise is the lack

of consistent trends. In the early years (1914-30) Sears sold numerous elaborate dresses

made of silk and/or velvet, and this shows up in the relatively high value of the

“Organic” variable in Table 10. Similarly, through 1940 there were relatively large

values for the “LSE” (lace, sequins, embroidery) variable. The mix of dresses then shifts
                                                                      Apparel Prices, Page 31



in the postwar period to a very large fraction of knit and/or woven (KWV). A peculiar

aspect of Table 9 is that the “DRY” (dry-cleaning) variable was at a high value between

the late 1940s and mid 1970s and then dropped off to almost nothing. This could

indicate a change in the catalog policy of explicitly listing the need for dry cleaning.

Hedonic Regression Results

       There is always a tradeoff between two extremes in running hedonic price

regressions on a long time-series of data. One extreme would be to run separate

regressions on every pair of years. This has the advantage of allowing the regression

coefficients on characteristics like weight to shift as market and production conditions

change, and the disadvantage that it minimizes sample size. The opposite extreme

would be to run a single regression on all the data for all the years. This has the

advantage of maximizing sample size and the disadvantage that it forces coefficients on

characteristics to remain the same over a sample period of 79 years.

       In the case of apparel, there is the additional consideration that fabrics changed

over time — silk disappeared and synthetics appeared, and so an approach that allowed

for changing coefficients seemed essential. There were sufficient data to base the

estimated coefficients on each successive pair of years, an abundance of data that

allowed us to escape the many compromises required in a previous study of mainframe

computers (Gordon, 1989, 1990). Looking at the regression coefficients as displayed in
                                                                     Apparel Prices, Page 32



Table 11, those on weight are almost always highly significant, with an average

estimated elasticity of 0.71. The weight , with much higher estimated elasticities in the

1928-48 period (1.0 or above) and lower at the beginning and end. Several of the other

quality variables are highly significant with the expected positive coefficient and a

plausible magnitude of coefficients, particularly the “organic fabric” variable, as well as

the “LSE” (lace-sequins-embroidery) and “DRY” (dry cleaning) variables.

       The implied hedonic price index for womensʹ dresses is compared with the CPI

for womens’ dresses and the Sears MM index for womens’ dresses. These are displayed

in Table 12 and in Figures 7 and 8, along with the median price and the implicit hedonic

quality index (i.e., median price divided by the hedonic price index). Table 13

summarizes the growth rates of these five indexes for womensʹ dresses over key

intervals. Except for the negligible difference during 1914-47, the huge positive

differences between the annual growth rates of the hedonic and MM indexes for

womens’ dresses from absolutely the same data set are remarkable. The introduction of

this paper provided a context for the “Hulten-Bruegel” paradox based on long-term

annual rates of bias of 0.5 or 1.5 percent. Here we have a long-term difference in the

Sears hedonic vs. MM index of 2.90 percent per year.

       An important aspect of these results is that the Sears/MM difference in growth

rates is so much larger in the postwar era than between 1914 and 1947. While this is a
                                                                      Apparel Prices, Page 33



puzzle, it may be related to the very different quality of dresses sold by Sears in the

early part of the sample period, silk and velvet during 1914-30 compared to pedestrian

working-class dresses in the later parts of the sample, e.g., 1975-93. A paradox that is

not resolved by this paper is that the hedonic/MM difference increases in annual growth

rates in the later years of the postwar just when Sears is becoming more “pedestrian”

and “less fashionable.”

A Closer Look at Particular Pairs of Years

       Are any generalizations possible about the periods when the Sears hedonic price

increased so much more than the Sears MM index? To answer this question a closer

look was taken at three pairs of adjacent years with the greatest difference in growth

rates between the two price indexes; as shown in the first three columns of Table 14,

these were 1972-73, 1978-79, and 1982-83. The fourth column looks at the five-year

interval (1978-83) that had the greatest discrepancy. For contrast three other pairs of

years were chosen with only negligible differences between the growth rates of the two

indexes; these pairs (1960-61, 1966-67, and 1977-78) are displayed in the three right-hand

columns of Table 14.

       The first three lines of Table 14 records the annual growth rates of the two price

indexes in each pair of years. The greatest difference was in 1982-83, with a 30 percent

increase in the hedonic index versus zero for the MM index. The next greatest
                                                                      Apparel Prices, Page 34



difference was in 1978-79, with respective increases of 27.2 and 4.5 percent. We note

from Table 11 that the hedonic regressions for 1978-79 and 1982-83 were based on 116

and 170 observations, respectively, whereas the MM indexes are based on only four

observations in each year-pair. Even this small number of comparisons overstates the

representativeness of the MM index, since in 1978-79 the “two” models in each year are

actually a single dress, with the two models differing only as to whether they are

available in half-sizes (with a slightly higher price).

       The remaining lines of Table 4 stratify the dresses in the hedonic sample in each

year by weight. The top section shows raw price change in each weight quartile in each

pair of years; this number was obtained by regressing the price on a constant and a

dummy variable for the second year in each pair. The second section shows the

coefficient on a time dummy in hedonic regressions run separately for each weight

quartile. Because the sample sizes were smaller by a factor of four, degrees of freedom

were economized by deleting any quality variable (among those listed in Table 8) which

was not significant in a particular regression at the 10 percent level. The third section

subtracts the numbers in each cell in the second section (hedonic price change) from the

corresponding cell in the first section (raw price change), resulting in the change in the

implicit hedonic quality index. For instance, in the second column for 1978-79, the raw

price change is 34 percent, the hedonic price change is 29 percent, and the implicit
                                                                        Apparel Prices, Page 35



improvement in quality is 5 percent.

       In the first four columns there is a consistent pattern that the lighter dresses (first

two weight quartiles) exhibit a substantially faster rate of raw price change and hedonic

price change than the two heavier quartiles, especially the heaviest. There was no such

difference across the lower two and higher two weight quartiles in the final three

columns, showing three pairs of adjacent years when the hedonic and MM price

indexes increased by about the same amount. Given the large samples in the hedonic

regressions, this result is consistent with the hypothesis that the MM technique, with its

sample sizes that of necessity are severely truncated, misses large price increases

associated with model changes. Looking at the bottom section of Table 14, there does

not appear to be any significant tendency for lighter dresses to decline in quality

relative to the heavier dresses. In several columns, the change in quality across weight

quartiles has a zig-zag pattern, alternating between positive and negative.

       Several other experiments were run on the data for these pairs of years. Each of

the subset of significant quality variables was interacted with the year dummy to look

for changes in the coefficients of quality characteristics over time. However, none of

these interaction terms was significant at the 10 percent level. The absence of time

interaction effects, and the stability of the subset of coefficients which are significant in

Table 11, attests to the robustness of the hedonic regression results. Another
                                                                     Apparel Prices, Page 36



experiment was to stratify the sample for these years by the DRY variable (0 or 1

depending on the need for dry cleaning), but price changes in this stratification

appeared to differ randomly across the DRY=0 and DRY=1 subsets of the sample. The

last experiment was to identify subsets of dresses with identical quality characteristics

across two adjacent years. This amounts to trying to “mimic” the MM technique within

the subset of variables available for the hedonic regression, without requiring (as does

the MM technique) that the models are absolutely identical. The result is that within

these constant-quality subsets, price increases in adjacent-year pairs were mostly higher

rather than lower than the basic hedonic time coefficient in those same year-pairs.

       As a last step to understand the phenomenon of rapid price increases in the

hedonic regressions for these pairs of years, I visited the pair of microfilm machines

displaying the 1978 and 1979 Sears catalogs (after years of relying on research assistants

to collect the data). I checked the MM models to make sure they were identical, and

they were in both the photo, the available colors, and the specifications:

       “Fabric: polyester-cotton blend. Tuck-stitching at sides, front placket

       opening, pointed colar, should yoke in front, yoke and shirring in back,

       one side-seam pocket, short sleeves, self-tie belt.”

This standard dress in standard sizes increased in price from $11.44 to $11.99, and in

available half sizes increased from $12.44 to $12.99. These price increases calculated in
                                                                     Apparel Prices, Page 37



logs are 4.7 and 4.3 percent, respectively, yielding the 4.5 percent increase in the MM

index shown in Table 14, line 2, for 1978-79.

       Then I looked for 1979 dresses that were “closely comparable” to their 1978

counterparts, and it immediately became apparent why the sample sizes in the MM

indexes are so small. I found a poly-rayon blend “cap-sleeve” one-piece dress in 1978

that in its photo looked just like a cap-sleeve one-piece dress in 1979. But upon closer

inspection of the specifications, they weren’t identical at all. The 1979 dress was poly-

cotton rather than poly-rayon, its weight was 13 oz instead of 9 oz, it had no collar

instead of a pointed collar, and it had one pocket instead of two (the price increased

from $18 to $25). A two-piece dress comparison was more promising, since both the

1978 and 1979 version had a poly-cotton fabric. Both had a pointed collar, placket

opening, and a skirt with a “slightly flared style.” However, the 1978 dress had a zipper

in back while the 1979 style was “pullover,”, the 1979 dress had an elastic waistband

that was not mentioned in 1978, and the 1978 dress had “attached tabs with D-ring

closure” that was not mentioned in 1979. Despite a decline in weight from 15 to 10 oz,

the price went up from $20 to $24. Similarly, a floral print one-piece dress increased in

weight from 6 to 7 oz but increased in price from $19 to $27. Again, they looked similar

in photos but upon closer inspection one had a square neck, the other a “band

neckline,” one had 3/4 length sleeves, the other elbow-length sleeves, and the 1979 skirt
                                                                    Apparel Prices, Page 38



was “three-tiered.”

      Overall, the mind boggles at the difference between price research on womens’

dresses and on the many types of durable goods studied in my previous book (Gordon,

1990). In durable goods quality improves steadily, if not from year to year then from

decade to decade. Engines become more powerful, quieter, and more fuel efficient.

Electric and electronic products become more capable at the same time as they become

smaller. The difference with womens’ dresses could not be more profound. The many

small changes from year to year in womens’ dresses that prevent a researcher from

“matching a model” do not correspond to our standard notions of “quality.” A pocket

is moved from the top to the side, a zipper is replaced by buttons or vice-versa, a square

neck is replaced by a scooped neck. Immersion in the catalogs for a year-pair like 1978-

79 leaves the overwhelming impression that the isolated model that was “matched” was

actually a freak, and that the large sample of dresses with as many as ten dimensions of

quality controlled, make the hedonic regression results greatly superior to the MM

indexes.

      Many types of apparel, from mens’ suits to work clothes to underwear to

childrens’ clothes, exhibit far fewer dimensions of style change than womens’ dresses.

But our overall finding of minimal quality change between 1914-93 should carry over to

these apparel products as well, if there is any communality of production techniques
                                                                     Apparel Prices, Page 39



used across different types of apparel. One may speculate that an index of the raw price

change for the Sears sample of these more homogeneous types of apparel would be

closer to the truth than the corresponding MM indexes displayed in Tables 2 through 7

above.



V. Conclusion

         This paper develops new price indexes for apparel based on data from the Sears

catalog for the entire period 1914-93, beginning in the first year of the CPI and ending in

the last year of the general Sears catalog. The research, which is based on roughly

10,000 exact comparisons for the matched model(MM) index and another 6500

observations on the prices and quality characteristics of womensʹ dresses, leads to

several conclusions and numerous questions for further research.

         The Sears matched-model indexes do not exhibit a consistent negative or positive

drift relative to the CPI. For womensʹ apparel the drift is always negative but for mensʹ

apparel there is a turnaround, from negative before 1965 to positive thereafter. Both the

matched-model indexes and the CPI rise less rapidly for womensʹ apparel than for

mensʹ apparel, which would be consistent with the hypothesis that price changes

accompanying model changes are more frequent for womensʹ apparel, since models

change more frequently.
                                                                      Apparel Prices, Page 40



       The hedonic price index for womensʹ dresses increases much faster than the

matched-model index from the same data over the entire postwar period, although not

in the earlier 1914-47 period. Likewise, the hedonic index also increases faster than the

CPI over the entire postwar period but also not during 1914-47 (when the CPI-hedonic

difference is a relatively minor 0.65 percent per year). To the extent that the Sears

hedonic and matched model indexes are based on the same data, so that systematic

differences between catalog market shares and pricing policies are not relevant, the

results provided here offer a nice complement to past research on computer prices,

which also found that price changes were contemporaneous with model changes. Just

as hedonic price indexes for computers almost always drop faster than matched-model

indexes for computers, we have found the opposite relationship for apparel prices,

presumably for the same reason.

       Despite the large amount of data examined in this paper, it leaves open the

answer to the basic question that motivated the research – what is the overall bias in the

CPI for apparel from 1914 to 1993? One answer is a downward bias of 1.28 percent per

year, the difference between the CPI and hedonic indexes for womens’ dresses over the

1914-88 period for which the hedonic index was compiled. As shown in Table 13, the

figure of 1.28 is misleading, since the difference was actually in the opposite direction

before 1947, and the 1947-88 difference implies a much higher downward bias of -2.83
                                                                      Apparel Prices, Page 41



percent per year for that period.

       In extrapolating this difference from womens’ dresses sold by Sears to all apparel

sold by all retail outlets, two factors suggest scaling down the -2.83 difference for the

postwar period to a smaller number, say -1.5 percent. First, as discussed above the

market position changed over the years from the lowest-priced vendor to somewhere in

the middle. The fact that the catalog was eventually shut down in 1993 suggests the

growing importance of lower-priced merchants like Target and Wal-Mart. Second, the

underlying diagnosis of the MM-hedonic price difference as being due to frequent style

changes would apply less to mens’ and childrens’ apparel than to womens’ dresses,

suggesting the the CPI may have done a better job in these other categories. However,

the annual rate of increase in the CPI for mens’ apparel over the 1947-93 period was

only 0.57 percent per year faster than that for womens’ apparel, indicating that the

style-fashion source of bias for womens’ vs. mens’ apparel is only a fraction of the

overall difference between the CPI for womens’ dresses and Sears hedonic for womens’

dresses established in this paper. Our final conclusion that the downward bias in the

CPI for the postwar period, at least through 1988, is roughly in the range of -1.5 to -2.0

percent, with no evidence of bias in the 1914-47 period.

       The implications of this paper go beyond the limited empirical application of

Sears catalog data for womens’ dresses. Perhaps the most important conclusion of this
                                                                      Apparel Prices, Page 42



paper is one that economizes enormously on future research resources. Quality change

in womens’ dresses over the full 1914-93 period was negligible. If this can be extended

to other types of apparel, this creates an radical breakthrough for historical research.

However sophisticated the modern CPI in measuring price changes for apparel in the

21st century, significant information may be contained in raw price changes of

individual apparel products for most of the 20th century.
                                                                      Apparel Prices, Page 43




                                    REFERENCES


ARMKNECHT, PAUL A., AND WEYBACK, DONALD (1989). ʺAdjust6ments for Quality
     Change in the U. S. Consumer Price Index,ʺ Journal of Official Statistics, vol. 5, no.
     2, pp. 107-23.

BERNDT, ERNST R., GRILICHES, ZVI, AND RAPPAPORT, NEAL (1995). ʺEconometric
     Estimates of Price Indexes for Personal Computers in the 1990s, NBER Working
     Paper 4549, August.

BERNDT, ERNST R. AND RAPPAPORT, NEAL (2003). ʺHedonics for Personal Computers: A
     Reexamination of Selected Econometric Issues,ʺ MIT Sloan School draft
     manuscript, August.

DOMS, MARK, AIZCORBE, ANA, AND CORRADO, CAROL (2003). ʺWhen do Matched-Model
      and Hedonic Techniques Yield Similar Measures?ʺ Federal Reserve Bank of San
      Francisco, Working Papers in Applied Economic Theory 2003-14.

GORDON, ROBERT J. (1989). ʺThe Postwar Evolution of Computer Prices,ʺ in Dale W.
     Jorgenson and Ralph Landau, eds. Technology and Capital Formation (Cambridge:
     MIT Press, 1989), pp. 77-125.

__________ (1990). The Measurement of Durable Goods Prices. Chicago: University of
      Chicago Press for NBER.

__________ AND TODD VANGOETHEM (2004). “A Century of Downward Bias in the Most
      Important Component of the CPI: The Case of Rental Shelter, 1914-2003,” in E.
      Berndt and C. Hulten, eds., Hard-to-Measure Goods and Services, Conference on
      Research in Income and Wealth. Chicago: University of Chicago Press for NBER,
      forthcoming.

HOBSBAWM, ERIC (1994). The Age of Extremes: A History of the World, 1914-91. New York:
     Pantheon.

LIEGEY, PAUL F., JR. (1993). ʺAdjusting Apparel Indexes in the Consumer Price Index for
                                                                    Apparel Prices, Page 44



      Quality Differences,ʺ in Murray F. Foss, Marilyn E. Manser, and Allan H. Young,
      eds., Price Measurements and Their Uses. Chicago: University of Chicago Press for
      NBER, pp. 209-26.

LIEGEY, PAUL F., JR. (1994). ʺApparel Price Indexes: Effects of Hedonic Adjustment,ʺ
      Monthly Labor Review (May), pp. 38-45.

PASHIGIAN, B. PETER (1988). “Demand Uncertainty and Sales: A Study of Fashion and
Markdown Pricing,” American Economic Review, vol. 78, no. 5 (December), pp. 936-53.

__________, AND BOWEN, BRIAN (1991). “Why Are Products Sold on Sale?: Explanations
of Pricing Regulatities,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 106, no. 4 (November), pp.
1015-38.

__________ BOWEN, BRIAN, AND GOULD, ERIC (1995). “Fashion, Styling, and the Within-
      Season Decline in Automobile Prices,” Journal of Law and Economics, vol. 38, no. 2
      (October), pp. 281-309.

REES, ALBERT (1961a). Real Wages in Manufacturing, 1890-1914. Princeton, N.J.:
       Princeton University Press for NBER.

__________(1961b). ʺAlternative Retail Price Indexes for Selected Nondurable Goods,
      1947-59.ʺ In The Price Statistics of the Federal Government, General Series 73. New
      York: NBER, pp. 137-72.

TRIPLETT, JACK (1971). ʺDetermining the Effects of Quality Change on the CPI.ʺ Monthly
      Labor Review, vol. 94 (May), pp. 27-32.

TRIPLETT, JACK (2004). Handbook on Hedonic Indexes and Quality Adjustments in Price
      Indexes: Special Application to Information Technology Products. Paris: OECD,
      Directorate for Science, Technology, and Industry, forthcoming.

WHITE, ALAN G., ABEL, JAISON R., BERNDT, ERNST R., AND MONROE, CORY W. (2004).
     ʺHedonic Price Indexes for Personal Computer Operating Systems and
     Productivity Suites,ʺ NBER Working Paper 10427, April.

WYNNE, MARK A. AND SIGALLA, FIONA D. (1994). ʺThe Consumer Price Index,ʺ Federal
                                                           Apparel Prices, Page 45



Reserve Bank of Dallas Review, second quarter, pp. 1-22.
                                             TABLE 1A
                   Sears Products and Corresponding CPI Products - Apparel 1914-47
                                                                                     Comparisons
    Sears Product        Years Excluded                    CPI Products                Per Year
Womenʹs Apparel                           Womenʹs and Girl’s Apparel                    26.0
Coats                          ---        Wool Apparel                                  1.7
Skirts                         ---                                                      1.3
Dresses                        ---        Rayon and Silk Apparel                        1.2
Slips                        1926-47                                                    1.6
Panties                        ---                                                      0.8
Hosiery                        ---                                                      1.0
Pajamas                      1914-29                                                    1.0
Dresses                        ---        Cotton Apparel                                0.9
Housedresses                   ---                                                      1.5
Nightgowns                     ---                                                      0.6
Unionsuits                     ---                                                      1.6
Hosiery                        ---                                                      1.0
Bloomers                     1927-47                                                    0.4
Slips                          ---                                                      0.6
Hats, wool                     ---        Other Apparel                                 1.9
Gloves                         ---                                                      1.8
Girdles                        ---                                                      1.6
Brassieres                     ---                                                      1.8
Rubbers                        ---        Footwear                                      1.8
Street Shoes                   ---                                                      1.9

Menʹs Apparel                             Men’s and Boy’s Apparel                       26.1
Suits                          ---        Wool Apparel                                  2.0
Trousers                       ---                                                      1.8
Sweaters                     1914-22                                                    1.4
Overcoats                    1931-46                                                    0.5
Socks                          ---        Rayon Apparel                                 0.9
Overcoats                      ---        Cotton Apparel                                1.7
Overalls                     1946-47                                                    1.6
Shirts, work                   ---                                                      0.9
Shirts, business               ---                                                      1.0
Pajamas                      1946-47                                                    1.6
Unionsuits                     ---                                                      2.1
Socks                          ---                                                      1.0
Hats, wool                     ---        Other Apparel                                 2.1
Neckties                       ---                                                      1.8
Rubbers                        ---        Footwear                                      1.9
Street Shoes                   ---                                                      1.9
Work Shoes                     ---                                                      1.9
                                              TABLE 1B

                 Sears Products and Corresponding CPI Products - Apparel (1947-1964)

                                                                                       Comparisons
          Sears Products           Years Excluded                CPI Products            per Year
Womenʹs Apparel                …                       Womenʹs Apparel                    99.4

Bathrobes                      1947-48, 1963-64        Underwear, nightwear,               3.9
Brassieres                     …                       hosiery, and                       19.8
Camisoles                      1947-49, 50-52, 63-65   accessories                          2
Hosiery                        …                                                          13.2
Panties                        …                                                          29.9
Slips                          1947-48                                                     9.5
Jackets                        1947-48                 Coats and Jackets                   4.4
Jeans                          1953-54                 Separates and                       5.3
                                                       Sportswear
Pants                          …                                                           5.9
Skirts                         1947-49                                                     2.4
Dresses                        1948-49, 60-61, 63-64   Dresses                             3.1

Menʹs Apparel                                          Menʹs Apparel                      146.8

Bathrobes                      1960-61                 Furnishings and                     2.3
Belts                          …                       special clothing                    5.8
Coveralls                      …                                                           3.7
Pajamas                        1947-48                                                     3.4
Shorts                         1947-55                                                     1.4
Socks                          1964-65                                                    16.5
Swimming Trunks                1947-48, 49-50, 53-55                                       2.4
Undershirt                     …                                                          10.6
Underwear                      1947-48                                                    20.1
Jeans                          1947-48                 Dungarees, Jeans, and              10.3
Pants                          …                       Trousers                           12.4
Dress Shirts                   …                       Shirts                             11.1
Shirts                         …                                                          13.4
Blazers                        1962-63                 Suits, sport coats,                 1.8
Jackets                        …                       coats, and jackets                 10.7
Rainwear                       …                                                          12.6
Suits                          1947-48, 62-64                                              8.1
                                              TABLE 1C
               Sears Products and Corresponding CPI Products - Apparel 1965-93
Sears Products               CPI Products                               Comparison Per Year


Womenʹs Apparel              Womenʹs Apparel                                   57.9

Bathrobes                    Underwear, nightwear, hosiery, and                3.3
Bras                         accessories                                       9.3
Camisoles                                                                      2.4
Hosiery                                                                        7.7
Panties                                                                        9.3
Slips                                                                          6.1
Jackets                      Coats and Jackets                                 4.7
Jeans                        Separates and Sportswear                          4.4
pants                                                                          4.1
Skirts                                                                         3.4
Dresses                      Dresses                                           3.3

Menʹs Apparel                Menʹs Apparel                                     93.3

Bathrobes                    Furnishings and special clothing                   3.1
Belts                                                                           4.8
Coveralls                                                                       5.2
Pajamas                                                                          5
Jumpsuits                                                                       3.2
Shorts                                                                          3.1
Socks                                                                           8.3
Swimming Trunks                                                                 2.4
Undershirts                                                                     8.1
Underwear                                                                      10.8
Jeans                        Dungarees, Jeans, and Trousers                     7.5
Pants                                                                           5.7
Dress Shirts                 Shirts                                             4.4
Shirts                                                                          7.8
Blazers                      Suits, sport coats, coats, and jackets             3.7
Jackets                                                                         6.8
Rainwear                                                                        4.5
                               TABLE 2

       Matched-Model Apparel Price Indexes (1958 = 100), 1914-93

                        WOMENʹS APPAREL
YEAR         SEARS           CPI        SEARS/CPI              OBSERVATIONS
1914          52.2               22.5               2.32            27
1915          54.4               22.9               2.37            30
1916          80.0               25.2               3.18            28
1917          92.1               30.2               3.04            28
1918          115.3              40.9               2.82            30
1919          148.1              54.2               2.73            31
1920          195.0              64.5               3.02            30
1921          123.6              49.7               2.49            28
1922          104.7              40.4               2.59            27
1923          97.1               40.6               2.39            28
1924          94.8               40.1               2.36            23
1925          92.6               39.4               2.35            31
1926          89.5               38.8               2.31            31
1927          84.0               37.9               2.22            29
1928          80.0               37.4               2.14            31
1929          75.3               37.0               2.04            28
1930          75.2               36.2               2.07            30
1931          69.9               32.9               2.12            27
1932          57.0               29.2               1.95            30
1933          54.6               28.1               1.94            28
1934          64.7               30.8               2.10            28
1935          51.6               31.1               1.66            26
1936          53.4               31.5               1.70            25
1937          53.2               33.0               1.61            26
1938          52.1               32.8               1.59            24
1939          52.2               32.4               1.61            23
1940          55.7               32.6               1.71            26
1941          57.2               34.1               1.68            27
1942          66.0               39.4               1.67            24
1943          67.0               39.1               1.71            26
1944          74.1               44.3               1.67            22
1945          75.0               46.7               1.61            26
1946          81.2               50.2               1.62            23
1947          90.9               58.1               1.56            23
1948          87.3               61.6               1.42            57
1949          86.6               58.2               1.49            85
1950          80.8               56.2               1.44            83
1951          86.8               60.5               1.43            95
1952          84.5               59.8               1.41            90
                         TABLE 2 (Cont.)
       Matched-Model Apparel Price Indexes (1958 = 100), 1914-93
                      WOMENʹS APPAREL
YEAR         SEARS             CPI            SEARS/CPI        OBSERVATIONS
1953          104.8            100.7           104.27             70
1954          107.5             99.8           107.69             90
1955          103.5             99.0           105.13             83
1956          103.8             99.7           104.27             80
1957          100.0            100.2           100.00             86
1958          100.0            100.0           100.00            100
1959          99.1             100.5            99.15            106
1960          99.9             101.0            99.15            93
1961          98.3             101.4            97.44            112
1962          98.5             101.2            97.44            62
1963          95.5             102.0            94.02            80
1964          93.8             102.6            91.45            65
1965          94.9             103.4            92.31            72
1966          95.2             105.5            90.60            79
1967          100.6            110.2            91.45            70
1968          103.2            116.9            88.89            69
1969          106.1            123.2            86.32            69
1970          106.5            127.8            83.76            72
1971          106.7            132.5            81.20            46
1972          107.3            135.6            79.49            46
1973          110.4            140.2            78.63            36
1974          119.3            148.7            80.34            37
1975          124.4            152.3            82.05            37
1976          116.3            156.6            74.36            38
1977          125.0            161.3            77.78            33
1978          131.2            164.6            80.34            48
1979          139.9            167.5            83.76            34
1980          145.1            170.4            85.47            35
1981          155.7            172.6            90.60            39
1982          169.5            174.4            97.44            31
1983          179.8            177.7           101.71             38
1984          187.5            180.1           104.27             46
1985          195.1            186.9           105.13             57
1986          193.5            185.3           105.13             61
1987          195.8            196.8           100.00             25
1988          199.0            204.6            97.44            25
1990          180.6            218.1            82.91            29
1991          172.3            226.4            76.07            27
1992          185.2            230.8            80.34            35
1993          187.2            235.4            79.49              0
                               TABLE 3

       Matched-Model Apparel Price Indexes (1958 = 100), 1914-93

                          MENʹS APPAREL
YEAR         SEARS             CPI              SEARS/CPI      OBSERVATIONS
1914           24.3              16.9               1.44            28
1915           24.3              17.3               1.41            27
1916           29.1              19.0               1.53            26
1917           32.9              22.8               1.44            29
1918           42.7              30.8               1.38            26
1919           53.5              40.9               1.31            25
1920           63.8              48.7               1.31            23
1921           47.3              37.5               1.26            21
1922           45.8              30.5               1.50            26
1923           41.4              30.6               1.35            28
1924           42.6              30.3               1.41            27
1925           41.0              29.7               1.38            28
1926           39.4              29.2               1.35            26
1927           37.4              28.6               1.31            25
1928           40.1              28.2               1.42            22
1929           39.4              27.9               1.41            27
1930           40.4              27.3               1.48            30
1931           37.1              24.8               1.49            27
1932           29.1              22.0               1.32            29
1933           28.0              21.2               1.32            30
1934           32.8              23.3               1.41            30
1935           23.6              23.5               1.00            27
1936           24.5              23.8               1.03            27
1937           25.0              25.1               1.00            28
1938           23.4              25.0               0.94            28
1939           23.6              24.5               0.96            29
1940           27.5              25.0               1.10            29
1941           25.6              26.2               0.98            26
1942           29.4              30.5               0.96            22
1943           31.0              32.0               0.97            25
1944           31.4              33.5               0.94            24
1945           31.4              34.9               0.90            21
1946           32.7              39.6               0.82            22
1947           43.2              47.0               0.92            52
1948           41.8              49.6               0.84            95
1949           41.4              48.2               0.86            95
1950           40.1              48.0               0.84           118
1951           44.5              51.9               0.86           126
1952           43.1              52.2               0.83           121
                         TABLE 3 (Cont.)
       Matched-Model Apparel Price Indexes (1958 = 100), 1914-93
                        MENʹS APPAREL
YEAR         SEARS             CPI            SEARS/CPI        OBSERVATIONS
1953          102.6             98.9           103.75             96
1954          102.6             98.3           103.75             94
1955          97.6              97.1           100.00            95
1956          98.6              98.9            98.75            102
1957          98.3             100.4            97.50            99
1958          100.0            100.0           100.00            100
1959          103.6             99.8           103.75             96
1960          105.3            101.7           102.50            102
1961          106.0            102.9           102.50             92
1962          108.2            103.4           103.75             88
1963          108.6            104.8           102.50             93
1964          108.9            106.3           101.25             91
1965          107.7            107.4           100.00             98
1966          110.1            110.3            98.75            128
1967          116.8            114.5           101.25            110
1968          123.5            120.8           101.25             86
1969          131.9            128.6           102.50             93
1970          135.0            134.0           100.00             86
1971          139.8            137.8           101.25             74
1972          144.1            139.5           102.50             65
1973          153.5            144.7           105.00             56
1974          168.6            156.1           107.50             53
1975          191.6            162.8           117.50             50
1976          188.0            168.3           111.25             59
1977          208.9            176.1           117.50             64
1978          215.6            180.0           118.75             67
1979          221.3            182.6           120.00             57
1980          239.8            190.8           125.00             62
1981          263.1            201.1           130.00             62
1982          289.4            209.0           137.50             59
1983          302.9            214.1           141.25             45
1984          317.0            218.1           145.00             66
1985          326.1            224.6           145.00             80
1986          322.8            227.3           141.25             77
1987          315.3            235.9           132.50             37
1988          322.3            245.6           130.00             43
1990          341.0            263.0           128.75             51
1991          341.0            271.4           125.00             46
1992          372.7            276.0           133.75             52
1993          367.4            277.5           131.25              0
                               TABLE 4


       Matched-Model Apparel Price Indexes (1980 = 100), 1978-93
                        GIRLʹS APPAREL
YEAR         SEARS             CPI             SEARS/CPI        OBSERVATIONS
1978           88.8               95.3              0.93           21
1979           95.9               96.6              0.99           22
1980          100.0              100.0              1.00           24
1981          107.5              103.6              1.04           18
1982          116.5              103.6              1.12           18
1983          129.4              104.6              1.24           19
1984          134.3              104.6              1.28           21
1985          141.8              107.6              1.32           22
1986          145.2              106.4              1.37           21
1987          141.2              112.2              1.26           12
1988          151.7              117.4              1.29            6
1990          126.7              125.9              1.01           14
1991          139.0              133.3              1.04           16
1992          153.2              138.0              1.11           15
1993          157.9              137.5              1.15



                               TABLE 5
       Matched-Model Apparel Price Indexes (1980 = 100), 1978-93
                        BOYʹS APPAREL
YEAR         SEARS             CPI             SEARS/CPI           OBS
1978           87.1               90.1              0.97           29
1979           95.2               94.2              1.01           30
1980          100.0              100.0              1.00           27
1981          106.8              105.0              1.02           29
1982          116.8              108.1              1.08           25
1983          120.1              112.0              1.07           19
1984          121.5              113.9              1.07           29
1985          123.3              116.7              1.06           28
1986          125.1              117.1              1.07           27
1987          127.0              115.7              1.10            8
1988          127.8              119.2              1.07            2
1990          128.3              121.4              1.06           20
1991          131.8              125.4              1.05           17
1992          140.9              129.0              1.09           19
1993          138.5              131.0              1.06
                               TABLE 6

       Matched-Model Apparel Price Indexes (1958 = 100), 1914-93

                            ALL APPAREL
YEAR         SEARS              CPI             SEARS/CPI      OBSERVATIONS
1914          66.5               30.6             217.65           55
1915          68.0               31.2             217.65           57
1916          90.9               34.3             264.71           54
1917          103.8               41.2            251.96            57
1918          132.0               55.7            237.25            56
1919          167.6               73.8            227.45            56
1920          212.0               87.9            241.18            53
1921          143.6               67.7            211.76            49
1922          129.5               55.1            235.29            53
1923          118.5               55.3            214.71            56
1924          118.7               54.7            216.67            50
1925          104.5               53.6            195.10            59
1926          110.9               52.9            209.80            57
1927          104.5               51.6            202.94            54
1928          105.6               51.0            206.86            53
1929          101.8               50.5            201.96            55
1930          102.9               49.4            208.82            60
1931          95.1               44.9             211.76           54
1932          76.2               39.9             191.18           59
1933          72.9               38.4             190.20           58
1934          86.0               42.1             204.90           58
1935          65.3               42.5             153.92           53
1936          67.6               42.9             157.84           52
1937          68.0               44.9             151.96           54
1938          65.3               44.7             146.08           52
1939          65.5               44.2             149.02           52
1940          73.1               44.5             164.71           55
1941          71.3               46.6             152.94           53
1942          82.2               54.5             150.98           46
1943          85.1               56.8             150.00           51
1944          90.2               60.9             148.04           46
1945          90.7               64.0             141.18           47
1946          96.4               70.1             137.25           45
1947          116.9               95.0            123.53            75
1948          112.4              100.7            111.76           152
1949          111.6               95.9            116.67           180
1950          106.2               94.2            112.75           201
1951          116.4              101.7            114.71           221
1952          112.7              100.9            111.76           211
                         TABLE 6 (Cont.)
       Matched-Model Apparel Price Indexes (1958 = 100), 1914-93
                         ALL APPAREL
YEAR         SEARS             CPI            SEARS/CPI        OBSERVATIONS
1953          104.0            100.0           103.92            221
1954          105.3             99.1           105.88            244
1955          100.5             98.3           101.96            237
1956          100.9             99.3           101.96            242
1957          98.9             100.2            99.02            246
1958          100.0            100.0           100.00            265
1959          101.1            100.2           100.98            268
1960          102.9            101.1           101.96            259
1961          103.5            101.7           101.96            269
1962          104.7            101.9           102.94            200
1963          103.6            103.0           100.98            229
1964          103.1            103.7            99.02            208
1965          103.1            104.5            99.02            226
1966          104.4            106.3            98.04            277
1967          110.5            110.6           100.00            241
1968          115.5            116.9            99.02            205
1969          121.6            123.7            98.04            216
1970          123.5            128.8            96.08            209
1971          126.2            132.7            95.10            160
1972          128.9            135.3            95.10            148
1973          135.1            139.9            97.06            123
1974          147.6            150.1            98.04            120
1975          162.5            155.7           104.90            116
1976          156.7            160.1            98.04            130
1977          156.7            166.6            94.12            130
1978          162.7            170.5            95.10            153
1979          171.8            175.3            98.04            121
1980          181.8            185.5            98.04            130
1981          196.9            192.6           101.96            136
1982          215.3            195.7           109.80            121
1983          227.6            199.8           113.73            110
1984          236.4            202.6           116.67            150
1985          247.6            208.2           118.63            182
1986          246.5            208.9           117.65            183
1987          244.5            218.6           111.76             83
1988          250.7            228.2           109.80             92
1990          237.8            244.9            97.06            107
1991          249.5            254.2            98.04            97
1992          266.7            259.7           102.94            116
1993          268.4            263.1           101.96
                       TABLE 7

       Comparison of Sears/CPI Ratio (1958 = 1.0)

Year   Womenʹs Apparel           Menʹs Apparel      All Apparel
1914         2.32                     1.44             2.22
1915         2.37                     1.41             2.22
1916         3.18                     1.53             2.70
1917         3.04                     1.44             2.57
1918         2.82                     1.38             2.42
1919         2.73                     1.31             2.32
1920         3.02                     1.31             2.46
1921         2.49                     1.26             2.16
1922         2.59                     1.50             2.40
1923         2.39                     1.35             2.19
1924         2.36                     1.41             2.21
1925         2.35                     1.38             1.99
1926         2.31                     1.35             2.14
1927         2.22                     1.31             2.07
1928         2.14                     1.42             2.11
1929         2.04                     1.41             2.06
1930         2.07                     1.48             2.13
1931         2.12                     1.49             2.16
1932         1.95                     1.32             1.95
1933         1.94                     1.32             1.94
1934         2.10                     1.41             2.09
1935         1.66                     1.00             1.57
1936         1.70                     1.03             1.61
1937         1.61                     1.00             1.55
1938         1.59                     0.94             1.49
1939         1.61                     0.96             1.52
1940         1.71                     1.10             1.68
1941         1.68                     0.98             1.56
1942         1.67                     0.96             1.54
1943         1.71                     0.97             1.53
1944         1.67                     0.94             1.51
1945         1.61                     0.90             1.44
1946         1.62                     0.82             1.40
1947         1.56                     0.92             1.26
1948         1.42                     0.84             1.14
1949         1.49                     0.86             1.19
1950         1.44                     0.84             1.15
1951         1.43                     0.86             1.17
1952         1.41                     0.83             1.14
1953         1.22                     0.83             1.06
                    TABLE 7 (Cont.)
       Comparison of Sear/CPI Ratio (1980 = 1.0)
Year   Womenʹs Apparel         Menʹs Apparel       All Apparel
1954         1.08                     1.04            1.06
1955         1.05                     1.00            1.02
1956         1.04                     0.99            1.02
1957         1.00                     0.98            0.99
1958         1.00                     1.00            1.00
1959         0.99                     1.04            1.01
1960         0.99                     1.03            1.02
1961         0.97                     1.03            1.02
1962         0.97                     1.04            1.03
1963         0.94                     1.03            1.01
1964         0.91                     1.01            0.99
1965         0.92                     1.00            0.99
1966         0.91                     0.99            0.98
1967         0.91                     1.01            1.00
1968         0.89                     1.01            0.99
1969         0.86                     1.03            0.98
1970         0.84                     1.00            0.96
1971         0.81                     1.01            0.95
1972         0.79                     1.03            0.95
1973         0.79                     1.05            0.97
1974         0.80                     1.08            0.98
1975         0.82                     1.18            1.05
1976         0.74                     1.11            0.98
1977         0.78                     1.18            0.94
1978         0.80                     1.19            0.95
1979         0.84                     1.20            0.98
1980         0.85                     1.25            0.98
1981         0.91                     1.30            1.02
1982         0.97                     1.38            1.10
1983         1.02                     1.41            1.14
1984         1.04                     1.45            1.17
1985         1.05                     1.45            1.19
1986         1.05                     1.41            1.18
1987         1.00                     1.33            1.12
1988         0.97                     1.30            1.10
1990         0.83                     1.29            0.97
1991         0.76                     1.25            0.98
1992         0.80                     1.34            1.03
1993         0.79                     1.31            1.02
                                                 TABLE 8


   Growth Rates of Sears Matched Model (MM) Indexes Compared with the CPI, Alternative Intervals, 1914-93
                      1914-47           1947-65        1965-78            1978-93             1914-93
Womensʹ Apparel
 Sears MM                      1.68             -1.83              2.49              2.37                1.15
 CPI                           2.87              0.24              3.57              2.39                2.30
 Sears/CPI                    -1.19             -2.07             -1.08             -0.02               -1.15

Menʹs Apparel
 Sears MM                      1.74              0.21              5.34              3.55                2.33
 CPI                           3.10              1.00              3.97              2.89                2.72
 Sears/CPI                    -1.36             -0.79              1.37              0.67               -0.39

All Apparel
 Sears MM                      1.71             -0.70              3.51              3.34                1.77
 CPI                           3.43              0.53              3.77              2.89                2.72
 Sears/CPI                    -1.72             -1.22             -0.25              0.44               -0.95
                        TABLE 9
         Characteristics of Hedonic Index Dresses
 Variable Name      Coding                 Description

                                 The weight of a dress (in ounces),
                              indicates the amount of fabric utilized
  LN Weight         LN WT
                               to construct the dress and is a proxy
                                       for its overall quality

                               Organic Fabrics include Wool, Silk,
                              Linen, and Cotton Derivatives such as
                                Velvet. These type of fabrics are
  ORGANIC            ORG
                               considered high grade material and
                              contributes to the perceived quality of
                                              apparel.
                               Apparel that were imported from a
                                foreign country and advertised as
  IMPORTED            IMP
                                 such, could add or subtract from
                                        perceived quality.

                                 Manufacturing cost for items of
LACE/ SEQUINS/                 apparel with either lace, sequins, or
                      LSE
 EMBROIDERY                   embroideries tend to be priced higher
                                than those without these qualities.

     BELT             BLT               Presence of a belt

                              Two-piece dresses require more fabric
  TWO-PIECE           2PC
                                 as well as sewing to produce.

                              Indicates whether or not the apparel
  DRY-CLEAN          DRY       required dry-cleaning or any other
                                  special care for laundering.


                               Indicates the inclusion of a jacket or
                              blazer, generally of heavier fabric and
   JACKET             JCK
                               higher quality than the top of a two-
                                  piece dress (see ʺ2PCʺ above).


                              Items of apparel with either a bow or
   BOW/TIE         BOW/TIE      a tie were considered to have extra
                              trimmings and contributed to its cost.

                               Indicates that the fabric was knit or
KNIT OR WOVEN        KWV
                                              woven
    ZIPPER            ZIP         Indicates presence of a zipper.
                                                              TABLE 10
                                        Percentage of Dresses with Various Quality Attributes
       Observations
Year     Per Year      Price   Weight    ORG         IMP        LSE      BLT     2-PC     DRY       JCK BOW/TIE         KWV           ZIP
1914              60     4.0     18.8     15.0           1.7    73.3     23.3      5.0      0.0      1.7         51.7     1.7         0.0
1921              77     8.0     25.7     18.2           0.0    37.7     20.8      2.6      0.0      1.3         61.0     0.0         0.0
1926              71     8.3     26.0     46.5           4.2    33.8     11.3     11.3      0.0      0.0         80.3     1.4         0.0
1936             183     3.0     18.9         0.5        5.5    31.7     28.4     79.8      0.0     23.0         33.3    13.1         0.0
1941             148     3.1     20.0         2.0        0.0    23.0      6.8     16.9     23.0     18.9         14.9    32.4     11.5
1946              96     4.9     21.6         0.0        0.0    18.8     13.5     39.6     67.7      0.0          6.3    57.3     19.8
1950             157     6.1     23.6         0.6        0.0    10.8     21.0      8.9     66.9     10.2          4.5    61.1     31.8
1955             155     7.0     22.1         0.0        0.6     8.4     12.3      6.5     43.9      9.7         18.7    37.4     26.0
1960             150     9.5     17.9         5.3        6.0    21.3     10.7      5.3     60.7      6.7         10.7    43.3         0.0
1965             149    10.2     16.2         2.7        0.0     5.4      0.0     22.8     58.4      8.1          4.7    84.6         0.0
1970              97    13.9     21.7         1.0        1.0     6.2     13.4      9.3     53.6      8.2         12.4    97.9         0.0
1975              78    18.8     19.1         0.0        0.0    14.1     14.1      9.0      2.6     17.9          1.3    94.9         0.0
1980              42    20.8     14.8         2.4        0.0     0.0     21.4     14.3      0.0     19.0          7.1    90.5         0.0
1985             100    42.7     14.6         6.0        3.0    15.0     45.0     16.0     16.0      9.0         10.0    78.0         0.0
1988              80    49.5     30.0         6.3        7.5     28.8     47.5     15.0     16.3     10.0         7.5     15.0        0.0
1993        --          63.5     22.2    --         --         --       --       --       --       --       --          --       --
                                                                    TABLE 11
                                             Coefficients From Hedonic Regressions of Womenʹs Dresses
                                                                                                                                  Adj.
Years     YEAR        LN WT       ORG       IMP       LSE      BLT        2-PC     DRY         JCK    BOW/TIE KWV         ZIP     R-sq     SEE    OBS
1914-21   0.553**    0.444     1.259**   0.066     0.397**   0.060      -0.168    -         -0.057    0.198*  0.296     -        0.70    0.44    137
1921-22   -0.490**   0.436*    1.182**   0.020     0.312**   -0.205*    0.102     -         -0.315    0.039   -0.361    -        0.69    0.42    168
1922-23   0.178**    0.351     1.119**   0.116     0.227**   -0.021     -0.071    -         0.001     0.127   0.100     -        0.74    0.37    151
1923-24   0.183**    0.651**   0.899**   0.221**   -0.011    0.013      0.103     -         0.231     0.067   -0.082    -        0.68    0.31    133
1924-25   -0.117     1.060**   0.915**   0.286**   0.030     0.058      0.379*    -         -0.032    0.003   -0.032    -        0.57    0.40    163
1925-26   0.071      0.616*    0.957**   0.276*    0.088     0.140      0.447**   -         -0.223    -0.121  0.112     -        0.59    0.44    161
1926-27   -0.177*    0.355*    0.941**   -0.263    0.149     0.068      0.411**   -         -         0.096   0.235     -        0.57    0.38    153
1927-28   -0.168**   0.545**   0.963**   0.145     0.123     0.102      0.357**   -         0.182     -       0.247     0.228** 0.58     0.40    178
1928-34   0.209*     1.116**   0.679**   -0.030    0.172*    0.167**    0.275*    -         -         -0.383* 0.261     0.188** 0.70     0.46    192
1934-35   -0.301**   1.118**   0.490**   0.034     0.188**   0.238**    -0.003    -         -0.075    0.235** 0.026     0.137    0.67    0.40    228
1935-36   0.219**    1.294**   0.489**   -         0.031     0.027      0.092     0.055     0.004     0.206** 0.186**   0.084    0.70    0.34    316
1936-37   -0.022     1.481**   -0.036    -         -0.018    0.096      -0.029    -0.040    0.034     0.142** 0.185**   0.386    0.76    0.30    329
1937-38   0.093**    1.612**   -0.415*   -         -0.077    -0.184*    -0.002    -0.058    0.089     0.105** 0.148**   0.233** 0.79     0.27    299
1938-39   -0.127*    1.570**   0.103     -         -0.057    0.062      -0.065    -0.004    0.060     0.123*  0.100     0.154** 0.65     0.39    336
1939-40   0.059      1.471**   0.230*    -         0.148**   -0.006     0.123*    -         0.084     0.062   0.140**   0.111*   0.69    0.37    335
1940-41   -0.173**   1.635**   0.052     -         0.248**   -0.042     0.100*    0.033     0.089     0.002   0.145**   0.095*   0.83    0.28    300
1941-46   0.354**    1.600**   0.117     -         0.132**   0.029      0.041     0.041     0.088     0.081   0.239**   0.160** 0.82     0.29    244
1946-47   0.337**    1.015**   -         -         0.066     0.174**    0.028     0.134*    -         0.189*  0.261**   0.253** 0.70     0.26    174
1947-48   0.199**    1.104**   0.887**   -         0.161**   0.050      0.154**   0.128*    0.251**   0.009   0.182**   0.137** 0.80     0.22    202
1948-49   -0.081**   0.912**   0.892**   -         0.029     -0.025     0.155**   0.203**   0.179**   -0.061  0.184**   0.062    0.81    0.20    289
1949-50   -0.310**   0.974**   0.731**   -         0.045     0.062      0.077     0.144**   0.108*    -0.060  0.154**   0.000    0.71    0.23    323
1950-51   0.106**    1.094**   0.730**   -         0.119**   0.083*     0.001     0.111     0.090     0.054   0.071*    -0.023   0.67    0.26    292
1951-52   0.098**    0.669**   0.759**   -         0.168**   0.000      0.027     0.334**   0.150**   0.110   0.063     -0.029   0.64    0.28    276
1952-53   -0.036     0.498**   0.638**   -         0.159**   -0.020     0.135     0.372**   0.189**   0.166** -0.006    -0.135** 0.59    0.30    286
1953-54   0.101**    0.540**   0.421*    -         0.106     -0.027     0.137*    0.337**   0.037     0.150** -0.062    -0.174** 0.51    0.30    286
1954-55   -0.021     0.625**   0.487*    0.094     0.118*    -0.029     -0.049    0.222**   -0.008    0.096*  -0.025    -0.184** 0.46    0.28    296
1955-56   -0.253**   0.765**   0.787**   0.169     0.221**   0.027      0.017     0.325**   0.086     0.029   0.040     0.028    0.63    0.28    332
1956-57   0.218**    0.786**   0.902**   -         0.321**   -0.144**   0.043     0.365**   0.099*    -0.015  0.039     0.063    0.70    0.29    367
1957-58   0.103**    0.760**   0.792**   -         0.253**   -0.140**   -0.020    0.340**   0.143*    0.070   0.024     0.037    0.68    0.30    342
1958-59   0.186**    0.829**   0.672**   -         0.153**   0.017      0.001     0.305**   0.197**   0.038   -0.050    -        0.67    0.30    345
                                                                 TABLE 11 (contʹd)
                                             Coefficients From Hedonic Regressions of Womenʹs Dresses
                                                                                                                              Adj.
Years     YEAR        LN WT       ORG       IMP       LSE      BLT        2-PC      DRY      JCK     BOW/TIE KWV       ZIP    R-sq     SEE    OBS
1959-60   0.096**    0.849**   0.623**   0.074     0.181**   0.039      0.008     0.255**  0.105     0.016   -0.047    -     0.72    0.29    333
1960-61   0.092*     0.846**   0.494**   0.167*    0.156**   0.215**    0.025     0.285**  0.027     0.134*  -0.037    -     0.78    0.27    253
1961-62   0.066      0.840**   0.560**   0.271*    0.056     0.215**    -0.118    0.412**  0.115     0.049   -0.008    -     0.73    0.30    217
1962-63   0.007      0.625**   0.488**   0.312*    0.109*    0.299**    -0.125    0.584**  0.160     0.249*  0.040     -     0.68    0.33    237
1963-64   0.023      0.629**   0.381**   -0.180    0.170**   0.266**    -0.036    0.532**  0.107     0.190   0.082*    -     0.7     0.32    290
1964-65   0.020      0.635**   0.437**   -0.386    0.219**   0.241**    0.062     0.474**  0.043     0.162   0.135**   -     0.74    0.29    316
1965-66   0.043      0.467**   0.416**   -         0.294**   0.345*     0.166**   0.524**  0.148*    0.194*  0.107*    -     0.67    0.30    308
1966-67   0.068      0.430**   -         -         0.268**   0.266*     0.122*    0.380**  0.156*    0.117   0.052     -     0.62    0.30    288
1967-68   -0.024     0.738**   -         -         0.123**   0.142      -0.040    0.170**  0.044     0.116   0.129*    -     0.69    0.27    273
1968-69   0.066*     0.849**   0.623*    -         0.080*    0.070      -0.062    0.130**  0.046     0.137   0.158     -     0.78    0.25    258
1969-70   0.007      0.865**   0.602*    -0.239    0.043     0.007      -0.001    0.083*   0.033     0.050   0.117     -     0.8     0.22    211
1970-71   0.162**    0.703**   0.462     -         -0.112    0.096      0.029     0.131**  0.247**   0.100   0.121     -     0.71    0.23    197
1971-72   -0.019     0.721**   -         -         -0.016    0.171*     0.014     0.194**  0.317**   0.138   0.061     -     0.63    0.26    200
1972-73   0.230**    0.621**   -         -         0.069     0.081      0.056     0.330**  0.139     0.126   0.046     -     0.62    0.26    201
1973-74   0.093**    0.486**   -         -         0.071     0.045      0.180**   0.313**  0.221**   0.206*  0.038     -     0.6     0.23    192
1974-75   0.063      0.443**   -         -         0.074     0.025      0.142*    0.157    0.216**   0.208   -0.107    -     0.56    0.23    169
1975-76   -0.027     0.420**   -         -         0.117*    0.050      0.133*    -0.054   0.071     0.224** -0.101    -     0.51    0.22    166
1976-77   0.023      0.314**   -         -         0.155**   0.157**    0.128*             0.179**   0.280** 0.139     -     0.53    0.22    155
1977-78   0.093*     0.192*    -         -         0.145     0.149*     0.171*    0.549** 0.305**    0.367** -0.098    -     0.44    0.25    138
1978-79   0.272**    0.186*    -0.109    -         0.206*    0.099      0.127     0.500** 0.202*     0.121   -0.067    -     0.47    0.24    116
1979-80   -0.187**   0.085     0.027     -         0.260*    0.147**    0.087     0.468* 0.181**     0.125   0.155*    -     0.48    0.19    87
1980-81   0.110**    0.087     -         -         0.068     0.114**    0.079              0.174**   0.231** 0.362**   -     0.57    0.16    83
1981-82   0.095**    0.232**   0.660**   -         0.117*    0.076*     0.150*    0.306    0.177**   0.129*  0.037     -     0.51    0.20    115
1982-83   0.299**    -0.225*   0.262     0.187     -0.024    -0.172**   0.092     -0.673** 0.132     -0.010  0.006     -     0.32    0.35    170
1983-84   -0.006     -0.054    0.611**   0.788**   -0.077    -0.097     0.094     -0.467** 0.090     0.063   0.164     -     0.18    0.40    204
1984-85   0.160**    0.557**   0.006     0.137     0.136*    0.046      0.092*    0.427** -0.014     0.067   -0.063    -     0.64    0.23    208
1985-86   0.023      0.497**   -0.086    0.266**   0.195**   0.041      0.146**   0.472** 0.056      0.018   -0.047    -     0.67    0.21    169
1986-87   -0.154**   0.387**   0.045     0.176*    0.084     0.000      0.079     0.464** -0.017     0.054   0.030     -     0.71    0.19    150
1987-88   0.014      0.411**   0.168*    0.049     0.137**   0.009      -0.041    0.354** 0.030      -0.001  0.077     -     0.69    0.18    161
                                TABLE 12
              Comparison of Price Indices for Womenʹs Dresses
        Sears                            Sears            Sears         Sears
       Median                          Matched           Hedonic       Implicit
Year    Price           CPI          Model Index       Price Index   Quality Index
1914    45.34          43.87             84.16             44.71        101.42
1915      --           44.74             87.68            48.38            --
1916      --           49.13            129.03            52.36            --
1917      --           59.07            148.53            56.67            --
1918      --           79.83            186.22            61.32            --
1919      --          105.86            239.00            66.37            --
1920      --          126.04            314.81            71.82            --
1921    90.01          97.09            199.56             77.72        115.81
1922    67.90          78.96            169.06             47.62        142.60
1923    84.85          79.25            156.74             56.89        149.14
1924    86.42          78.37            153.08             68.32        126.50
1925    94.16          76.91            149.41             60.77        154.94
1926    92.82          75.74            144.43             65.25        142.26
1927    37.04          73.99            135.48             54.66         67.76
1928    88.44          73.11            129.03             46.21        191.39
1929      --           72.23            121.55            47.85            --
1930      --           70.77            121.26            49.54            --
1931      --           64.34            112.76            51.29            --
1932      --           57.02             91.94            53.11            --
1933      --           54.98             88.12            54.99            --
1934    42.42          60.24            104.40             56.95         74.49
1935    33.33          60.53             83.28             42.15         79.09
1936    33.56          60.74             86.07             52.47         63.96
1937    33.11          62.58             85.78             51.32         64.51
1938    38.16          61.35             84.02             56.33         67.75
1939    40.97          61.55             84.16             49.61         82.58
1940    35.02          61.55             89.88             52.62         66.54
1941    34.90          63.60             92.23             44.26         78.86
1942      --           76.48            106.45            47.51            --
1943      --           79.75            108.06            51.00            --
1944      --           87.32            119.50            54.74            --
1945      --           92.02            120.97            58.75            --
1946    55.56          93.87            130.94             63.07         88.09
1947    73.51         107.16            150.88             88.34         83.22
1948    87.43         115.95            146.63            107.79         81.11
1949    87.65          99.80            148.24             99.40         88.18
1950    68.91          90.18            128.30             72.91         94.52
1951    79.24          96.93            122.58             81.06         97.75
1952    78.34          97.03            120.82             89.40         87.62
1953    74.64          97.14            117.45             86.24         86.54
                                           Table 12 (Cont.)
                        Comparison of Price Indices for Womenʹs Dresses
                 Median                            Sears                                      Implicit
    Year          Price           CPI         Matched Model     Hedonic Index               Quality Index
    1954          83.73          97.34            111.73             95.41                      87.76
    1955          79.12          97.96            107.48             93.43                      84.69
    1956          89.67          98.77            119.79             72.54                     123.62
    1957         103.48          99.39            107.04             90.21                     114.71
    1958         100.00         100.00            100.00            100.00                     100.00
    1959         101.46         102.45             94.72            120.44                      84.24
    1960         106.29         102.86             90.47            132.58                      80.17
    1961         109.43         103.07             98.68            145.35                      75.28
    1962         112.68         103.48             78.89            155.27                      72.57
    1963         116.27         104.29             78.15            156.36                      74.36
    1964         128.84         106.34             82.70            160.00                      80.53
    1965         114.48         108.18             87.98            163.23                      70.13
    1966         123.01         113.50             87.98            170.40                      72.19
    1967         133.22         123.31             94.87            182.39                      73.04
    1968         130.86         137.83             95.75            178.07                      73.49
    1969         143.55         151.33             81.23            190.22                      75.46
    1970         156.57         159.51            103.81            191.55                      81.73
    1971         141.86         157.26            103.81            225.24                      62.98
    1972         145.68         160.33            103.81            221.00                      65.92
    1973         176.54         167.48            106.45            278.15                      63.47
    1974         206.06         173.62            111.44            305.26                      67.50
    1975         211.22         177.71            115.69            325.11                      64.97
    1976         203.70         184.05            121.70            316.45                      64.37
    1977         220.99         190.80            127.86            323.81                      68.25
    1978         210.21         195.30            140.18            355.37                      59.15
    1979         288.33         202.25            146.63            466.46                      61.81
    1980         233.33         202.25            146.63            386.90                      60.31
    1981         252.08         202.45            146.63            431.89                      58.37
    1982         307.63         196.93            147.95            474.93                      64.77
    1983         409.99         203.68            147.95            640.45                      64.02
    1984         410.89         213.09            157.18            636.62                      64.54
    1985         478.79         217.38            174.19            747.08                      64.09
    1986         549.61         214.72            174.19            764.46                      71.89
    1987         498.32         238.45            145.60            655.35                      76.04
    1988         555.56         252.56            147.07            664.59                      83.59
    1989            --          252.54            148.53               --                         --
    1990            --          263.68            148.53               --                         --
    1991            --          273.75            169.21               --                         --
    1992            --           273.2            169.21               --                         --
    1993            --          278.35            150.88               --                         --

Note: Italics indicate that the Sears hedonic price index is interpolated for these years
                                                    TABLE 13
                      Growth Rates of Sears Matched Model (MM) and Hedonic Indexes
      Compared with the CPI, the Median Price, and the Implicit Quality Index, Alternative Intervals, 1914-88
                                          1914-47         1947-65        1965-78        1978-88         1914-88


Sears Median Price                                  1.46          2.46          4.67          9.72                3.39
CPI                                                 2.71          0.05          4.54          2.57                2.37
Sears MM Index                                      1.77         -3.00          3.58          0.48                0.75
Sears Hedonic Index                                 2.06          3.41          5.98          6.26                3.65

Median Price - CPI                                 -1.25          2.41          0.13           7.15            1.02
CPI - Sears MM Index                                0.94          3.05          0.96           2.09            1.62
CPI - Sears Hedonic Index                           0.65         -3.36         -1.44          -3.69           -1.28
Sears MM Index - Sears Hedonic Index               -0.29         -6.41         -2.40          -5.78           -2.90

Implicit Quality Index =
 Median Price - Sears Hedonic Index                -0.60         -0.95         -1.31          3.46            -0.26
                                         TABLE 14
        Comparison of Years When Sears Hedonic Index Grew Much Faster than Sears MM Index
        with Years when the Two Indexes Grew at the Same Rate, Annual Growth Rates in Percent
                                                  Hedonic >> MM                  Hedonic ≈ MM
                                        1972-73 1978-79 1982-83 1978-83     1960-61 1966-67 1977-78


Hedonic Price Index                           23.0    27.2   29.9    11.8       9.2      6.8     9.3
Matched Model Price Index                      2.5     4.5    0.0    -0.6       8.7      7.5     9.2
Hedonic - MM                                  20.5    22.7   29.9    12.4       0.5     -0.7     0.1

Raw Price Change                              22.0    34.0    20.0   11.8        1.0     9.0    -4.0
 First Weight Quartile                        37.0    38.0    34.0   16.9       -1.0     0.0     8.0
 Second Weight Quartile                       28.0    40.0    50.0   18.7        9.0     1.0   -12.0
 Third Weight Quartile                        16.0    34.0    19.0   10.0        9.0    27.0    -5.0
 Fourth Weight Quartile                        9.0    22.0   -24.0    1.1       -3.0    10.0    -8.0

Hedonic Price Index by Weight Quartile        24.0    29.0    32.0   11.8       9.0      8.0    10.0
 First Weight Quartile                        32.0    44.0    48.0   14.2       0.0     23.0    10.0
 Second Weight Quartile                       35.0    40.0    53.0   20.1      17.0      7.0     5.0
 Third Weight Quartile                        14.0    13.6    26.0   -1.0      -5.0     26.0    26.0
 Fourth Weight Quartile                       13.0    24.0   -10.0   13.6      14.0      5.0    -1.0

Implicit Quality Change by Wt Quartile         -2.0    5.0   -12.0     0.0      -8.0     1.0   -14.0
 First Weight Quartile                          5.0   -6.0   -14.0     2.7      -1.0   -23.0    -2.0
 Second Weight Quartile                        -7.0    0.0    -3.0    -1.4      -8.0    -6.0   -17.0
 Third Weight Quartile                          2.0   20.4    -7.0    11.0      14.0     1.0   -31.0
 Fourth Weight Quartile                        -4.0   -2.0   -14.0   -12.5     -17.0     5.0    -7.0
