                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           COMPETITION AND PRODUCTIVITY IN
                         JAPANESE MANUFACTURING INDUSTRIES

                                            Yosuke Okada

                                         Working Paper 11540
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w11540


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 2005




An earlier version of this paper was presented at the 17th Annual NBER-CPER-TCER Trio Conference on
Enhancing Productivity held at Keio University on 11 December 2004. I appreciate a lof of beneficial
comments from Fumio Hayashi, Charles Y. Horioka, Takeo Hoshi, Dale Jorgenson, Hiroki Kawai, Kazuyuki
Motohashi, Takanobu Nakajima, and two anonymous referees. I am also indebted to Hiroyuki Chuma, Akira
Goto, Masaharu Hanazaki, Hideshi Itoh, Daiji Kawaguchi, Yukinobo Kitamura, Hyeong Ug Kwon, Tsutomu
Miyagawa, Sadao Nagaoka, Hitoyuki Odagiri, and Kotaro Suzumura for helpful comments on a preliminary
version of the present study at various occasions. This study is based on the research project on Changing
Corporate Governance and its Effects on Productivity in Japan with the collaboration of the Research and
Statistics Department of the Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry (METI). I would like to thank METI
and the Ministry of Public Management, Home Affairs, Posts and Telecommunications for enabling me to
use the dataset of The Basic Survey of Business Structure and Activity. Financial support was provided by
the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology. The usual disclaimer applies. The
views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by Yosuke Okada. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Competition and Productivity in Japanese Manufacturing Industries
Yosuke Okada
NBER Working Paper No. 11540
August 2005
JEL No. L11, L60, O30

                                              ABSTRACT




This paper examines the determinants of productivity in Japanese manufacturing industries, looking

particularly at the impact of product market competition on productivity. Using a newly available panel data

on around ten thousand firms in Japanese manufacturing for the years 1994-2000, I show that competition,

as measured by lower level of industrial price-cost margin, enhances productivity growth, controlling for a

broad range of industrial and firm-specific characteristics. Moreover, I suggest that market power, as

measured by either individual firm’s price-cost margin or market share, has negative impact on productivity

level of R&D performing firms.




Yosuke Okada
Graduate School of Economics
Hitotsubashi University
Naka 2-1, Kunitachi, Tokyo 186-8601
JAPAN
yookada@econ.hit-u.ac.jp
1. Introduction
Does competition improve productivity? There is some theoretical basis that competition
enhances productivity, but the empirical basis is not strong enough, especially in Japan1. There
is nevertheless the growing prevalence of opinions emphasizing the importance of competition
in the policy arena such as deregulation, re-regulation, and antitrust. This paper examines the
determinants of productivity in Japanese manufacturing industries, looking particularly at the
impact of product market competition on productivity.
          Using a newly available panel data on around ten thousand firms in Japanese
manufacturing for the years 1994-2000, I provide some additional support for the view that
competition, as measured by lower level of industrial mark-ups, enhances productivity growth,
controlling for a broad range of industrial and firm-specific characteristics. Moreover, I suggest
that market power, as measured by either individual price-cost margin or market share, has
negative impact on productivity level of R&D performing firms.
          This paper regards price-cost margin as the main competition indicator. There are
several prior studies which treat price-cost margin as a competition index. Boone (2000)
provides a convincing argument that any parameter increase that would result in raising the
relative profit shares of firms would be a suitable measure of product market competition.
Nickel (1996) defines a competitive measure by average rents normalized on value-added.
Aghion et al. (2002) uses the Lerner Index which is defined by operating profit minus financial
cost divided by sales. Furthermore, Nishimura et al. (1999) shows that there is a negative
correlation between international competitiveness and mark-up. Its sensitivity is uniform within
an industry though skewness may be problematic in estimation. Overall there is a sound
theoretical and empirical support for using price cost margin or other forms of rent as the
measure of product market competition.
          Traditional competition measures such as Herfindahl index and market share are
misleading in certain business fields, because these measures are crucially dependent on the
definition of the relevant market and tend to neglect potential as well as international
competition. Therefore, price-cost margin would be, arguably, a more desirable measure to
gauge the extent of competition, especially in certain manufacturing industries which are
confronted with intense international competition.
          At first glance, it seems to be obvious that price-cost margin decreases with


1
  There are several prior studies confirming competition effects on the level of productivity, such as
Geroski (1990, 1995), Caves et al. (1992), Nickel et al. (1992) and Torii (2001). On the other hand,
Nickel (1996), Geroski et al. (1997), Nickel et al. (1997), Blundell et al. (1995, 1999), and Aghion et al.
(2002) utilize dynamic panel data models, and suggest that market power reduce the growth of
productivity and/or innovation. Regrettably there are quite few solid empirical studies concerning
Japanese industries.


                                                    2
competitive pressure. However, price-cost margin is apparently affected by not only competition
but also by other various economic conditions, such as demand fluctuation, R&D appropriation,
and technological opportunity. Accordingly, there are serious endogeneity issues on the
relationship between price-cost margin and productivity.
          To alleviate endogeneity biases, I utilize a convenient and widely used class of
generalized method of moments (GMM) estimators, i.e. the Arellano-Bond dynamic panel data
model (Arellano and Bond, 1991). By using this estimation method, I treat several key
explanatory variables as endogenous. This estimator optimally exploits all the linear moment
restrictions that follow from the assumption of no serial correlation in the error terms. This
method has been widely used in the empirical industrial organization literature (Geroski et al.,
1993, 1997; Nickel, 1996; Nickel et al., 1997; Blundell et al., 1995, 1999; Klette, 1999; Aghion
et al., 2002).
          I will basically follow the empirical strategy by Nickel (1996). I utilize his
econometric framework as a basic model in a slightly different specification. Furthermore, I
expand the basic model with a broad range of industrial and firm specific characteristics. As will
be discussed in detail in the following sections, I will try to incorporate various market
conditions as much as possible into empirical formulation to control simultaneity, such as
demand fluctuation, R&D activity, diversification, financial constraint, and technological
opportunity. Furthermore, I will examine whether R&D performing and non-performing firms
may adopt distinct managerial strategies which would result in different productivity dynamics,
reflecting the Schumpeterian dynamics.
          This paper uses an exceptionally valuable panel data at the firm level. The Ministry of
Economy, Trade and Industry (METI) has conducted the comprehensive survey about
real-world activities of Japanese firms, Basic Survey of Business Structure and Activities
(BSBSA), since 1991. The BSBSA is one of the “specified” statistics, which means that all
relevant respondents have legal obligations to respond to them, as is the case in the National
Census. The BSBSA has been conducted annually by METI since the second survey and I am
able to examine firm level data consecutively since 1994 to the present. The BSBSA covers all
the firms with no less than 50 employees and greater than 30 million yen capitalization in
mining, manufacturing, wholesale and retail trade2.
          The most valuable character of this survey is that it has been conducted by firm-unit of
observation with a permanent identification code. Establishment data such as Census of
Manufacturers are also available in many countries, but price setting, investment, diversification
and R&D activities, to name a few, are rarely determined by the unit of establishment as


2 The survey also covers firms in agriculture, construction, and service sectors, as long as they also
engage at least partly in one of mining, manufacturing, wholesale and retail trade or restaurant activities.


                                                     3
managerial decisions. In this respect, the BSBSA provides valuable information to accomplish
empirical studies on firms’ competitive behaviors.
          The available dataset consists of an unbalanced panel with a large number of
cross-section units of manufacturing (more than 13000 firms which are classified by 59 industry
codes in manufacturing), each observed for a small number of time periods (for the years
1994-2000 at most). This situation is typical of micro panel data, thereby calls for the estimation
method that does not require the time dimension to become large in order to obtain consistent
parameter estimates.
          The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 gives a theoretical background
concerning the relationship between competition and productivity. Section 3 lays out empirical
formulation. Section 4 explains variable construction and measurement issues. Section 5
presents empirical findings. Section 6 discusses some implications and reservations of the
estimation results. Section 7 concludes the paper.


2. Theoretical Background
There is a broad range of theoretical as well as empirical literatures on the relationship between
competition and productivity. It is almost impossible to negate that a lot of important
manufacturing sectors are subject to imperfect competition (Hall, 1988; Bresnahan, 1989). In
the following, I will review various types of theoretical research which would clarify the
relationship between competition and productivity3.
          First, there have been a lot of studies in line with a neoclassical model of firms. If
firms have market power, their optimum size may differ from minimum cost position, and if
economies of scale and/or scope exist, such differences may be more noticeable. Furthermore,
game-theoretic arguments have suggested that the degree to which costs are sunk and the
resulting intensity of potential competition may be important determinants of market structure
(Sutton 1991, 1998). Investment, advertising and R&D are typical examples of such strategic
behaviors that would raise sunk cost, and thereby enhance competitive advantage under certain
circumstances.
          Second, contract theory of firms provides various theoretical predictions. The
relationship between competition and efficiency incentive can be described by using models of
moral hazard with multiple agents. Holmstrom (1982), Hart (1983), Nalebuff and Stiglitz (1983),


3 The literature survey hereafter is greatly indebted to Cohen and Levin (1989), Schmalensee (1989),
Scherer and Ross (1990), Cohen (1995), Nickel (1996), Geroski (1995, 1999), Meyer and Vickers (1997),
Aghion and Howitt (1998), Bartelsman and Doms (2000), Klette and Griliches (2000), Aghion et al.
(2001, 2002), and Nishimura et al. (1999, 2003). Obviously the literature review here is not complete and
I neglected many important applications to a variety of other related topics, such as macroeconomic
dynamics.


                                                   4
Mookherjee (1984), and Meyer and Mookherjee (1987) present models that demonstrate how
comparative performance information yielded by competition may enhance efficiency
incentives. On the other hand, Scharfstein (1988) and Martin (1993) provide models in which
competition in the product market may raise the sensitivity of profits to manager’s decision.
They find that increased competition tends to be negatively associated with managerial effort.
Furthermore, Meyer and Vickers (1997) show that overall welfare effect of comparative
performance information can either reinforce or weaken efficiency incentives in dynamic
settings depending on underling information structure.
           Third, endogenous growth theory (hereafter EGT) provides an alternative theoretical
basis of the relationship between competition and productivity (Grossman and Helpman 1991,
Aghion and Howitt 1992, Caballero and Jaffe 1993, Jones 1995, Aghion and Howitt 1998,
Aghion et al. 2001). EGT generates various predictions as to the relationship between
competition, innovation and productivity. For instance, Aghion et al. (2002) predicts
theoretically and then examine empirically the relationship between product market competition
and the number of successful patents. They find an inverted-U relationship between them as in
line with earlier empirical findings by Scherer (1967) and Levin et al. (1985, 1987).
           Joint consideration of the impact of R&D and competition needs additional care about
the Schumpeterian dynamics in market structure, since R&D incentive depends not only on
post-R&D competition, but also on the differences between post- and pre-R&D competition
(Arrow, 1962). A standard industrial organization theory predicts that R&D should decline with
competition, as more competition reduces the monopoly rents that reward successful innovators
(Dasgupta and Stiglitz, 1980). However, a lot of empirical studies show that there is a positive
correlation between product market competition and innovative output (Geroski 1995; Blundell
et al. 1995, 1999; Aghion et al. 2002). Competition may increase the incremental profit from
R&D because it may reduce a firm’s pre-R&D rents by more than it reduces its post-R&D rents.
Competition thereby encourages R&D investments which may lead to higher productivity
growth4.
           Fourth, there are a lot of attempts to identify life cycles of firms. Geroski (1999)
describes the literature as stage theories of growth (Jovanovic, 1982; Hopenhayn, 1993; Ericson
and Pakes, 1995; Klepper, 1996). Several case studies using relatively long time-series data
provide appealing empirical findings which are consistent with predictions of the theoretical


4
  A recent game theoretic analysis by Vives (2004) shows that increasing the number of firms still tend to
reduce R&D effort, whereas increasing the degree of product substitutability increase R&D effort
provided that the total market for varieties does not shrink. This indicates that it is an important role of
innovation to expand the set of new products, which would change resulting market structure. See also
Klette and Griliches (2000) which give an alternative explanation to new product innovation by using a
quality ladder model.


                                                     5
models (Jovanovic and MacDonald 1994, Pakes and Ericson 1998, Klepper and Simon 2000).
           Finally, there is a growing body of the literature concerning Penrosian models of
organizational capabilities (Penrose 1959, Slater 1980, Nelson 1981, Clark and Fujimoto 1991,
Teece et al. 1997, Dosi et al. 2000). Penrose thought of firms as bundles of managerial resources
which were bound together by a set of organizational capabilities. In the spirit of this theory,
firms compete in constructing organizational capability (or core competence), rather than simply
setting price or quantity. R&D competition seems to be relevant to this view. Obviously R&D is
not the only method to build up organizational capability. There are a lot of other aspects of a
firm’s organizational capability, such as managerial skill, product market strategies, experiences
(learning by doing or practiced routines), and IT investment. Bresnahan et al. (2002) present
another line of research in a related vein.
           The gist which emerged from these growing literatures is that the relationship between
competition and productivity has a complex dynamics, and that these models of industry
evolution are mainly driven by differences in productivity within and between firms. Different
theoretical predictions may be attributable to various assumptions in terms of the source of
productivity change. Obviously competition is one of the important driving forces, although the
implication for productivity dynamics varies according to different assumptions on market
structure and firms’ behavior.


3. Empirical Formulation
In an excellent study, Nickel (1996) presents evidence that competition, as measured by lower
levels of rents, is associated with a significantly higher rate of total factor productivity (TFP) in
UK manufacturing. I utilize his econometric framework as a basic model in a slightly different
specification. Furthermore, I expand the basic model with an additive term of R&D stock using
the conventional specification of the literature (Griliches 1979, 1986). Both product market
competition and R&D investment possibly enhances productivity in an intertwined fashion.
Therefore I treat both of them simultaneously in single empirical specification. That is, I define
a productivity equation utilizing a Cobb-Douglas production function as follows:

y it = β i + β t + λ y i ,t −1 + (1 − λ ) α l it + (1 − λ ) (1 − α ) cit + γ k it + δ hit + ς s it + ξ comp j t + ε it

where y it is log of real output, l it is log of employment, cit is log of capital stock, k it is
log of R&D stock, hit is a cyclical component, sit reflects the impact of market power on the
level of productivity, comp j represents a cross-sectional impact of product market competition
on productivity growth at the industry level, i is the firm subscript, j is the industry
subscript, t is the time subscript, β i is firm fixed effects, β t is time effects, and ε it is
serially uncorrelated error terms.



                                                           6
           This specification assumes that the production function exhibits constant returns to
conventional inputs ( l it , cit ) and therefore increasing returns to the basic three arguments
( l it , cit , k it ), following the EGT literature. Note that the present formulation does not make any
explicit assumption of global profit maximization, reflecting various predictions of firms’
behavior in the literature. Put differently, the model allows for the possibility that intangible
inputs (especially knowledge stock) are not fully adjusted to their equilibrium values, but are
considered quasi-fixed while the firm solves its short run profit maximization problem. As
Griliches (1986, p.152) indicated, “while it is likely that major divergences among firms in rate
of return to R&D would be eliminated or reduced in the long run, the relevant runs can be quite
long.”
          To eliminate the firm fixed effects, I difference the production function to obtain, after
rearrangement,

∆( y it − cit ) = ∆β t + λ∆( y it −1 − cit ) + (1 − λ )α∆ (l it − cit ) + γ ∆k it + δ ∆hit + ς ∆s it + ξ comp j + ∆ε it .


To avoid the corruption of parameter estimates, y it , l it , cit , k it , sit and some other control
variables (which are explained in the next section) are treated as endogenous, in that they are
correlated with ε it and earlier shocks, but is uncorrelated with ε it +1 and subsequent shocks.
That is, the endogenous variables are treated symmetrically with the dependent variable y it 5.
Furthermore, after differencing, y i ,t −1 is correlated with the equation error ∆ε it . As long as the
basic error term ε it is serially uncorrelated, however, all lags on y it , l it , cit , k it and
sit beyond t − 1 are valid instruments6.
           To alleviate endogeneity issues between competition and productivity, I utilize the
Arellano-Bond dynamic panel data model (Arellano and Bond, 1991)7. This estimator optimally
exploits all the linear moment restrictions that follow from the assumption of no serial
correlation in the error terms. That is, I estimate the model using orthogonality assumptions
between ∆ε it and the set of instruments Z is :

           E ( ∆ε it Z is ) = 0


5
  According to the usual terminology of the dynamic panel data analysis, xit series is endogenous if xit
is correlated with ε it and earlier shocks although xit is uncorrelated with ε it +1 and subsequent
shocks. On the other hand, if x it and ε it is also uncorrelated but still correlated with ε i ,t −1 and
earlier shocks, the variable xit series are called predetermined.
6
  As is pointed out by Griliches (1986, p.152), “It is possible to use simultaneous equation techniques to
estimate such models, but then the argument shifts to the validity of the exogeneity assumption for the
particular instruments. In the context of my specific data set, it is hard to think of any valid instruments
except for possibly lagged values of the same variables.”
7 Baltagi (2001), Wooldridge (2001), Arellano and Honoré (2001), Bond (2002), and Arellano (2003)

concisely explain recent developments of dynamic panel data models. The description of econometric
issues in the following heavily depends on these studies.


                                                         7
where    Z is is    a      vector    of       instruments     dated s ≤ t − 2 (i = 1,2,..., N ; t = 3,4,..., T ) ,
∆ε it = (∆ε i 3 , ∆ε i 4 ,..., ∆ε iT ) ′ , and N is the total number of firms. Instrumental variables
estimators based on this fact is a generalized method of moment estimators (GMM), making use
of the moment restrictions generated by the serially uncorrelated errors (Arellano and Bond,
1991).
          GMM optimally combines the set of orthgonality conditions8. The asymptotically
efficient GMM estimator based on the set of moment conditions minimizes

               ⎛1   N           ⎞      ⎛1      N          ⎞
          J = ⎜⎜    ∑ ∆ε i′Z i ⎟⎟W2 N ⎜⎜ N    ∑ Z i′∆ε i ⎟⎟
               ⎝N   i =1        ⎠      ⎝      i =1        ⎠

by using the weight matrix

                                                     −1
                    ⎛1    N
                              ⎛      ∧  ∧  ⎞⎞
          W2 N   = ⎜⎜    ∑ ⎜ i i ε i′ Z i ⎟⎟ ⎟⎟
                              ⎜ Z ′ ∆ε ∆
                    ⎝N   i =1 ⎝            ⎠⎠


         ∧
where ∆ε i is consistent estimate of the first-differenced residuals obtained from a preliminary

consistent estimator, and W2 N is a consistent estimator of the covariance matrix of ( Z i′∆ε i ) .
This is a two-step GMM estimator. Under homoskedasticity of the ε it disturbances, this structure
of the first-differenced model implies that an asymptotically equivalent GMM estimator can be
obtained through a one-step procedure, replacing the weight matrix to

                                         −1
                    ⎛1   N           ⎞
          W1N    = ⎜⎜    ∑ Z i′HZ i ⎟⎟
                    ⎝N   i =1        ⎠

where H is a square matrix with twos on the main diagonal, minus ones on the first
off-diagonals and zeros otherwise. This method crucially depends on the absence of serial
correlation in ε it . Absence of serial correlation is partially assisted by the inclusion of dynamics
in the form of a lagged dependent variable. I use serial correlation tests developed by Arellano
and Bond (1991) (hereafter A-B test), as well as a standard instrument validity test (Sargan test).
          I will mainly report one-step GMM estimators’ results since the standard errors
associated with the two-step estimators tend to be seriously downward biased, as shown by
Arellano and Bond (1991). This is because the dependence of the two-step weight matrix on
estimated parameters makes the usual asymptotic distribution approximations less reliable for

8
  I am greatly indebted to Arellano and Bond (1991), Arellano and Honoré (2001) and Bond (2002) as to
the following econometric description.


                                                          8
the two-step estimators (Arellano and Bond, 1991).
          Generally, estimators which eliminate unobserved fixed effects by first-differencing,
and use lagged values of endogenous variables as instruments, tend to perform poorly in
situations where the series are close to being random walks. Furthermore, firms’ growth rate
might be subject to Gibrat’s Law (Sutton, 1997; Goddard et al., 2002). Identification would be
weak where the series is near unit root process. Blundell and Bond (1998) shows that dynamic
panel data models obtained after first differencing have large finite sample bias where the
autoregressive parameters is moderately large and the number of time series observations is
moderately small. Thus the A-B test statistics and the autoregressive parameters are crucial to
examine whether estimates are spurious statistical artifacts or not.
          It is worth noting that, in the context to the present model, the attempt to isolate the
impact of competition on the level of productivity is a search for a time-series effect. It is clear
from the estimation equation that what is concerned is the impact of changes in the level of
market power ( ∆sit ) on changes in productivity. On the other hand, the impact of competition
on productivity growth is represented by the cross-sectional correlation between industrial
competition index ( comp j ) and productivity growth. Accordingly, the coefficient of
competition variables either represents growth effect (cross-section effect) or level effect
(time-series effect), depending on the variable construction of the competitive measures.


4. Variable Construction and Measurement Issues
Variable definitions are summarized in Table 1. Complete definitions are available in the
Appendix. I discuss some variable definitions and their measurement issues here because they
have important implications for the interpretation of the estimation results.


4.1. Real Output, Real Input of Labor and Capital
As is suggested by Nickel (1996, p738), freely estimated on the parameters of labor and capital,
the data tends to push the coefficients strongly toward diminishing returns, which is not unusual
in a dynamic time-series context. Nickel indicates that this is because of inadequately controlled
measurement error in labor and capital, strongly accentuated by differencing. Hence for the
purposes of investigating total factor productivity effects, it is better to impose constant returns9.


9 By using establishment data, Nakajima et al. (1998) find that, while significant scale economies exist in
many manufacturing industries, the TFP growth is attributable primarily to technical progress. They
suggest that the finding validates the current practice of assuming constant returns to scale production
functions. Klette (1999) shows that there is little scale effect on price-cost margins and productivity using
establishment data in Norwegian manufacturing. Klette shows that simultaneous estimation of price-cost
margins, scale economies and productivity reveals statistically significant, but quite small margins
between price and marginal costs in most manufacturing industries. That is, problems with market power
and unexploited scale economies seem to be small on average across manufacturing.


                                                     9
The present specification attempts to alleviate the simultaneity bias in the determination of
employment, capital and output by using lagged variables as instruments. Although the
coefficients of labor and capital are not the primary concern at the present study, the ultimate
directions of biases are not known a priori.


4.2. Product Market Competition
The main indicator of product market competition is constructed by using price-cost margin. I
utilize individual price-cost margin as a proxy for market power10. At the same time, I define
industry aggregate competition measure, following Aghion et al. (2002), as follows:

                         1
          comp j = 1 −
                         Nj
                              ∑ pcmij
                              i


where i indexes firms, j indexes industry, and N j is the number of firms in industry j 11.
These competitive measures may contain several misspecification biases. The most important
appears to be: (i) estimates of the competition index would suffer from endogeneity bias; and
(ii) mark-ups would fluctuate either pro-cyclically or counter-cyclically.
          Concerning the fist issue which is the primary concern of the present study, I treat
individual firm’s price-cost margin as endogenous, and utilize the firm specific competition
variable ( ∆pcmit ) to measure time-series competitive effect on productivity level. On the other
hand, the industrial competition measure ( comp j ) is assumed to be exogenous, and their
identification comes from variation across industries over time. This means that, although
 comp j is assumed to be time-invariant in the empirical formulation (and this is virtually in
accordance with the actual data), there still remains some endogeneity bias. To alleviate possible
endogeneity bias in the industrial competitive measure, I contain several cross-sectional control
variables in regressions as will be explained below.
          The second point has been examined extensively in the industrial organization
         12
literature . To control market demand fluctuation, I include growth rates of both industrial sales

10
   Concerning the calculation of price-cost margin, see Appendix for more detail.
11
   The conventionally used measures are concentration ratio and the Herfindahl index. In exploratory
works, however, I had no statistically significant impact of these traditional competition measures on
productivity in various specifications.
12
   Green and Porter (1984) show that markups will be pro-cyclical under imperfect information. On the
other hand, Rotenberg and Saloner (1986) show markups will be counter-cyclical under perfect
information by specifying that demand is subject to i.i.d. shocks. Haltiwanger and Harrington (1991) and
Kandori (1991) further show theoretically that counter-cyclicality is robust with serially correlated
demand shocks for a range of values for the discount factor. These theoretical analyses assume implicit
collusion among firms. As for empirical findings, Odagiri and Yamashita (1987) and Nishimura et al.
(1999) find pro-cyclical mark-ups in Japanese manufacturing industries. Domowitz et al. (1986), Machin
and Van Reenen (1993), Chirinko and Fazzari (1994), and Ghosal (2000) also find similar pro-cyclicality
in manufacturing industries in UK and US.


                                                  10
( industrial _ sales jt ) and import penetration ( import _ penetration jt ) in regressions. These
variables as well as year dummies are expected to control the cyclical components of
productivity dynamics.


4.3. Market Share and Diversity Index
Although market share is conventionally used as an index of market power, there are a lot of
reservations to use. Nickel (1996, p.733) enumerates the caveats of market share as follows: (i)
collusion depends not only on the size of the various firms involved relative to the market but
also on other factors that are hard to control; (ii) potential as well as actual competition
influences market power; (iii) market share does not fully reflect foreign competitors; and (iv)
market share uses industrial sales as the denominator, but it is not certain that this represents the
actual market. Thus, the estimates of market share would have little value as a cross-section
measure of market power.
             However, if market share is used as a time-series measure, the problems above may be
less serious. Nickel (1996, pp.733-4) explains the reason as follows. There are two types of
possible causality: (i) competition to firm growth and productivity growth; and (ii) firm growth
and productivity growth to competition. Reverse causality yields the opposite sign. Thus if there
is a positive relationship between productivity growth and competition (or negative relationship
between market share and productivity growth), the true relationship would be much stronger.
             I use market share ( ∆shareit ) and individual price-cost margin ( ∆pcmit ) alternatively
in regressions for the sole purpose of robustness check. Furthermore, in order to alleviate the
above mentioned issues, I define weighted average market share following Crépon et al. (1998).
By using their definition, it is also possible to define diversity index of firms.
             To calculate the weighted average market share and the diversity indices, I fully utilize
individual firm’s sales data by industry in the BSBSA: agriculture, construction, mining,
manufacturing, wholesale and retail trade, and remaining service sectors. The total number of
industries is 135 in which manufacturing sector consists of 59 industries. Thus the weighted
market share and diversity index ( diversityit ) likely reflect the extent of vertical (as well as
horizontal) diversification13.


4.4. Other Control Variables
I include additional control variables in regressions as shown in Table 1. Although it is very
difficult to incorporate a broad range of real-world business activities into a single empirical
formulation, I attempt to trace not only R&D activity but also some other related aspects of
industrial and firm characteristics as much as possible.

13
     Concerning the variable constructions, see Appendix for more detail.


                                                     11
          First, as is specified in the empirical formulation, the effect of R&D stock is measured
by γ that is allowed to vary across firms. Estimation of γ may require data on the growth of
R&D stock. But if investment in R&D does not depreciate, then data on R&D intensity
( rd _ intensityit ) can be used to capture the R&D effect 14 . That is, ∆k it ≅ Rit / K it and
γ ∆k it ≅ ρ ( Rit / Yit ) where ρ is the marginal product of R&D, Y is output, R is R&D
expenditures, and K is R&D stock. This implies that the rate of growth in productivity
depends on the intensity of R&D investment (Griliches 1986). Thus the coefficient of R&D
intensity can be regarded as the rate of return to R&D15.
          Second, in order to control a firm specific appropriability condition which may affect
individual firm’s productivity, I contain a technology trade variable ( tech _ tradeit ) in
regressions. This is defined by technology transaction turnovers (revenue + expenditure) divided
by sales. This variable is expected to condition appropriability of R&D in a comprehensive
manner (Levin et al. 1987, Cohen 1995). That is, an active firm in technology transaction is able
to retain more profit from R&D investment that would induce more R&D expenditures, thus
such a firm would be more productive.
         Third, in order to control remaining possible appropriation effect, I define the
Herfindahl index of R&D expenditures ( rd _ herf jt ). I include this variable in regressions, since
I noticed highly distinct distributions of R&D doers as well as the amount of expenditures
across industries. Larger industries contain more R&D doers and thus tend to have lower values
of rd _ herf jt , nonetheless, some of smaller industries have a lot of R&D performers: some
industries evenly spread R&D expenditure among firms whereas some other industries
concentrate R&D on a few large firms. These differences are likely associated with the R&D
appropriation effect across industries16.
          Finally, I contain debt-asset ratio ( debt _ assetit ) in regressions as a financial
constraint variable. The Japanese economy in the latter half of 1990s was suffered from severe
debt-deflationary pressure. Although this financial predicament would damage the firms with

14
    If R&D investments depreciate, as they likely do, the estimated coefficient may contain some
downward bias. Griliches and Lichenberg (1984) find that point estimates rise with the assumed rate of
depreciation but that the specification’s fit is best with zero rate of depreciation. On the other hand, Hall
and Mairesse (1995) suggest that this sort of method is still problematic because of (i) several
measurement issues concerning net R&D expenditures, and (ii) possible gestation lag between R&D and
productivity, and suggest that the relevant coefficients should be interpreted as an ‘excess’ rate of return
to R&D.
 15
     The potential measurement bias on the above-mentioned procedure would be quite serious.
Nevertheless, it is very likely that there is some R&D effect on productivity. The main purpose of
incorporating the R&D related variables at the present formulation is controlling the very probable source
of productivity gain and elucidating the impact of competition on productivity all the more.
16
    This index is accompanied by the similar caveats to the traditional competition measures. The most
salient point appears to be: (i) international R&D competition; (ii) economies of scale and scope in R&D;
(iii) gestation lag between R&D investment and productivity gain; and (iv) knowledge spillovers among
firms. Therefore the coefficients of this variable should be interpreted with the utmost caution.


                                                    12
stricter financial constraint, financial pressure may play some role in motivating organizational
efficiency and growth, as pointed out by Jensen (1986, 2000), Nickel et al. (1997), and Aghion
et al. (1999, 2002)17.
          Note that diversity index, technology trade, and debt-asset ratio are all included in
levels in regressions. Hence these variables are expected to control the cross-sectional correlates
of productivity growth. In addition I treat these variables as endogenous variables.


5. Results
5.1. Data Issues
To eliminate apparent outliers (due to missing data, erroneous data and possible erroneous
matches) without using arbitrary imputation procedures, I computed the sales/asset ratio and
eliminated those observations outside the 95 percentile (i.e. 2.5% on both side). I also
eliminated those observations whose price-cost margins were more than unity. Using these
procedures, the observations decreased by 5.05%. To make the dynamic panel data model
estimable, I further eliminated those observations with the number of consecutive periods for
which data were held was less than five years. By this procedure, the observations decreased by
27.40%. The industry classification in manufacturing as well as the corresponding number of
firms in both full sample and estimation sample is shown in Table 2.
          The summary statistics are presented in Tables 3 and 4. Number of observations and
basic statistics of R&D performers and non-performers are shown in Table 3. According to the
Student’s t-values, almost all key variables, such as sales growth rate, price-cost margin,
debt-asset ratio and real value added per employee, are statistically different between R&D
performers and non-performers. Employment adjustment rate is the sole variable which is not
statistically different between the two sub-samples. This indicates that R&D performing and
non-performing firms adopt distinct managerial strategies which may result in different
productivity dynamics.


5.2. Basic Specification
The estimation results of the basic specification are presented in Table 5. The dependent
variable is log of real sales. The number of consecutive periods for which data are held is at
least five years. Since some observations for market share and price-cost margins are differently
missing due to erroneous data and possible erroneous matches, the number of observations is
not necessarily identical with each other. Constant returns to scale in labor and capital are
imposed in all regressions. All equations are estimated in first differences and include both year

17
 Empirical findings by Aghion et al. (2002) suggest that firms with higher financial pressures innovate
more for any level of product market competition.


                                                  13
dummies and industry dummies. To save space the coefficients of these dummies are omitted.
          A-B test statistics that average auto-covariance in residuals of order 1 and 2 is zero are
shown by the rows denoted by m1 and m2 respectively. The pattern of serial correlation in the
first-differenced residuals is consistent with the assumption that the ε it disturbances are
serially uncorrelated, so that ∆ε it should have significant negative first-order serial correlation
but no significant second-order serial correlation. There is also some evidence that the AR(1)
model is well specified for the data series as is shown by the significant coefficients of the
lagged dependent variable. The estimates, however, are quite small and negative 18 . This
suggests that there may be some very weak tendency to mean reversion which has been pointed
out by the literature on Gibrat’s Law, although it may result from measurement errors.
          As the empirical model is over-identified, it is appropriate to use Sargan statistics to
test the validity of the over-identifying restrictions. Consistent with the evidence from the serial
correlation tests, the null that these moment conditions are invalid is not rejected at any
conventional significance level in columns (1) and (3). The Sargan statistic from the one-step
homoskedastic estimator in column (2) marginally rejects the null that the over-identifying
restrictions are valid. This could be due to heteroskedasticity. However, the two-step Sargan test
may be better for inference on model specification. Sargan χ2(98) is 80.51 (p=0.901) in column
(2) using two-step homoskedastic estimator. In addition, the two-step standard errors tend to be
biased downward in small samples. For this reason, Arellano and Bond (1991) recommend the
one-step results for statistical inferences. Thus I report the one-step results in column (2).
        The estimation result in columns (1) through (3) show that the industrial competitive
measures ( comp jt ) are strongly significant and positive. This reveals a significant
cross-sectional impact of competition on productivity growth, controlling for various firm and
industry specific characteristics. On the other hand, in columns (2) and (3), the time-series
measures of product market competition ( shareit or pcmit ) have negative sign as expected but
not statistically significant. These variables are entered in growth rate, thus there are no
significant impact of competition on productivity level. This non-significance may be partly due
to small within variation in the data with at most seven-year periods.
          It should be noted that several control variables have also significant coefficients. First,
cyclical time-series factors such as industrial growth and import penetration are positive and
significant. Unreported coefficients of either industry dummies or year dummies are also jointly
significant respectively. Thus it is arguable that industrial demand fluctuation would be well


18
   Blundell and Bond (1998) show that if lagged dependent variable has a relatively large coefficient, a
first differenced estimator such as the Arellano and Bond model may contain significant (mostly upward)
bias. In this case, they recommend using the system GMM estimator which utilizes additional moment
restriction of the cross-sectional instruments. Fortunately, this bias is not so serious for the present
specification, because the autoregressive coefficients are very small.


                                                  14
controlled in the basic specification. Second, debt asset ratio has significantly negative impact
on productivity. Third, product diversity and technology trade has positive signs although
statistical significances are quite weak. Finally the coefficients of R&D concentration index
( rd _ herf jt ) are negative and significant. This suggests that spreading R&D expenditures
among firms has positive impact on productivity growth. Although whether the R&D
concentration index can be regarded as a proxy for R&D competition or knowledge spillovers
remains to be questionable, it is an interesting finding from the viewpoint of Schumpeterian
dynamics19.


5.3. R&D and Productivity
Next, in order to see whether or not R&D affects productivity growth, I expand the basic
specification by including R&D intensity variable. Table 6 shows that the impact of R&D
intensity ( rd _ intensityit ) on productivity growth is positive and highly significant. If R&D
intensity can be regarded as the rate of return to R&D, substantial part of productivity growth
can be attributable to R&D stock. The parameter estimates (0.48 to 0.61) are virtually
comparable to but slightly higher than the estimates of the prior studies in Japan, such as
Odagiri and Iwata (1986) and Goto and Suzuki (1989).
          As for the remaining explanatory variables, I obtain virtually similar results to the
basic model. The time-series effect of market power ( shareit or pcmit ) is negative as expected
but not significant. The industrial competitive variables are still highly significant. Debt-asset
ratio is negative and technology trade has positive coefficients and both variables are
statistically significant.


5.4. R&D Performers and Non-performers
In Table 7, I employ regressions by using separate samples of R&D performers and
non-performers. R&D performers are defined as firms reporting non-zero R&D expenditures
and non-performers reporting no R&D expenditures within observation periods. In this case, the
time-series competition effect ( ∆shareit or ∆pcmit ) has negative signs and is statistically
significant in R&D performers, whereas they are not statistically significant in non-R&D
performers. This suggests that market power, as measured by market share or by higher level of
individual mark-up, has negative impact upon productivity level in R&D performing firms.
          On the other hand, industrial competitive effects are virtually preserved in Table 7.
Thus it is likely that industrial competitive effects have a robust cross-sectional impact on
productivity growth.

19
   Aghion et al. (2002) found that the equilibrium degree of technological ‘neck-and-neckness’ among
firms should decrease with product market competition.


                                                15
          Columns (3) and (4) in Table 7 show that R&D intensity has still positive and
marginally significant effect on productivity level, but the coefficients (0.23 to 0.24) become
slightly lower than the previous estimates. The possible reason would be an omitted variable
bias due to the negligence of knowledge spillovers which are more likely to exist among R&D
performers. Spillovers possibly make the estimated coefficients downward biased 20 . R&D
performers may have better absorptive capacity and could obtain external knowledge more
effectively than non-R&D-performers, as is suggested by Cohen and Levinthahl (1989).
          Other salient features of the estimated results in Table 7 are as follows. First, the
coefficients of debt-asset ratio are negative and still highly significant for non-R&D performers,
but no longer significant for R&D performers. The financial predicament in the 1990s would
thereby damage more the non-R&D performers than the R&D-performers. I will discuss some
related issues in the next section.
          Second, concerning the technology trade variable, Table 6 produced positive and
significant result at the 5% significance level. In Table 7, however, this variable is not
statistically significant in R&D performers, whereas it is slightly significant in non-R&D
performers (at 5 to 10% significance level). The possible reasons for this difference between
R&D performers and non-performers appear to be that: (i) R&D performers may tend to
appropriate their R&D outcome through in-house production; (ii) some industries with many
non-R&D performers are likely to be doing relatively more informal R&D, reporting less of it,
and hence providing the appearance of more productivity gain from technology transaction.
Thereby the relevant R&D expenditure is measured with error due to less-reporting bias and the
estimated coefficients for technological trade may be upward biased. Unfortunately this sort of
bias is hardly avoidable.


6. Discussion
6.1. Cross-sectional Competition Effect across Industries
In the previous section, I provided some evidence that product market competition enhanced
productivity. Now then, it is worth measuring the quantitative size of the competition effect.
Although our competition measures are defined by the basis of both industrial level ( comp j )
and firm level ( shareit or pcmit ), I will hereafter try to depict the cross-sectional competition
effect on the industrial basis following Nickel (1996).
          The impact of competition on productivity growth is represented by the cross-sectional
correlation between industrial competition index ( comp j ) and productivity growth. In Table 8,


20
   The fact that the social returns to R&D exceed its private returns due to knowledge spillovers among
firms has a sound empirical basis. For example, see Jaffe (1986), Griliches (1992) and Jones and Williams
(1998).


                                                   16
by using the competition coefficient of column (3) in Table 5 (2.097), I present the ceteris
paribus industry TFP growth differentials generated by the differences in the average value of
the competition index across industries. Industry names are placed in the order of productivity
differentials.
          These differentials are substantial in magnitude, and are broadly consistent with other
evidence on the extent of competition in Japanese manufacturing. Less productive industries
with negative differentials are newspaper, drug & medicines, publishing, toilet preparations &
others, beverage & tobacco, medical instruments, miscellaneous food products, oil products &
detergents, industrial inorganic chemicals, and measuring & analytical instruments. On the other
hand, highly productive industries with positive differentials consist of petroleum refining,
reeling plants & spinning mills, blast furnace & basic steel, sawmills & millwork, dyed &
finished textiles, motor vehicles & parts, non-ferrous metals, miscellaneous transport equipment,
woven & knitted fabrics, and watches, clocks & related parts.
          This simple calculation suggests that the productivity dispersion across industries is
extremely large. The lowest group contains many highly regulated industries such as
newspapers, drug & medicines, and medical instruments, whereas the highest group consists of
industries confronted with fierce domestic as well as international competition, such as reeling
plants & spinning mills, blast furnace & basic steel, and motor vehicles & parts.


7.2. Time-series Competition Effect
As was indicated in the previous section, the time-series competition effect presents positive
impact on productivity only in R&D performers. Under the present formulation, the impact of
market power (either ∆shareit or ∆pcmit ) is represented by the negative correlation with
productivity growth. Price-cost margins and market shares are fluctuated within our observation
periods, and these changes partially explain the time-series variation of the productivity level.
Hereafter I will measure the long-run competition effect on aggregate basis.
          The estimates of proportional change of market share ( ∆shareit ) on productivity
growth are -0.048 in column (1) and -0.046 in column (3) in Table 7. This means that around 21
percent increase in market share leads to a 1 percent fall in TFP of R&D performers in the long
run. Surprisingly, this magnitude is quite similar to the result of Nickel (1996, p.741). According
to Nickel, 25 percent increase in market share leads to a 1 percent fall in TFP in UK
manufacturing. It should be noted, however, that the present paper constructed the weighted
market share reflecting vertical as well as horizontal diversification to some extent. Therefore it
may not be appropriate to compare these two figures straightforwardly. On the other hand, the
impact of proportional change of price-cost margin ( ∆pcmit ) on productivity growth is -0.138 in
column (2) and -0.146 in column (4) in Table 7. These results suggest that about 7 percent



                                                17
increase in price-cost margin leads to a 1 percent fall in TFP in the long run.


7.3. Selectivity Bias
Sample selectivity may be quite serious for a dynamic panel data model. If observations are not
missing at random, estimates that are based on cleaned sub-samples could be badly biased. For
example, a negative correlation between estimated productivity shocks and future probabilities
of exit would induce a negative correlation between an error term and the stock of capital
among the surviving firms and bias the estimated capital coefficient downward. Moreover,
sample selection bias due to zero-R&D reporting or less-R&D reporting is hardly avoidable21.
          The comparison between the full sample and the estimation sample in Table 3 suggests
that firm size measured by permanent employee or real sales in the estimation sample is slightly
larger than that in full sample, whereas sales growth rate in estimation sample is relatively lower
than that in full sample. This indicates that some new growing firms are omitted in our
estimation sample. In other words, the coefficients of the competition measures would be
underestimated due to sample selection biases.
          It is difficult to eliminate these selectivity biases completely under the current
empirical specification22. By using price-cost margin as an alternative competition measure,
however, I expect that the above mentioned sampling bias would be, at least partially, alleviated.
There are no significant differences in price-cost margin between full sample and estimation
sample as is shown in Table 323. Thus it is arguable that price-cost margin would reflect some
potential as well as international competition.


7.4. Competition and the Japanese Economy in the 1990s
Finally I make somewhat speculative comments from the viewpoint of policy implications for
the Japanese economy in the 1990s. There was a lively debate on the causes for the productivity
decline in the Japanese economy (Motonishi and Yoshikawa, 1999; Hayashi and Prescott, 2002;
Nishimura et al., 2003; Fukao et al., 2003; Fukao and Kwon, 2004; Caballero et al., 2004;
Jorgenson and Nomura 2005, among others). Regulatory environment, international competition,
technological change, malfunction of financial market, IT investment, and evolution of
industrial mix would be possible factors that altered the nature and direction of productivity


21
  Griliches (1994) emphasized this point.
22
   Market turbulence (i.e., entry, exit, and merger) possibly affects productivity dynamics as depicted by
Baily et al. (1992), Hopenhayn (1993), Olley and Pakes (1996), Foster et al. (1997), Haltiwanger (1997),
Disney et al. (2003), Nishimura et al. (2003), Fukao et al. (2003), and Fukao and Kwon (2004).
23 The BSBSA data is truncated by the threshold of 50 employees and 30 million capitalizations. Thus
new small entrants are not likely to be covered in the survey. Moreover some firms are occasionally
classified in a different industrial sector from the previously classified one. This inter-industry artifactual
move would cause possible another sampling bias.


                                                     18
dynamics.
          For instance, Motonishi and Yoshikawa (1999) indicate that corporate investment is
the most important factor to explain the long stagnation of Japan during the 1990s. Motonishi
and Yoshikawa suggest that for large firms, financial constraints are not significant whereas the
converse is true for small firms. On the other hand, Hayashi and Prescott (2002) show that the
problem is not a breakdown of the financial system, and suggest that lower productivity growth
in Japan be ascribable to inefficient supply-side factors, such as aging population and
diminishing labor input24.
          The possible reason for the productivity decline in accordance with the findings from
the present study appear to be: (i) less competitive pressure in certain business fields is one of
the possible clues to elucidate the causes for inefficient supply-side sectors; and (ii) the financial
predicament in the 1990s might damage more the non-R&D performers rather than small firms.
          The first issue is the main concern of the present study. There are several prior studies
confirming that less competitive pressure is one of the possible causes for the productivity
decline in the 1990s. In a careful study, Nishimura et al. (2003) show that there is no evidence to
demonstrate natural selection mechanism of economic Darwinism works even in severe
recession periods in the 1990s. They explore a firm’s entry, survival, and exit and its
relationship with TFP. Their empirical results show that efficient firms in terms of TFP quit
while inefficient ones survived in the banking-crisis period of 1996-1997. Fukao and Kwon
(2004) also provide the similar finding to Nishimura et al. (2003). That is, a large portion of
aggregate productivity growth was attributable to resource reallocation effect, and such
metabolism did not work well in the latter half of 1990s. Barriers to new competition would be
one of the possible clues to clarify the economic slowdown in the 1990s.
          In a related vein, Caballero et al. (2004) explains the Japanese productivity decline by
the so-called zombie effect. That is, failing companies losing cash-flow were kept alive by
Japanese banks’ bad loans. This is related to the second point I raised above. As is well known,
in the latter half of 1990s, the Japanese economy suffered severe debt-deflationary pressure
which possibly damaged the firms with stricter financial constraint. But it should be noted that
the zombie firms were not necessarily small firms.
          The present study showed that debt-asset ratio had a negative impact on productivity
growth of non-R&D performing firms. This financial predicament would thereby damage more
the non-R&D performers than the R&D-performers25. R&D-related activities, perhaps, made


24
   Hayashi and Prescott (2002, p.227) emphasize that although the so-called “credit crunch” hypothesis
may be applicable only for the brief period of late 1997 through early 1998, it cannot account for the
decade-long stagnation in Japan.
25
   The similar results are also obtained by Fukao and Kwon (2004). They show that TFP gap between 75
and 25 percentile is widening in many industries where R&D intensity is high and internationalization is


                                                  19
firms somewhat resilient to productivity shocks even in the severe recession period. The
significance of debt-asset ratio is relatively robust with respect to separate samples of large and
small firms. The estimation results by using separated samples by large and small firms are
shown in Table 9. The specification fit is rather weak due to serial correlation or invalid
over-identification, but the coefficients of debt-asset ratio are significant in both samples. Firm
size may be a red herring because non-R&D performers are not necessarily small firms. This
finding may be corroborated by Hayashi and Prescott (2002, pp.222-7) showing that despite the
collapse of bank loans, small firms found ways to finance investment during the recession
period for 1996-1998.
          Jorgenson and Nomura (2005) raised another interesting issue concerning productivity
decline in Japan. According to Jorgenson and Nomura, there was a significant productivity gap
between IT-producing and IT-using sectors, especially in the latter half of 1990s; Japanese
IT-using sectors were in miserable situation in the 1990s except for telecommunications
industry; but IT-producing sectors were exceptionally active, especially in the latter half of
the1990s. This suggests that IT-using sectors cannot exploit the full potential of IT innovations
yet. Policy environments surrounding the IT-using sectors in Japan may not be favorable enough
to innovative use of IT. Generally, IT-using sectors are less competitive because many those
sectors are tightly regulated. Furthermore, collusive behaviors and bid-riggings are ubiquitous in
certain business fields in IT-using sectors26.


7. Concluding Remarks
Our findings suggest that product market competition enhance productivity growth
(cross-section effect). Market power has some negative impact upon productivity level in R&D
performing firms (time-series effect). The empirical findings provided here are subject to a
number of reservations. Nevertheless, they do raise the issue that suppressing competition may
turn out to have been very costly to the economy in terms of foregone growth opportunities.
          Hayashi and Prescott (2002, p.228) emphasize that “research effort should be focused
on determining what policy reform will allow productivity to again grow rapidly”. I agree to
this remark. It is quite natural to think that well-designed economic policy is a prerequisite for
productivity growth. Above all things, competition policy would be one of the clues to revive
the Japanese economy in the 21st century. I hope that the present study may shed some



more advanced.
26
   Japanese antitrust enforcement has slowly but steadily strengthened since the beginning of 1990 with
the assist of hard pressure from the US government. At the same time there was (and has been) a
considerable opposition from the Japanese business community against stricter antitrust enforcement. The
increased movement of strict antitrust enforcement and pro-competitive industrial policy would be an
important background to understand the Japanese economy since the 1990s.


                                                  20
additional light on the current productivity debate in Japan.
            The present study opens up a number of questions for further study. First, the analysis
should have controlled for product differentiation because most products in manufacturing
consist of a number of different level of quality and varieties. However, empirically useful
measures of product differentiation and appropriate deflators adjusted for quality are difficult to
derive even in principle, not to mention the practical problems with data availability.
            Second, the cause and effect of productivity change in non-manufacturing sectors is an
important issue to be explored in future research. The lack of attention to non-manufacturing
sectors is mainly due to data constraint, but it must be undoubtedly important to enhance
productivity in non-manufacturing sectors in Japan. Non-manufacturing sectors seem to be less
competitive than manufacturing sectors due to regulations and enclosed domestic markets. It is
therefore very likely that there is still a large growth opportunities left in the non-manufacturing
sectors.
            Third, Griliches (1998) shows that there are substantial heterogeneity and instability in
the coefficients of the estimated Cobb-Douglas production function. This indicates that a more
flexible specification of technology would be desirable, as suggested by Klette (1999) and
Nishimura et al. (1999). The parameter estimates at the present study are still likely to be
suffered from some instability, especially in the input coefficients of labor and capital. Further,
dynamic panel data models are in a developing research area and in many cases GMM for panel
data perform poorly in finite samples. I used a large panel dataset and luckily obtained
meaningful estimates, although the GMM on first differences may still produce imprecise
estimates. A new semi-parametric approach dealing with both selectivity and simultaneity in an
intertwined fashion by Olley and Pakes (1996) would be a promising method in future research.
            Fourth, I construct the R&D related variables by using the firm level data. But firm
level data may not be adequate enough for the purpose of investigating R&D related activities,
since some portion of manufacturing firms in Japan are integrated into interlocking groups27.
Economies of scope and spillovers in R&D may have also caused another possible estimation
biases. Furthermore, R&D outsourcing and joint R&D cooperation are more noticeable in the
late 1990s in Japan. Ownership structure and R&D cooperation, especially in high-tech sectors,
would be very important issues to be explored in future research. Patent data would be a
beneficial source of information on these issues (Jaffe and Trajtenberg 2002).
            Finally, I must admit that this research adds quite a modest size of knowledge to the
understanding of competition effect in the Japanese economy. Evidence from the present study
may not be representative enough because the observation period is just for the years 1994-2000.



27   See Klette (1996) concerning scope economies, interlocking group and R&D performance.


                                                  21
The Japanese economy was in turmoil during the period and many Japanese manufacturing
firms were in the process of fundamental adjustment of over-capitalization and excess
employment under serious debt-deflationary pressure. Furthermore, detailed investigation of the
individual industry and its comparison with industry aggregates is required before any strong
conclusion could be drawn about the relationship between competition and productivity.


Appendix: Variable Construction
Real Output, Real Input of Labor and Capital          Output is measured by deflated sales and input
of labor is defined by the total number of employees. Since there is no accurate information on
material or the number of hours worked in the dataset, I define value-added as follows: sales -
operating cost + wage + depreciation + interest payments. Concerning capital stock, making
consecutive time-series data from BSBSA is virtually impossible, because the BSBSA has
considerable numbers of samples with null investment as well as the dataset is unbalanced. Thus
a standard perpetual inventory method is not applicable here. Therefore capital stock is
represented by the book value of tangible fixed asset deflated by real price of capital goods.


Product Market Competition         I define individual firm’s average price cost margin as follows:

                  sales − cost of sales + depreciation − rK
          pcm =
                                    sales
where r is cost of capital and K is capital stock. Cost of capital is defined by
                                  1−τ d
          r = ( ρ + δ − π Ke ) × (      ) pK
                                   1−τ
where ρ is cost of fund (inter-bank prime rate), δ is economic rate of depreciation
(assuming δ =0.09), π Ke is expected rate of inflation of capital goods (approximated by the
past 3-year moving average of the real price of capital goods, Bank of Japan), τ is an effective
corporate tax rate (Cabinet Office), d denotes the present value of the depreciation deduction
on unit nominal investment, and            p K is a investment goods deflator (SNA private
non-residential investment deflator, Cabinet Office). I simply define d as

          δ /(δ + ρ + π Ke )

following Auerbach (1979).


Market Share and Diversity Index        I define weighted average market share following Crépon
et al. (1998). By using their definition, it is also possible to define diversity index of firms. Let
S i ,k be the sales of firm i for its product k in the industry segment or market k (time
subscripts are suppressed), then


                                                 22
            S i = ∑ S i ,k and S k = ∑ S i ,k
                    k                          i

are respectively the overall sales of firm i (over all its products) and the overall sales on
market k (over all firms). The market share si ,k of firm i on market k and the share of
product k in firm i total sales are thus equal to:

           si ,k = S i ,k / S k and bi ,k = S i ,k / S i .
Note that    ∑ bi,k = 1       for each firm i . Then for diversified firm i the weighted average
               k
market share       s iw   and the diversification index ( diversityi ) are calculated as follows:

            siw = ∑ bi ,k × si ,k and          1 / diversity i = ∑ bi2,k .
                     k                                               k

For a non-diversified firm, I have                 siw   = si and diversityi = 1 .

Other Control Variables              First, in order to control market demand fluctuation, I include
growth rates of both industrial sales and import penetration in regressions. Second, I also
contain a technology trade variable ( tech _ tradeit ) in regressions which is defined by
technology trade turnovers (revenue + expenditure) divided by sales. The sum of revenues and
expenditures of the whole category of technology (patents, utilities, design, copyrights,
trademarks, and know-how) are used in calculation. Finally, I include the number of R&D doers
measured by the Herfindahl index of R&D expenditures ( rd _ herf jt ). I define the measure as
follows:

           rd _ herf jt = ∑ ( Rijt / ∑ Rilt ) 2
                               i           l

where R is R&D expenditure,                i indexes firms, and j indexes industry.

References
Aghion, P., Bloom, N., Blundell, R., Griffith, R., Howitt, P., 2002. Competition and Innovation:
An Inverted U Relationship. NBER Working Paper, No.9269.


Aghion, P., Dewatripont, M., Rey, P., 1999. Competition, Financial Discipline and Growth. Rev.
Econ. Stud. 66, 825-852.


Aghion, P., Harris, C., Howitt, P., Vickers, J., 2001. Competition, Imitation and Growth with
Step-by-Step Innovation. Rev. Econ. Stud. 68(3), 467-492.


Aghion, P., Howitt, P., 1992. A Model of Growth through Creative Destruction. Econometrica
60, 323-357.



                                                                23
Aghion, P., Howitt, P., 1998. Endogenous Growth Theory. MIT Press, Cambridge.


Arellano, M., 2003. Panel Data Econometrics. Oxford Univ. Press, Oxford.


Arellano, M., Bond, S., 1991. Some Tests of Specification for Panel Data: Monte Carlo
Evidence and an Application to Employment Equations. Rev. Econ. Stud. 58, 277-297.


Arellano, M., Honoré, B., 2001. Panel Data Models: Some Recent Developments. In Heckman,
J. J., Leamer, E. (eds.), Handbook of Econometrics vol.5. North-Holland (Elsevier), Amsterdam,
pp. 3229-3296.


Arrow, K., 1962. Economic Welfare and the Allocation of Resources for Invention. In Nelson, R.
R. (ed.), The Rate and Direction of Inventive Activity, Princeton University Press, Princeton.


Auerbach, A. J., 1979. Inflation and the Choice of Asset Life. J. Polit. Economy 87(3), 621-638.


Baily, M. N., Hulten, C., Campbell, D., 1992. Productivity Dynamics in Manufacturing Plants.
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity: Microeconomics 2, 187-249.


Baltagi, B. H., 2001. Econometric Analysis of Panel Data. 2nd ed., John Wiley and Sons, New
York.


Bartelsman, E. J., Doms, M. 2000. Understanding Productivity: Lessons from Longitudinal
Microdata. J. Econ. Lit. 38, 569-594.


Blundell, R., Bond, S. 1998. Initial Conditions and Moment Restrictions in Dynamic Panel Data
Models. J. Econometrics 87, 115-143.


Blundell, R., Griffith, R., Van Reenen, J. 1995. Dynamic Count Data Models of Technological
Innovation. Econ. J. 105, 333-344.


Blundell, R., Griffith, R., Van Reenen, J. 1999. Market Share, Market Value and Innovation in a
Panel of British Manufacturing Firms. Rev. Econ. Stud. 66, 529-554.


Bond, S., 2002. Dynamic Panel Data Models: A Guide to Micro Data Methods and Practice.



                                               24
Cemmap working Paper CWP09/02. The Institute for Fiscal Studies, Department of Economics,
UCL.


Boone, J., 2000. Competitive Pressure: The Effects on Investments in Product and Process
Innovation. RAND J. Econ. 31, 549-569.


Bresnahan, T., 1989. Empirical Studies of Industries with Market Power. In Schmalensee, R.,
Willig, R. D. (eds.), Handbook of Industrial Organization Vol.2, North-Holland, Amsterdam, pp.
1011-1057.


Bresnahan, T., Brynjolfsson, E., Hitt, L., 2002. Information Technology, Workplace
Organization, and the Demand for Skilled Labor: Firm-level Evidence. Quart. J. Econ. 117,
339-376.


Caballero, R. J., Hoshi, T., Kashyap, A. K., 2004. Zombie Lending and Depressed Restructuring
in Japan. Mimeograph. Hitotsubashi University Macro-Money Workshop, 18 June.


Caballero, R. J., Jaffe, J., 1993. How High are the Giants Shoulders: an Empirical Assessment
of Knowledge Spillovers and Creative Destruction in a Model of Economic Growth. In
Blanchard, O. J., Fischer, S. (eds.), NBER Macroeconomics Annual Vol.8. MIT Press,
Cambridge MA.


Caves, R. E., 1992. Industrial Efficiency in Six Nations. MIT Press, Cambridge MA.


Chirinko, R., Fazzari, S., 1994. Economic Fluctuations, Market Power and Returns to Scale:
Evidence from Firm-level Data. J. Appl. Econometrics 9, 47-69.


Clark, K. B., Fujimoto, T., 1991. Product Development Performance. Harvard Business School
Press, Boston.


Cohen, W., 1995. Empirical Studies of Innovative Activity. In Stoneman, P. (ed.), Handbook of
the Economics of Innovation and Technological Change. Blackwell, Oxford, pp. 182-264.


Cohen, W. M., Levinthal, D. A., 1989. Innovation and Learning: The Two Faces of R&D. Econ.
J. 99, 569-596.




                                             25
Cohen, W. M., Levin, R. C., 1989. Empirical Studies of Innovation and Market Structure. In
Schumalensee, R., Willig, R. D. (eds.), Handbook of Industrial Organization Vol.2,
North-Holland, Amsterdam, pp. 1059-1107.


Crépon, B., Duguet, E., Mairesse, J., 1998. Research, Innovation, and Productivity: An
Econometric Analysis at the Firm Level. NBER Working Paper, No.6696.


Dasgupta, P., Stiglitz, J., 1980. Industrial Structure and the Nature of Innovative Activity. Econ.
J. 90, 266-293.


Disney, R., Haskel, J., Heden, Y., 2003. Entry, Exit and Establishment Survival in UK
Manufacturing. J. Ind. Econ. 51, 91-112.


Domowitz, I., Hubbard, G., Petersen, B., 1986. Business Cycles and the Relationship between
Concentration and Price-Cost Margins. RAND J. Econ. 17, 1-17.


Dosi, G., Nelson, R., Winter, S., 2000. The Nature and Dynamics of Organizational Capabilities.
Oxford University Press, New York.


Ericson, R., Pakes, A., 1995. Markov-Perfect Industry Dynamics: A Framework for Empirical
Work. Rev. Econ. Stud. 62, 53-82.


Foster, L., Haltiwanger, J., Krizan, C. J., 1997. Aggregate Employment Dynamics: Building
from Microeconomic Evidence. Amer. Econ. Rev. 87, 115-137.


Fukao, K., Kwon, H. U., 2004. Why Did Japan’s TFP Growth Slowdown in the Lost
Decade?-An Empirical Analysis Based on Firm-Level Data of Manufacturing Firms. High-Stat
Discussion Paper No.50, Institute of Economic Research, Hitotsubashi University.


Fukao, K., Inui, T., Kawai, H., Miyagawa, T., 2003. Sectoral Productivity and Economic
Growth in Japan, 1970-1998: An Empirical Analysis Based on the JIP Database. In Ito, T., Rose,
A. K. (eds.), Growth and Productivity in East Asia, National Bureau of Economic Research East
Asia Seminar on Economics Vol.13. The Univ. of Chicago Press, Chicago.


Geroski, P. A., 1990. Innovation, Technological Opportunity, and Market Structure. Oxford
Econ. Pap. 42, 586-602.



                                                26
Geroski, P. A., 1995. Market Structure, Corporate Performance and Innovative Activity. Oxford
Univ. Press, Oxford.


Geroski, P. A., 1999. The Growth of Firms in Theory and Practice. CEPR Discussion Paper
No.2092.


Geroski, P. A., Machin, S., Van Reenen, J., 1993. The Profitability of Innovative Firms. RAND J.
Econ. 24, 198-211.


Geroski, P. A., Machin, S. J., Walters, C. F., 1997. Corporate Growth and Profitability. J. Ind.
Econ. 45, 171-189.


Ghosal, V., 2000. Product Market Competition and the Industry Price-Cost Markup fluctuations:
Role of Energy Price and Monetary Change. Int. J. Ind. Organ. 18, 415-444.


Goddard, J., Wilson, J., Blandon, P., 2002. Panel Tests of Gibrat’s Law for Japanese
Manufacturing. Int. J. Ind. Organ. 20, 415-433.


Goto, A., Suzuki, K., 1989. R&D Capital, Rate of Return on R&D Investment and Spillover of
R&D in Japanese Manufacturing Industry. Rev. Econ. Statist. 71, 555-564.


Green E., Porter, R., 1984. Noncooperative Collusion under Imperfect Information.
Econometrica 52, 87-100.


Griliches, Z., 1979. Issues in Assessing the Contribution of Research and Development to
Productivity Growth. Bell J. Econ. 10, 92-116.


Griliches, Z., 1986. Productivity, R&D, and Basic Research at the Firm Level in the 1970s.
Amer. Econ. Rev. 76, 141-154.


Griliches, Z., 1992. The Search for R&D Spillovers. Scand. J. Econ. 94, S29-S47.


Griliches, Z., 1994. Productivity, R&D, and the Data Constraint. Amer. Econ. Rev. 84, 1-23.


Griliches, Z., 1998. R&D and Productivity. The Univ. of Chicago Press, Chicago.



                                                 27
Griliches, Z., Lichtenberg, F., 1984. R&D and Productivity Growth at the Industry Level: Is
There Still a Relationship? In Griliches, Z. (ed.), R&D, Patents, and Productivity. The Univ of
Chicago Press, Chicago, pp. 465-496.


Grossman, G. M., Helpman, E., 1991. Innovation and Growth in the Global Economy. MIT
Press, Cambridge MA.


Hall, R., 1988. The Relation between Price and Marginal Cost in U.S. Industry. J. Polit.
Economy 96, 921-947.


Hall, B. H., Mairesse, J., 1995. Exploring the Relationship between R&D and Productivity in
French Manufacturing Firms. J. Econometrics 65, 263-294.


Haltiwanger, J., 1997. Measuring and Analyzing Aggregate Fluctuations: The Importance of
Building from Microeconomic Evidence. Fed. Reserve Bank St. Louis Rev. 79, 55-77.


Haltiwanger, J., Harrington, Jr., J. E., 1991. The Impact of Cyclical Demand Shock Movements
on Collusive Behavior. RAND J. Econ. 22, 89-106.


Hart, O. D., 1983. The Market Mechanism as an Incentive Scheme. Bell J. Econ. 14, 366-382.


Hayashi, F., Prescott, E. C., 2002. The 1990s in Japan: A Lost Decade. Rev. Econ. Dynam. 5,
206-235.


Holmstrom, B., 1982. Moral Hazard in Teams. Bell J. Econ. 13, 324-340.


Hopenhayn, H., 1993. Entry, Exit, and Firm Dynamics in Long Run Equilibrium. Econometrica
60, 649-670.


Jaffe, A. B., 1986. Technological Opportunity and Spillovers of R&D: Evidence from Firms’
Patents, Profits and Market Value. Amer. Econ. Rev. 76, 984-1001.


Jaffe, A. B., Trajtenberg, M., 2002. Patents, Citations & Innovations: A Window on the
Knowledge Economy. MIT Press, Cambridge MA.




                                              28
Jensen, M. C., 1986. Agency Costs of Free Cash Flow, Corporate Finance and Takeovers. Amer.
Econ. Rev. 76, 323-329.


Jensen, M. C., 2000. A Theory of the Firm, Governance, Residual Claims, and Organizational
Forms. Harvard Univ. Press, Cambridge MA.


Jones, C. I., 1995. R&D-Based Models of Economic Growth. J. Polit. Economy 103, 759-784.


Jones, C. I. Williams, J. C., 1998. Measuring the Social Return to R&D. Quart. J. Econ. 113,
1119-1135.


Jorgenson, D. W., Nomura, K., 2005. Information Technology and the Japanese Growth
Recovery. J. Japan. Int. Econ. This issue.


Jovanovic, B., 1982. Selection and the Evolution of Industry. Econometrica 50, 649-670.


Jovanovic, B., MacDonald, G., 1994. The Life Cycle of a Competitive Industry. J. Polit.
Economy 102, 322-347.


Kandori, M., 1991. Correlated Demand Shocks and Price Wars During Booms. Rev. Econ. Stud.
58, 171-180.


Klepper, S., 1996. Entry, Exit, Growth and Innovation over the Product Life Cycle. Amer. Econ.
Rev. 86, 562-83.


Klepper, S., Simon, K. L., 2000. The Making of an Oligopoly: Firm Survival and Technological
Change in the Evolution of the U.S. Tire Industry. J. Polit. Economy 108, 728-760.


Klette, T. J., 1996. R&D, Scope Economies, and Plant Performance. RAND J. Econ. 27,
502-522.


Klette, T. J., 1999. Market Power, Scale Economies and Productivity: Estimates from a Panel of
Establishment Data. J. Ind. Econ. 47, 451-476.


Klette, T. J., Griliches, Z., 2000. Empirical Patterns of Firm Growth and R&D Investment: A
Quality Ladder Model Interpretation. Econ. J. 110, 363-387.



                                                 29
Levin, R., Cohen, W, Mowery, D., 1985. R&D Appropriability, Opportunity, and Market
Structure: New Evidence on Some Schumpeterian Hypotheses. Amer. Econ. Rev. 75, 20-24.


Levin, R. C., Klevorick, A., Nelson, R., Winter, S., 1987. Appropriating the Returns from
Industrial Research and Development. Brookings Pap. Econ. Act. Microeconomics, 783-820.


Machin, S. Van Reenen, J., 1993. Profit Margins and the Business Cycle: Evidence from UK
Manufacturing Firms. J. Ind. Econ. 42, 29-50.


Martin, S., 1993. Endogenous Firm Efficiency in a Cournot Principal-Agent Model. J. Econ.
Theory 59, 445-450.


Meyer, M. A., Mookherjee, D., 1987. Incentives, Compensation, and Social Welfare. Rev. Econ.
Stud. 54, 209-226.


Meyer, M. A., Vickers, J., 1997. Performance Comparisons and Dynamic Incentives. J. Polit.
Economy 105, 547-581.


Mookherjee, D., 1984. Optimal Incentive Scheme with Many Agents. Rev. Econ. Stud. 51,
433-446.


Motonishi, T., Yoshikawa, H. 1999. Causes of the Long Stagnation of Japan during the 1990s. J.
Japan. Int. Econ. 12, 181-200.


Nakajima, T., Nakamura, M., Yoshioka, K., 1998. An Index Number Method for Estimating
Scale Economies and Technical Progress Using Time-series or Cross-sectional Data: Sources of
Total Factor Productivity Growth for Japanese Manufacturing, 1964-1988. Japanese Econ. Rev.
49, 310-334.


Nalebuff, B. J., Stiglitz, J. E., 1983. Prizes and Incentives: Toward a General Theory of
Compensation and Competition. Bell J. Econ. 14, 21-43.


Nelson, R. R., 1981. Research on Productivity Growth and Productivity Differences: Dead Ends
and New Departures. J. Econ. Lit. 19, 1029-1064.




                                                30
Nickel, S. J., Wadhwani, S., Wall, M., 1992. Productivity Growth in U.K. Companies,
1975-1986. Europ. Econ. Rev. 36, 1055-1091.


Nickel, S. J., 1996. Competition and Corporate Performance. J. Polit. Economy 104, 724-746.


Nickel, S. J., Nicolitsas, D., Dryden, N., 1997. What makes Firms Perform Well? Europ. Econ.
Rev. 41, 783-796.


Nishimura, G. K., Nakajima, T., Kiyota, K., 2003. Does Natural Selection Mechanism Still
Work in Severe Recessions? –Examination of the Japanese Economy in the 1990s–. CIRJE
Discussion Papers F-222, University of Tokyo.


Nishimura, K. G., Ohkusa, Y., Ariga, K., 1999. Estimating the Mark-up over Marginal Cost: a
Panel Analysis of Japanese Firms 1971-1994. Int. J. Ind. Organ. 17, 1077-1111.


Odagiri, H., Iwata, H., 1986. The Impact of R&D on Productivity Increase in Japanese
Manufacturing Companies. Res. Pol. 15, 13-19.


Odagiri, H., Yamashita, T., 1987. Price Mark-ups, Market Structure, and Business Fluctuation in
Japanese Manufacturing Industries. J. Ind. Econ. 35, 317-331.


Olley, S., Pakes, A., 1996. The Dynamics of Productivity in the Telecommunications Equipment
Industry. Econometrica 64, 1263-1297.


Pakes, A., Ericson, R., 1998. Empirical Implications of Alternative Models of Firm Dynamics. J.
Econ. Theory 79, 1-45.


Penrose, E., 1959. The Theory of the Growth of the Firms. Basil Blackwell, Oxford.


Rotemberg, J., Saloner, G., 1986. A Supergame-Theoretic Model of Price Wars during Booms.
Amer. Econ. Rev. 70, 390-407.


Scharfstein, D. S., 1988. Product Market Competition and Managerial Slack. RAND J. Econ. 19,
147-155.


Scherer, F. M., 1967. Market Structure and the Employment of Scientists and Engineers. Amer.



                                                31
Econ. Rev. 57, 524-531.


Scherer, F. M., Ross, D., 1990. Industrial Market Structure and Economic Performance. 3rd
Edition. Houton Mifllin Company, Boston MA.


Schmalensee, R., 1989. Inter-industry Studies of Structure and Performance. In Schmalensee, R.,
Willig, R. D. (eds.), Handbook of Industrial Organization Vol.2, North-Holland, Amsterdam,
951-1009.


Slater, M., 1980. The Managerial Limitation to the Growth of Firms. Econ. J. 90, 520-528.


Sutton, J., 1991. Sunk Costs and Market Structure: Price Competition, Advertising, and the
Evolution on Concentration. MIT Press, Cambridge MA.


Sutton, J., 1997. Gibrat’s Legacy. J. Econ. Lit. 35, 40-59.


Sutton, J., 1998. Technology and Market Structure: Theory and History. MIT Press, Cambridge
MA.


Teece, D., Pisano, G., Shuen, A., 1997. Dynamic Capabilities and Strategic Management.
Strategic Management Journal 18, 509-533.


Torii, A., 2001. Efficiency in Japanese Industries, NTT Publishing, Tokyo (in Japanese).


Vives, X., 2004. Innovation and Competitive Pressure. CEPR Discussion Paper 4369.


Wooldridge, J. M., 2001. Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data. MIT Press,
Cambridge MA.




                                                32
Table 1       Summary of variables

        Variables                                               Definition


                            Real sales (1995 yen; deflated by domestic corporate goods price index by industry,
          output
                                                          Cabinet Office, 2003）


           emp                                       Number of permanent employees


                            Gross fixed asset deflated by capital goods deflator (1995yen using SNA private non-
          capital
                                           residential investment deflator, Cabinet Office, 2003)


                            Industrial sales in manufacturing industry (using the whole sample of the BSBSA,
     industrial_sales
                           METI, 1995-2001) deflated by the domestic corporate goods price deflator by industry.

                               Imports divided by home demand in manufacturing industry (the JIP database
    import_penetration     constructed using the Input-Output Table, the Economic and Social Research Institute,
                           Cabinet Office, 2003). We imputed the 1998 data for the missing 1999 and 2000 data.

                             R&D expenditure divided by value added. We use R&D deflators (JIP database,
       rd_intensity
                           Cabinet Office) and wholesale price index (Cabinet Office) as the respective deflators.


          share                                  Weighted average market share (see text)



           pcm                                          Price-cost margin (see text)



          comp                              1 - "Industry-averaged price cost margin" (see text）



         rd_herf                Herfindahl index of R&D expenditures in manufacturing industry (see text)


                              Diversification index defined using Herfindahl concentration index of firm sales
         diversity
                                                          in all sectors (see text)


        debt_asset                                     Total debt to total asset ratio



        tech_trade                 Technology trade turnovers (revenue + expenditure） divided by sales



           size                                      Number of permanent employees


Data sources: The Basic Survey of Japanese Business Structure and Activities (METI, 1995-2001) except some d
penetration index as explained above.
               Table 2 Industry classification in BSBSA and number of firms (manufacturing industries)
                                                                                           Number of firms
  #               Industry name
                                               1994            1995           1996              1997            1998            1999             2000
  1    Livestock products                     195      124   223       139   204     150      220     154      222     156     232      148     216      135
  2    Seafood products                       194      114   211       139   205     147      197     144      200     142     202      132     202      126
  3    Flour & grain mill products             42       26    47        26    42      26       41      26       45      26      37       24      34       23
  4    Miscellaneous food products            791      506   847       571   854     630      858     632      885     632     887      599     858      553
  5    Beverages & tobacco                    173      126   178       135   177     143      160     136      167     141     169      128     155      117
  6    Prepared feed & fertilizers             41       24    43        24    39      28       40      31       39      28      40       27      46       28
  7    Reeling plants & spinning mills         61       26    47        26    43      27       48      29       36      28      38       23      32       22
  8    Woven & knitted fabrics                142       84   134        83   122      85      122      85      105      84      96       77      78       61
  9    Dyed &finished textiles                127       86   120        85   116      92      116      93      111      93     112       90      90       72
  10   Other textile mill products            123       73   121        80   118      87      117      88      118      88     105       79     102       76
  11   Textile outer garments                 399      200   381       205   370     225      340     215      322     218     297      190     253      157
  12   Apparel                                122       55   144        73   131      70      132      81      108      80      91       70      84       62
  13   Sawmills & millwork                    146       91   167       105   150     107      161     110      153     105     151       98     139       89
  14   Wooden containers & wood                22       10    21        12    21      14       19      12       21      12      15       11      19       13
  15   Furniture & fixtures                   198      104   193       113   188     123      184     127      184     126     177      114     171      101
  16   Pulp & paper mills                     151      103   152       113   142     105      133     103      121     103     111       90     116       87
  17   Paper products                         291      207   299       219   297     248      311     251      317     244     326      237     312      214
  18   News paper industries                   81       56    80        60    82      64       80      63       92      65      86       63      88       60
  19   Publishing industries                   99       67   107        69   103      72      107      73      109      72     125       68     125       65
  20   Printing                               505      369   554       418   553     439      570     450      598     449     588      427     569      393
  21   Industrial inorganic chemicals         103       86   117        95   108      96      113     100      113      99     107       91     104       85
  22   Industrial organic chemicals           190      147   193       157   203     166      186     158      183     159     194      154     185      138
  23   Chemical fibers                         22       18    21        18    20      18       18      16       20      16      18       13      17       11
  24   Oil products & detergents              145      113   145       114   145     115      138     119      139     116     142      110     139      105
  25   Drugs & medicines                      201      144   203       156   201     164      193     167      192     167     203      166     197      154
  26   Toilet preparations & others           241      176   253       194   265     212      259     209      259     213     271      204     255      186
  27   Petroleum refining                      31       26    27        23    28      24       26      24       27      24      26       22      22       18
  28   Petroleum & coal products               26       14    25        17    25      20       25      19       26      21      26       18      28       20
  29   Plastic products                       624      442   657       477   660     513      664     517      662     517     685      510     665      471
  30   Tires & inner tubes                     14        9    12        10    11      10       13      11       11      10      10       10      13       10
  31   Rubber & plastic footwear              134       86   134       101   135     103      139     105      133     105     127       95     124       88
  32   Leather products & fur skins            50       26    45        22    40      26       38      27       42      27      35       21      38       21
  33   Glass & glass products                  97       69    99        72    95      73      104      74       96      71     102       67     100       62
  34   Cement & cement products               256      154   269       169   252     172      236     175      239     178     228      156     232      141
  35   Clay, pottery & stone products         261      153   251       163   258     183      253     179      237     176     217      162     195      142
  36   Blast furnace & basic steel            165      127   161       124   176     136      170     138      151     133     165      136     187      140
  37   Iron & steel                           234      161   264       175   236     181      236     179      236     182     206      157     210      148
  38   Non-ferrous metals                      51       33    52        40    51      41       51      43       51      42      54       38      54       33
  39   Non-ferrous rolling & casting          277      191   290       215   275     218      266     217      280     228     265      206     263      194
  40   Fabricated structural metal            347      220   370       237   362     258      357     264      350     268     334      244     313      225
  41   Miscellaneous metal work               605      433   650       492   639     522      623     512      661     528     655      501     656      487
  42   Metal working machinery                243      158   262       180   256     192      270     194      272     202     235      177     228      161
  43   Special industry machinery             361      240   396       282   423     305      392     292      418     301     388      273     419      274
  44   Office & household machines            149      106   157       112   157     120      159     122      154     123     157      122     160      117
  45   General industrial machinery           717      492   760       561   756     599      798     617      751     590     758      561     744      510
  46   Electrical industrial machinery        394      287   421       319   414     332      402     322      381     318     383      294     394      283
  47   Household electric appliances          204      123   209       131   195     142      168     123      151     113     146      100     117       81
  48   Communication equipment                282      179   286       198   295     218      294     216      287     208     295      196     267      170
  49   Electric equipment & computers         185      121   189       119   188     124      186     136      185     130     189      123     191      111
  50   Electronic parts & devices             605      416   637       477   666     528      692     533      710     538     702      513     693      465
  51   Miscellaneous electric equipment       180      125   213       146   208     152      206     153      207     154     211      145     230      161
  52   Motor vehicles & parts                 898      659   931       717   927     756      913     750      919     755     913      711     863      670
  53   Miscellaneous transport equipment      219      158   213       166   211     170      222     175      237     181     219      163     213      152
  54   Medical instruments                     70       47    81        57    86      61       84      61       87      62      86       56      84       50
  55   Optical instruments & lenses            62       48    56        47    65      55       69      57       70      58      72       54      75       54
  56   Watches, clocks & related parts         29       20    33        26    35      26       33      27       31      25      29       18      22       14
  57   Measuring & analytical instruments     166      108   178       125   184     131      169     133      163     129     168      126     166      113
  58   Ordnance & accessories                   9        6     6         4     5       4        4       3        4       4       4        4       6        4
  59   Miscellaneous manufacturing            288      145   319       176   314     190      267     168      275     175     252      157     247      145
       Total                                13038     8717 13654      9609 13527   10238    13392   10238    13363   10238   13162     9569   12805     8868

Note: The numbers of firms are given in full sample (left column) and in estimation sample (right column) for every year. The BSBSA covers all the firms
with no less than 50 employees and greater than 30 million yen capitalization.
Table 3 R&D performers and non-performers （manufacturing industries, 1994〜2000）
                                                                           All                       R&D performers                     Non-performers

                                                             Full sample    Estimation sample   Full sample   Estimation sample   Full sample   Estimation sample
Number of observations (total)                                 92941             67477            43116            33451            49825            34026
                Number of firms (every year)     1994          13038              8717             6320             4564             6718             4153
                                                 1995          13654              9609             6453             4894             7201             4715
                                                 1996          13527             10238             6229             4991             7298             5247
                                                 1997          13392             10238             6112             5000             7280             5238
                                                 1998          13363             10238             6076             4961             7287             5277
                                                 1999          13162              9569             6091             4702             7071             4867
                                                 2000          12805              8868             5835             4339             6970             4529


Full sample (annual average, standard deviations are in parentheses)
                                                                           All                       R&D performers                     Non-performers              Student's t-value   p-value
     Real sales （1995 million yen）                               19233.3 (133540.3)                 34355.4 (192322.3)                 6147.3 (29810.9)                 -32.29          0.000
     Permanent employees                                            415.3 (1790.0)                     677.3 (2555.9)                    188.5 (461.6)                  -41.90          0.000
                                                                   0.52% (16.1%)                      0.89% (14.7%)                     0.18% (17.2%)
     Sales growth rate                                                                                                                                                   -5.89          0.000
                                                                    (69867 firms)                      (33512 firms)                     (36355 firms)
                                                                   -1.33% (12.6%)                     -1.28% (11.8%)                    -1.38% (13.4%)
     Employment adjustment rate （%）                                                                                                                                      -1.07          0.287
                                                                    (69867 firms)                      (33163 firms)                     (36704 firms)
     Price-cost margin                                                0.19 (0.13)                        0.21 (0.13)                       0.17 (0.13)                  -47.49          0.000
     Debt-asset ratio                                                 0.73 (0.35)                        0.69 (0.25)                       0.76 (0.42)                  33.18           0.000
     Real value added per employee (1995 million yen)                 6.85 (4.27)                        7.74 (4.58)                       6.08 (3.81)                  -60.38          0.000
     Firm age (since establishment year through 1994-2000)          37.75 (14.91)                      40.49 (15.07)                     35.38 (14.36)                  -52.87          0.000


Estimation sample (annual average, standard deviations are in parentheses)
                                                                           All                       R&D performers                     Non-performers              Student's t-value   p-value
     Real sales （1995 million yen）                               23151.5 (155255.6)                 39834.9 (216517.1)                 6750.0 (34233.3)                 -27.84          0.000
     Permanent employees                                            480.5 (2061.6)                     762.9 (2853.1)                    202.9 (520.5)                  -35.61          0.000
                                                                   0.43% (15.2%)                           0.76%                        0.10% (16.3%)
     Sales growth rate                                                                                                                                                   -5.20          0.000
                                                                    (56849 firms)                      (28403 firms)                     (28446 firms)
                                                                   -1.31% (12.0%)                     -1.32% (11.2%)                    -1.3% (12.7%)
     Employment adjustment rate （%）                                                                                                                                      0.18           0.857
                                                                    (56849 firms)                      (28115 firms)                     (28734 firms)
     Price-cost margin                                                0.19 (0.13)                        0.21 (0.13)                      0.16 (0.13)                   -44.36          0.000
     Debt-asset ratio                                                 0.71 (0.26)                        0.67 (0.24)                      0.74 (0.27)                   33.85           0.000
     Real value added per employee (1995 million yen)                 7.07 (4.26)                        7.90 (4.59)                      6.24 (3.72)                   -51.66          0.000
     Firm age (since establishment year through 1994-2000)          38.96 (14.59)                      41.57 (14.69)                     36.39 (14.01)                  -46.94          0.000
                                      Table 4 Summary statistics

            Variable                        Obs            Mean        Std. Dev.              Min             Max

          output                         67477         23151.46       155255.60             84.31        9104792
    annual growth rate (%)               56849             0.43           15.24           -169.23          174.65


              emp                        67477           480.48          2061.62               50          77185
         annual change (%)               56849            -1.31            11.96          -267.22          296.37


            capital                      67477          7208.69        42868.88                 0        1423501
         annual change (%)               56813             2.20           28.13           -616.12          830.90


      industrial_sales                      420     4434326.43       6325494.38             33284       43112537
       annual change (%)                    420          -0.42            13.56           -125.28           76.44


    import_penetration                      420          0.0847           0.0837           0.0015          0.6085
      annual change (%)                     420             4.49           39.57          -380.14          450.15


          rd_intensity                   67477           0.0390           0.1436           -26.16             5.56


             share                       64783           0.0032           0.0119                0          0.4179
         annual change (%)               53821              0.28           45.86          -752.55          787.78


              pcm                        67477           0.1856           0.1287          -0.3632          0.9942
         annual change (%)               55012              0.91           42.35          -775.61          734.67


             comp                           420          0.8140           0.0607           0.5473          0.9577


            rd_herf                         420          0.1549           0.1065           0.0213          0.9942


            diversity                    67477           1.4218           0.6435                 1        11.3792


           debt_asset                    67477           0.7072           0.2593                 0        10.0485


           tech_trade                    67477           0.0008           0.0062                 0         0.3435

Notes:
Regressions are employed in first differences in terms of output, emp, capital, industrial_sales, import_penetraion, share,
and pcm. The annual growth rate of these variables are also shown in the table. On the other hand, the remaining
variables (rd_intensity, comp, rd_herf, diversity, debt_asset, tech_trade, and emp) are entered in levels.
                                                              Table 5
                                    Production function: GMM estimates (basic model)
                                               Dependent variable: ∆output it

                                      (1)                                 (2)                                 (3)
* ∆output it-1                -0.046                              -0.035                              -0.043
                              (0.006, p= 0.000)                   (0.007, p= 0.000)                   (0.006, p= 0.000)

* ∆emp it                     0.327                               0.443                               0.347
                              (0.053, p= 0.000)                   (0.062, p= 0.000)                   (0.056, p= 0.000)

* ∆capital it                 0.719                               0.592                               0.696

  ∆industrial_sales jt        0.057                               0.052                               0.059
                              (0.016, p= 0.000)                   (0.016, p= 0.001)                   (0.016, p= 0.000)

  ∆import_penetration jt      0.008                               0.009                               0.008
                              (0.004, p= 0.060)                   (0.004, p= 0.028)                   (0.004, p= 0.063)

* ∆share it                                                       -0.013
                                                                  (0.014, p= 0.352)

* ∆pcm it                                                                                             -0.016
                                                                                                      (0.015, p= 0.305)

   comp jt                    2.450                               2.357                               2.156
                              (0.305, p= 0.000)                   (0.292, p= 0.000)                   (0.307, p= 0.000)

   rd_herf jt                 -0.310                              -0.311                              -0.289
                              (0.049, p= 0.000)                   (0.048, p= 0.000)                   (0.049, p= 0.000)

* diversity it                0.050                               0.037                               0.029
                              (0.023, p= 0.028)                   (0.022, p= 0.099)                   (0.022, p= 0.198)

* debt_asset it               -1.063                              -1.193                              -1.046
                              (0.270, p= 0.000)                   (0.249, p= 0.000)                   (0.248, p= 0.000)

* tech_trade it               2.385                               2.540                               2.422
                              (1.513, p= 0.115)                   (1.400, p= 0.070)                   (1.446, p= 0.094)

* size it                     -1.20e-05                           -1.40e-05                           -1.65e-05
                              (1.52e-05, p=0.420)                 (1.41e-05, p=0.322)                 (1.47e-05, p=0.264)

 m1                           -30.99 (p = 0.000)                  -29.29 (p = 0.000)                  -27.79 (p = 0.000)

 m2                            -0.00 (p = 0.996)                   -0.89 (p = 0.376)                  -0.74 (p = 0.462)
                                2                                                   †
                              χ (98) = 79.31                      χ2(98) = 117.70                     χ2(98) = 103.6
 Sargan
                              (p = 0.625)                         (p = 0.085)                         (p = 0.331)

 Observation                  26121 (10231 firms)                 24671 (9683 firms)                  25118 (9963 firms)

Notes:
1) The dependent variable is log of real sales. The number of consecutive periods for which data are held is at least five years.
Some observations for market share (shareit) and price-cost margin (pcmit) are missing differently, therefore the number of
observations using shareit as an independent variable is not identical with that using pcmit. Constant returns constraint is
imposed in all equations. All equations are estimated in first differences and include both year dummies and industry dummies,
although compjt, rd_herfjt, diversityit, debt_assetit, tech_tradeit, and sizeit are all entered in level as control variables. Firm size
is measured by permanent employees.
2) The equations are estimated using the dynamic panel data model based on Arellano and Bond (1991). The GMM estimates
reproted are one-step results. Asymptotic standard errors and p-values are reported in parentheses. m1 and m2 are Arellano-Bond
tests that average autocovariance in residuals of order 1 and 2 are zero, i.e., they are tests for the null on no first-order and
second-order serial correlations, asymptotically N(0,1). Sargan statistics are used for testing of over-identifying restrictions for the
GMM estimators, asymptotically χ2. P-values are also reported. All computations are done using STATA.

3) * Variables are treated as endogenous.
4) † indicates that Sargan test from the one-step homoskedastic estimator in column (2) marginally rejects the null that the over-
identifying restrictions are valid. This could be due to heteroskedasticity. However, the two-step Sargan test may be better fro
inference on model specification. The two-step Sargan statistics is χ2(98)=80.51(p=0.901).
                                                            Table 6
                           Production function: GMM estimates (R&D and productivity)
                                            Dependent variable: ∆output it

                                      (1)                               (2)                              (3)
* ∆output it-1                -0.044                            -0.034                           -0.041
                              (0.006, p= 0.000)                 (0.007, p= 0.000)                (0.006, p= 0.000)

* ∆emp it                     0.349                             0.459                            0.375
                              (0.053, p= 0.000)                 (0.062, p= 0.000)                (0.055, p= 0.000)

* ∆capital it                 0.695                             0.575                            0.666

  ∆industrial_sales jt        0.058                             0.052                            0.059
                              (0.016, p= 0.000)                 (0.016, p= 0.001)                (0.016, p= 0.000)

  ∆import_penetration jt      0.006                             0.007                            0.005
                              (0.004, p= 0.172)                 (0.004, p= 0.090)                (0.004, p= 0.195)

* rd_intensity it             0.576                             0.482                            0.608
                              (0.169, p= 0.001)                 (0.144, p= 0.001)                (0.170, p= 0.000)

* ∆share it                                                     -0.010
                                                                (0.014, p= 0.447)

* ∆pcm it                                                                                        -0.014
                                                                                                 (0.015, p= 0.354)

  comp jt                     2.387                             2.295                            2.097
                              (0.302, p= 0.000)                 (0.290, p= 0.000)                (0.302, p= 0.000)

  rd_herf jt                  -0.306                            -0.309                           -0.286
                              (0.049, p= 0.000)                 (0.048, p= 0.000)                (0.048, p= 0.000)

* diversity it                0.048                             0.033                            0.027
                              (0.023, p= 0.034)                 (0.022, p= 0.134)                (0.022, p= 0.216)

* debt_asset it               -1.035                            -1.164                           -1.008
                              (0.261, p= 0.000)                 (0.244, p= 0.000)                (0.239, p= 0.000)

* tech_trade it               3.141                             3.214                            2.847
                              (1.482, p= 0.034)                 (1.378, p= 0.020)                (1.411, p= 0.044)

* size it                     -5.68e-06                         -8.57e-06                        -9.56e-06
                              (1.51e-05, p=0.708)               (1.41e-05, p=0.544)              (1.46e-05, p=0.509)

  m1                          -32.18 (p = 0.000)                -30.57 (p = 0.000)               -29.34 (p = 0.000)

  m2                           0.06 (p = 0.954)                  -0.77 (p = 0.440)               -0.83 (p = 0.407)
                               2
                              χ (98) = 82.20                    χ2(112) = 125.67                 χ2(112) = 109.07
  Sargan
                              (p = 0.874)                       (p = 0.178)                      (p = 0.561)

  Observation                 26121 (10231 firms)               24671 (9683 firms)               25118 (9963 firms)


Notes:
1) See footnotes of Table 5. The GMM estimates reproted are one-step results in all equations.
2) * Variables are treated as endogenous.
                                                                        Table 7
                           Production function: GMM estimates (R&D performers and non-performers)
                                                  Dependent variable: ∆output it

                                                             R&D performers                                                  non-R&D performers
                                 (1)                   (2)            (3)                          (4)                   (5)            (6)
* ∆output it-1              -0.024                -0.022                -0.022                -0.019                -0.033                -0.052
                            (0.008, p= 0.003)     (0.008, p= 0.004)     (0.008, p= 0.003)     (0.007, p= 0.009)     (0.009, p= 0.000)     (0.008, p= 0.000)

* ∆emp it                   0.320                 0.377                 0.388                 0.459                 0.641                 0.440
                            (0.098, p= 0.001)     (0.099, p= 0.000)     (0.090, p= 0.000)     (0.092, p= 0.000)     (0.063, p= 0.000)     (0.055, p= 0.000)

* ∆capital it               0.704                 0.645                 0.634                 0.560                 0.392                 0.612

  ∆industrial_sales jt      0.056                 0.053                 0.059                 0.057                 0.054                 0.073
                            (0.021, p= 0.007)     (0.020, p= 0.007)     (0.020, p= 0.004)     (0.019, p= 0.003)     (0.024, p= 0.021)     (0.024, p= 0.003)

  ∆import_penetration jt    0.011                 0.007                 0.008                 0.004                 0.008                 0.008
                            (0.007, p= 0.107)     (0.007, p= 0.270)     (0.007, p= 0.241)     (0.006, p= 0.495)     (0.005, p= 0.138)     (0.005, p= 0.139)

* rd_intensity it                                                       0.242                 0.232
                                                                        (0.115, p= 0.036)     (0.120, p= 0.053)

* ∆share it                 -0.048                                      -0.046                                      -0.009
                            (0.020, p= 0.015)                           (0.019, p= 0.015)                           (0.018, p= 0.618)

* ∆pcm it                                         -0.138                                      -0.146                                      0.013
                                                  (0.028, p= 0.000)                           (0.026, p= 0.000)                           (0.018, p= 0.445)

  comp jt                   2.264                 1.742                 2.294                 1.771                 2.356                 2.410
                            (0.405, p= 0.000)     (0.403, p= 0.000)     (0.387, p= 0.000)     (0.387, p= 0.000)     (0.413, p= 0.000)     (0.448, p= 0.000)

  rd_herf jt                -0.396                -0.345                -0.392                -0.336                -0.231                -0.227
                            (0.075, p= 0.000)     (0.074, p= 0.000)     (0.072, p= 0.000)     (0.071, p= 0.000)     (0.062, p= 0.000)     (0.064, p= 0.000)

* diversity it              -0.001                -0.016                -0.012                -0.025                0.065                 0.048
                            (0.031, p= 0.987)     (0.031, p= 0.614)     (0.030, p= 0.691)     (0.030, p= 0.396)     (0.030, p= 0.032)     (0.031, p= 0.114)

* debt_asset it             -0.357                -0.210                -0.359                -0.222                -1.483                -1.250
                            (0.208, p= 0.086)     (0.207, p= 0.311)     (0.199, p= 0.072)     (0.197, p= 0.261)     (0.405, p= 0.000)     (0.324, p= 0.000)

* tech_trade it             3.294                 2.518                 3.315                 2.558                 2.501                 2.237
                            (2.115, p= 0.119)     (2.092, p= 0.229)     (2.042, p= 0.104)     (2.022, p= 0.206)     (1.172, p= 0.033)     (1.253, p= 0.074)

* size it                   -4.09e-06             0.63e-06              -1.78e-06             3.11e-06              6.02e-04              4.86e-04
                            (1.36e-05, p=0.764)   (1.36e-05, p=0.963)   (1.31e-05, p=0.892)   (1.30e-05, p=0.811)   (3.92e-04, p=0.124)   (4.32e-04, p=0.261)

  m1                        -17.19 (p = 0.000)    -18.39 (p = 0.000)    -19.50 (p = 0.000)    -20.96 (p = 0.000)    -30.56 (p = 0.000)    -24.84 (p = 0.000)

  m2                        -0.56 (p = 0.573)     -1.75 (p = 0.080)     -0.61 (p = 0.543)     -2.06 (p = 0.039)     -0.26 (p = 0.794)     0.57 (p = 0.570)
                             2                     2                     2                     2                     2                     2
                            χ (98) = 87.24        χ (98) = 77.55        χ (112) = 106.87      χ (112) = 91.08       χ (98) = 74.57        χ (98) = 87.20
  Sargan
                            (p = 0.774)           (p = 0.937)           (p = 0.619)           (p = 0.927)           (p = 0.963)           (p = 0.774)

  Observation               12868 (5453 firms)    12868 (5489 firms)    12868 (5453 firms)    12868 (5489 firms)    11803 (5377 firms)    12250 (5615 firms)


Notes:
1) See footnotes of Table 5. The GMM estimates reproted are one-step results in all equations. R&D performers are defined as firms reporting non-
zero R&D expenditures and non-performers reporting no R&D expenditures within observation periods.
2) * Variables are treated as endogenous.
         Table 8 TFP Growth Rate Differentials Generated by Differences in Competition

News paper industries                       -52.8%       Furniture & fixtures                 2.7%
Drugs & medicines                           -46.8%       Electric equipment & computers       3.0%
Publishing industries                       -44.5%       Wooden containers & wood             3.3%
Toilet preparations & others                -25.3%       Plastic products                     3.5%
Beverages & tobacco                         -23.5%       Flour & grain mill products          3.9%
Medical instruments                         -21.6%       Rubber & plastic footwear            4.0%
Miscellaneous food products                 -15.4%       Pulp & paper mills                   4.2%
Oil products & detergents                   -13.1%       Electrical industrial machinery      5.6%
Industrial inorganic chemicals              -12.2%       Textile outer garments               5.8%
Measuring & analytical instruments           -9.2%       Household electric appliances        7.6%
Tires & inner tubes                          -8.9%       Communication equipment              8.1%
Printing                                     -6.3%       Prepared feed & fertilizers          8.4%
Clay, pottery & stone products               -4.6%       Fabricated structural metal          8.6%
Petroleum & coal products                    -3.6%       Electronic parts & devices           8.6%
Seafood products                             -1.7%       Optical instruments & lenses         8.8%
Industrial organic chemicals                 -1.2%       Non-ferrous rolling & casting        9.7%
Cement & cement products                     -0.5%       Iron & steel                        11.9%
Miscellaneous metal work                      0.2%       Ordnance & accessories              12.1%
Paper products                                0.4%       Leather products & fur skins        12.1%
Chemical fibers                               0.9%       Watches, clocks & related parts     12.2%
Miscellaneous electric equipment              1.1%       Woven & knitted fabrics             12.6%
Office & household machines                   1.3%       Miscellaneous transport equipment   12.7%
Apparel                                       1.4%       Non-ferrous metals                  12.9%
Livestock products                            1.5%       Motor vehicles & parts              12.9%
Glass & glass products                       1.6%        Dyed &finished textiles             13.1%
General industrial machinery                  1.8%       Sawmills & millwork                 13.5%
Special industry machinery                    1.8%       Blast furnace & basic steel         16.6%
Other textile mill products                   2.1%       Reeling plants & spinning mills     23.1%
Metal working machinery                       2.2%       Petroleum refining                  23.3%
Note: These differentials are calculated from the unweighted mean.
                                                           Table 9
                           Production function: GMM estimates (large and small firms)
                                           Dependent variable: ∆output it

                                          Large firms (emp>300)                                      Small firms
                                         (1)                 (2)                           (3)                       (4)
* ∆output it-1                 -0.023                   -0.017                   -0.036                    -0.052
                               (0.011, p= 0.033)        (0.010, p= 0.091)        (0.010, p= 0.000)         (0.008, p= 0.000)

* ∆emp it                      0.312                    0.270                    0.545                     0.440
                               (0.106, p= 0.003)        (0.101, p= 0.007)        (0.083, p= 0.000)         (0.055, p= 0.000)

* ∆capital it                  0.711                    0.747                    0.491                     0.612

  ∆industrial_sales jt         0.067                    0.071                    0.048                     0.073
                               (0.029, p= 0.021)        (0.028, p= 0.011)        (0.017, p= 0.005)         (0.024, p= 0.003)

  ∆import_penetration jt       0.002                    0.003                    0.011                     0.008
                               (0.009, p= 0.805)        (0.008, p= 0.686)        (0.004, p= 0.007)         (0.005, p= 0.139)

* ∆share it                    -0.024                                            -0.035
                               (0.023, p= 0.306)                                 (0.018, p= 0.050)

* ∆pcm it                                               -0.049                                             0.013
                                                        (0.030, p= 0.105)                                  (0.018, p= 0.445)

  comp jt                      2.291                    2.143                    2.304                     2.410
                               (0.468, p= 0.000)        (0.488, p= 0.000)        (0.355, p= 0.000)         (0.448, p= 0.000)

  rd_herf jt                   -0.222                   -0.196                   -0.326                    -0.227
                               (0.089, p= 0.013)        (0.088, p= 0.026)        (0.054, p= 0.000)         (0.064, p= 0.000)

* diversity it                 0.090                    0.085                    0.052                     0.048
                               (0.037, p= 0.015)        (0.037, p= 0.022)        (0.026, p= 0.047)         (0.031, p= 0.114)

* debt_asset it                -0.963                   -0.662                   -0.815                    -1.250
                               (0.251, p= 0.000)        (0.266, p= 0.013)        (0.362, p= 0.024)         (0.324, p= 0.000)

* tech_trade it                1.319                    -0.603                   2.737                     2.237
                               (2.798, p= 0.637)        (2.822, p= 0.831)        (0.808, p= 0.001)         (1.253, p= 0.074)

* size it                      -9.47e-06                -6.55e-06                -9.72e-04                 4.86e-04
                               (1.27e-05, p=0.455)      (1.26e-05, p=0.604)      (3.06e-04, p=0.001)       (4.32e-04, p=0.261)

  m1                           -17.98 (p = 0.000)       -17.60 (p = 0.000)       -17.26 (p = 0.000)        -24.84 (p = 0.000)

  m2                                                †   -1.54 (p = 0.123)        -1.15 (p = 0.251)          0.57 (p = 0.570)
                               -2.20 (p = 0.028)
                                2                                                                  ††
                               χ (98) = 77.77           χ2(98) = 60.73           χ2(98) = 151.75           χ2(98) = 87.20
  Sargan
                               (p = 0.935)              (p = 0.999)              (p = 0.0004)              (p = 0.774)

  Observation                  6947 (2704 firms)        6929 (2723 firms)        17724 (7222 firms)        12250 (5615 firms)

Notes:
1) See footnote of Table 5. GMM estimates reproted are one-step results in all equations. Small firms are defined by the number
of permanent employees which is no more than 300.
2) * Variables are treated as endogenous.
3) † indicates that serial correlation test from the one-step homoskedastic estimator in column (1) cannot reject the null of no
second-order autocorrelation. This may imply that the estimates are inconsistent.

4) †† indicates that Sargan test rejects the null that the over-identifying restrictions are valid. However, this could be due to
heteroskedasticity. Therefore we reported robust estimates and serial correlation tests in column (3).
