NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE DOT-COM BUBBLE, THE BUSH DEFICITS
AND THE U.S. CURRENT ACCOUNT
Aart Kraay
Jaume Ventura
Working Paper 11543
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11543
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2005

This is a draft of a chapter forthcoming in R. Clarida (ed.) G7 Current Account Imbalances: Sustainability
and Adjustment, NBER. We are grateful to Fernando Broner, Jospeh Gagnon, Maury Obstfeld for their
useful comments, and to Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas and Hélène Rey for sharing their data. The views
expressed here are the authors’ and do not reflect those of the World Bank, its Executive Directors, or the
countries they represent. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by Aart Kraay and Jaume Ventura. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

The Dot-Com Bubble the Bush Deficits, and the U.S. Current Account
Aart Kraay and Jaume Ventura
NBER Working Paper No. 11543
August 2005
JEL No. F21, F32, F36
ABSTRACT

Over the past decade the US has experienced widening current account deficits and a steady
deterioration of its net foreign asset position. During the second half of the 1990s, this deterioration
was fueled by foreign investment in a booming US stock market. During the first half of the 2000s,
this deterioration has been fuelled by foreign purchases of rapidly increasing US government debt.
A somewhat surprising aspect of the current debate is that stock market movements and fiscal policy
choices have been largely treated as unrelated events. Stock market movements are usually
interpreted as reflecting exogenous changes in perceived or real productivity, while budget deficits
are usually understood as a mainly political decision. We challenge this view here and develop two
alternative interpretations. Both are based on the notion that a bubble the 'dot-com' bubble) has been
driving the stock market, but differ in their assumptions about the interactions between this bubble
and fiscal policy (the 'Bush' deficits). The 'benevolent' view holds that a change in investor sentiment
led to the collapse of the dot-com bubble and the Bush deficits were a welfare-improving policy
response to this event. The 'cynical' view holds instead that the Bush deficits led to the collapse of
the dot-com bubble as the new administration tried to appropriate rents from foreign investors. We
discuss the implications of each of these views for the future evolution of the US economy and, in
particular, its net foreign asset position.

Aart Kraay
The World Bank
1818 H. Street NW
Washington, DC 20433
akraay@worldbank.org

Jaume Ventura
CREI
Universitat Pompeu Fabra
Ramon Trias Fargas 25-27
Barcelona 08005
SPAIN
and NBER
jaume.ventura@upf.edu

0. Introduction
Since the early 1990s the United States has experienced steadily
widening current account deficits, reaching 5.7 percent of GNP in 2004 (see top
panel of Figure 1). These deficits are large relative to the post-war US historical
experience. With the exception of a brief period in the mid-1980s where current
account deficits reached 3.3 percent of GNP, the US current account has
typically registered small surpluses or deficits averaging around one percent of
GNP. As a consequence of the recent deficits, the US net foreign asset position
has declined sharply from –5 percent of GNP in 1995 to about –26 percent by
the end of 2004 (see bottom panel of Figure 1). The goal of this paper is to
provide an account of this decline that relates it to other major macroeconomic
events and helps us to grasp its implications for welfare and policy.

Any attempt to do this must take into consideration a major change in the
pattern of asset trade between the US and the rest of the world (see Figure 2).
During the second half of the 1990s, the US accumulated foreign assets and
liabilities at the rate of $765 billion and $965 billion per year. About two-thirds of
this consisted of increases in the volume and value of equity holdings. This
pattern reversed sharply in the first half of the 2000s. The worldwide collapse in
equity prices erased a substantial fraction of the assets and liabilities that the US
had accumulated during the 1990s, resulting in an increase of US net holdings of
equity of about $232 billion per year. Despite this, the US net foreign asset
position declined at the rate of $296 billion per year as US net holdings of debt
(both public and private) declined at the rate of $528 billion per year. While in the
second half of the 1990s most of the changes in US foreign assets and liabilities
were driven by equity, in the first half of the 2000s these changes were mainly
driven by debt.

This change in the composition of the US current account deficit is a
natural reflection of the two major macroeconomic events of this period. The first
one is the “dot-com” bubble of the 1990s. Between 1990 and the peak in mid2000, US equity prices increased nearly five-fold, and the growth rate of equity

2

prices accelerated from 10.4 percent per year between 1990 and 1995, to 21.2
percent per year between 1995 and 2000 (see top panel of Figure 3). The value
of US stock market capitalization grew even faster, doubling between 1990 and
1995, and then tripling between 1995 and the peak in 2000 (see bottom panel of
Figure 3). The stock market boom in the rest of the world was less spectacular,
but still quite impressive by historical standards. Equity prices in the major
foreign markets grew 7.9 percent per year during the second half of the 1990s.
As is well known, this episode ended with a sharp downward adjustment that
started in 2000. By 2003 equity prices in the US and abroad had fallen by 30
percent, and stock market capitalization had fallen by about 25 percent. Since
these changes in equity prices have taken place against a background of
relatively low interest rates and low inflation, being in the stock market surely
was a good idea in the second half of the 1990s but a lousy one in the first half
of the 2000s.

The second major macroeconomic event was the reemergence of large
fiscal deficits in the United States after the Bush administration took over in 2000
(see Figure 4). Unlike the 1980s, the 1990s were a period of declining budget
deficits and small surpluses. After 2000 budget deficits reappeared with a
vengeance however, reaching 4.8 percent of GNP in 2004. As a result, US
public debt has increased sharply from 33 to 37 percent of GNP between 2001
and 2004. An intriguing feature of this recent period is that large budget deficits
have not been accompanied by any significant increase in the cost of borrowing
for the federal government (see Figure 4). Roughly speaking, the 1970s were
characterized by low budget deficits and low interest rates, while the period
1980-95 featured high budget deficits and high interest rates. But over the past
10 years this pattern has unraveled, with fairly high interest rates and low deficits
during the second half of the 1990s, followed by low interest rates and large
budget deficits since 2000.

What are the links between the dot-com bubble, the Bush deficits, and
the US current account? As a first attack to this question, we develop in Sections
one and two a conventional macroeconomic that crudely, but effectively,
encapsulates conventional views of the US current account deficit. According to

3

these views, its appearance in the second half of the 1990s reflected an
increase in US productivity relative to the rest of the world that led investors all
over the world to place their savings in the US stock market. The situation
reversed and US productivity declined in 2000, leading to the stock market
collapse. But the current account deficit continued despite this, now fueled by a
the drastic change in fiscal policy implemented by the Bush administration. This
change is usually attributed to purely exogenous factors such as the cost of the
wars in Afghanistan and Iraq, as well as a desire to cut taxes. This policy is
however unsustainable and something must eventually give. Most observers
think that this episode will end with a painful fiscal adjustment, although there
are also those who argue that the resolution will entail some default on the part
of the US government.1

This view has two major problems when confronting the data however.
The first one is inability to explain observed movements in the stock market. If
the latter only contains productive firms, its value should reflect that of the capital
held by these firms. Since capital is reproducible, its price cannot exceed the
cost of producing additional units. Therefore, increases in the value of the stock
market must either reflect increases in the cost or the quantity of capital owned
by US firms. But it is hard to find evidence of increases in either of these
variables that would justify the more than three-fold increase in US stock market
capitalization that occurred during the second half of the 1990s. And it is even
harder to find evidence that would justify a one-quarter decline in the first few
years of the 2000s. The second problem relates to the behavior of interest rates.
The model predicts that the US fiscal expansion should increase the interest rate
as government debt crowds out capital from the portfolios of investors. But the
evidence shows exactly the opposite. The real interest rate fell from above three
percent in the second half of the 1990s to almost zero percent in the early
2000s.

1

Few would argue that the US government will fail to make stipulated payments, but still
some think that there is some probability that the US government effectively defaults on
its obligations by engineering a high and unexpected inflation that reduces the real value
of these payments.

4

What has been driving the stock market during the last decade? Why did
the interest rate fall in the midst of one of the largest fiscal expansions in US
history? We argue in Section three that the conventional model is ill-equipped to
handle these questions, because it assumes that financial markets work
relatively well and all savings are channeled into efficient investments. If financial
markets do not work as well, the economy might contain pockets of inefficient
investments that deliver a rate of return that is below the growth rate of the
economy. These investments are inefficient since they absorb on average more
resources than they produce.2 It is well-known that in this situation both stock
market bubbles and government debt can play the useful role of displacing
inefficient investments, raising the interest rate and hence the consumption and
welfare of all. Moreover, those who create the bubbles and/or issue the debt
receive rents that can be interpreted as a fee for providing this service.3 A
crucial and novel aspect of the model presented here is that it provides a formal
description of how bubbles and debt interact with each other as they compete for
a fixed pool of savings.

In Sections four and five we show that these interactions provide a new
perspective on recent macroeconomic events. In Section four we construct an
equilibrium in which the stock market initially creates a bubble that eliminates
inefficient investments. The world economy operates efficiently and the interest
rate and welfare are both high. But a change in investor sentiment triggers the
collapse of the bubble, so that inefficient investments reappear and the interest
rate declines. The government reacts to this by running large budget deficits and
expanding public debt sufficiently to crowd out these inefficient investments.
According to this “benevolent” view, the Bush deficits constitute a welfareimproving policy response to the collapse of the dot-com bubble.
2

The resources devoted to keep these investments are roughly equal to the growth rate
times the capital stock. The resources obtained from such investments are roughly equal
to the rate of return times the capital stock. If the growth rate exceeds the rate of return,
the economy obtains additional resources by eliminating these inefficient investments.
See Abel et al. [1989].
3
The paper that discovered dynamic inefficiency is Samuelson [1958]. See also Shell
[1971] for a revealing discussion of this problem. For the analysis of government debt,
see Diamond [1965], Woodford [1990] and Hellwig and Lorenzoni [2003]. For the
analysis of stock market bubbles, see Tirole [1985], Grossman and Yanagawa [1993],
King and Ferguson [1993], Olivier [2000], Ventura [2002, 2003].

5

Section five constructs an alternative equilibrium which again begins with
the stock market creating a bubble that eliminates inefficient investments. The
government initially refrains from running budget deficits and this creates space
for the bubble to grow. But there is a change in government that leads to a
drastic change in fiscal policy. The new government wants to collect as much
revenue as possible and starts a fiscal expansion that crowds out the bubble.
This policy implements a transfer from the owners of the bubble at home and
abroad to the US government. In this “cynical” view, the Bush deficits constitute
a “beggar-thy-neighbour” policy that is responsible for the collapse of the dotcom bubble.

Interestingly, the “benevolent” and cynical” views are observationally
equivalent. In both of them, the collapse of the bubble is accompanied by a
decline in the interest rate and a large fiscal expansion that leads to a high but
stable level of debt. In both views, this high level of debt is compatible with the
US running budget deficits forever (although smaller than the current ones). In
both of them, the US net foreign asset position can remain negative forever. In
both views, the collapse of the bubble generates a loss for shareholders at home
and abroad and a windfall for the US government. The only difference between
the two views lies in the shock that caused this chain of events. While in the
“benevolent” view this shock is a change in investor sentiment, in the “cynical”
view this shock is a change in government policy.

Of course, this is not the first paper to be written on the US current
account deficit. A substantial literature in the past few years has studied the
determinants and sustainability of the US current account deficit. Much of this
literature has adopted what we have termed as “conventional” views without
much discussion, and has instead focused on determining its implications. Most
notably, Obstfeld and Rogoff [2000, 2004, and 2005], Blanchard, Giavazzi and
Sa [2005], and Roubini and Setser [2004] have all argued a large current

6

account reversal is inevitable and will likely be accompanied by a large and
disruptive depreciation in the dollar.4

The two papers that are perhaps closer to this one are Ventura [2001]
and Caballero, Farhi and Hammour [2005]. Both of these papers challenge
“conventional” views and stress instead the effects of an expectations-driven
stock market bubble on the US net foreign asset position. Ventura emphasized
the role of the dot-com bubble as the main driver of the current account deficits
during the second half of the 1990s, and argued that those deficits would be
sustainable in the absence of a bubble collapse. Unlike this paper, Ventura did
not offer a formal model connecting stock market bubbles and the net foreign
asset position, nor did he analyze the potential interactions between bubbles and
fiscal deficits. Caballero et al. study a one-country model in which high
expectations about the future create sufficient savings to fund the investment
necessary to validate these expectations. In contrast, we work with a world
equilibrium model in which there is a fixed pool of world savings and the stock
market bubble, capital, and public debt compete for it. While Caballero et al.
place the savings decision and adjustment costs in investment at center stage of
their story, we instead emphasize the portfolio decision and financial market
imperfections.

1. A model of crowding-out with debt and capital
This section presents a stylized model of productivity, debt and deficits. It
depicts a world where young individuals save to provide for their old age
consumption. These savings are used to finance both productive investments
and government deficits. Fiscal policy is used to redistribute consumption across
different generations. In particular, deficits finance additional present
4

We do not analyze the implications of our scenarios for the real exchange rate,
although it would be straightforward to do it. The results would also be straightforward
and standard. The real exchange rate would move in opposite direction to the current
account and the magnitude of the change would depend on the usual parameters, i.e.
the elasticity of substitution between traded and nontraded goods and the elasticity of
substitution between traded goods produced at home and abroad.

7

consumption by crowding-out productive investments and lowering future
consumption. This model constitutes a useful starting point for our argument,
since it neatly encapsulates conventional views on the effects and the
sustainability of fiscal deficits.

Consider a world with two regions: US and ROW. This world is populated
by overlapping generations of young and old. Each generation contains a
continuum of members with aggregate size one that are evenly distributed
across the two regions. Let I and I* be the sets of US and ROW residents,
respectively. As usual, use an asterisk to denote ROW variables and omit the
asterisk to denote US variables. There is a single good that can be used for
consumption and investment. Each generation receives an endowment of this
good during youth, which is evenly distributed among all its members. The
endowment grows from one generation to the next at a (gross) rate γ. We
normalize units so that the endowment of generation t is equal to γt, and we
express all quantity variables as a share of this endowment.

The young are patient and risk-neutral, and they maximize expected old
age consumption. Given this objective, the young save all their income and the
old consume all of theirs. Since the income of the young consists only of the
endowment mentioned above, our normalization implies that all the quantity
variables are to be interpreted as a share of world savings. The income of the
old consists of the return to their savings plus a transfer from the government
which could be positive or negative. We shall assume throughout that this
transfer is independent of an individual’s actions. Therefore, the only important
decision in any individual’s life is how to invest his/her savings so as to maximize
its expected return. This portfolio choice is at the heart of the story we want to
tell here.

The menu of investment options available to the young consists of
government debt and firms. Government debt consists of one-period bonds. We
assume that fiscal policies are consistent in the sense that, if the market decided
not to roll over the debt, the government would be able (and willing) to generate

8

enough of a surplus so as to redeem all the bonds issued. This ensures that
debt payments are made with probability one. It also implies that debt issued by
US and ROW governments must offer the same interest rate. Let rt+1 be this
common (gross) interest rate for holding government debt from date t to date
t+1.
Firms are investment projects run by entrepreneurs. A fraction κt of these
projects is located in the US (although some of these projects might be managed
by ROW entrepreneurs). We assume that this share can vary stochastically over
time within the unit interval. Firms purchase capital during the entrepreneur’s
youth, produce during the entrepreneur’s old age and then distribute a single
dividend per unit of capital before breaking up. This dividend or production is
random and has a mean π. To finance the purchase of capital, firms can use
private or internal funds (i.e. the entrepreneur’s own savings) or they can go
public and raise external funds in the stock market (i.e. the savings of young
other than the entrepreneur). Firms that are financed by internal funds offer an
expected gross return equal to π. Firms that are financed by external funds are
subject to agency costs equal to α and offer an expected gross return π-α.5
Therefore, investing in self-financed firms is preferred to holding stocks of traded
firms.

Throughout the paper, we assume that the economy is sufficiently
productive, i.e. π>γ. This ensures that the expected return to capital exceeds the
growth rate of savings. For the next couple of sections, we further assume that
agency costs are not too severe, i.e. α<π-γ. This is equivalent to saying that
financial frictions are small and the stock market is close enough to the
frictionless paradigm. This assumption turns out to be crucial and will be
removed in Section three.

5

Agency costs arise from incentive problems that are created by the separation between
ownership and control. One example is the cost of monitoring the manager to ensure
that he/she does not embezzle funds from the firm. Another example is the efficiency
loss due to less than optimal effort in situations where shareholders imperfectly observe
the manager’s actions or information set.

9

Each generation contains two types of young: “entrepreneurs” and
“shareholders”. The former have good investment projects that they can convert
into a firm, while the latter do not. For simplicity, assume both regions have the
same distribution of types. It follows from our assumptions that entrepreneurs
either invest in their own self-financed firms or buy government debt, while
shareholders are forced to choose between holding stocks of publicly traded
firms and government debt.6 Therefore, we can write the expected consumption
of the different individuals as follows:

(1)

if i ∈ E
max{π ,rt +1 } + E t Ti,t +1
E t Ci,t +1 = 
max{π − α ,rt +1 } + E t Ti,t +1 if i ∉ E

where Ti,t+1 is the transfer that old individual i receives from its government7
(remember that all quantity variables are expressed as a share of the world
endowment); while E is the set of entrepreneurs. We assume the measure of
this set is ε. Unless rt+1≥π, entrepreneurs enjoy higher expected consumption
and therefore higher welfare than shareholders because of their ability to
manage firms.8
Let Dt be total (US plus ROW) government debt, and let δt be the fraction
of this total that has been issued by the US. Then, we can write debt dynamics
as follows:

6

Who runs publicly traded firms? Remember each generation contains a continuum of
t
individuals with aggregate income equal to γ . Assume each (“infinitesimal”) entrepreneur
can run a (“non-infinitesimal”) firm of size υ. If this entrepreneur uses only internal funds,
t
his/her expected utility is π⋅γ ⋅di. If this entrepreneur uses external funds, his/her
t
expected utility is old age consumption is (π-α)⋅γ ⋅di+m; where m is the manager’s fee.
Since there is free entry, the equilibrium manager’s fee is m=α⋅γt⋅di. Since this fee is
infinitesimal, it constitutes a negligible cost for a non-infinitesimal of size υ and we can
disregard it. Therefore, the model depicts a world where a “small” subset of
entrepreneurs use external funds to build “large” firms that are traded in the stock
market, while a “large” subset of entrepreneurs runs “small” firms using internal funds.
7
We are assuming here that only the old receive transfers.
8
This comparison holds both the transfer and the date of birth constant. Remember that
expected consumption is measured as a share of the endowment and therefore welfare
t
is given by γ ⋅EtCi,t+1. A shareholder of a future generation might enjoy more welfare than
an entrepreneur of the present generation.

10

∑

rt +1
⋅ Dt +
Ti,t +1
γ
i∈I∪I*

(2)

D t +1 =

(3)



δ t +1 ⋅ D t +1 = δ t ⋅  D t +1 −
Ti,t +1  +
i∈I ∪I*



∑

∑T
i∈I

i, t +1

Equation (2) shows that debt equals to debt payments plus the primary deficit.
The latter is nothing but the sum of all the transfers received by the old. Equation
(3) shows how the US share evolves, for given primary deficits of the two
regions. We shall only consider sequences of deficits such that Dt≤1 in all dates
and states of nature. This is equivalent to assuming that governments never
default on their debts. This assumption will be removed later, but it turns out not
to be crucial.

The interest rate depends on the amount of debt that the government is
trying to place in the market. In particular, we have that:

(4)

rt +1

if D t < 1 − ε
π − α

= [π − α , π] if D t = 1 − ε
π
if D t > 1 − ε


Equation (4) shows how the interest rate increases with debt. For low
values of debt, the interest rate is π-α as the marginal buyer is a shareholder.
For high values of debt, the interest rate increases to π as the marginal buyer of
debt is now an entrepreneur. An important observation is that the assumption
that financial frictions are small implies that the interest rate always exceeds the
growth rate.

Let Kt denote the world capital stock, which is:

(5)

K t = 1 − Dt

Equation (5) simply says that capital and debt must add to world savings, since
they are the only investment options available. Let NFAt be the US net foreign

11

asset position, i.e. the difference between US wealth and the US capital stock.
This is a measure of US capital exports to the rest of the world, and is given by:

(6)

NFA t = (0.5 − δ t ) ⋅ D t + (0.5 − κ t ) ⋅ K t

Equation (6) shows that the net foreign asset position of the US contains
two pieces. The first term is the difference between the debt held by US
residents and the debt issued by the US government, that is, the first term is US
net borrowing. The second term is the difference between the capital stock
owned by US residents and the capital stock located within the US, that is, the
second term is US net holdings of equity.9

The mechanics of this model are as follows: Equations (2)-(4) jointly
determine the dynamics of debt and the interest rate for a given sequence of
primary deficits. With these dynamics at hand, Equations (5) and (6) determine
the world capital stock and the pattern of trade. With the help of an additional
assumption on how these deficits are distributed among old individuals, Equation
(1) describes the welfare of different individuals. It is straightforward to see that
this world economy has a unique equilibrium. We are now ready to use this
simple model to provide a first analysis of the evolution of the world economy
during the last decade.

2. Conventional views
Although stylized, this model captures well some conventional views of
the sources and effects of the large and persistent deterioration in the US net
9

Note that US residents own half of the world debt and half of the world capital stock.
This only because we have assumed both regions have the same population size, the
same distribution of types and the same endowment. This is just a harmless
simplification as it is straightforward to generalize the model to include asymmetries in
these variables. Note also that since we have assumed that government debt consists
of one-period bonds and firms last only one period, the current account is equal to the
net foreign asset position and we can use Equation (6) to talk about either concept. This
is another simplification, of course, since the real world contains long-lived assets. But it
will not play a role in what follows.

12

foreign asset position during the last decade. According to these views, in the
second half of the 1990s the US became a more attractive place to invest
relative to the rest of the world. That is, the number of good investment projects
in the US grew relative to ROW (i.e. there was an increase in κt). Many have
identified the boom in the information technology (IT) sector as a main reason for
this. Although this sector grew rapidly worldwide in the second half of the 1990s,
the US benefited more from this growth due to its strong technological lead
relative to Europe and Japan. Others have pointed to the flurry of currency and
banking crises in emerging markets as the main reason for the US becoming a
more attractive place to invest relative to ROW. These crises, which started in
Mexico and moved to East Asia and Russia, led to a downward reassessment of
the expected return to emerging market projects.

For either or both of these reasons, the story goes, investors all over the
world decided to put their savings into the US stock market and this is what
generated the current account deficits of the second half of the 1990s. This is
consistent with the evidence reported in Figure 2 that, in the second half of the
1990s, a large component of the change in the US net foreign asset position
consisted of a decline in net holdings of equity. The story becomes a bit fuzzy
when it comes to explaining the reversal in net holdings of equity that took place
in the first half of the 2000s, also reported in Figure 2. In the context of our
model, this reversal could be seen as a decline in the number of good
investment projects in the US grew relative to ROW (i.e. there was a decrease in
κt), although there is scant direct evidence supporting this view.
Although this account might sound reasonable at a superficial level, it
should be met with a healthy dose of skepticism after looking at the actual
numbers. Remember that value of the stock market increased threefold from
1995 to 2000 and then declined by one-quarter from 2000 to 2003. If the stock
market contains only productive firms, its value reflects that of the stock of
capital held by these firms. That is, the increase in stock market capitalization
requires a comparable increase in the price of capital, or the stock of capital or
both. Since capital is reproducible, its price cannot exceed the cost of producing

13

additional units. In the model, this cost is constant and equal to one. Naturally,
we could extend the model to allow for congestion effects on the cost of capital
as in the popular Q-theory of investment. But it seems unlikely that such an
extension would be able to explain much of the rise in the value of the stock
market.10

Neither can this rise and fall be explained by an increase in the stock of
capital. In the model world savings grow at a constant rate γ, and so a large
increase in the US stock of capital would have to be associated with a decline in
ROW’s stock of capital. However, the increase in stock market capitalization
took place all around the industrial world. Naturally, one could extend the model
to allow for increases in savings and therefore the capital stock. But this would
not get us very far quantitatively. Since the US capital stock is about twice US
GNP, a three-fold increase in the stock of capital during the second half of the
1990s would have required astronomical investment rates! The question
remains: how did the value of the stock market grow so much in the second half
of the 1990s and then drop in the first half of the 2000s?11

Of course, there have also been many voices arguing that the US stock
market during this period was fueled by a bubble rather than by an increase in
US productivity relative to the rest of the world. According to this alternative
view, foreign investors were not buying US firms in the IT sector because of their
high productivity, but instead because they were expecting to resell them later at
a higher price. The appearance of a bubble brings huge capital gains to those
that are able to “create” it, and this could explain the massive increases in equity
prices during the second half of the 1990s. But to realize these capital gains one
must first find buyers for the bubble, and this is only possible if the bubble

10

Hall [2001] estimates the price of installed capital in the US since 1946, and finds that
this price increased by only about 25 percent during the second half of the 1990s. See
also Hall [2004] for an attempt to measure the cost of capital.
11
Hall [2001] argues that the increase in the total value of the stock market reflects
massive accumulation of intangible capital. This increase is mostly a windfall, since it did
not require significant investment expenditures. As Ventura [2001] points out, it is hard to
see why this intangible capital suddenly disappeared in 2000.

14

promises a sufficiently attractive return. That is, a bubble can be created if and
only if it is expected to grow fast enough so as to justify buying it.

It is possible to examine this alternative interpretation within our model.
To do this, we formally define a stock market bubble as a situation in which firms
without capital are valued and traded in the stock market. We refer to these firms
as “bubbly” firms, as opposed to the “productive” firms that own the capital stock.
The question is whether bubbly firms can survive in a stock market that also
contains productive firms. Let Bt be the asset bubble (or aggregate value of
bubbly firms as a share of world savings). Since bubbly firms do not distribute
dividends, the return to holding them consists only of their price appreciation.
Therefore, the young will buy these firms if and only if the expected rate of price
appreciation is high enough:

(7)

γ⋅

E tB t + 1
≥ rt +1 if B t > 0
Bt

Otherwise, the young would prefer to hold shares in productive firms or
government bonds. A bubble can therefore create its own demand only by
growing on average as fast or faster than the interest rate. But the growth of the
bubble cannot be so fast so as to outgrow world savings, i.e. Bt≤1 must hold in
all dates and states of nature. And this requirement is incompatible with
Equation (7) if the interest rate exceeds the growth rate. Therefore, we conclude
that bubbly firms cannot survive in the stock market in this case. Our assumption
that financial frictions are small rules implies that the interest rate always
exceeds the growth rates and therefore rules out the possibility of stock market
bubbles. This, we think, is the first serious shortcoming of the standard or
conventional view.

This view also holds that the current account deficits continued after
2000 due to the sharp change in fiscal policy implemented by the Bush
administration (i.e. an increase in the US primary deficit that leads to an increase
in δt). This fiscal policy consists of spending more, cutting taxes, and financing

15

the resulting budget deficits by issuing government debt. Overwhelmingly, this
change in policy has been interpreted as a political decision and not as an
economic policy response to a specific macroeconomic disturbance. In other
words, the US fiscal expansion has been treated as an “exogenous” shock to the
macroeconomic landscape. Much of the increment to public debt has been
placed abroad. Between end-2000 and end-2003 US public debt increased by
$500 billion, while foreign holdings of US treasury bills increased by almost the
same amount. And to the extent that public debt has been placed at home, it
likely has crowded out US corporate debt and forced firms to place an increasing
fraction of their own debt abroad. Through these direct and indirect channels, the
budget deficits of the Bush administration account for a substantial part of the
large increase in net borrowing from abroad shown in Figure 2. The important
question is whether this situation is sustainable and, if it is not, how the
necessary adjustment will look.

To answer this question, we use the model to analyze the effects of a
fiscal expansion in the US. The experiment is as follows. Initially both regions
have no debt and follow balanced-budget policies, i.e. Dt=0 and

∑T

i, t

= 0 . At

i∈I ∪I*

some date, the US switches its policy for exogenous reasons and decides to
increase spending, cut taxes and finance the resulting deficit by going into debt,
while ROW keeps its budget balanced, i.e.

∑T

i, t

i∈I

= T > 0 and

∑T

i, t

= 0 . The

i∈I *

questions we address next are: What are the possible endings for this fiscal
episode? What are its welfare consequences?

When the fiscal deficits appear, government debt starts growing at an
accelerating rate, crowding out the investments of the shareholders. The growth
of the debt is fueled directly by the deficits, but also indirectly by unfavourable
debt dynamics resulting from the interest rate exceeding the growth rate. In fact,
it is this second component growing over time that leads to accelerating debt
growth. If the fiscal expansion lasts long enough, the debt also starts crowding
out the investments of the entrepreneurs. At this point the interest rate goes up,
debt dynamics become more unfavourable and debt accumulation further

16

accelerates. As debt accumulates, US net borrowing abroad increases. Since
the debt crowds out capital from the portfolios of investors worldwide, US net
holdings of equity decline in absolute value.

This situation is not sustainable since the accelerating growth rate of debt
is incompatible with a fixed pool of savings, and the US eventually must go
through a period of fiscal adjustment. This essentially means that the US must
reverse its fiscal policy (since it does not want to default) and start running
sufficiently large surpluses, i.e.

∑T

i, t

i∈I

 γ − rt 
= T < 
 ⋅ Dt . Not surprisingly, the
 γ 

magnitude of the fiscal adjustment increases with the level of debt. When the
debt is higher, the surpluses need to be larger, last longer, or both.

Assuming that the US government only makes transfers to US citizens,
the fiscal expansion increases the welfare of current US generations in detriment
of future ones. After all, in this model a policy of budget deficits is nothing but a
policy of passing the bill forward. When this policy is implemented, the old
consume beyond the return to their savings and pass the bill to the next
generation. This bill includes their extra consumption plus the interest. Rather
than paying the bill, the next generation further increases it by also consuming
more than the return to their savings and then passes the bill along to the
following generation. This keeps going on for as long as the government follows
a policy of running deficits and rolling over the debt. But the bill is growing too
fast and must eventually be paid. This is what a fiscal adjustment is all about.
The longer it takes for this adjustment to happen, the larger is the final bill and
the costlier will be for the US to face it.

The welfare of present generations is also affected by the fiscal
expansion indirectly through its effects on the interest rate. High interest rates
raise the expected consumption of young shareholders both in the US and
ROW. Since interest rate costs are added to the bill, future generations of US
residents are also supporting higher consumption of current ROW generations.
This constitutes a positive spillover of the US fiscal expansion on ROW. The

17

fiscal adjustment will eliminate it and this is why ROW residents might prefer this
to happen as late as possible.

Of course, one could argue that this scenario is unrealistic since it
assumes that the US government will honor its debt in all contingencies. But
relaxing this assumption has only minor effects on the overall story. To see this,
replace Equations (2) and (4) for these straightforward generalizations:12

(8)

 rt +1
Ti,t +1 with prob. 1 − µ t
⋅ Dt +

D t +1 =  γ
i∈I ∪I *

0
with prob. µ t


(9)

if D t < 1 − ε
π − α + µ t

= [π − α + µ t , π + µ t ] if D t = 1 − ε
π + µ
if D t > 1 − ε
t


∑

rt +1

where µt is the (exogenous) probability that the US government defaults on its
debt. A reasonable assumption is that this probability grows as the debt
increases, but we need not make it here. Equation (8) recognizes that now debt
can be defaulted upon, while Equation (9) recognizes that the expected return
on government debt includes the promised return minus the expected loss from
default. Note that default risk makes debt dynamics even more unfavourable by
raising the interest rate. In other words, default risk makes the current situation
even more unsustainable.

With a positive default probability the US fiscal expansion might have a
different ending. If the current deficit goes on long enough and the required fiscal
adjustment becomes too large, the US government might simply default on its
debt. In this case, the adjustment takes place in a dramatic fashion. The
generation of old (US and ROW) shareholders that suffers the default pays the
entire bill for the excess consumption of its US predecessors. Since half of the

12

One can think of default as surprise inflation that erases the real value of the debt.
Here we are also assuming that the ROW government keeps with its policy of having no
debt. Otherwise, we should also “break down” Equations (8)-(9) into their two regional
components.

18

shareholders are not US residents, half of the bill is therefore paid by ROW
citizens. In this scenario, current US economic policy is simply increasing
consumption and welfare of current US residents at the expense of future US
and ROW residents. This constitutes a negative spillover of the US fiscal
expansion on ROW. A fiscal adjustment would ensure that this scenario does
not happen and, as a result, ROW residents might prefer the US to reduce its
budget deficits even if this lowers the interest rate.

One problem with this standard story is the behavior of the interest rate.
While the model predicts that the US fiscal expansion will increase the interest
rate, the evidence shows exactly the opposite. Figure 4 showed that, in the midst
of one of the largest fiscal expansions in US history, the interest rate fell from
above three percent to close to zero percent. The model can only account for
this observation if there is a decline in the expected return to capital (i.e. a
decline in π) and/or an increase in agency costs (i.e. an increase in α).13 Given
the magnitude of both the fall in interest rates and the increase in budget deficits,
the decline in productivity and/or a increase in agency costs would have to be
very large. There is scant evidence for a major decline in world productivity. And
despite the intense media coverage of some financial scandals such as Enron or
Parmalat, it is also unlikely that frictions in financial markets increased
dramatically overnight. In our view, the inability to predict the behavior of the
interest rate constitutes a second serious shortcoming of the conventional view.

To sum up, the model crudely but effectively encapsulates conventional
views of the US current account deficit. Its appearance in the second half of the
1990s reflects an increase in US productivity relative to the rest of the world that
led investors all over the world to place their savings in the US stock market.
This situation ended with the stock market collapse in 2000. But the current
account deficits continued after this now fueled by the drastic change in fiscal
policy implemented by the Bush administration. This policy is however
unsustainable and something must eventually give. Most observers think that

We have assumed that π and α are constant. Note however that all the equations of
the model still apply if we assume that these parameters vary stochastically over time.
13

19

this episode will end with a painful fiscal adjustment, although there are also
those who argue that the resolution will entail some default on the part of the US
government. The stylized model developed above shows how all of these
observations fit together.

But the model is not free of problems, though. It cannot explain observed
movements in equity prices, nor can it explain why the interest rate fell in the
midst of one of the largest fiscal expansions in US history. How can we come to
grips with these observations? The preceding analysis relies to a large extent on
the condition that the interest rate exceeds the growth rate. This condition rules
out the existence of stock market bubbles and underlies the notion that a policy
of continued fiscal deficits is unsustainable. But this condition is not satisfied in
the data. Figure 5 plots the ex-post real one-year Treasury bill rate and the real
GDP growth rate for the US since 1970. With the exception of the 1980s, the
interest rate has been consistently below the growth rate for almost all years
during this period. More importantly for our purposes, since 1992 interest rates
have averaged 1.7 percent while GDP growth has averaged 3.3 percent. As we
shall show next, the behavior of the world economy is quite different when the
growth rate exceeds the interest rate.

3. A model of crowding-out with debt, bubbles and capital
Assume next that agency costs are severe, i.e. α>π-γ. This is equivalent
to saying that financial frictions are large and the stock market is far from the
frictionless paradigm. To analyze this case, we need to generalize a bit the
theory since now the world economy can experience stock market bubbles.
Consider the possibility that the stock market contains unproductive or bubbly
firms that never deliver a dividend. The only reason to hold these firms is to
realize capital gains. We assume that creating bubbly firms is simply a matter of
luck and entails negligible costs. Naturally, all young try to create them and
those that are successful obtain a rent by selling their bubbly firm during old

20

age.14 Let Ni,t be the rent that individual i receives. We generalize Equation (1) as
follows:

(10)



E t {B t +1 − Nt +1}
if i ∈ E
max π ,rt +1 , γ ⋅
 + E t Ti,t +1 + E tNi, t +1
Bt



E t Ci,t +1 = 
max π − α ,r , γ ⋅ E t {B t +1 − Nt +1} + E T + E N
t +1
t i, t +1
t i, t +1 if i ∉ E

Bt




where Nt =

∑N

i, t

is the total value of the bubbly firms that appear at date t.

i∈I∪I *

Note that the expected (gross) return on holding a bubbly firm is equal to the
(gross) growth rate of its price. This growth rate is equal to the expected value of
tomorrow’s bubbly firms at date t+1, i.e. γt+1⋅ E t {B t +1 − Nt +1} ; divided by their value
at date t, i.e. γt⋅Bt.15 Equation (10) exhibits two differences with respect to
Equation (1). Bubbly firms are now included in the menu of assets and this
affects the expected return on the savings of the young. In addition, the creation
of new bubbly firms generates rents for the old and this constitutes an additional
source of income.

Equations (2) and (3) describing debt dynamics still apply, but we must
modify Equation (4) describing the interest rate as follows:16

(11)

rt +1

if D t < 1 − ε − B t
π − α

= [π − α , π] if D t = 1 − ε − B t
π
if D t > 1 − ε − B t


14

Success is nothing but a positive realization of an individual-specific sunspot.
Equation (6) implicitly assumed a fixed number of bubbly firms. In this case, the
expected growth rate of the bubble equals the expected price appreciation of existing
bubbly firms.
16
We assume again that governments never default on their debts. As shown before, it
is straightforward to generalize the analysis to the case in which there is an exogenous
probability that governments default on their debts.
15

21

Equation (11) recognizes that debt and the bubble both compete with capital for
the savings of the young. In order to create its own demand, the bubble must
grow sufficiently fast:

(12)

E t {B t +1 − Nt +1} rt +1
=
Bt
γ

if B t > 0

Equation (12) is a necessary condition for the young to be willing to buy bubbly
firms. It applies whenever bubbly firms have a positive value in equilibrium. We
shall construct later equilibria in which bubbly firms not only survive in the stock
market, but drive all productive firms out of it. Finally, let βt be share of all bubbly
firms created by US residents. It then follows that:

(13)



Ni,t +1  +
β t +1 ⋅ B t +1 = β t ⋅  B t +1 −
i∈I∪I *



∑

∑N
i∈I

i, t +1

The presence of a bubble naturally affects asset trade. The world capital
stock is now given by:

(14)

K t = 1 − Dt − B t

and the capital stock of the US is then κt⋅(1-Dt-Bt). The US net foreign asset
position is now given as follows:

(15)

NFA t = (0.5 − δ t ) ⋅ D t + (0.5 − β t ) ⋅ B t + (0.5 − κ t ) ⋅ (1 − D t − B t )

Equation (15) is a natural generalization of Equation (6) and includes an
additional piece of the net foreign asset position of the US. This piece is the
second term and consists of the difference between the share of the bubble held
by US residents and the share of the bubble created by them. Now, the US net
holdings of equity are given by the sum of the second and third terms of
Equation (6).

22

The mechanics of this model are very close to those of the model in
section 1: Equations (2), (11), (12) and (13) describe the dynamics of debt and
the interest rate for a given sequence of bubbles and deficits. With these
dynamics at hand, Equations (14) and (15) determine the world capital stock and
the pattern of trade. With the help of additional assumptions about the creation
of new bubbly firms and the distribution of deficits among individuals, Equation
(10) describes the welfare of each individual. This world economy has many
equilibria now, each of them corresponding to a different set of (consistent)
assumptions about the behavior of bubbles and deficits. We shall later construct
some of these equilibria and examine their implications.

This model allows us to study the large and persistent deterioration of the
US net foreign asset position under the more realistic assumption that the
interest rate falls short of the growth rate. As is well known, this condition
implies that the world economy contains pockets of dynamically inefficient
investments.17 The logic behind this inefficiency is disarmingly simple and well
understood: every period young shareholders invest γt⋅(1-ε) units of the single
good, while old shareholders receive a return to their savings that on average
equals rt⋅γt-1⋅(1-ε). If rt<γ, it is welfare-improving to implement a social contract
whereby all young shareholders are forced to stop investing and instead give all
of their income to the old shareholders. This social contract would liberate an
amount of resources equal to (γ-rt) ⋅γt-1⋅(1-ε) per period, and these resources
would go directly to the pockets of the future shareholders. Moreover, the
17

In an influential paper, Abel et al. [1989] noticed that capital income exceeds
investment in industrial countries and then argued that this observation is incompatible
with the view that these countries contain dynamically inefficient investments. Their
argument is misleading however. To see this, note that in our world economy capital
t-1
t
income is [π-α⋅(1-ε)]⋅γ while investment is γ . The observation that capital income
exceeds investment, i.e. π-α⋅(1-ε)>γ; does not rule out the possibility that there exist
pockets of dynamic inefficiency, i.e. γ>π-α. The observation that capital income exceeds
investment only implies that the “average” investment is dynamically efficient. But this is
not incompatible with the statement that the “marginal” investment be dynamically
inefficient. Abel et al. [1989] did not notice this because they assumed throughout that
financial markets are frictionless and, as a result, all investments exhibit the same return.
This corresponds to the special case of our model in which α=0. This is an unrealistic
and yet crucial assumption. Once we remove it, the argument of Abel et al. does not go
through.

23

generation that starts the social contract would get an upfront fee (for its service
to society) that equals the endowment of the first generation of young that
participate in the social contract, i.e. γt⋅(1-ε). This social contract therefore
improves on the market and raises the consumption and welfare of all
generations.18

At first sight, the practical difficulties in implementing this social contract
appear overwhelming. But this is only a false appearance. It has been known for
a long time that government debt and stock market bubbles can both crowd out
inefficient investments and improve welfare. Complying with the social contract
during youth and giving the endowment to the old can be seen as equivalent to
purchasing the “right” to receive the endowment of the young during old age. But
this exactly what government debt or stock market bubbles are. When the young
buy any of these assets from the old (and thus give the old their endowment),
they are doing so in the expectation of reselling them to the young later during
their old age (and therefore receiving the endowment of the young). In this way,
government debt and stock market bubbles eliminate inefficient investments and
liberate resources that increase the consumption of all future generations. Since
issuing debt or creating bubbly firms has negligible costs, those that “create”
them receive in addition an upfront fee or rent which equals the full value of the
asset created. This upfront fee or pure rent is exactly what Ti,t and Ni,t are.
As the previous discussion hints, the presence of pockets of dynamic
inefficiency might lead to a substantial rethinking of the role of fiscal policy.
Naturally, fiscal policy still redistributes consumption across generations. But it
now also eliminates inefficient investments. Since bubbles are an alternative and
market-generated solution to the same problem, this observation raises some
interesting and still unanswered questions: Under what conditions does fiscal
policy complement stock market bubbles as a mechanism to eliminate inefficient
investments? Under what conditions does fiscal policy compete with stock
market bubbles for this role? What are the welfare implications of these
18

Since entrepreneurs receive an expected gross return to their savings that exceeds
the growth rate, their investments are dynamically efficient and the government should
not try to eliminate them.

24

interactions between bubbles and deficits? We next show that the answers to
these questions lead to new and somewhat surprising views on US economic
policy.

4. A “benevolent” view of US economic policy
We next construct an equilibrium in which the stock market initially
creates a bubble that is large enough to crowd out all inefficient investments.
The world economy operates efficiently and welfare is high. But there is a
change in investor sentiment that triggers the collapse of the bubble. The result
is that inefficient investments reappear. The government reacts to this by
running large deficits that crowd out some of these investments and improve the
functioning of the world economy. In this equilibrium, the US fiscal expansion
constitutes a welfare-improving policy response to the bubble collapse.

Consider the case of a world economy in which investor sentiment
fluctuates between two states: St∈{L,H}. In the L (or low) state, investors are
“pessimistic”, bubbly firms are not valued, and the stock market contains only
productive firms. In the H (or high) state, investors are “optimistic”, bubbly firms
are valued, and they completely crowd productive firms out of the stock market.
That is, we assume that the bubble evolves as follows:

(16)

0

Bt = 
1 − ε − D t

if S t = L
if S t = H

We shall assume also that Nt=0 for all t, except for those dates in which the
world economy transitions from L to H and Nt=Bt. That is, all bubbly firms appear
at the onset of the bubble. After this, no more bubbly firms are created and the
stock market bubble contains only a fixed number of firms whose value
fluctuates over time.

25

How do these changes in investor sentiment happen? We assume that
individuals coordinate to an equilibrium using a sunspot variable that moves
between the high and low states. We refer to this variable as “investor
sentiment”. Assume the transition probability or probability that there is a change
in investor sentiment is λ. When a generation is optimistic, it believes that the
probability the next generation will buy the bubble is 1-λ. When a generation is
pessimistic, it believes that the probability the next generation will buy the bubble
is λ. If λ is sufficiently small, optimistic generations buy the bubble, pessimistic
generations do not, and the probabilities assigned by both types of generations
are exactly the equilibrium ones. We assume from now on that γ⋅(1-λ)>π-α>γ⋅λ.
As we shall see, this ensures that these changes in investor sentiment are an
equilibrium. We shall see that a change in investor sentiment that moves the
world economy from the high to the low state is nothing but a coordination
failure, since the low state provides less welfare than the high state.

The fiscal policy of the US government recognizes the beneficial role that
bubbly firms play in the world economy and avoids competing with them. When
investor sentiment is high, the government refrains from running budget deficits
and lets the (stock) market eliminate the inefficient investments on its own.
When investor sentiment is low, the market cannot do this and the government
runs budget deficits in order to help. These deficits raise government debt and
crowd out the inefficient investments that the market is unable to eliminate by
itself. In particular, we assume the US follows this fiscal policy:

(17)

∑
i∈I

 γ − rt
⋅ (1 − ε) if S t = L

Ti, t =  γ

0
if S t = H


We shall see that this fiscal policy ensures that government debt eventually
absorbs all inefficient investments if investor sentiment remains low indefinitely.
However, consistent with the view that the government is trying to remedy
market failures, debt will never crowd out the investments of entrepreneurs.

26

Throughout, and only for simplicity, we assume that ROW has no debt and
follows a balanced-budget policy, i.e. δt=1 and

∑T

i, t

=0.

i∈I *

The assumptions made allow us to determine the equilibrium interest rate
as follows:19

(18)

if S t = L
π−α


rt +1 =  (1 − λ ) ⋅ (1 − ε)
if S t = H
γ ⋅ 1 − ε − λ ⋅ D
t


Equation (18) shows that the implications of increased government debt on the
interest rate depend crucially on investor sentiment. Note that the assumptions
made ensure that the interest rate is always higher when investor sentiment is
high. When investor sentiment is low, the interest rate is low because debt
competes with capital and the latter offers a low expected return to shareholders.
When investor sentiment is high, the interest rate is high because debt competes
with the bubble which is a better asset than capital. It follows from Equation (15)
(and the assumption that Nt=0) that the interest rate is nothing but the expected
(gross) growth rate of the bubble.

To understand what is behind Equation (18), assume first that there is no
government debt. Then, the expected growth rate of the bubble is γ if there is no
change in investor sentiment, but zero if there is a change in investor sentiment.
Since the latter happens with probability λ, the expected growth rate of the
bubble is γ⋅(1-λ) and this is what the interest rate must be when Dt=0. Assume
instead that there is some debt in the world economy. Since debt dynamics are
favourable and both governments follow a policy of balanced budgets, we have
that the debt is falling and the bubble is replacing it. Therefore, the bubble grows
faster than the world economy since it absorbs an increasing fraction of the

19

To derive the interest rate when St=H, substitute Equations (2), (16) and (17) into
Equation (12) and then solve for the interest rate. Note that when St=L and Dt=1-ε, any
rt∈[π-α,γ] is also an equilibrium.

27

shareholders’ savings. The larger is the debt, the faster it falls and the faster is
the growth of the bubble and the interest rate.

Under the assumptions made about bubbles and deficits, the dynamics
of debt are given by Equations (2) and (17)-(18). Substituting these dynamics
into Equation (16), we also obtain the dynamics of the bubble. It is
straightforward to check that, under our parameter restrictions, the sequences of
bubbles and debt generated by these equations satisfy the conditions that Bt≤1
and Dt≤1 in all dates and states of nature. This confirms that these sequences
constitute an equilibrium of the world economy. We use next this equilibrium to
re-interpret the main macroeconomic developments of the last decade.

This equilibrium portrays an alternative and “benevolent” view of current
US economic policy. The story goes as follows. Initially the world starts in the
pessimistic state with the US having some intermediate level of debt and a low
interest rate, i.e. 0<Dt<1-ε and rt=π-α. At some date, there is a change in investor
sentiment and a stock market bubble appears. The bulk of this bubble consists
of US bubbly firms, i.e.

∑N

i, t

>0.5. After a few periods, there is a new change in

i∈I

investor sentiment that moves the world economy back into the pessimistic
state. This brings about a collapse in the bubble. The questions we address next
are: What are the macroeconomic effects of the appearance and bursting of the
bubble? What are the effects of US fiscal policy?

Figure 6 illustrates the dynamics of debt by plotting Dt+1 as a function of
Dt. The convex upward-sloping line captures the dynamics of debt when
investor sentiment is high, while the straight upward-sloping line shows the same
when investor sentiment is low. The economy starts out with low investor
sentiment and an initial level of debt D*. Debt dynamics are favourable and debt
increases at a decreasing rate. Absent any further shocks it would
asymptotically reach an upper bound of 1-ε where it would fully crowd out all the
inefficient investments of the shareholders. However, before this (when debt is
equal to D0) investor sentiment changes and a bubble appears in the stock

28

market. The government reacts to this by eliminating the budget deficit, and
debt begins to fall. Absent any further shocks debt would asymptotically reach
zero as it is no longer needed to crowd out inefficient investments. Before this
happens, there is again a change in investor sentiment (when debt is equal to
D1) and the bubble collapses. The government responds with fiscal deficits that
set debt on an upward trajectory again.

During the period before the bubble appears, US debt accumulates
gradually and the net foreign asset position becomes more negative as some of
this debt is held by foreigners. The government responds to the appearance of
the bubble by eliminating the budget deficit, and debt accordingly begins to
decline. The bubble provides shareholders with a more attractive investment
option and therefore crowds out all productive firms from the stock market. As
time passes, government debt declines and the bubble keeps growing and
absorbing an increasing fraction of the savings of the shareholders. Despite the
elimination of the budget deficit, the interest rate jumps up as government debt
must now compete with the bubble for the savings of shareholders. The interest
rate then declines slowly as the growth rate of the bubble also declines over
time. The net foreign asset position jumps down as the US old sell their bubbly
firms to the ROW young, and the composition of the net foreign asset position of
the US shifts from debt to equity.

This rosy situation changes overnight as a result of a change in investor
sentiment that brings about a collapse in the bubble. The inefficient investments
of shareholders return. The US government reacts to this situation by
engineering a fiscal expansion that eliminates these inefficient investments over
time. Unlike the analysis of section two, debt dynamics are favourable and the
debt grows at a decelerating rate, eventually stabilizing without the need for a
fiscal adjustment. Despite the appearance of budget deficits, the interest rate
jumps down and stays low since debt no longer competes with the bubble. The
collapse of the bubble erases a fraction of the negative US net holdings of
equity, and leads to a sharp increase in net foreign assets. But this is quickly
reversed as US government debt accumulates.

29

This story is therefore broadly consistent with the evidence presented in
the introduction. It can account for the boom in the stock market and the sharp
decline in budget deficits during the second half of the 1990s, as well as the
collapse of the stock market and the re-emergence of fiscal deficits during the
early 2000s. It can explain why interest rates were high during a period of low
budget deficits, but fell when high budget deficits returned. It can account for the
decline in the net foreign asset position associated with the appearance of the
bubble. Moreover, by virtue of the assumption that the bubble was created
primarily in the US, it can account for the large expansion in foreign purchases of
US equity during the second half of the 1990s, followed by a sharp reversal.
This reversal in US net holdings of equity is offset by a decline in US net
holdings of debt as the US government issues debt and sells part of it to
foreigners.

The welfare implications of this scenario are easy to spot. The
appearance of the bubble brings about an extraordinary bonanza for the current
generation of old, since they cash in the rents from bubble creation and enjoy an
unexpectedly high level of consumption. This windfall is equivalent to the upfront
fee of implementing the part of the social contract that the debt was not
implementing, i.e. γt⋅(1-ε-Dt). This fee is unevenly distributed since we have
assumed that most of the bubble was created by US residents. The following
generations of US and ROW shareholders are not so well off as the previous
one, since there is no further creation of bubbly firms. But they still enjoy the
benefit of a high interest rate, and this increases the consumption and welfare of
shareholders all around the world. Through the high interest shareholders
receive all the gains from eliminating their inefficient investments just as in the
social contract, i.e. (γ-π+α)⋅γt-1⋅(1-ε).20 In this world economy, a stock market
bubble is a very good thing since it implements the social contract and
everybody benefits.

20

To understand the welfare implications for the subsequent generations, simply
remember that trading the bubble essentially means that each generation of
shareholders receives the endowment of the next one in exchange of its own.

30

The collapse of the bubble brings substantial hardship to the
contemporary generation of shareholders, who bought the bubble during their
youth and find out in their old age that it is worthless. Somewhat unfairly, this
generation of shareholders pays a dear price for the fact that the next generation
of the young decides to “break the social contract” and not buy the bubble from
them. This price can be understood as the devolution of the upfront fee for
destroying the social contract, i.e. γt⋅(1-ε-Dt). Subsequent generations do not
suffer as much although they still find that interest rates are low and, as a result,
so are their consumption and welfare. The gains from eliminating the inefficient
investments are lost. The bursting of the bubble is a coordination failure and
everybody loses from it.

The US fiscal expansion offsets part of this loss for US residents. To see
this, note that we can use Equation (2) to decompose the revenues from the
fiscal expansion, i.e. γ t ⋅

∑T

i,t

, into two components. The first one consists of

i∈I

the gains from eliminating inefficient investments, i.e. (γ-rt)⋅γt-1⋅Dt. The second
one consists of the upfront fee for creating debt, i.e. γt⋅(Dt+1-Dt). That is, the US
government is gradually implementing the social contract and distributing the
gains to the different US generations in the form of transfers, i.e. higher
spending and lower taxes. ROW residents do not benefit from this US fiscal
policy because they are assumed not to receive transfer from the US
government and the interest rate remains low throughout.21

This analysis departs fundamentally from the conventional view in two
important respects. The first one is that the fiscal expansion is now seen as
sustainable, while in section two it was deemed unsustainable. The second
difference is that the fiscal expansion is now seen as benefiting all generations,
while in section two it was perceived as a means to re-distribute consumption
from future to present generations. Both of these differences, of course, are a

21

They would benefit too though, if we had postulated a concave technology rather than
a linear one, since the debt would raise the interest rate. And this would be a positive
spillover of the US fiscal expansion abroad.

31

direct consequence of removing the unrealistic assumption, which underlies
conventional views, that the interest rate exceeds the growth rate.

How plausible is this “benevolent” view of US economic policy? A first
objection to it comes from a simple numerical observation. Favourable debt
dynamics mean that debt accumulation decelerates and eventually stabilizes.
But this requires that the deficits not be too large. To see this, assume now that

∑T

i,t

i∈I

>

γ − rt
⋅ (1 − ε) . In this case, government debt starts crowding out efficient
γ

investments before stabilizing and this turns favourable debt dynamics into
unfavourable ones. If the deficits are too large, the situation is unsustainable
even if the world economy contains pockets of dynamic inefficiency. This seems
to be the situation nowadays. The US economy is about forty percent of the
world economy. Its (net) growth rate is about three percent, the (net) interest rate
is about one and a half percent, and the budget deficit remains at five percent of
US GNP. Under these assumptions, by the time US government debt stabilizes
it has already surpassed world savings by almost forty percent! The current
budget deficits are not sustainable and this seems an unobjectionable
conclusion to us.

But this does not mean however that the “benevolent” view is incorrect.
The essence of this view is that the US government is supplying an asset
(government debt) that is useful to eliminate inefficient investments, and it is
receiving payments (deficits) for this service. The time profile of deficits reflects
how these payments are distributed across the different generations. We made
the simple assumption in Equation (16) that these benefits grew at the same rate
as the world economy, i.e. so that generation t obtained γt+1⋅T. But this is
obviously not the option that the current US government has chosen. We get
much closer to the actual behavior of the US government if we replace Equation
(17) by the following one:

32

(19)

∑
i∈I

 γ − rt
if S t = S t −1 = L
⋅ (1 − ε )

γ

r

Tit =  1 − ε − t ⋅ D t −1 if S t = L and S t −1 = H
γ


0
if S t = H


Under this new assumption on fiscal policy, Equation (18) describing the interest
rate still applies. The dynamics of debt under this fiscal policy are now however
very different. When the bubble bursts, the US responds by engineering a very
large fiscal expansion. In particular, it immediately expands debt by exactly the
amount required to absorb all of the savings of the shareholders, and then
stabilizes debt at this level by running much smaller deficits. The first generation
after the bubble collapses receives the entire upfront fee. Future generations
then simply receive the gains from eliminating inefficient investments. Whether
this choice of distribution of gains corresponds to a preference for the current
generation or, instead, to a desire to compensate the generation that lost the
bubble is unclear. But to make the “benevolent” view consistent with observed
policy one must assume that the lion’s share of the gains that accrue from
supplying government debt are being reaped by the current generation.

This view is comes surprisingly close to capturing actual US fiscal policy.
Suppose that the decline in the value of the stock market between 2000 and
2003, equalling a bit more than $3 trillion, represents the elimination of the
bubble. According to this benevolent view the US government should run large
fiscal deficits to quickly expand public debt by about the same amount.
Interestingly, according to the baseline projections of the US Congressional
Budget Office, public debt will expand by $2.6 trillion between 2000 and 2012,
and then stabilize thanks to much smaller projected budget deficits of around 2
percent of GDP. This suggests that projected fiscal policy over the next several
years will be successful in eliminating almost as many inefficient investments as
the stock market bubble did in the 1990s.

Of course, it is possible that a bubble reappears in the stock market in
the future, and this would require an adjustment in fiscal policy. According to the

33

benevolent view, the government should respond to the reappearance of a stock
market bubble by eliminating the fiscal deficits. In the context of our model,
whether this fiscal adjustment will be painful or not depends on who issues the
bubble. If the US is lucky and the new bubble is mostly created by US residents,
then the rents from bubble creation will make for most of the lost budget deficits.
And if this is the case, the US net foreign asset position will remain negative as
US residents on net sell their bubbly firms to foreigners. If instead it is mostly
ROW residents that issue the new bubble, then the fiscal adjustment would be
costly since US residents would not be compensated for the loss of the budget
deficits. In this case, the US net foreign asset position would turn positive as US
debt declines and ROW residents sell bubbly firms to US ones.

Central to our model is the result that providing an asset that eliminates
inefficient investments yields a benefit or fee to those that create it. According to
the benevolent view, the government is “altruistic”: it lets the private sector
appropriate this benefit (rents from bubbly creation), and only intervenes when
the market is incapable of providing itself with the appropriate asset. When this
is the case, the government also receives part of this benefit (the budget
deficits). But why would the government not want to appropriate this benefit even
when the market works? One can also imagine that the government could be
“opportunistic”: it might try to displace an existing bubble and capture all the
benefits from providing an asset that eliminates inefficient investments, and
redistribute these benefits to its constituents. We examine next this possibility.

5. A “cynical” view of US economic policy
We consider next a situation in which there are two types of government.
The “altruistic” government acts as in the previous section. Rather than allow
the private sector to capture the rents from bubble creation, the “opportunistic”
government expands public debt and crowds out the bubble in order to capture
these rents and distribute them to its constituents. We construct an equilibrium
in which initially the altruistic government is in power and the stock market

34

creates a bubble that is large enough to crowd out all inefficient investments.
The government responds by eliminating its budget deficits and making room for
the bubble to grow. But there is a change in government and this leads to a
drastic change in fiscal policy. The opportunistic government starts a fiscal
expansion whose objective is to crowd out the bubble and in this way
appropriate its value. In this equilibrium, the US fiscal expansion constitutes a
“beggar-thy-neighbour” policy that is responsible for the collapse in the stock
market.
Let Gt∈{A,O} be a state variable indicating whether the altruistic (Gt=A) or
the opportunistic (Gt=O) government is in power, and let φ be the probability the
US government changes type. As in the previous section, the altruistic
government uses fiscal policy to immediately eliminate inefficient investments
whenever the stock market fails to do so. Therefore Equation (19) still applies
when Gt=A. Instead, the opportunistic government uses fiscal policy to
appropriate as many resources as possible and then distributes them as it sees
fit. As a result, when Gt=O we must replace Equation (19) with the following:

(20)

∑
i∈I

 

rt
 χ ⋅ 1 − ε − ⋅ D t −1  if D t −1 < 1 − ε

γ

Tit =  
γ
−
r
t

⋅ (1 − ε)
if D t −1 = 1 − ε
γ


where χ∈(0,1]. Since 1 − ε −

rt
⋅ D t −1 is the value of productive and bubbly firms
γ

owned by shareholders, Equation (20) is simply saying that the opportunistic
government runs budgets deficits that crowd out a fraction χ of these firms. Note
that this fiscal policy does not depend on investor sentiment. The government
always expands debt when it arrives to power, regardless of whether this
displaces inefficient investments or a stock market bubble.

Is the bubble in Equation (16) consistent with the existence of the
opportunistic government? Assume first that χ is small, so that when investor
sentiment is high the opportunistic government displaces the bubble slowly. In

35

this case, the expected growth rate of the bubble still exceeds the return to the
inefficient investments. And, as a result, the bubble in Equation (16) still
constitutes an equilibrium. The interest rate (which can be obtained by the same
procedure we obtained Equation (18)) depends on which government is in
power. In particular, when investor sentiment is high the interest rate will be
lower when the opportunistic government is in power. This reflects the effect of
fiscal policy on the size of the bubble and therefore the return it offers. The
opportunistic government makes the bubble a worse asset and debt does not
need to offer a high interest rate to compete with it.
Assume instead that χ is large, so that the opportunistic government
displaces the bubble rapidly when investor sentiment is high. In this case, the
expected growth rate of the bubble falls short of the return to the inefficient
investments. Therefore, the demand for the bubble drops to zero and the bubble
bursts. In this case, the arrival of an opportunistic government burst the bubble
on impact and leads to the reemergence of inefficient investments. As a result,
Equation (16) no longer constitutes an equilibrium and must be replaced by the
following one:22

(21)

0
Bt = 
1 − ε − D t

if S t = L or G t = O
if S t = H and G t = A

Equation (21) recognizes that, if χ is high enough, the bubble can only exist if
investor sentiment is high and the government is sufficiently altruistic. From now
on, we shall assume that the altruistic government crowds out the bubble
immediately, i.e. χ→1; and we consider the bubble in Equation (21). Note that in
this case, there is a bubbly state where both the altruistic government is in power
and investor sentiment is high, and a non-bubbly state where either investor
sentiment is low, the opportunistic government is in power, or both.

22

Can the bubble exist even if there is an altruistic government in power? The answer is
positive if the transition probability φ is low enough (one example was the model of the
previous section which is nothing but the limiting case where φ→0). We assume this in
what follows.

36

Given our assumptions, we have now that the equilibrium interest rate is
given by:23

(22)

π−α


rt +1 =  γ ⋅ (1 − ε) ⋅ (1 − η)
 1− ε − η ⋅ D
t


if S t = L or G t = O
if S t = H and G t = A

where η=1-(1-λ)⋅(1-φ) is the probability that the economy transitions from the
bubbly to the non-bubbly state. Note that the expression for the interest rate is
identical to that in Equation (18), with the exception that we must replace the
transition probability λ with η. The intuitions are also identical: in the absence of
a bubble, the interest rate is low since debt competes with capital and the latter
offers a low expected return to shareholders. When the bubble appears, the
interest rate is high because debt competes with the bubble which is a better
asset than capital.

Interestingly, the equilibrium of this section is observationally equivalent
to that of the previous section. In both equilibria, when the bubble exists, budget
deficits are zero and the bubble absorbs all of the inefficient investments of the
shareholders. In both equilibria, the bursting of the bubble is accompanied by a
large fiscal expansion that ensures that debt now performs the same task of
eliminating inefficient investments. The welfare consequences of these two
equilibria are also the same. When the bubble collapses, both US and ROW
shareholders suffer large losses. US shareholders of the current generation are
compensated for this loss by the large fiscal deficit which corresponds to the upfront fee for creating debt, but ROW shareholders receive none of this. The
collapse of the bubble therefore implements a transfer from ROW to the US.

They key difference between the two equilibria lies in the underlying
shock that leads to the bursting of the bubble. The first possibility corresponds to
the “benevolent” view that we have already discussed: investor sentiment

Once again, note that when St=L or Gt=O and Dt=1-ε, any rt∈[π-α,γ] is also an
equilibrium.
23

37

changes exogenously, and an altruistic government responds by running large
fiscal deficits. This policy reaction does not hurt ROW residents because the
bubble bursts anyway, but helps US residents. The other possibility corresponds
to a more “cynical” view: when the opportunistic government comes into power,
it immediately crowds out the bubble in order to appropriate its value. This policy
reaction hurts ROW residents, since the bubble would not have burst without it.
In this case, US fiscal policy is a “beggar-thy-neighbour” type of policy.

6. Final remarks
In this paper we have provided a joint account of some of the major US
macroeconomic events of the past decade: large current account deficits and a
steadily decline in the net foreign asset position; the large boom and subsequent
crash in the stock market; and the emergence of large fiscal deficits. According
to the conventional view, the evolution of the stock market and fiscal deficits are
more or less unrelated events, with the former driven by sharp swings in US
productivity, and the latter by shifting US political considerations. Both of these
in turn fuelled current account deficits that must eventually be reversed as the
accumulation of public debt becomes excessive.

We instead propose two alternative views in which the stock market and
the fiscal deficits are closely linked. Central to our account is the notion that the
US economy contains “pockets” of inefficiency. This opens the possibility for
asset bubbles to exist, which in turn provides a more plausible explanation for
the large swings in equity values over the past decade. The appearance of a
bubble in the US stock market in the second half of the 1990s accounts for much
of the decline in US net foreign assets during this period. At the same time, the
bubble raised welfare worldwide by eliminating inefficient investments.
According to the “benevolent” view, the collapse of the stock market in 2000 was
the result of a coordination failure or change in investor sentiment, and the rapid
expansion of public debt since then served to displace inefficient investments in
the same way that the bubble did. Viewed in this light, the large budget deficits

38

of the Bush administration can be interpreted as a welfare-improving response to
this market failure. But there is also a more “cynical” interpretation, that is
observationally equivalent to the “benevolent” view. Under this interpretation the
expansion in public debt caused the collapse of the bubble, as the US
government tried to appropriate the value of the bubble from its US and foreign
owners.

To explore these ideas, we have used a minimalist model that puts a
large weight on theoretical clarity even at the cost of leaving out many important
aspects of reality. The advantage of this approach is that, by clearly exposing
the main mechanisms at work, it provides a simple framework to think about the
interactions between stock market bubbles, budget deficits and the current
account. This framework has been used to provide a qualitative account of the
recent US macroeconomic experience. But this can only be seen as a first step
towards a fuller understanding of this period. The natural next step is to use the
framework presented here to provide a quantitative account of the recent US
macroeconomic experience. This will no doubt require enriching the theory by
bringing back some of those important aspects of reality that have been left out
here.

39

References
Abel, A.B., N.G. Mankiw, L.H. Summers and R.J. Zeckhauser [1989], “Assessing
Dynamic Efficiency: Theory and Evidence,” The Review of Economic Studies,
56, 1, pp. 1-19.
Blanchard, O., F. Giavazzi, and F. Sa [2005], “The US Current Account and the
Dollar”. CEPR Discussion Paper No. 4888.
Caballero, R., E. Farhi and M. Hammour [2005], “Speculative Growth: Hints from
the US Economy,” MIT, manuscript.
Diamond, P. [1965], “National Debt in a Neoclassical Growth Model,” American
Economic Review, 55, pp.1126-1150.
Grossman, G. and N. Yanagawa [1993], “Asset Bubbles and Endogenous
Growth,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 31, 3-19.
Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier and Hélène Rey (2005). “From World Banker to
World Venture Capitalist: The US External Adjustment and the Exorbitant
Privilege”. Forthcoming in Richard Clarida, ed. G7 Current Account
Imbalances: Sustainability and Adjustment”. Cambridge, NBER.
Hall, Robert E. (2001). “The Stock Market and Capital Accumulation”. American
Economic Review. 91(5):1185-1202.
Hall, Robert E. (2004). “Measuring Factor Adjustment Costs”. Quarterly Journal
of Economics. 119(3):899-928.
Hellwig, C. and G. Lorenzoni [2003], “Bubbles and Private Liquidity,” manuscript
UCLA and Princeton University.
King, I. and D. Ferguson [1993], “Dynamic Inefficiency, Endogenous Growth and
Ponzi Games,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 32, 79-104.
Obstfeld, M., and K. Rogoff [2000], “Perspective on OECD Capital Market
Integration: Implications for US Current Account Adjustment”, in Federal
Reserve Bank of Kansas City, “Global Economic Integration: Opportunities and
Challenges”. March: 169-208.
Obstfeld, M. and K. Rogoff [2004], “The Unsustainable US Current Account
Position Revisited,” NBER Working Paper W10869.
Obstfeld, M. and K. Rogoff [2005], “Global Current Account Imbalances and
Exchange Rate Adjustments,” Paper prepared for the Brookings Panel on
Economic Activity.
Olivier, J. [2000], “Growth-Enhancing Bubbles,” International Economic Review,
41(1), 133-151.

40

Roubini, N. and B. Setser [2004], “The US as a Net Debtor: The Sustainability of
the US External Imbalances,” Manuscript, Oxford and New York University.
Samuelson, P.A. [1958], “An Exact Consumption-Loan Model of Interest with or
Without the Social Contrivance of Money,” Journal of Political Economy, 66, pp.
467-482.
Shell, K. [1971], “Notes on the Economics of Infinity,” Journal of Political
Economy, 79, pp. 1002-1011.
Tirole, J. [1985], “Asset Bubbles and Overlapping Generations,” Econometrica,
53, pp. 1499-1528.
Ventura, J. [2001], “A Portfolio View of the US Current Account Deficit,”
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity.
Ventura, J. [2002], “Bubbles and Capital Flows,” NBER working paper W7795
and CEPR discussion paper #3657.
Ventura, J. [2003], “Economic Growth with Bubbles,” Manuscript, CREI and
UPF.
Weil, P. [1987], “Confidence and the Real Value of Money in an Overlapping
Generations Economy,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, CII, 1, 1-22.
Woodford, M. [1990], “Public Debt as Private Liquidity,” American Economic
Review, 80, 2, pp. 382-388.

41

Figure 1: US Current Account and Net Foreign Assets

Current Account
6%

2%

0%
2005

2000

1995

1990

1985

1980

1975

1970

Current Account / GNP

4%

-2%

-4%

-6%

Net Foreign Assets
15%
10%

Net Foreign Assets/GNP

5%
0%
1970
-5%

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

-10%
-15%
-20%
-25%
-30%

Source: Current account data are from US Bureau of Economic Analysis. NFA data are from
Gourinchas and Rey (2005).

42

Average Annual Change in Foreign
Liabilities, Billions USD

Figure 2: Average Annual Changes in US Foreign Assets and Liabilities

1200
1000
800
600
400
200
0
-200

1995:1-2000:2

2000:3-2004:1

-400
Debt

Value of US Equity

Volume of US Equity

Average Annual Change in Foreign Assets, Billions
USD

1000

800

600

400

200

0
1995:1-2000:2

2000:3-2004:1

Average Annual Change in Net Foreign
Assets, Billions USD

-200

Debt

Value of Foreign Equity

Volume of Foreign Equity

300
200
100
0
-100

1995:1-2000:2

2000:3-2004:1

-200
-300
-400
-500
-600
Debt

Value of Equity

Volume of Equity

Source: Gourinchas and Rey (2005). Change in value of equity estimated as
sum over all quarters of difference between quarterly change in stocks and and
corresponding quarterly flows.

43

Figure 3: Stock Market Boom of the 1990s

Share Prices
600

Share Price Index (1990=100)

500

400

World Excl. USA
USA

300

200

100

0
1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2000

2005

Market Capitalization

Market Capitalization Index (1990=100)

800
700
600
500

World Excl. USA
USA

400
300
200
100
0
1980

1985

1990

1995

Source: Datastream

44

Figure 4: Budget Deficits and Interest Rates

8%
6%
4%
2%
0%
1970
-2%

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

-4%
-6%
Budget Surplus/GNP

One-Year Ex-Post Real T-Bill Rate

-8%

Source: Congressional Budget Office and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
System.

45

Figure 5: Interest Rates and Growth Rates

8%
One-Year Ex-Post Real T-Bill Rate
6%

Real GDP Growth

4%

2%

0%
1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

-2%

-4%

Source: GDP growth is from US Bureau of Economic Analysis and interest rates are
from the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.

46

Figure 6: Debt Dynamics in the Benevolent View

Dt+1
45º

1-ε

St=L

Bubble
Appears

St=H

Bubble
Bursts

D1

D*

47

D0

1-ε

Dt

