                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              $100 BILLS ON THE SIDEWALK:
                         SUBOPTIMAL INVESTMENT IN 401(K) PLANS

                                              James J. Choi
                                             David Laibson
                                           Brigitte C. Madrian

                                          Working Paper 11554
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w11554


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 2005


This paper originally circulated under the title, “$100 Bills on the Sidewalk: Suboptimal Saving in
401(k) Plans.” We thank Hewitt Associates for providing the data and for their help in designing, conducting,
and processing the survey analyzed in this paper. We are particularly grateful to Lori Lucas, Yan Xu,
and Mary Ann Armatys, some of our many contacts at Hewitt Associates, for their feedback on this
project. Outside of Hewitt, we have benefited from the comments of Erik Hurst, Ebi Poweigha, and
seminar participants at Berkeley, Harvard, and the NBER. We are indebted to John Beshears, Carlos
Caro, Keith Ericson, Holly Ming, Laura Serban, and Eric Zwick for their excellent research assistance.
Choi acknowledges financial support from a National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship
and the Mustard Seed Foundation. Choi, Laibson, and Madrian acknowledge individual and collective
financial support from the National Institute on Aging (grants R01-AG021650 and T32-AG00186).
The survey was supported by the U.S. Social Security Administration through grant #10-P-98363-1
to the National Bureau of Economic Research as part of the SSA Retirement Research Consortium.
The findings and conclusions expressed are solely those of the authors and do not represent the views
of NIA, SSA, any other agency of the Federal Government, or the NBER. Laibson also acknowledges
financial support from the Sloan Foundation. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2005 by James J. Choi, David Laibson, and Brigitte C. Madrian. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
$100 Bills on the Sidewalk: Suboptimal Investment in 401(k) Plans
James J. Choi, David Laibson, and Brigitte C. Madrian
NBER Working Paper No. 11554
August 2005
JEL No. G1

                                            ABSTRACT

It is typically difficult to determine whether households invest optimally. But sometimes, investment
incentives are strong enough to create sharp normative restrictions. We identify employees at seven
companies who are eligible to receive employer matching contributions in their 401(k) and can make
penalty-free withdrawals for any reason. For these employees, contributing less than the match threshold
is a dominated action that violates the no-arbitrage condition. Nevertheless, between 20% and 60%
contribute below the threshold, losing as much as 6% of their annual pay. Providing employees with
information about the free lunch they are foregoing fails to raise contribution rates.


James J. Choi                                      Brigitte C. Madrian
Yale School of Management                          John F. Kennedy School of Government
135 Prospect Street                                Harvard University
P.O. Box 208200                                    79 JFK Street
New Haven, CT 06520-8200                           Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER                                           and NBER
james.choi@yale.edu                                Brigitte_Madrian@Harvard.edu

David Laibson
Department of Economics
Littauer M-14
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
dlaibson@harvard.edu
         Do households make investment mistakes? It is typically difficult to prove that they do,
despite widespread concern about household financial literacy (e.g. Campbell, 2006; Bernheim,
1994, 1995, 1998; Lusardi and Mitchell, 2007). The household investment problem is
sufficiently complex and economic theory sufficiently rich that few restrictions can be imposed
on the range of investment behaviors we should observe in the absence of errors. Nearly any
choice can be normatively justified by some combination of preferences and information
unobserved by the econometrician.
         In this paper, we identify a sizeable group of employees at seven companies whose
observable choice set does include actions that are precluded by normative economic theory.
These individuals are over 59½ years old and have their 401(k) contributions matched by their
employer; that is, for every dollar they contribute up to a certain threshold, their employer makes
an additional proportional matching contribution. They furthermore have virtually unconstrained
access to their 401(k) balances because their company allows employees over 59½ to make
penalty-free 401(k) withdrawals for any reason, even while still employed by the company.1 For
these workers, a contribution rate below the match threshold is a dominated strategy that violates
the no-arbitrage condition for their portfolios. Nevertheless, we find that many of them are not
contributing up to the match threshold.
         We calculate the arbitrage losses for these individuals by computing the difference
between the payoff to the current (dominated) investment strategy and the payoff to an
alternative (undominated) strategy. The alternative strategy is simple: Increase the flow of
before-tax 401(k) contributions up to the match threshold and withdraw these contributions soon
after they are made. The contribution increase triggers instantaneous windfall gains because of
the employer match. Relative to the original strategy, the alternative strategy raises the
employee’s wealth inside the 401(k) plan while leaving her resources outside the plan
unaffected. This “contribute and withdraw” strategy may not be an optimal savings strategy, but
it nevertheless dominates the original policy of contributing below the match threshold.



1
  In particular, employees do not have to document financial hardship in order to access their balances. There are
two potential penalties associated with making a withdrawal. First, there is a 10% (federal) tax penalty levied on
individuals under the age of 59½. Second, some companies prohibit employee contributions for a period of time
after a withdrawal, which precludes receipt of matching contributions during that time as well. Neither of these
penalties applies to the individuals we identify: their firms do not limit future contributions after withdrawals, and
they are over the age of 59½.


                                                           3
       The arbitrage losses from not contributing at least to the match threshold can be
substantial. Consider a 60-year-old employee who does not currently contribute to her 401(k)
plan but whose company would match her contributions dollar-for-dollar up to 6% of her salary.
If her annual salary is $52,000, then the incremental value of contributing up to the match
threshold is $2,000 × 6% = $120 in match money every two-week pay period. Executing the
withdrawal strategy, she would end up with an extra $3,120 in her 401(k) account each year.
Alternatively, if the firm allows it, she could also withdraw the $3,120 in employer matching
contributions as well and increase her consumption by $3,120 (minus taxes) per year without
decreasing her assets relative to her non-contributing strategy.
       Despite the large risk-free gains from contributing up to the employer match threshold,
we find that, depending on the company, between 20% and 60% of older employees picked a
dominated contribution rate—one that is below the match threshold. The arbitrage losses for
these individuals are bounded above by the total matching contributions available to them.
Averaging across employees with a strictly positive loss, the (firm-level) average loss ranges
from 24% to 98% of the employees’ maximum possible arbitrage loss. As a percent of salary,
this translates into an average annual loss that ranges from 0.66% ($160) at the company with the
least generous match to 2.32% ($782) at the company with the most generous match. These
averages mask much larger losses in the right tail. For example, in the company with the most
generous match, the largest loss was $7,596, in 1998, or 6.0% of the worker’s salary.
       The fact that so many employees in our sample fail to take full advantage of the employer
match is especially surprising because one would expect this population to be aware of the
benefits of a 401(k) savings plan. Since the people that we study are at least 59½ years old, the
need for retirement savings should be salient to them. Having decades of experience managing
their money, they should be more financially savvy than their younger counterparts. And with a
(firm-level) average length of employment between 5.9 years and 22.5 years, they have had
ample time to familiarize themselves with their 401(k) plans.
       We have noted that implementing the “contribute and withdraw” strategy is not
necessarily the global optimum for an employee. Therefore, the utility loss associated with these
arbitrage losses is a lower bound on an employee’s total utility losses from imperfect
optimization. This lower bound may be well below the total utility losses from non-optimizing
behavior. If an employee’s portfolio fails to clear the minimal hurdle of no-arbitrage, the



                                                 4
employee may be making other (more subtle) optimization errors in her consumption and
investment choices.
         To better understand why older employees do not take full advantage of their 401(k)
match, we conducted a survey/field experiment with the help of Hewitt Associates, the firm that
supplied our 401(k) data. We find evidence that employees who are not fully exploiting the
employer match are more prone to delay taking other profitable actions, suggesting that time-
inconsistent preferences play a partial role in undermining optimal investment choices. Survey
responses also indicate that neither perceived direct transactions costs nor utility satiation explain
the failure to contribute to the match threshold. Rather, these individuals appear to be much less
financially sophisticated and knowledgeable about their firm’s 401(k) plan. Nevertheless,
highlighting the foregone match money to a randomly selected treatment group—while
explaining that there is no loss of liquidity from contributing up to the match threshold—
produced only an infinitesimal response, raising 401(k) contribution rates by only one-tenth of
one percentage point relative to the control group. In this instance, providing better information
did not lead to better choices.
         Our findings are related to other research on unexploited arbitrage. Gross and Souleles
(2002) document that some households simultaneously hold high-interest credit card debt and
low-interest checking balances.2 Bergstresser and Poterba (2004) and Barber and Odean (2004)
identify unexploited tax arbitrage by households who hold heavily taxed assets in taxable
accounts and lightly taxed assets in tax-deferred accounts.3 Amromin, Huang, and Sialm (2007)
argue that some U.S. households who pay their mortgages down more quickly than a 30-year
amortization schedule requires would be better off saving the prepayment amounts in a tax-
deferred account instead.4 Warshawsky (1987) highlights the unexploited arbitrage opportunities
available to individuals with whole life insurance policies who, due to increases in market




2
  Some authors have argued that such holdings are not no-arbitrage violations because demand deposits and credit
cards are not perfect substitutes, differing in transaction utility and treatment under bankruptcy (Bertaut and
Haliassos, 2002; Lehnert and Maki, 2002; Haliassos and Reiter, 2007; Zinman, 2007).
3
  Theoretical research has been divided on whether such allocations are in fact suboptimal (Amromin, 2003;
Dammon, Spatt, and Zhang, 2004; Garlappi and Huang, 2006).
4
  This strategy is vulnerable to interest rate changes, moving-related prepayment risks, liquidity shocks, and tax law
changes.


                                                          5
interest rates subsequent to their policy purchase, could borrow against their policy’s cash value
at rates below what they could earn by investing in similarly risky outside assets.5
          Our paper proceeds as follows. Section I describes our data and the procedures we used
to select our sample. Section II discusses the methodology we use to calculate arbitrage losses in
the 401(k) plan. Section III presents the arbitrage loss calculation results and compares the
401(k) contribution behavior of employees over 59½ years of age with their younger coworkers.
Section IV presents the survey/field experiment and discusses potential reasons why individuals
are reluctant to contribute up to the match threshold. Section V concludes by discussing the
efficacy of educational interventions and monetary incentives for raising the savings rate of low
savers.


I. Data Description
          Our data come from Hewitt Associates, a large benefits administration and consulting
firm. The sample consists of a year-end 1998 cross-section of all employees at seven firms.6 This
cross-section contains demographic information such as birth date, hire date, gender, and
compensation. The cross-section also contains point-in-time information on each employee’s
401(k) outcomes, including participation status in the plan, date of first participation, the elected
contribution rate at the time of the snapshot, and total balances. In addition, the cross-section has
annual measures of individual and employer contribution flows into the 401(k) plan.
          We selected these seven firms because they offer an employer match and it is possible for
employees over the age of 59½ to make 401(k) withdrawals for any reason without penalty (such
as an ensuing freeze on future contributions or matches), even while still employed at the
company. The companies span many different industries: consumer products, electronics, health
care, manufacturing, technology, transportation, and utilities.
          Table 1 summarizes the 401(k) plan rules at these seven firms. Employees at all firms can
make contributions using before-tax money, and some firms also allow contribution of after-tax
money. The maximum gain from the company match in our sample is 6% of annual salary for
certain employees at Company A who are matched at a 100% rate for the first 6% of their pay

5
  The extent of such unexploited arbitrage depends on assumptions about the rate of return on other assets,
individuals’ access to outside investments of similar risk, individuals’ marginal tax rates, and the amount of
measurement error in the survey data used.
6
  At one of these companies, we were also able to conduct a field experiment. At this company we have additional
cross-sectional snapshots for August 1, 2004 and November 1, 2004.


                                                        6
contributed to the 401(k) plan. Company C offers the smallest potential gain of 0.75% of annual
salary, as it only matches 25 cents per dollar for the first 3% of pay contributed.
           Employees do not have access to their employer match money until it is vested. If an
employee is only 80% vested when he leaves the company, he forfeits 20% of the balances
accrued in his employer match account. If the employer allows withdrawals from the match
account, an employee can only withdraw the vested amount. The fraction of match money vested
is typically a function of an employee’s tenure at the company. In our sample of firms,
Companies C, F, and G use a graded vesting schedule in which the fraction of match balances
vested increases gradually with years of service until the employee is 100% vested. In contrast,
Companies A, B, and E have cliff vesting schedules in which employees are not vested at all
before achieving five years of tenure and are 100% vested thereafter. Employer match
contributions at Company D are fully vested immediately. Four of the companies with graded or
cliff vesting schedules fully vest employees who reach a certain age even if they would not be
fully vested based on their tenure (Companies B, C, E, and G).
           Not being vested can eliminate the arbitrage gains from contributing up to the match
threshold. If an employee is not vested and knows that she will leave the company before
becoming even partially vested, then the employer match is worth nothing to her.7 On the other
hand, the employer match should be fully valued if the currently unvested employee is
completely confident that she will stay at the company until she is fully vested. It turns out that
the vast majority of our over-59½ sample is already fully vested at the beginning of 1998, so
vesting is not an issue. Nonetheless, we account for incomplete vesting in our computation of
potential arbitrage gains (the methodology for doing so is described in Section II).
           The effort and time cost of executing the “contribute and withdraw” strategy could
reduce or eliminate potential arbitrage gains. These costs, however, are minimal since all seven
firms allow participants to request withdrawals by calling a toll-free number. Four of our
companies have 401(k) plan documents that even report check processing times; three of these
companies indicate that they issue checks within a week of the request, and the fourth mails
checks in two to three weeks. Our survey evidence—reported in Section IV—indicates that
employees do not believe transactions in their 401(k) are time-consuming. Furthermore, the
financing cost of withdrawing infrequently—e.g. once every three months rather than every pay

7
    These employees may still realize some tax benefit if they participate in the 401(k).


                                                             7
cycle—are small. Even if the cost of capital is calibrated with a typical credit card interest rate
(e.g. 15%), an employee with a $50,000 annual salary and a 6% 401(k) contribution rate will pay
only $14 per quarter to borrow the funds necessary to finance the savings plan contributions.8 If
the cost of capital is the foregone after-tax earnings in a money market account (5% interest),
this costs less than $3 per quarter. Because the “carrying cost” is small, the “contribute and
withdraw” policy can be implemented on a quarterly basis without substantial loss of efficiency.9
           Table 2 reports summary demographic statistics as of year-end 1998 for the 5,045 active
employees in our sample who were older than 59½ at the beginning of 1998, eligible to receive
matching contributions at the beginning of 1998, and whose 1998 salary exceeded that of a full-
time worker earning the federal minimum wage.10 For the sake of comparison, we also present
demographic statistics on the match-eligible population younger than 59½ earning more than the
salary cutoff at these firms.


II. Calculating Arbitrage Losses
           We calculate arbitrage losses as the difference between the matching contributions
individuals actually received in 1998 and the maximum possible match they could have received
based on their compensation, the employer matching formula, and the IRS contribution limits.
This difference represents the additional 401(k) balances they would have accrued (before capital
gains) by following the “contribute and withdraw” strategy. There are two relevant IRS
contribution limits. First, IRS section 402(g)(3) sets a maximum dollar limit on an employee’s
before-tax contributions, which was $10,000 per year in 1998. Second, IRS section 415(b)(1)(A)
prohibits employee 401(k) contributions out of annual compensation above a certain amount,
which was $160,000 in 1998. (Both thresholds have increased in subsequent years.) In a plan that
matches 100% of contributions up to 5% of salary, an employee who earned $200,000 in 1998




8
 This amounts to (Average debt of 6% of 1.5 months of salary) × (monthly salary of $50,000/12) × (interest rate of
15%) × (1/4 of the year) = $14 per quarter.
9
 Small carrying costs also imply that minimum withdrawal amounts and/or maximum
withdrawal frequency restrictions have small costs.
10
     The annual salary cutoff we use is $5.15/hour × 35 hours/week × 50 weeks/year = $9,012.50.


                                                          8
could only receive a maximum of $8,000 that year in matching contributions ($160,000 × 0.05).
We take both of these restrictions into account when calculating arbitrage losses.11
        As previously discussed, an employee’s valuation of the match may be significantly
affected by her vesting status. Because we do not know each unvested employee’s subjective
probability of leaving the company before becoming vested, we adopt a conservative approach to
incorporating vesting into our loss calculations. The loss from not contributing up to the
employer match threshold is calculated as the employer match foregone multiplied by the
employee’s vested percentage at the time of the contribution.12 For example, consider an
employee in a firm with a dollar-for-dollar match up to 5% of pay whose vesting percentage
increases from 0% to 20% on July 1, 1998. In calculating the 401(k) losses in calendar year
1998, this approach would not include any foregone matching contributions prior to July 1, 1998.
After this date, when the employee’s vesting percentage increases to 20%, her calculated losses
are only 20% of the foregone employer match. So if this employee contributed 2% of her salary
every pay period, then her losses for the year as a fraction of her annual salary would be defined
as
                  1
                  2
                    ( 0% × ( 5% − 2% ) × 100% ) + ( 20% × (5% − 2%) × 100% ) = 0.3% .
                                                 1
                                                 2
Note that this calculation will understate expected losses by ignoring all continuation values
from receiving the match. In unreported results, we find that calculating ex post losses using the
employee’s actual subsequent employment history at the company yields numbers that are only
slightly greater.13 The reason for this similarity is that almost all sample employees over 59½
years old are fully vested as of January 1, 1998.
        Contributions to 401(k) plans are usually made with before-tax dollars. Withdrawals from
before-tax 401(k) balances are taxed at the ordinary income tax rate on the entire withdrawal
amount. Thus, in our withdrawal strategy, when the incremental contribution up to the match
threshold is withdrawn, its entire amount is taxed as ordinary income. However, if the employee
continued to contribute less than the match threshold, the incremental contribution amount would


11
   Because the match threshold for employees in our sample does not exceed 6%, the $10,000 contribution limit
does not in practice constrain any employees from receiving the full employer match available under their plan rules
once the $160,000 compensation limit is accounted for.
12
   Because we only observe an employee’s total contributions for a calendar year, we assume that the contribution
rate was constant throughout that year.
13
   We use cross-sectional data from future years at these companies for these alternative calculations.


                                                         9
have been immediately taxed as ordinary income anyway. Therefore, the withdrawal strategy
does not affect the employee’s current tax liability if both contributions and withdrawals are
made to and from the before-tax 401(k) account.
        In some of our companies, employees have the option to contribute using after-tax
dollars. At Companies A, D, and F, after-tax 401(k) balances must be depleted first when
withdrawing money from the plan.14 Withdrawals from after-tax balances are taxed only on
accumulated capital gains. Therefore, if one has after-tax balances, the ability to shift
withdrawals from those balances into years when one’s marginal tax rate is high is a potentially
valuable option.15 Executing our withdrawal strategy eliminates the option to delay after-tax
withdrawals at Companies A, D, and F.
        Only 17% of employees older than 59½ who contribute less than the match threshold at
these three firms have after-tax account balances. In order to avoid having to calculate the loss
caused by early withdrawals from the after-tax account, we simply do not attribute arbitrage
losses to anybody at these three firms who had a positive balance in her after-tax account at year-
end 1998, regardless of her 401(k) contribution rate. This conservative assumption leads us to
understate the fraction of employees who are foregoing a free lunch.
        Finally, to allow for the possibility of rounding error, we do not classify an employee as
failing to fully exploit the employer match if the gap between the actual and possible match
received is less than 0.1% of annual income.


III. Frequency and Magnitude of Arbitrage Losses
        Table 3 reports the frequency and magnitude of unexploited 401(k) arbitrage in 1998.
Between 20% and 60% (a median of 31%) of match-eligible employees over 59½ at our seven
firms did not receive the full employer match despite being at least partially vested and having
no after-tax balances. The most an individual can lose due to unexploited arbitrage is the total
matching contribution available to them that immediately vests. At Company C, which offers the
smallest match, this upper bound is 0.75% of salary. At the other extreme, Company A offers a
match as large as 6% of salary for some of its employees. Among those with arbitrage losses, the


14
   Company D no longer allowed after-tax contributions at year-end 1998, so any after-tax balances present are
legacies of a prior plan regime.
15
   As an extreme example, suppose that the tax rate on 401(k) withdrawals next year jumped to 100%. Then before-
tax 401(k) balances cannot fund consumption in that year, whereas after-tax balances could still be used.


                                                       10
average loss as a fraction of the maximum potential loss ranges from 24% to 98%, with a median
of 72%. Conditional on having a loss, the average loss was 0.66% of salary ($160) at Company
C, and 2.32% of salary ($782) at Company A. The proportion lost relative to the maximum
possible loss is driven largely by the fraction of employees who contributed nothing at all.
Companies D and G are notable for having a relatively small number of non-participants; at the
other five companies, at least half of those with arbitrage losses gave up the entire match.
         The bottom half of Table 3 shows the distribution of arbitrage losses among those whom
we classify as having an arbitrage loss. In companies with a generous match, the losses at the
right tail of the distribution are considerable. For example, the 75th percentile arbitrage losses at
Companies A, E, and G are around $1,000 and at least 3% of salary. At the 90th percentile,
arbitrage losses at Company D and F also exceeded $1,000, or 4.5% and 2.1% of salary,
respectively. The maximum dollar arbitrage loss ranges from $947 (2% of salary) at Company B
to $7,596 (6% of salary) at Company A.
         Three of the seven firms in our sample (Companies A, D, and F) invest the match in
employer stock and restrict diversification for those over age 59½. Since a match in employer
stock is worth less than a match that can be diversified, our calculations for these four companies
may overstate the money metric utility loss from unexploited arbitrage.16 However, it is not clear
how to quantify this bias. First, employees do not seem to regard diversification restrictions as
particularly onerous. Benartzi (2001) documents that among companies that match in employer
stock, participants voluntarily hold an average of 29% of their own contributions in employer
stock as well. Benartzi et al. (2004) report that 20% of their survey respondents would
paradoxically prefer $1,000 of employer stock which they could not diversify until age 50 to
$1,000 invested without restrictions. Second, the diversification restrictions only partially affect
the over-59½ employees at these three firms. Company A allows complete diversification after a
two-year holding period or five years of plan participation; Company D allows complete
diversification after a two-year holding period; and Company F allows salaried employees to
diversify half of the match after age 55 or five years of service at the company. All of the
employees in our sample are at least 59½ years old, and their average tenure in these three firms
ranges from 16.0 years to 22.2 years.


16
 Several papers calculate discounts for portfolios that are partially invested in employer stock (Poterba, 2003;
Meulbroek, 2002; and Brennan and Torous, 1999).


                                                         11
         Even after accounting for any discount employees might place on a match in employer
stock, Table 3 is likely to grossly understate the cumulative magnitude of arbitrage losses over
time because the losses in Table 3 are calculated over a period of only one year. Most of those
with arbitrage losses in our sample have had several years of tenure with their firm since age
59½. Thus, they have been forfeiting matching contributions for many years, leading to much
larger cumulative losses. For example, among those who contributed nothing to their 401(k) plan
in 1998, between 27% and 71% have never contributed to the plan.17 We do not attempt an exact
calculation of these cumulative amounts because doing so would require information on 401(k)
eligibility, the 401(k) match, employee compensation, and employee contribution rates for many
years before 1998, which we do not have. But a simple extrapolation from Table 3 suggests that
substantial cumulative losses are probable for many of these individuals.
         Table 4 displays similar calculations using a much simpler loss definition than that in
Table 3. In Table 4, we include the full amount of any matching contribution foregone, without
regard to the employee’s age, vesting status, or the impact of capital gains taxes on after-tax
account withdrawals.18 Note that the arbitrage losses in Table 3 are a strict subset of the matches
foregone in Table 4.
         We present Table 4 for two reasons. First, we would like to compare the behavior of
employees older than 59½ to that of employees younger than 59½. However, the “contribute and
withdraw” strategy is largely infeasible for employees younger than 59½ because they must
demonstrate financial hardship in order to withdraw money from their 401(k).19 Thus, the
arbitrage losses calculated in Table 3 for employees older than 59½ do not extend in a
straightforward way to younger workers. We can, however, simply compare the total matching
contributions foregone by older and younger employees. Second, other 401(k) datasets may not
contain all of the information needed to calculate arbitrage losses as we have here. The simpler



17
   We calculate these numbers by dividing the fraction of those with arbitrage losses who have never enrolled in the
401(k) by the fraction of those with arbitrage losses who contributed nothing in 1998.
18
   To allow for rounding error, we continue not to classify as losers those who lost less than 0.1% of annual salary in
matching contributions.
19
   Firms are not required to allow employees to make hardship withdrawals, although many do so. Withdrawals are
subject to a 10% tax penalty for employees younger than 59½. There are some circumstances under which younger
employees can avoid the penalty. These include permanent disability, a court order pursuant to a divorce, medical
expenditures in excess of 7.5% of income, and some cases of early retirement or permanent layoff. Home purchases,
educational expenses, or general financial hardship do not exempt employees from the tax penalty on early
withdrawals.


                                                          12
measure in Table 4 allows for easier comparability of this paper’s results with tabulations from
other data sources.
       The top half of Table 4 presents statistics on employees older than 59½. Between 20%
and 72% of employees over 59½ contribute below the match threshold. Note that at most of our
companies, these fractions are not that much higher than the fractions with arbitrage losses in
Table 3. This is because most older employees not contributing up to the match threshold are
able to unambiguously profit from the “contribute and withdraw” strategy: they are almost all
vested in the employer match, and only a small minority have after-tax balances. The average
employer match foregone in Table 4 among older employees is thus similar to the average
arbitrage loss in Table 3.
       The bottom half of Table 4 presents statistics on match-eligible employees younger than
59½. Interestingly, the fraction of employees contributing below the match threshold is generally
similar among younger and older employees; this proportion differs by no more than 11
percentage points across the age divide with the exception of Company G. There is, however,
one notable difference between those older and younger than 59½: employees younger than 59½
under the match threshold are more likely to be contributing something to the 401(k), whereas
older employees under the match threshold are more prone to contribute nothing at all. There is
no systematic tendency for younger employees under the threshold to forego more match dollars
as a percent of their salary than older employees under the threshold. However, the absolute
dollar amounts forfeited by younger employees under the threshold are usually higher.
       In Figure 1, we pool all of the match-eligible employees in our seven companies and plot,
by age, the fraction of employees over the age of 59½ with arbitrage losses, as well as the
fraction of employees who contribute below the match threshold. Consistent with the results in
Tables 3 and 4, these two series are similar for employees above age 59½. Over the entire
working life, the likelihood of contributing below the match threshold is U-shaped, declining
with age until the mid-50s and increasing thereafter. One might have expected a discrete drop in
the likelihood of contributing below the match threshold at age 59½, when the 401(k) essentially
becomes a liquid asset. It is thus surprising that the failure to exploit the match begins to increase
at precisely the age when the economic reasons for 401(k) participation become most




                                                 13
compelling.20 This may arise from a selection effect generated by low savers who are less able to
afford to retire and thus remain in the labor force longer. Alternatively, this phenomenon may
reflect consumption smoothing by older employees whose wages are falling and who are
unaware of the 401(k) withdrawal privileges available only to older workers. (Table 2 shows that
the older employees at our firms usually have a lower median wage than their younger
counterparts). We discuss other potential explanations for older workers’ failure to exploit the
401(k) match in Section IV.
        To explore the characteristics associated with the failure to fully exploit the employer
match, we present in Table 5 the results of probit regressions for the likelihood that employees
are leaving matching contributions on the table. We pool the match-eligible employees in our
seven firms and include firm fixed effects in these regressions. The sample in the first four
columns is match-eligible employees older than 59½. The dependent variable in the first two
columns is a binary indicator for having arbitrage losses in 1998, whereas in the third and fourth
columns, the dependent variable is a binary indicator for simply contributing below the match
threshold. In the final two columns, the sample is match-eligible employees under 59½, and the
dependent variable is a binary indicator for contributing below the match threshold. Both the
probit coefficients and marginal effects (slopes) at the sample means are reported.
        The qualitative effects of most of the variables are similar across all these regressions.
Those with higher pay are substantially less likely to leave matching contributions on the table.
Men are 6 to 13 percentage points more likely to forego matching contributions than women,
while those who are married are 5 to 8 percentage points less likely to forego matching
contributions than singles. The two variables with qualitatively different results across the three
regression specifications in Table 5 are age and tenure. Among employees younger than 59 ½,
age is negatively related to leaving match money on the table, while the reverse is true for
employees older than 59½, a pattern consistent with Figure 1. Finally, employees over 59½ with
higher tenure are more likely to have arbitrage losses (first two columns), but are less likely to
contribute under the match threshold (middle two columns). This apparent anomaly is explained
by the fact that individuals with very low tenure tend to be completely unvested and are thus not
classified as having arbitrage losses.

20
  This upward turn at age 59 also appears if we instead calculate the fraction under the match threshold separately
by company, and then compute an average that equally weights each company. The result is therefore not driven by
certain companies having a disproportionate number of employees at certain ages.


                                                        14
IV. Survey/Field Experiment
        Given the low direct costs of initiating 401(k) participation, it is surprising that such a
high fraction of employees forfeit employer matching contributions, especially among workers
over age 59½.
        To gain further insight into why employees are contributing suboptimally to their 401(k),
and to see if providing information about the employer match would increase 401(k)
contributions, we conducted a field experiment at Company A in partnership with Hewitt
Associates. On August 3 and 4, 2004, we mailed treatment and control surveys to 889 Company
A employees over the age of 59½.21 All surveys were accompanied by a cover letter printed on
the employer’s letterhead. The 889-person sample includes all 689 employees at Company A
who were contributing less than the match threshold as of May 2004, as well as 200 randomly
selected employees contributing at or above the match threshold.
        We randomly (and unevenly) divided our sample of 889 employees into two subgroups: a
control group and a treatment group. We sent control surveys to approximately half of the
employees contributing below the match threshold (344 selected at random from the population
of 689) and to the 200 randomly selected employees contributing at or above the match
threshold. This control survey included questions about the employee’s satisfaction with and
knowledge about the 401(k) plan, general financial literacy, and savings preferences.
        We sent treatment surveys to the other 345 employees contributing below the match
threshold. The treatment survey (reproduced in Appendix A) was identical to the control survey,
except that it included an additional five questions at the end (Questions 26 through 30).
Question 26 explains that the company matched the first 6% of salary contributed to the 401(k).
Question 27 explains that transactions in the 401(k) could be made via the Internet, a touch-tone
phone system, or by speaking to a benefits center representative on the phone. Question 28
explains that penalty-free withdrawals from the 401(k) are available for any reason for
participants over age 59½. Question 29 asks respondents to calculate the amount of employer
match money they would lose each year if they did not contribute to the 401(k). Respondents
received a matrix of match amounts corresponding to various match rates and salaries to aid in


21
  We also mailed surveys to 4,000 employees below the age of 59½. Results from those respondents are available
on request.


                                                      15
this calculation (see Appendix A). Question 30 asks if the employee is interested in raising his
contribution rate to 6% in light of the losses calculated in question 29. We estimate that it would
take employees about 15 minutes to complete the control survey and 20 minutes to complete the
treatment survey.
        For 200 employees in each of the three groups (below the match threshold control group,
above the match threshold control group, below the match threshold treatment group), we
included a $1 bill with the survey and promised to send them a $50 American Express Gift
Cheque if they responded no later than August 27, 2004 in an enclosed postage-paid envelope.
Appendix B shows the cover letter that accompanied the survey.
        Respondents from the remaining 289 people below the match threshold who received the
survey were entered into a raffle, along with all respondents younger than 59½, for a personal
digital assistant, an MP3 player, and a digital camera.22 Gift Cheques were sent and raffle prizes
awarded on September 17, 2004.
        A total of 232 employees over the age of 59½ responded—128 contributing below the
match threshold and 104 contributing at or above the match threshold—resulting in an overall
response rate of 26%.23 Interestingly, the response rate among employees contributing at or
above the match threshold was much higher (52%) than among employees below the threshold
(19%), even though the former group’s median income is higher than the latter’s. Apparently, the
difference in employees’ willingness/ability to collect cheap money in 401(k) accounts extends
to other domains.
        We first examine whether perceived transactions costs keep employees from exploiting
the employer match. Responses to Question 3 of the survey indicate that in general, respondents
believe that joining the 401(k) plan and conducting 401(k) transactions generates only modest
time costs. The average respondent who was not participating in the 401(k) plan believed that it
would take 1.7 hours to join the plan, 1.3 hours to change his plan contribution rate for the first
time, and 1.5 hours to change his plan asset allocation for the first time. The average respondent
who is actually in the 401(k) plan reported even lower averages of 1.4, 0.6, and 0.6 hours,

22
   Budget constraints precluded us from offering a $50 Gift Cheque to all respondents. Assignment to the Gift
Cheque and raffle groups was random, and comparing the characteristics (age, compensation, tenure, participation in
the 401(k) plan) of employees who received these different response incentives suggests that the two groups are
indeed very similar. There were three raffle winners, one for each of the prizes.
23
   For employees older than 59½ and contributing below the match threshold, the response rate was 24% among
those receiving the $50 American Express Gift Cheque and 11% among those entered into the raffle.


                                                        16
respectively, for these three actions. Consistent with these responses, among the employees who
claimed in question 23 that they did not ever plan on enrolling in the 401(k), none cited in
question 25 the time it takes to enroll as a reason for non-participation. Therefore, the perceived
time costs of conducting transactions in the 401(k) are not large enough to justify the sizeable
amounts of money employees below the match threshold forego. Our survey does not measure
the indirect transactions costs of 401(k) participation, such as the costs of figuring out one’s
optimal 401(k) contribution rate and asset allocation. The evidence on financial literacy
discussed below indicates that these may be substantial.
        We now consider whether those who were not contributing up to the match threshold felt
little need to save more for retirement. Is their current wealth high enough that there is little
value to further increasing consumption during retirement? This possibility is rejected by the
data. Consistent with other survey evidence on the relationship between actual and perceived-to-
be-optimal savings rates (e.g., Choi, Laibson, Madrian, and Metrick, 2002; Bernheim, 1995;
Farkas and Johnson, 1997), 86% of employees below the match threshold and 70% of employees
at or above the match threshold do not think they are saving enough, according to Question 16.
Those under the threshold report in Question 15 an average actual savings rate of 7.4% but
believe they should be saving 17.1%. The corresponding averages for those at or above the
threshold are 15.3% and 20.0%, respectively.24 Remarkably, among respondents who think they
should be saving more, only 33% of those below the threshold and 22% of those at or above the
threshold report being unable to do so in Question 16; the remainder claim they could afford to
save at least $520 more per year ($10 per week).
        Having ruled out several mechanisms that might explain why so many employees fail to
fully exploit their employer match, what does matter? We find striking differences in financial
literacy between those contributing under the match threshold and those contributing at or above
the match threshold. For example, only 8% of those under the match threshold report themselves
to be a very or relatively knowledgeable investor, compared to 20% of those at or above the
match threshold. This self-perceived lack of financial expertise is borne out in the answers to
more objective questions on financial literacy. For example, in their response to Question 20,
53% of employees below the match threshold incorrectly believe their own employer’s stock to

24
  Despite these stated convictions about optimal savings rates, only 30% of those under the threshold and 47% of
those at or above the threshold were able to give an answer in Question 18 about how much wealth they would need
to live comfortably in retirement.


                                                      17
be less risky than a large U.S. stock mutual fund. Only 26% of employees at or above the
threshold share this erroneous belief.25 Employees below the threshold are less knowledgeable
about their 401(k) plan features. In Question 4, only 21% were able to correctly state their
employer match rate, and only 27% were able to correctly state the match threshold. In contrast,
employees at or above the threshold were able to correctly state these figures 41% and 59% of
the time, respectively.
        Our survey responses also suggest that procrastination26 plays some role in keeping
people from raising their contribution rate to the match threshold. Recall that a much higher
proportion of employees at or above the threshold (52%) than employees below the threshold
(19%) collected $50 for completing our 15-minute survey, even though the former group’s
median income is higher than the latter’s. In addition, the average respondent contributing at
least up to the match threshold took 15.1 days to mail the survey back to us, while the average
respondent below the threshold took 17.2 days. Finally, in Question 10, we find that fewer
respondents at or above the match threshold (11%) than respondents under the threshold (16%)
report themselves to often or almost always leave things to the last minute. These gaps are likely
to understate the true difference in procrastination between the two groups, since the sample is
right-truncated; the inveterate delayers never returned the survey, and non-respondents have
saving rates that are disproportionately below the match threshold.
        The key purpose of the survey was to see by how much those contributing less than the
match threshold would increase their 401(k) contributions if the benefits of the employer match
and the penalty-free discretionary withdrawal rules were explained to them. Recall that we
implemented a treatment condition that added Questions 26 through 30 to the baseline survey.
The median respondent to Question 29 calculated that she would lose $1,200 each year by not
contributing up to the match threshold.27




25
   See John Hancock Financial Services (2002) and Benartzi et al. (2004) for the results from other surveys asking
similar questions.
26
   Laibson (1997), O’Donoghue and Rabin (1999), and Carroll et al. (2007) analyze models in which time-
inconsistent preferences lead people to undersave and procrastinate.
27
   This is larger than the median arbitrage loss of $747 and average total foregone employer match of $768 reported
in Tables 3 and 4 for Company A. However, the $1,200 median response to Question 29 was calculated relative to
not participating at all in the 401(k) plan. A comparable calculation using data from 1998 on individuals
contributing below the match threshold or not at all gives a median loss of $991. The remainder of the discrepancy is
likely accounted for by increases in salaries between 1998 and 2004.


                                                        18
        Table 6 presents the average 401(k) contribution rates on August 1, 2004 (immediately
prior to the survey mailing) and November 1, 2004 (approximately two months after the
response deadline) for employees who were under the match threshold in May 2004 (when the
survey mailing list was finalized).28 The average contribution rates of the control group and the
treatment group increase over this period, but by a very small amount (0.08% of pay for the
control group and 0.16% of pay for the treatment group).29 The average difference in the
contribution rate changes between the two groups was only 0.08% of pay and statistically
insignificant. Using receipt of the treatment survey as an instrument for reading and returning the
treatment survey, we estimate the treatment effect to be a 0.53 percentage point increase in the
contribution rate (t-statistic 0.87). Consistent with other financial education research that tracks
participant behavior in administrative data (Madrian and Shea, 2005; Choi, Laibson, Madrian,
and Metrick, 2002; Duflo and Saez, 2003), it appears that giving workers information does not
meaningfully raise their 401(k) contribution rates, even when the recommended action exploits a
free lunch. We note, however, that our results are for a selected sample. Individuals older than
59½ who are not contributing up to their 401(k) match threshold may be particularly insensitive
to financial education. Other groups may be more responsive.


V. Conclusion
        Despite the presence of employer matching contributions in 401(k) plans, a substantial
fraction of employees fails to contribute up to their employer’s match threshold. For many
employees, it is possible to rationalize their willingness to leave employer 401(k) matching
contributions on the table by appealing to factors such as liquidity constraints, early withdrawal
penalties, and incomplete vesting of the match. In this paper, we examine the 401(k) contribution
choices of a group of employees for whom these explanations do not apply. These employees are
older than 59½, receive employer matching contributions, are largely fully vested, and can
withdraw their 401(k) balances at any time without penalty. For these employees, contributing
below the match threshold violates the no-arbitrage condition for their portfolio. Nevertheless,
across a sample of seven firms, between 20% and 60% of the employees do so. The average


28
   There are fewer than 689 employees in the table because some employees left the company before November 1,
2004.
29
   Seven members of the control group increased their contribution rate, while 8 members of the treatment did. One
control and no treatment group members decreased their contribution rate over this same period.


                                                        19
arbitrage loss in 1998, conditional on having a positive arbitrage loss, ranges from $160 to $782
at the seven firms in our sample, or between 0.66% and 2.32% of annual pay. The arbitrage
losses over a longer time horizon are likely much larger. The widespread failure to exploit
arbitrage opportunities in this context suggests that there may be additional utility losses from
imperfect optimization in other aspects of the employees’ investing and saving problems.
       We examine several possible explanations for the failure of those over the age of 59½ to
optimally exploit the employer match. Based on survey evidence, we rule out direct transactions
costs and satiation. We find evidence that employees who fail to exploit the employer match are
less financially literate than those at or above the match threshold, which may indicate
substantial indirect transactions costs (i.e., decision-making costs) associated with 401(k)
participation. We also find evidence for procrastination.
       Many financial education interventions are intended to increase savings rates by
describing the benefits of saving. Consistent with previous evidence, our survey finds that most
employees already believe that they should be saving more than they currently are. However,
even though employees think they should save more, our effort to facilitate such savings had no
effect. This is intriguing because we described a highly profitable savings strategy that generates
no liquidity costs, whereas most educational interventions promote savings strategies that are not
as easy or costless to pursue. Some employees apparently need more than just good advice.
However, the group we study may be a particularly intractable population.
       Our results are also cause for pessimism about the ability of monetary incentives alone to
increase savings in the left tail of the savings distribution. Despite offering costly matching
programs with strong marginal financial incentives, the firms studied here were unable to induce
many of their older employees to contribute up to the match threshold. Although matching alone
does not appear sufficient to increase savings in the left tail, it may be more effective when
combined with other interventions that account for employee passivity (Madrian and Shea, 2001;
Benartzi and Thaler, 2004; Choi, Laibson, Madrian, and Metrick, 2002, 2004; Carroll et al.,
2007) or that sharply reduce the complexity of the savings and investment decision (Choi,
Laibson, and Madrian, 2005; Beshears et al., 2006; Duflo, et al., 2005; Mitchell, Utkus, and
Yang, 2005).
       Finally, the results in this paper speak more generally to the role of the no-arbitrage
condition in economic equilibria. Among the population studied in this paper, unexploited



                                                 20
arbitrage opportunities are commonly observed, despite the fact that the potential gains are large
and the necessary strategy to capitalize on these gains is simple and widely socially encouraged.
Our evidence suggests that in non-competitive domains like retirement saving where the failure
to maximize cannot be exploited by others, arbitrage opportunities may persist in equilibrium.




                                                21
 Appendix A: Treatment Survey
 1. What percentage of your pay are you currently contributing to your 401(k)? If you
    aren’t contributing, write “0” in the blank. Don’t count employer contributions to
    your plan.
    (a) Before-tax contributions:        % of pay                I don’t know
    (b) After-tax contributions:         % of pay                I don’t know

 2. For each statement, please check the box that best represents your views.

                                Strongly    Somewhat   Neither Agree   Somewhat    Strongly
                                 Agree        Agree    nor Disagree     Disagree   Disagree

(a) I have enough information
about the rules of my 401(k)

(b) I have a good under-
standing of the investment
choices my 401(k) offers
(c) I’m satisfied with the
investment choices my
401(k) offers

(d) My 401(k) meets my
retirement needs

(e) I’d rather save for
retirement in my 401(k) than
outside my 401(k)
(f) My company’s 401(k) plan
is better than other
companies’ 401(k) plans
   3. We want to know how long it took you to do certain things in the 401(k) for the first
      time. If you haven’t done these things, we want to know how long you think they
      would take you. Check the appropriate box and fill in the blanks for each of parts (a)
      through (c).

      (a) It   would take me/        actually took me about          hours and       minutes
      to join my 401(k) plan.

      (b) It   would take me/ actually took me about                  hours and        minutes
      to change my contribution rate for the first time after joining the 401(k) plan.

      (c) It  would take me/ actually took me about                   hours and        minutes
      to change the funds I’m invested in for the first time after joining the 401(k) plan


We want to find out how well your company has communicated its 401(k) plan
features to you. Please answer the questions without looking at your 401(k) plan
documents.

   4. Please fill in the following blanks, or indicate that you don’t know the answer.

      For every before-tax dollar I contribute to the 401(k) up to       % of my salary, my
      employer makes a matching contribution to the plan of           cents.

          I don’t know how much my employer matches my contributions

   5. Does your company’s 401(k) plan offer the following investment options?
      (a) US stock market fund                     Yes        No       I don’t know
      (b) Stable value fund                        Yes        No       I don’t know
      (c) Bond fund                                Yes        No       I don’t know
      (d) Commodities fund                         Yes        No       I don’t know
      (e) International stock fund                 Yes        No       I don’t know
      (f) Your employer’s stock                    Yes        No       I don’t know
      (g) Real estate investment trust             Yes        No       I don’t know

   6. Which of the following statements best describes your beliefs about the withdrawal
      rules that currently apply to you in your 401(k)? (Please check only one box.)
          If I have money in my 401(k), I can’t withdraw it
          If I have money in my 401(k), I can withdraw it, but I will pay taxes plus a
      penalty on the withdrawal
          If I have money in my 401(k), I can withdraw it without any penalty, but I will
      pay taxes on the withdrawal
          I don’t know



                                             23
7. Which of the following statements best describes your beliefs about the loan rules
   that currently apply to you in your 401(k)? (Please check only one box.)
       If I have money in my 401(k), I can’t take out any loans from it
       If I have money in my 401(k), I can have a limited number of loans from it at one
   time
       If I have money in my 401(k), I can take out as many loans as I want from it at a
   time
       I don’t know

8. How knowledgeable an investor would you consider yourself?
   (Please check only one box.)
        Very knowledgeable
        Relatively knowledgeable
        Somewhat knowledgeable
        Less than knowledgeable
        Not at all knowledgeable

9. Which of the following statements best describes how often you think about your
   retirement savings? (Please check only one box.)
        I think about my retirement savings a great deal
        I think about my retirement savings sometimes
        I rarely think about my retirement savings
        I never think about my retirement savings

10. Which of the following statements best describes you?
    (Please check only one box.)
         I never leave things to the last minute
         I rarely leave things to the last minute
         I sometimes leave things to the last minute
         I often leave things to the last minute
         I almost always leave things to the last minute

11. Which of the following best describes your level of education?
    (Please check only one box.)
         Some high school
         High school degree
         Some college
         College degree
         Some graduate school
         Graduate school degree




                                         24
12. What is your marital status?
    (Please check only one box.)
         Single
         Married
         Separated
         Divorced

13. Imagine that you just won a $500 prize in a raffle. What would you do with your
    winnings? (Please check only one box.)
       I would save the entire prize.
       I would use the entire prize to pay down my debts.
       I would spend the entire prize.
       I would save           %, pay down debts with       %, and spend        %.
       (These percentages should add up to 100%)

14. Suppose that you decided to save an extra $1,000 of your annual income, and you had
    a financial planner who would help you do this. Where would you instruct your
    planner to make this investment? The dollar amounts below should sum to $1,000.
    (Please check all boxes that apply and fill in amounts to the right.)

       The checking account at my bank or other financial institution   $
       The savings account at my bank or other financial institution    $
       An Individual Retirement Account (IRA)                           $
       My employer’s 401(k) plan                                        $
       A college savings account (for example, 529 plan)                $
       A brokerage account                                              $
       A stock mutual fund outside a 401(k) plan                        $
       A bond mutual fund outside a 401(k) plan                         $
       Other (please indicate) __________________________               $

15. (a) What percent of your household income do you think you should ideally be saving
    for retirement right now? If you don’t know, answer with your best guess.

            % of my household income

   (b) What percent of your household income are you actually saving for retirement
       right now?

            % of my household income




                                         25
16. If you think you are already saving enough for retirement, check here.

   If not, how much more do you think you could commit to saving than you currently
   are?
   (Please check only one box.)
        I can’t afford to save any more
        $10 per week
        $20 per week
        $40 per week
        $50 or more per week

17. Suppose you decided to cut your spending by $2 a day in order to save more for
    retirement. (This comes out to saving $730 more per year.) Where would you cut
    your spending the most?
         Food
         Clothing
         Entertainment
         Alcohol/cigarettes
         Other (please indicate) ___________________

18. About how much would your household need to have saved by the time you retire in
    order to live comfortably in retirement?

   I/we would need to save $_____________                              I don’t know

19. After you retire, do you expect your household’s monthly spending to be lower than,
    about the same as, or higher than your monthly spending right before you retire?
    (Please check only one box.)
         Lower
         About the same
         Higher

20. Rate each of the following investments’ riskiness on a scale of 1 to 5.
    1 indicates “no risk” and 5 indicates “very high risk.”

                                                 No risk           Very high risk
   (a) A large US stock mutual fund                1       2   3   4     5       Don’t know
   (b) Your employer’s stock                       1       2   3   4     5       Don’t know
   (c) A savings account at your bank              1       2   3   4     5       Don’t know
   (d) Bonds                                       1       2   3   4     5       Don’t know
   (e) Stable value/money market fund              1       2   3   4     5       Don’t know
   (f) Stock of a typical Fortune 500 company      1       2   3   4     5       Don’t know
   (g) An international stock mutual fund          1       2   3   4     5       Don’t know
   (h) An emerging markets stock mutual fund       1       2   3   4     5       Don’t know


                                           26
SKIP THIS PAGE IF YOU’RE NOT CONTRIBUTING TO
YOUR COMPANY 401(k) PLAN RIGHT NOW.

 21. For each of questions (a) through (d), please check the box that best describes your
     plans.
     In the next two months:

    (a) I plan to    raise /    lower /    maintain my 401(k) contribution rate
    (b) I     plan /     do not plan to make a withdrawal from my 401(k) plan
    (c) I    plan /     do not plan to take a loan out of my 401(k) plan
    (d) I     plan /     do not plan to change the mix of funds in which I am invested

 22. If you’re not planning on making any of the changes in question 21, check here.

    If you are planning on making some changes, when are you planning on making
    them?
    (Please check only one box.)
        In the next few days
        In the next week
        In the next two weeks
        In the next month
        In the next two months




                                           27
SKIP THIS PAGE IF YOU ARE CONTRIBUTING TO
YOUR COMPANY 401(k) PLAN RIGHT NOW.
 23. When do you plan to begin contributing to your company’s 401(k) plan?
     (Please check only one box.)
         In the next few days
         In the next week
         In the next two weeks
         In the next month
         In the next two months
         In the next                     (more than two months)
         I do not plan on ever contributing to the 401(k) plan

 24. If you’re not planning on ever contributing to the 401(k) plan, check here.

    If you are planning on contributing some day, what percent of your salary do you
    expect to contribute when you start?
           % of my salary

 25. If you are planning on contributing to the 401(k) plan some day, check here.

    If you’re not planning on ever contributing to the 401(k) plan, what are the main
    reasons?
    (Please check all boxes that apply.)
        I don’t want to save right now
        I can’t afford to save right now
        I’d rather save in accounts outside of the 401(k)
        I don’t have enough information to know how much to save
        I don’t understand my company’s 401(k) plan
        It takes too long to sign up for my company’s 401(k) plan
        There’s always a chance I might be changing jobs or retiring soon
        My company 401(k) match isn’t high enough
        I’m worried about the state of the stock market/financial markets
        I’m worried about corporate scandals and accountability
        Other. Please specify




                                           28
In this section, you will be told some facts about your 401(k) plan.

   26. Your company offers its employees a matching contribution on the first 6% of salary
       contributed to their before-tax 401(k) account. When did you become aware of this
       fact?
       (Please check only one box.)
           I just became aware of this fact
           I may have known this fact before, but I’m not sure
           I definitely knew this fact before

   27. Your company lets you make transactions in your 401(k) by using the Internet. You
       can also call a toll-free number, where you can use an automated touch-tone system
       or speak to a benefits center representative. When did you become aware of these
       facts?
       (Please check only one box.)
           I just became aware of at least one of these facts
           I may have known these facts before, but I’m not sure
           I definitely knew these facts before

   28. If you ever need the money in your 401(k) for any reason, you can withdraw it
       without penalty once you’re over 59½ years old. You’ll pay ordinary income tax on
       any money withdrawn that hasn’t already been taxed. When did you become aware
       that penalty-free withdrawals are available?
       (Please check only one box.)
           I just became aware of these facts
           I may have known these facts before, but I’m not sure
           I definitely knew these facts before




                                              29
  29. Suppose you’re contributing $0 to your before-tax 401(k) account. How much
      employer match money would you lose each year from not contributing 6% of your
      salary?
      (Use the table below to get an approximate answer. If you aren’t sure what your employer match rate
      is, use your best guess.)

       Example: If your salary is $30,000 and your match rate is 50%, then your annual loss is $900.

      I would lose $            in matching contributions every year from contributing
      0% instead of 6% of my salary to my before-tax 401(k) account.

                     Annual employer match lost from not contributing
Annual                                           Employer match rate
 Salary        0%      16.7%      25%        30%    40%    50%     60%               65%       75%      100%
$10,000        $0       $100      $150       $180   $240   $300    $360              $390      $450      $600
$20,000        $0       $200      $300       $360   $480   $600    $720              $780      $900     $1,200
$30,000        $0       $301      $450       $540   $720   $900 $1,080              $1,170    $1,350    $1,800
$40,000        $0       $401      $600       $720   $960 $1,200 $1,440              $1,560    $1,800    $2,400
$50,000        $0       $501      $750       $900 $1,200 $1,500 $1,800              $1,950    $2,250    $3,000
$60,000        $0       $601      $900      $1,080 $1,440 $1,800 $2,160             $2,340    $2,700    $3,600
$70,000        $0       $701     $1,050     $1,260 $1,680 $2,100 $2,520             $2,730    $3,150    $4,200
$80,000        $0       $802     $1,200     $1,440 $1,920 $2,400 $2,880             $3,120    $3,600    $4,800
$90,000        $0       $902     $1,350     $1,620 $2,160 $2,700 $3,240             $3,510    $4,050    $5,400
$100,000       $0      $1,002    $1,500     $1,800 $2,400 $3,000 $3,600             $3,900    $4,500    $6,000

  30. Does your answer to the previous question make you interested in raising your
      contribution rate to 6% so you won’t lose any more employer match money?
         Yes. I plan to do so in the next       weeks.
         No, I’m already contributing 6% or more before-tax to the 401(k) plan.
         No, my losses aren’t large enough.
         I don’t know.




                                                  30
Appendix B: Cover Letter Sent to Treatment Subjects
Dear <Company A employee>:

Would you like to earn $50 for about 15 minutes of your time?

Company A wants to better understand the retirement saving and investment issues facing its
employees. We are inviting you to participate in a survey that Company A is conducting with
researchers from Harvard University, the Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania, and
Hewitt Associates, the company that performs the recordkeeping for Company A Savings Plan.

As a way of saying thanks in advance for your help with this effort, we’ve enclosed a dollar bill
in this mailing. You will receive an additional $50 American Express® Gift Cheque from the
researchers, simply by

       1) Reading the Official Gift Check Rules on the reverse side of this letter
       2) Completing the enclosed questionnaire
       3) Mailing the questionnaire with your name and current address to Hewitt Associates in
          the postage-paid envelope provided by no later than 8/27/2004

Gift Cheques are accepted at over a million locations—virtually everywhere American Express®
Travelers Cheques are welcome. Returning the enclosed questionnaire indicates that you’ve fully
read and agreed to the Official Gift Check Rules.

Your participation in the survey is important. The responses you provide, combined with those
provided by other employees eligible to participate in Company A Savings Plan, will help the
researchers understand the barriers to saving and investing for retirement. All gift checks will be
mailed three weeks after the survey closing date.

Your responses and information are completely confidential. Company A will never see your
individual responses to the questionnaire, and answers to questions will not be used to identify
individuals. Hewitt will report results to Company A only in aggregate form.

We look forward to your participation!

Sincerely,

Jane Doe
Director, Retirement Benefits
Company A




                                                31
Official Gift Check Rules
American Express® Gift Cheques will be awarded only to those invited to participate in this survey. American
Express® Gift Cheques are accepted virtually everywhere American Express® Travelers Cheques are welcomed.
For further details regarding rules, policies and limitations that may apply to the use of American Express®
Travelers Cheques, visit “www.aeis.com/American_Express_Gift_Cheques.html” via the internet or call (888) 853-
9899. Hewitt Associates and the Researchers are not responsible for lost, late or misdirected mail. Hewitt Associates
and the Researchers reserve the right to cancel American Express® Gift Cheque payments if the package containing
the Cheque is returned undeliverable.

If you have questions regarding your American Express® Gift Cheque, please write to the following address:

<Address>

Void where prohibited.

Each participant agrees to release, indemnify, and hold harmless Hewitt Associates, and their affiliates, parents,
subsidiaries, advertising and promotion agencies and their respective officers, directors, employees, representatives
and agents from any and all liability for any injuries, loss or damage of any kind to any person, including death, and
property arising in whole or in part, directly or indirectly, from acceptance, possession, use or misuse of the gift
check as a result of participation in the survey.

In no event will Hewitt Associates, their affiliates, parents, subsidiaries, advertising and promotion agencies and
their respective officers, directors, employees, representatives and agents be responsible for any damages or losses
of any kind, including direct, indirect, incidental, or consequential or punitive damages arising from your
participation in the survey. All gift checks are provided without warranty of any kind, express or implied, including
but not limited to warranties of purchases made with gift checks, fitness for a particular purpose or non-
infringement.




                                                         32
References
Amromin, Gene, 2003. “Household Portfolio Choices in Taxable and Tax-Deferred Accounts:
     Another Puzzle?” European Finance Review 7, pp. 547-582.

Amromin, Gene, Jennifer Huang, and Clemens Sialm, 2007. “The Tradeoff Between Mortgage
     Prepayments and Tax-Deferred Savings.” Forthcoming in Journal of Public Economics.

Barber, Brad M., and Terrance Odean, 2003. “Are Individual Investors Tax Savvy? Evidence
       from Retail and Discount Brokerage Accounts.” Journal of Public Economics 88, pp.
       419-442.

Benartzi, Shlomo, 2001. “Excessive Extrapolation and the Allocation of 401(k) Accounts to
       Company Stock.” Journal of Finance 56, pp. 1747-1764.

Benartzi, Shlomo, and Richard Thaler, 2004. “Save More Tomorrow: Using Behavioral
       Economics to Increase Employee Savings.” Journal of Political Economy 112, pp. S164-
       S187.

Benartzi, Shlomo, Richard Thaler, Stephen Utkus, and Cass Sunstein, 2004. “Company Stock,
       Market Rationality, and Legal Reform.” Mimeo. University of Chicago Graduate School
       of Business.

Bergstresser, Daniel, and James Poterba, 2004. “Asset Allocation and Asset Location:
       Household Evidence from the Survey of Consumer Finances.” Journal of Public
       Economics 88, pp. 1893-1916.

Bernheim, B. Douglas, 1994. “Personal Saving, Information, and Economic Literacy: New
      Directions for Public Policy.” In Tax Policy for Economic Growth in the 1990s.
      Washington D.C.: American Council for Capital Formation, pp. 53-78.

Bernheim, B. Douglas, 1995. “Do Households Appreciate Their Financial Vulnerabilities? An
      Analysis of Actions, Perceptions, and Public Policy.” In Tax Policy for Economic Growth
      in the 1990s. Washington, D.C.: American Council for Capital Formation, pp. 1-30.

Bernheim, B. Douglas, 1998. “Financial Illiteracy, Education and Retirement Saving.” In Olivia
      Mitchell and Sylvester Schieber, editors, Living with Defined Contribution Pensions.
      Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, pp. 38-68.

Bertaut, Carol C., and Michael Haliassos, 2002. “Debt Revolvers for Self Control.” University of
       Cyprus Working Paper.

Beshears, John, David Laibson, James J. Choi, and Brigitte C. Madrian, 2006. “Simplification
      and Saving.” NBER Working Paper No. 12659.

Brennan, Michael, and Walter N. Torous, 1999. “Individual Decision Making and Investor
      Welfare.” Economic Notes 28, pp. 119-143.



                                              33
Carroll, Gabriel D., James J. Choi, David Laibson, Brigitte C. Madrian, and Andrew Metrick,
        2007. “Optimal Defaults and Active Decisions.” NBER Working Paper 11074.

Choi, James J., David Laibson, Brigitte C. Madrian, and Andrew Metrick, 2002. “Defined
       Contribution Pensions: Plan Rules, Participant Decisions, and the Path of Least
       Resistance.” In James Poterba, editor, Tax Policy and the Economy 16, pp. 67-114.

Choi, James J., David Laibson, Brigitte C. Madrian, and Andrew Metrick, 2004. “For Better or
       For Worse: Default Effects and 401(k) Savings Behavior.” In David Wise, editor,
       Perspectives in the Economics of Aging, pp. 81-121. Chicago: University of Chicago
       Press.

Choi, James J., David Laibson, and Brigitte C. Madrian, 2005. “Reducing the Complexity Costs
       of 401(k) Participation: The Case of Quick Enrollment™.” Mimeo. Harvard University.

Dammon, Robert M., Chester S. Spatt, and Harold H. Zhang, 2004. “Optimal Asset Location and
     Allocation with Taxable and Tax-Deferred Investing.” Journal of Finance 59, pp. 999-
     1037.

Duflo, Esther, William Gale, Jeffrey Liebman, Peter Orszag and Emmanuel Saez, 2005. “Saving
       Incentives for Low- and Middle-Income Families: Evidence from a Field Experiment
       with H&R Block,” Washington DC: The Retirement Security Project.

Duflo, Esther and Emmanuel Saez, 2003. “The Role of Information and Social Interactions in
       Retirement Plan Decisions: Evidence From a Randomized Experiment”. Quarterly
       Journal of Economics 118, pp. 815-842.

Farkas, Steve and Jean Johnson, 1997. “Miles to Go: A Status Report on Americans' Plans for
       Retirement.” New York: Public Agenda.

Garlappi, Lorenzo, and Jennifer Huang, 2006. “Are Stocks Desirable in Tax-Deferred
       Accounts?” Journal of Public Economics 90, pp. 2257-2283.

Gross, David B., and Nicholas S. Souleles, 2002. “Do Liquidity Constraints and Interest Rates
       Matter for Consumer Behavior? Evidence from Credit Card Data.” Quarterly Journal of
       Economics 117, pp. 149-185.

Haliassos, Michael, and Michael Reiter, 2007. “Credit Card Debt Puzzles.” Goethe University
       Working Paper.

John Hancock Financial Services, 2002. Eighth Defined Contribution Plan Survey: Insight into
      Participant Investment Knowledge & Behavior. Boston: John Hancock Financial
      Services.




                                              34
Laibson, David, 1997. “Golden Eggs and Hyperbolic Discounting.” Quarterly Journal of
       Economics 62, pp. 443-477.

Lehnert, Andreas, and Dean M. Maki, 2002. “Consumption, Debt, and Portfolio Choice: Testing
       the Effect of Bankruptcy Law.” Finance and Economic Discussion Series 2002-14.
       Washington D.C.: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.

Lusardi, Annamaria, and Olivia Mitchell, 2007. “Financial Literacy and Retirement
       Preparedness: Evidence and Implications for Financial Education Programs.” Business
       Economics (January), pp. 35-45.

Madrian, Brigitte and Dennis Shea, 2001. “The Power of Suggestion: Inertia in 401(k)
      Participation and Savings Behavior.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 116, pp. 1149-
      1187.

Meulbroek, Lisa, 2002. “Company Stock in Pension Plans: How Costly Is It?” Harvard Business
      School Working Paper 02-058. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University.

Mitchell, Olivia S., Steven Utkus, and Tongxuan Yang, 2005. “Better Plans for the Better-Paid:
       Determinants and Effects of 401(k) Plan Design.” Pension Research Council Working
       Paper No. 2005-5. University of Pennsylvania Wharton School.

O’Donoghue, Ted and Matthew Rabin, 1999. “Doing It Now or Later.” American Economic
     Review 89, pp. 103-124.

Poterba, James M., 2003. “Employer Stock and 401(k) Plans.” American Economic Review
       Papers and Proceedings 93, pp. 298-404.

Warshawsky, Mark, 1987. “Sensitivity to Market Incentives: The Case of Policy Loans.” Review
      of Economics and Statistics 69, pp. 286-295.

Zinman, Jonathan, 2007. “Household Borrowing High and Lending Low Under No-Arbitrage.”
      Dartmouth College Working Paper.




                                              35
                                                         Table 1. 401(k) Plan Rules of Seven Firms in 1998
This table shows the 401(k) plan rules at our sample firms as of 1998, according to the firms’ 401(k) plan documents.

                          Company A            Company B              Company C             Company D               Company E              Company F               Company G

 Eligibility          Immediate              Only non-union      January 1             3 months of service      Non-temporary          Salaried employees     Immediate
                                             employees after     following hire                                 employees after 1      immediate; union
                                             1,000 hours of                                                     month of service       employees after 3
                                             service in a year                                                                         months of service
 Contribution types   Before-tax and         Before-tax and      Before-tax            Before-tax (after-tax    Before-tax and         Before-tax and         Before-tax
 allowed              after-tax              after-tax                                 contributions dis-       after-tax              after-tax
                                                                                       continued)
 Employer match       25% to 100%            50% match on        25% match on first    100% match on first      75% match on first     20% to 35% match       100% match on
 rate                 match on first 6%      first 4% of pay     3% of pay contrib-    3% of pay contrib-       2% of pay contrib-     on first 6% of pay     first 3% of pay
                      of pay contributed,    contributed         uted (before-tax      uted; 50% match on       uted; 50% match        contributed, de-       contributed; 50%
                      depending on em-                           contributions only)   next 3% contributed      on next 3% con-        pending on em-         match on next
                      ployee group                                                                              tributed               ployee group           3%. No match in
                                                                                                                                                              1st service year.
 Match invested in    Yes; diversification   No                  No                    Yes; diversification     Yes; diversification   Yes; diversification   No
 employer stock       restricted                                                       restricted               restricted if < 50     restricted
                                                                                                                years old
 Vesting              5-year cliff           5-year cliff, or    5-year graded from    Immediate                5-year cliff, or       5-year graded from     4-year graded
                                             100% at age 65      3 to 7 years of                                100% upon              1 to 5 years of        from 2 to 5 years
                                                                 tenure, or 100% at                             retirement at or       tenure                 of tenure, or
                                                                 age 65                                         after age 55                                  100% at age 60
 Withdrawal           $250 minimum; no       No restrictions     Matching              No more than 1 per       1-year contribution    $100 minimum; no       Order of account
 restrictions         more than 1 per                            contributions not     month. Order of          suspension after       more than 6 per        depletion: match,
                      month. Order of                            available for         account depletion:       withdrawals from       year. Order of         before-tax
                      account depletion:                         withdrawal            after-tax, match         matched after-tax      account depletion:
                      after-tax, match,                                                dollars that have been   dollars. Can with-     after-tax, before-
                      before-tax                                                       in plan for more than    draw match only if     tax, match
                                                                                       2 years, rollover,       the money has been
                                                                                       before-tax               in plan for 2 years
 Withdrawal           Call toll-free         Call toll-free      Call toll-free        Call toll-free number.   Call toll-free         Call toll-free         Call toll-free
 procedures           number. Checks         number. Checks      number. Checks        Check processing         number. Withdraw-      number. Check          number. Check
                      mailed next week       cut within 2        mailed in 2-3         time not in plan         als processed          processing time not    processing time
                                             business days       weeks                 documents                within 1 week          in plan documents      not in documents
                                      Table 2. Demographic Characteristics of Seven Firms at Year-End 1998
The sample for all rows but the first is employees who are eligible to receive a 401(k) matching contribution at the beginning of 1998 and whose 1998
salary is more than that of a full-time minimum wage worker. The first row includes all employees at each company, whether or not they meet the
eligibility and salary requirements. We sort employees into age subsamples based on their age at January 1, 1998. However, all statistics are reported as of
year-end 1998. To maintain the confidentiality of the companies analyzed, we report only the approximate number of total active employees, and we do
not report the number of employees under the age of 59½.

                                 Company A         Company B         Company C         Company D         Company E         Company F         Company G

 Total active employees          Over 20,000        Over 4,000       Over 50,000       Over 10,000       Over 20,000       Over 30,000       Over 10,000

 Match-eligible employees older than 59½
   Number of employees                816               537              2,084              142               383               841               242
   Fraction male (%)                91.7%             82.7%             16.7%             70.4%             73.3%             65.2%             58.9%
   Average age (years)               62.6              68.2              64.4              62.6              62.7              63.0              63.6
   Average tenure (years)            16.0               5.9              14.9              18.4              22.5              22.2              12.1
   Median salary                   $32,444           $11,829           $24,704           $57,788           $40,830           $45,812           $43,711
   401(k) participation rate        82.8%             32.8%             51.2%             97.2%             68.1%             78.2%             90.1%
   Median 401(k) balance of        $46,830            $7,635           $16,259           $47,382           $117,151          $90,983           $69,440
   participants
 Match-eligible employees younger than 59½
   Fraction male                    81.7%             49.5%             19.1%             76.9%             70.6%             65.7%             66.0%
   Average age (years)               43.7              38.2              41.3              50.0              42.3              43.2              39.2
   Average tenure (years)            10.9               5.5               8.3              17.7              14.1              15.3               7.7
   Median salary                   $32,326           $23,229           $29,267           $62,111           $38,605           $46,854           $44,932
   401(k) participation rate        81.0%             44.5%             46.6%             96.7%             72.3%             81.8%             79.0%
   Median 401(k) balance of        $30,258           $11,521            $9,136           $53,078           $45,215           $52,951           $31,669
   participants
                                                 Table 3. Arbitrage Losses in 1998: Employees Over Age 59½
The sample is employees age 59½ and older on January 1, 1998 who are eligible to receive a 401(k) matching contribution and whose 1998 salary is more
than that of a full-time minimum wage worker. Arbitrage losses arise from not contributing at least to the match threshold, being at least partially vested in
the match, and having no after-tax 401(k) balances. The proportion of pay lost and dollar amounts lost are sorted separately to compute the percentiles.

                                                            Company A   Company B     Company C      Company D      Company E     Company F      Company G

 Number with arbitrage losses                                  196          320           915            36             78            263           102
 Fraction of sample who have arbitrage losses                 24.0%       59.6%          43.9%          25.4%         20.4%          31.3%         42.1%
 Maximum possible loss as a fraction of pay                 1.5 to 6%       2%           0.75%          4.5%            3%        1.2 to 2.1%       4.5%
 Among those with arbitrage losses:
    Average fraction of maximum possible loss realized        72.4%       97.5%          96.8%          23.7%         69.2%          81.4%         34.9%
    Fraction contributing nothing                             54.1%       95.0%          93.7%          11.1%         73.1%          69.6%         21.6%
    Fraction who have never enrolled in the 401(k)            20.9%       32.5%          66.4%          5.6%          38.5%          49.4%          5.9%
    Average loss, percent of annual pay                       2.32%       1.71%          0.66%          1.07%         2.07%          1.63%         1.57%
    Average loss, $                                           $782         $215           $160          $350           $722          $677           $660

    Distribution of losses as a percent of annual pay ($)
       Maximum                                                6.00%       2.00%          0.75%          4.50%         3.00%          2.10%         4.50%
                                                             ($7,596)     ($947)        ($1,200)       ($1,182)      ($2,651)       ($3,360)      ($6,357)
       95th percentile                                        4.45%       2.00%          0.75%          4.50%         3.00%          2.10%         4.50%
                                                             ($1,521)     ($379)         ($361)        ($1,168)      ($1,560)       ($1,756)      ($2,083)
       90th percentile                                        3.00%       2.00%          0.75%          4.50%         3.00%          2.10%         4.50%
                                                             ($1,098)     ($320)         ($280)        ($1,004)      ($1,397)       ($1,412)      ($1,650)
       75th percentile                                        3.00%       2.00%          0.75%          1.44%         3.00%          2.10%         3.50%
                                                              ($938)      ($252)         ($196)         ($489)       ($1,048)        ($859)        ($997)
       Median                                                 2.51%       2.00%          0.75%          0.25%         3.00%          2.10%         0.52%
                                                              ($747)      ($204)         ($135)         ($121)        ($662)         ($582)        ($282)
       25th percentile                                        1.50%       1.57%          0.75%          0.17%         0.88%          1.05%         0.17%
                                                              ($429)      ($181)          ($91)          ($80)        ($262)         ($257)         ($65)
       10th percentile                                        0.91%       0.75%          0.31%          0.17%         0.41%          0.37%         0.17%
                                                              ($262)       ($93)          ($66)          ($60)        ($126)         ($173)         ($49)
       5th percentile                                         0.45%       0.42%          0.22%          0.17%         0.24%          0.33%         0.17%
                                                              ($132)       ($42)          ($42)          ($48)         ($89)         ($106)         ($47)
       Minimum                                                0.13%       0.11%          0.10%          0.17%         0.10%          0.15%         0.11%
                                                               ($40)       ($11)          ($11)          ($47)         ($36)          ($41)         ($33)
                                             Table 4. Foregone Employer Matching Contributions in 1998
The sample is all employees eligible to receive the 401(k) matching contribution and whose 1998 salary is more than that of a full-
time minimum wage worker. The ages used to sort employees into subsamples are computed as of January 1, 1998. To maintain the
confidentiality of the companies analyzed, we do not report the number of employees under the age of 59½.
                                                      Company A   Company B   Company C   Company D   Company E   Company F   Company G

Match-eligible employees older than 59½
  Number contributing less than match threshold          246         386        1,088        51           78         267         114
  Fraction of ≥ 59½ sample contributing less than       30.1%       71.9%       52.2%       35.9%        20.4%      31.7%       47.1%
  match threshold
  Among those below the threshold:
     Average fraction of maximum possible match         74.0%       96.5%       96.6%       20.2%        69.2%      80.6%       33.9%
     foregone
     Fraction contributing nothing                      56.9%       93.5%       93.5%       7.8%         73.1%      68.5%       21.1%
     Fraction who have never enrolled in the 401(k)     30.5%       38.1%       68.8%       3.9%         38.5%      48.7%       5.3%
     Average match foregone, percent of annual pay      2.38%       1.73%       0.72%       0.91%        2.07%      1.67%       1.52%
     Average match foregone, $                          $768         $221       $180        $313         $722       $693        $638
Match-eligible employees younger than 59½
  Fraction of < 59½ sample contributing less than       37.3%       70.6%       61.8%       46.9%        30.6%      37.1%       66.2%
  match threshold
  Among those below the threshold:
     Average match foregone as percent of maximum       69.6%       87.8%       93.8%       23.2%        67.9%      69.7%       46.0%
     available match
     Fraction contributing nothing                      50.7%       77.5%       86.4%       7.1%         60.2%      48.8%       30.4%
     Fraction who have never enrolled in the 401(k)     36.5%       49.5%       68.1%       0.9%         23.5%      35.6%       17.3%
     Average match foregone, percent of annual pay      2.53%       1.44%       0.70%       1.04%        2.04%      1.40%       2.06%
     Average match foregone, $                          $840         $340       $194        $533         $726       $629        $907
                Table 5. Predictors of Arbitrage Losses or Foregoing Employer Matching Contributions in 1998
This table presents the results of probit regressions. The dependent variable is either a binary indicator for whether an employee had
arbitrage losses in 1998, or a binary indiator for whether an employee contributed less than the match threshold in 1998. Arbitrage
losses arise from not contributing at least to the match threshold, being at least partially vested in the match, and having no after-tax
401(k) balances. The sample is restricted to employees eligible for the 401(k) match and whose 1998 salary is more than that of a full-
time minimum wage worker. The ages used to sort employees into subsamples are computed as of January 1, 1998. Male and Married
are dummies set for if the participant is male and married, respectively. Age is the participant’s age on December 31, 1998. Tenure is
the number of years since the participant’s original hire date as of December 31, 1998. Salary is the participant’s salary in 1998. Firm
fixed effects are included, although their coefficients are not reported. The columns labeled “Coefficient” present coefficient estimates
from the probits. Those labeled “Slope” present marginal effects evaluated at the means of the explanatory variables. The marginal
effect reported for dummy variables is the effect of changing the variables from 0 to 1. Standard errors are in parentheses. ** denotes
significance at the 1% level.
                                            Employees older than 59½                                 Employees younger than 59½
                            Dependent variable:                 Dependent variable:                       Dependent variable:
                            Has arbitrage losses          Contributes less than threshold            Contributes less than threshold
                       Coefficient          Slope         Coefficient            Slope               Coefficient            Slope
Male                     0.3212**           0.1194**            0.3374**             0.1317**           0.1530**            0.0608**
                        (0.0515)           (0.0190)            (0.0519)             (0.0201)           (0.0081)            (0.0032)
Married                 -0.1611**          -0.0604**           -0.2104**            -0.0827**          -0.1138**           -0.0454**
                        (0.0445)           (0.0167)            (0.0446)             (0.0175)           (0.0076)            (0.0030)
Age                      0.0509**           0.0376**            0.0286**             0.0112**          -0.0069**           -0.0027**
                        (0.0056)           (0.0021)            (0.0057)             (0.0023)           (0.0004)            (0.0002)
Log(Tenure)              0.1005**           0.0376**           -0.2405**            -0.0944**          -0.2175**           -0.0866**
                        (0.0264)           (0.0099)            (0.0265)             (0.0104)           (0.0043)            (0.0017)
Log(Salary)             -0.8875**          -0.3320**           -0.9451**            -0.3711**          -0.8805**           -0.3507**
                        (0.0430)           (0.0160)            (0.0431)             (0.0169)           (0.0083)            (0.0033)
Firm fixed effects                  Yes                                   Yes                                      Yes
Sample size                       N = 5,043                             N = 5,043                              N = 158,986
                            Table 6. Field Experiment Results
This table shows the average 401(k) contribution rates on August 1, 2004 (pre-survey) and
November 1, 2004 (post-survey). The sample is Company A employees contributing under
the match threshold in May 2004. The control group received a mailed survey about their
401(k). The treatment group received the control survey plus additional questions that
highlighted the loss from not contributing up to the match threshold. The last column gives
the t-statistic for the null that there is no difference between the two groups.

                                                                        t-statistic of
                                 Control group    Treatment group        difference

Pre-survey contribution rate        1.73%              1.48%                1.38
(8/1/2004)

Post-survey contribution            1.81%              1.64%                0.86
rate (11/1/2004)

Contribution rate change:           0.08%              0.16%                0.86
8/1/2004 – 11/1/2004

Sample size                        N = 341            N = 337                —
                                       100%
Fraction of match-eligible employees




                                        80%


                                        60%


                                        40%


                                        20%


                                          0%
                                               20           30               40            50              60               70
                                                                                    Age

                                                    Contributes below match threshold                Has arbitrage losses

                                       Figure 1. Failure to Fully Exploit the 401(k) Match in 1998, by Age. This graph
                                       shows, by age, the fraction of match-eligible employees who either contributed below the
                                       match threshold or who had positive arbitrage losses in 1998. Employees in all seven
                                       sample firms are pooled in this graph.
