                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           THE MARGINAL PRODUCT OF CAPITAL

                                            Francesco Caselli
                                              James Feyrer

                                          Working Paper 11551
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w11551


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 2005




We would like to thank Tim Besley, Maitreesh Ghatak, Berthold Herrendorf, Jean Imbs, Faruk Khan,
Michael McMahon, Nina Pavcnik, Mark taylor, and Silvana Tenreyro for comments. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

©2005 by Francesco Caselli and James Feyrer. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
The Marginal Product of Capital
Francesco Caselli and James Feyrer
NBER Working Paper No. 11551
August 2005, Revised July 2006
JEL No. E22, O11, O16, O41

                                           ABSTRACT



Whether or not the marginal product of capital (MPK) differs across countries is a question that

keeps coming up in discussions of comparative economic development and patterns of capital flows.

Attempts to provide an empirical answer to this question have so far been mostly indirect and based

on heroic assumptions. The first contribution of this paper is to present new estimates of the cross-

country dispersion of marginal products. We find that the MPK is much higher on average in poor

countries. However, the financial rate of return from investing in physical capital is not much higher

in poor countries, so heterogeneity in MPKs is not principally due to financial market frictions.

Instead, the main culprit is the relatively high cost of investment goods in developing countries. One

implication of our findings is that increased aid flows to developing countries will not significantly

increase these countries' incomes.

Francesco Caselli
Department of Economics
London School of Economics
Houghton Street
London WC2A 2AE
United Kingdom
and NBER
f.caselli@lse.ac.uk

James Feyrer
Department of Economics
Dartmouth College
6106 Rockefeller
Hanover, NH 03755-3514
james-feyrer@dartmouth.edu
I       Introduction

Is the world’s capital stock efficiently allocated across countries? If so, then all countries

have roughly the same aggregate marginal product of capital (M P K). If not, the M P K
will vary substantially from country to country. In the latter case, the world foregoes
an opportunity to increase global GDP by reallocating capital from low to high M P K

countries. The policy implications are far reaching.
         Given the enormous cross-country differences in observed capital-labor ratios

(they vary by a factor of 100 in the data used in this paper) it may seem obvious that
the M P K must vary dramatically as well. In this case we would have to conclude

that there are important frictions in international capital markets that prevent an

efficient cross-country allocation of capital.1 However, as Lucas [1990] pointed out in his
celebrated article, poor countries also have lower endowments of factors complementary
with physical capital, such as human capital, and lower total factor productivity (TFP).
Hence, large differences in capital-labor ratios may coexist with M P K equalization.2

         It is not surprising then that considerable effort and ingenuity have been de-
voted to the attempt to generate cross-country estimates of the M P K. Banerjee and
Duflo [2005] present an exhaustive review of existing methods and results. Briefly, the

literature has followed three approaches. The first is the cross-country comparison of

interest rates. This is problematic because in financially repressed/distorted economies

interest rates on financial assets may be very poor proxies for the cost of capital actually

borne by firms.3 The second is some variant of regressing ∆Y on ∆K for different sets
    1
     The credit-friction view has many vocal supporters. Reinhart and Rogoff [2004], for example,
build a strong case based on developing countries’ histories of serial default, as well as evidence by
Alfaro, Kalemli-Ozcam and Volosovych [2003] and Lane [2003] linking institutional factors to capital
flows to poorer economies. Another forceful exposition of the credit-friction view is in Stulz [2005].
   2
     See also Mankiw [1995], and the literature on development-accounting (surveyed in Caselli [2005]),
which documents these large differences in human capital and TFP.
   3
     Another issue is default. In particular, it is not uncommon for promised yields on “emerging
market” bond instruments to exceed yields on US bonds by a factor of 2 or 3, but given the much
higher risk these bonds carry it is possible that the expected cost of capital from the perspective of
                                                  2
of counties and comparing the coefficient on ∆K. Unfortunately, this approach typi-
cally relies on unrealistic identification assumptions. The third strategy is calibration,

which involves choosing a functional form for the relationship between physical capital
and output, as well as accurately measuring the additional complementary factors –
such as human capital and TFP – that affect the M P K. Since giving a full account of

the complementary factors is quite ambitious, one may not want to rely on this method

exclusively. Both within and between these three broad approaches results vary widely.

In sum, the effort to generate reliable comparisons of cross-country M P K differences

has not yet paid off.

        This paper presents estimates of the aggregate M P K for a large cross-section
of countries, representing a broad sample of developing and developed economies. Rel-
ative to existing alternative measures, ours are extremely direct, impose very little

structure on the data, and are simple to calculate. The general idea is that under
conditions approximating perfect competition on the capital market the M P K equals
the rate of return to capital, and that the latter multiplied by the capital stock equals

capital income. Hence, the aggregate marginal product of capital can be easily recov-

ered from data on total income, the value of the capital stock, and the capital share in
income. We then combine data on output and capital with data on the capital share

to back out the M P K.4

        Our main result is that M P Ks are essentially equalized: the return from invest-

ing in capital is no higher in poor countries than in rich countries. This means that one

can rationalize virtually all of the cross-country variation in capital per worker without

appealing to international capital-market frictions. We also quantify the output losses
the borrower is considerably less. More generally, Mulligan [2002] shows that with uncertainty and
taste shocks interest rates on any particular financial instruments may have very low – indeed even
negative – correlations with the rental rate faced by firms.
   4
     Mulligan [2002] performs an analogous calculation to identify the rental rate in the US time series.
He finds implicit support for this method in the fact that the rental rate thus calculated is a much
better predictor of consumption growth than interest rates on financial assets.
                                                   3
due to the (minimal) M P K differences we observe: if we were to reallocate capital
across countries so as to equalize M P Ks the corresponding change in world output

would be negligible.5 Consistent with the view that financial markets have become
more integrated worldwide, however, we also find some evidence that the cost of credit
frictions has declined over time.

        The path to this result offers additional important insights. We start from a

“naive” estimate of the M P K that is derived from the standard neoclassical one-sector

model, with labor and reproducible capital as the only inputs. Using this initial mea-

sure, the average M P K in the developing economies in our sample is more than twice

as large as in the developed economies. Furthermore, within the developing-country
sample the M P K is three times as variable as within the developed-country sample.
When we quantify the output losses associated with these M P K differentials we find

that they are very large (about 25 percent of the aggregate GDP of the developing
countries in our sample). These results seem at first glance to represent a big win for
the international credit-friction view of the world.

        Things begin to change dramatically when we add land and other natural re-

sources as possible inputs. This obviously realistic modification implies that standard
measures of the capital share (obtained as 1 minus the labor share) are not appropriate
to build a measure of the marginal productivity of reproducible capital. This is because

these measures conflate the income flowing to capital accumulated through investment

flows with natural capital in the form of land and natural resources. By using data
recently compiled by the World Bank, we are able to separate natural capital from re-

producible capital and calculate the share of output paid to reproducible capital that

is our object of interest. This correction alone significantly reduces the gap between
rich and poor country capital returns. The main reason for this is that poor countries
   5
    Our counter-factual calculations of the consequences of full capital mobility for world GDP are
analogous to those of Klein and Ventura [2004] for labor mobility.
                                                4
have a larger share of natural capital in total capital, which leads to a correspondingly
larger overestimate of the income and marginal-productivity of reproducible capital

when using the total capital-income share. The correction also reduces the GDP loss
due to M P K differences to about 5% of developing country GDP, one fifth of the
                                                   6
amount implied by the naive calculation.

        The further and final blow to the credit-friction hypothesis comes from gener-

alizing the model to allow for multiple sectors. In a multi-sector world the estimate of

M P K based on the one-sector model (with or without natural capital) is – at best –

a proxy for the average physical M P K across sectors. But with many sectors physical

M P K differences can be sustained even in a world completely unencumbered by any
form of capital-market friction. In particular, even if poor-country agents have access to
unlimited borrowing and lending at the same conditions offered to rich-country agents,

the physical M P K will be higher in poor countries if the relative price of capital goods
is higher there. Intuitively, poor-country investors in physical capital need to be com-
pensated by a higher physical M P K for the fact that capital is more expensive there

(relative to output). Or, yet in other words, the physical M P K measures output per

unit of physical capital invested, while for the purposes of cross-country credit flows
one wants to look at output per unit of output invested. Accordingly, when we correct

our measure to capture the higher relative cost of capital in poor countries we reach
our result of M P K equalization.7
   6
      We are immensely grateful to Pete Klenow and one other referee for bringing up the issue of land
and natural resources. Incidentally, these observations extend to a criticism of much work that has
automatically plugged in standard capital-share estimates in empirical applications of models where
all capital is reproducible. We plan to pursue this criticism in future work.
    7
      In a paper largely addressing other issues, Taylor [1998] has a section which makes the same basic
point about price differences and returns to capital, and presents similar calculations for the M P Ks.
Our paper still differs considerably in that it provides a more rigorous theoretical underpinning for the
exercise; it provides a quantitative model-based assessment of the deadweight costs of credit frictions;
and it presents a decomposition of the role of relative prices v. other factors in explaining cross-
country differences in capital-labor ratios. Perhaps most importantly, in this paper we use actual data
on reproducible capital shares instead of assuming that these are constant across countries and equal
to the total capital share. This turns out to be quite important. Cohen and Soto [2002] also briefly
                                                   5
        We close the paper by returning to Lucas’ question as to the sources of differ-
ences in capital-labor ratios. Lucas proposed two main candidates: credit frictions –

about which he was skeptical – and differences in complementary inputs (e.g. human
capital) and TFP. Our analysis highlights the wisdom of Lucas’ skepticism vis-a-vis
the credit friction view. However, our result that physical M P Ks differ implies that

different endowments of complementary factors or of TFP are not the only cause of dif-

ferences in capital intensity. Instead, an important role is also played by two additional

proximate factors: the higher relative price of capital and the lower reproducible-capital

share in poor countries. When we decompose differences in capital-labor ratios to find

the relative contributions of complementary factors on one side, and relative prices and
capital shares on the other, we find a roughly 50-50 split.
        Our analysis implies that the higher cost of installing capital (in terms of fore-

gone consumption) in poor countries is an important factor in explaining why so little
capital flows to them. The important role of the relative price of capital in our analysis
underscores the close relationship of our contribution with an influential recent paper

by Hsieh and Klenow [2003]. Hsieh and Klenow show, among other things, that the

relative price of output is the key source for the observed positive correlation of real
investment rates and per-capita income, despite roughly constant investment rates in

domestic prices. We extend their results by drawing out their implications – together
with appropriately-measured reproducible capital shares – for rates of return differen-

tials, and the debate on the missing capital flows to developing countries.8
observe that the data may be roughly consistent with rate of return equalization.
    8
      Another important contribution of Hsieh and Klenow [2003] is to propose an explanation for
the observed pattern of relative prices. In their view poor countries have relatively lower TFP in
producing (largely tradable) capital goods than in producing (partially non-tradable) consumption
goods. Another possible explanation is that poor countries tax sales of machinery relatively more
than sales of final goods (e.g. Chari, Kehoe and McGrattan [1996]). Relative price differences may
also reflect differences in the composition of output or in unmeasured quality. None of our conclusions
in this paper is affected by which of these explanations is the correct one, so we do not take a stand
on this. Of course the policy implications of different explanations are very different. For example,
if a high relative price of capital reflected tax distortions, then governments should remove these
                                                  6
        Our results have implications for the recently-revived policy debate on financial
aid to developing countries. The existence of large physical M P K differentials between

poor and rich countries would usually be interpreted as prima facie support to the
view that increased aid flows may be beneficial. But such an interpretation hinges on
a credit-friction explanation for such differentials. Our result that financial rates of

return are fairly similar in rich and poor countries, instead, implies that any additional

flow of resources to developing countries is likely to be offset by private flows in the

opposite direction seeking to restore rate-of-return equalization.9



II      M P K Differentials

II A       M P K Differentials in a One-Sector Model

Consider the standard neoclassical one-sector model featuring a constant-return pro-
duction function and perfectly competitive (domestic) capital markets. Under these
(minimal) conditions the rental rate of capital equals the marginal product of capital,

so that aggregate capital income is M P KxK, where K is the capital stock. If α is the
capital share in GDP, and Y is GDP, we then have α = M P KxK/Y , or

                                                         Y
(1)                                        MP K = α        .
                                                         K

        In the macro-development literature it is common to back out the “capital
distortions, and capital would then flow to poor countries.
    9
      Our conclusion that a more integrated world financial market would not lead to major changes in
world output is in a sense stronger than Gourinchas and Jeanne [2003]’s conclusion that the welfare
effects of capital-account openness are small. Gourinchas and Jeanne [2003] find large (calibrated)
M P K differentials, and consequently predict large capital inflows following capital-account liberaliza-
tion. However, they point out that in welfare terms this merely accelerates a process of convergence
to a steady state that is independent of whether the capital-account is open or closed. Hence, the
discounted welfare gains are modest. Our point is that, even though differences in physical M P Ks
are large, differences in rates of return are small, so we should not even expect much of a reallocation
of capital in the first place.
                                                   7
share” as one minus available estimates of the labor share in income (we review these
data below). But such figures include payments accruing to both reproducible and non-

reproducible capital, i.e. land and natural resources. By contrast, the standard measure
of the capital stock is calculated using the perpetual inventory method from investment
flows, and therefore represents only the reproducible capital stock. As is clear from

the formula above, therefore, using standard measures of α leads to an overestimate of

the marginal productivity of reproducible capital. In turn, this bias on the estimated

levels of the M P Ks will translate into a twofold bias in cross-country comparisons.

First, it will exaggerate absolute differences in M P K, which is typically the kind of

differences we are interested in when comparing rates of return on assets (interest-rate
spreads, for example, are absolute differences).10 Second, and most importantly, since
the agricultural and natural-resource sectors represent a much larger share of GDP in

poor countries, the overestimate of the M P K when using the total capital share is
much more severe in such countries, and cross-country differences will once again be
inflated (both in absolute and in relative terms).

        Of course equation (1) holds (as long as there is only one sector) whether or not

non-reproducible capital enters the production function or not. The only thing that
changes is the interpretation of α. Hence, these considerations lead us to two possible
estimates of the M P K:

                                                          Y
(2)                                      M P KN = αw        ,
                                                          K
  10
     As an example, suppose that all countries have the same share of land and natural resources in
the total capital share, say 20%. Using the total-capital share instead of the reproducible-capital will
simply increase all the M P Ks by the same proportion. If the US’ “true” M P K is 8% and India’s
16% (a spread of 8 percentage points), the M P Ks computed with the total capital share are 10% and
20% (a spread of 10 percentage points).




                                                   8
and

                                                   Y
(3)                                 M P KL = αk      .
                                                   K

In these formulas, Y and K are, respectively, estimates of real output and the reproducible-

capital stock; αw is one minus the labor share (the standard measure of the capital
share); and αk is an estimate of the reproducible-capital share in income. The suffix

“N ” in the first measure is a mnemonic for “naive,” while the suffix “L” in the second

stands for “land and natural-resource corrected.”

       It is important to observe that, relative to alternative estimates in the literature,

this method of calculating M P K requires no functional form assumptions (other than
linear homogeneity), much less that we come up with estimates of human capital, TFP,
or other factors that affect a country’s M P K. Furthermore, the assumptions we do
make are typically shared by the other approaches to M P K estimation, so the set of

restrictions we impose is a strict subset of those imposed elsewhere. This calculation is
a useful basis for our other calculations because it encompasses the most conventional

set of assumptions in the growth literature.


II B     M P K Differentials in a Multi-Sector Model

The calculations suggested above are potentially biased because they ignore an impor-

tant fact – the price of capital relative to the price of consumption goods is higher in

poor countries than in rich countries. To see why this matters consider an economy
that produces J final goods. Each final good is produced using capital and other fac-

tors, which we don’t need to specify. The only technological restriction is that each

of the final goods is produced under constant returns to scale. The only institutional

restriction is that there is perfect competition in good and factor markets within each

                                             9
country. Capital may be produced domestically (in which case it is one of the J final
goods), imported, or both. Similarly, it does not matter whether the other final goods

produced domestically are tradable or not.
             Consider the decision by a firm or a household to purchase a piece of capital

and use it in the production of one of the final goods, say good 1. The return from
this transaction is

                                P1 (t)M P K1 (t) + Pk (t + 1)(1 − δ)
(4)                                                                  ,
                                               Pk (t)

where P1 (t) is the domestic price of good 1 at time t, Pk (t) is the domestic price of

capital goods, δ is the depreciation rate, and M P K1 is the physical marginal product
of capital in the production of good 1. When do we have frictionless international
capital markets? When the firms/households contemplating this investment in all
countries have access to an alternative investment opportunity, that yields a common

world gross rate of return R∗ . Abstracting for simplicity from capital gains, frictionless
international capital markets imply

                                    P1 M P K1
(5)                                           = R∗ − (1 − δ).
                                        Pk

Hence, frictionless international credit markets imply that the value of the marginal

product of capital in any particular final good, divided by the price of capital, is

constant across countries.

             To bring this condition to the data let us first note that total capital income
     P
is       j   Pj M P Kj Kj , where Kj is the amount of capital used in producing good j. If
capital is efficiently allocated domestically, we also have Pj M P Kj = P1 M P K1 , so total
                               P
capital income is P1 M P K1 j Kj = P1 M P K1 K, where K is the total capital stock in

operation in the country. Given that capital income is P1 M P K1 K, the capital share
                                        10
in income is α = P1 M P K1 K/(Py Y ) ,where Py Y is GDP evaluated at domestic prices.
Hence, the following holds:

                                       P1 M P K1   αPy Y
(6)                                              =
                                           Pk      Pk K

In other words, the multi-sector model recommends a measure of the marginal product
of capital that is easily backed out from an estimate of the capital share in income, α,

GDP at domestic prices, Py Y , and the capital-stock at domestic prices, Pk K. Compar-

ing this with the estimate suggested by the one-sector model (equation (1)) we see that

the difference lies in correcting for the relative price of final-to-capital goods, Py /Pk .

It should be clear that this correction is fundamental to properly assess the hypothesis
that international credit markets are frictionless.
        All of the above goes through whether or not reproducible capital is the only
recipient of non-labor income or not. Again, the only difference is in the interpretation

of the capital share α. Hence, we come to our third and fourth possible estimates of
the M P K:

                                                      αw Py Y
(7)                                  P M P KN =               ,
                                                       Pk K

and

                                                      αk Py Y
(8)                                   P M P KL =
                                                       Pk K

where Py /Pk is a measure of the average price of final goods relative to the price of
reproducible capital, and the prefix “P ” stands for “price-corrected.”11
  11
    Since in our model Pj M P Kj is equalized across sectors j, the physical M P K in any particular
sector will be an inverse function of the price of output in that sector. Since the relative price of
capital is high in poor countries, this is consistent with the conjecture of Hsieh and Klenow [2003]
that relative productivity in the capital goods producing sectors is low in poor countries.
                                                 11
        Notice that the one-sector based measures, M P KN and M P KL, retain some
interest even in the multi-sector context. In particular, one can show that

                                          αY     1
(9)                                          = P Yj /Y .
                                          K
                                                     j M P Kj



In words, the product of the capital share and real income, divided by the capital
stock, tends to increase when physical marginal products tend to be high on average

in the various sectors.12 Hence, the one-sector based measures offer some quantitative

assessment of cross-country differences in the average physical M P K.


II C      Data

Our data on Y , K, Py , and Pk come (directly or indirectly) from Version 6.1 of the
Penn World Tables (PWT, Heston, Summers and Aten [2004]). Briefly, Y is GDP in

purchasing power parity (PPP) in 1996. The capital stock, K, is constructed with
the perpetual inventory method from time series data on real investment (also from
the PWT) using a depreciation rate of 0.06. Following standard practice, we compute
the initial capital stock, K0 , as I0 /(g + δ), where I0 is the value of the investment

series in the first year it is available, and g is the average geometric growth rate for
the investment series between the first year with available data and 1970 (see Caselli

[2005] for more details).13 Py is essentially a weighted average of final good domestic
  12
     To obtain this expression start out by the definition of Py , which is
                                                  P
                                                     j Pj Yj
(10)                                        Py =             .
                                                      Y
                        αP Y
Then substitute Pj = M P Ky
                            jK
                                from the last equation in the text, and rearrange.
  13
     A potential bias arises if the depreciation rate δ differs across countries, perhaps because of
differences in the composition of investment, or because the natural environment is more or less
forgiving. In particular we will overestimate the capital stock of countries with high depreciation
rates, and therefore underestimate their M P K. However notice from equation (5) that countries with
a high depreciation rates should have higher M P Ks. In other words variation in δ biases both sides

                                                   12
prices, while Pk is a weighted average of capital good domestic prices. The list of final
and capital goods to be included in the measure is constant across countries. Hence,

Py /Pk is a summary measure of the prices of final goods relative to capital goods. As
many authors have already pointed out, capital goods are relatively more expensive in
poor countries, so the free capital flows condition modified to take account of relative

capital prices should fit the data better than the unmodified condition if the physical

M P K tends to be higher in poor countries.14

        The total capital share, αw is taken from Bernanke and Gurkaynak [2001], who

build upon and expand upon the influential work of Gollin [2002]. As mentioned, these

estimates compute the capital share as one minus the labor share in GDP. In turn, the
labor share is employee compensation in the corporate sector from the National Ac-
counts, plus a number of adjustments to include the labor income of the self-employed

and non-corporate employees.15

        Direct measures of reproducible capital’s share of output, αk , do not appear
to be available. However, a proxy for them can be constructed from data on wealth,

which has recently become available for a variety of countries from the World Bank

[2006]. These data split national wealth into natural capital, such as land and natural
resources, and reproducible capital. If total wealth equals reproducible capital plus
of (5) in the same direction.
   14
      See, e.g., Barro [1991], Jones [1994], and Hsieh and Klenow [2003] for further discussions of the
price data.
   15
      Bernanke and Gürkaynak use similar methods as Gollin, but their data set includes a few more
countries. The numbers are straight from Table X in the Bernanke and Gürkaynak paper. Their
preferred estimates are reported in the column labeled “Actual OSPUE,” and they are constructed by
assigning to labor a share of the Operating Surplus of Private Unincorporate Enterprises equal to the
share of labor in the corporate (and public) sector. We use these data wherever they are available.
When “Actual OSPUE” is not available we take the data from the column “Imputed OSPUE,” which
is constructed as “Actual OSPUE,” except that the OSPUE measure is estimated by breaking down
the sum of OSPUE and total corporate income by assuming that the share of corporate income in
total income is the same as the share of corporate labor in total labor. Finally, when this measure, is
also unavailable, we get the data from the “LF” column, which assumes that average labor income in
the non-corporate sector equals average labor income in the corporate sector. When we use Gollin’s
estimates we get very much the same results.

                                                  13
natural wealth, W = Pk K + L, then the payments to reproducible capital should be
Pk K ∗r, and payments to natural wealth should be L∗r. Reproducible capital’s share of

total capital income is therefore proportional to reproducible capital’s share of wealth
(since all units of wealth pay the same return).16 So,


(11)                                  αk = (Pk K/W ) ∗ αw .


We can therefore back out an estimate of αk from αw as estimated by Bernanke and

Gurkaynak [2001] and Pk K/W as estimated by the World Bank.

        Since the World Bank’s data on land and natural-resource wealth is by far the

newest and least familiar among those used in this paper, a few more words to describe
these data are probably in order. The general approach is to estimate the value of rents
from a particular form of capital and then capitalize this value using a fixed discount
rate. In most cases, the measure of rents is based on the value of output from that form

of capital in a given year. For subsoil resources, the World Bank also needs to estimate
the future growth of rents and a time horizon to depletion. For forest products, rents are

estimated as the value of timber produced (at local market prices where possible) minus
an estimate of the cost of production. Adjustments are made for sustainability based

on the volume of production and total amount of usable timberland. The rents to other
forest resources are estimated as fixed value per acre for all non-timber forest. Rents

from cropland are estimated as the value of agricultural output minus production costs.

Production costs are taken to be a fixed percentage of output, where that percentage

varies by crop. Pasture land is similarly valued. Protected areas are valued as if they
had the same per-hectare output as crop and pasture land, based on an opportunity cost

argument. Reproducible capital is calculated using the perpetual inventory method.
  16
    This requires the assumption that capital gains are identical for natural capital and reproducible
capital.

                                                 14
                                     Table I:
          Proportion of Different Types of Wealth in Total Wealth in 2000
                                                         Weighted   Corr w/
      Variable                Mean Stdev Median           Mean*   log(GDP)**
      Subsoil Resources       10.5  16.4   1.5             7.0        -0.13
      Timber                   1.7   2.6   0.8              0.9       -0.34
      Other Forest             2.2   5.4   1.1              0.3       -0.49
      Cropland                11.4  15.2   5.1             3.2        -0.73
      Pasture                  4.5   5.4   2.7              1.9       -0.00
      Protected Areas          1.9   2.5   0.3              1.4        0.01
      Urban Land              13.1   4.6  13.5             16.5        0.70
      Reproducible Capital    54.8  19.2  56.3             68.6        0.70

*Weighted by the total value of the capital stock.
** GDP is per worker.
Source: Authors calculations using data from World Bank [2006].

Due to data limitations, no good estimates of the value of urban land are available. A
very crude estimate values urban land at 24% of the value of reproducible capital.

       Summary statistics of the cross-country distribution of the shares of different

types of wealth in total wealth are reported in Table I. In the average country in our
sample, reproducible capital represents roughly one half of total capital, while various
forms of “natural” capital account for the other half. The proportion of reproducible
capital is highly correlated with log GDP per worker. All other types of capital (except

for urban land, which is calculated as a fraction of accumulated capital) are negatively
correlated with log GDP per worker. Cropland is particularly negatively correlated
with income. The weighted means are weighted by the total capital stock in each

country, so that they give the proportion of each type of capital in the total capital

stock of the World (as represented by our sample). The proportion of reproducible
capital is much higher in the weighted means, with almost 70% of total capital.

       Other data sources provide opportunities for checking the broad reliability of

these data. For the US, the OMB published an accounting of land and reproducible
                                          15
wealth (but not other natural resources) over time (Office of Management and Budget
[2005]). They find that the proportion of land in total capital varies between 20 and 26%

between 1960 and 2003, with no clear trend to the data. This range is consistent with
the World Bank estimate of 26% (when, for comparability with the OMB estimates,
one excludes natural resources other than land). Another check is from the sectorial

dataset on land and capital shares constructed by Caselli and Coleman [2001]. Our

approach to estimate the reproducible capital share in GDP implies a land share in

GDP in the US of 8%. According to Caselli and Coleman in the US the land share in

agricultural output is about 20%, and the land share in non-agriculture is about 6%.

Since the share of nonagriculture in GDP is in the order of 97%, these authors’ overall
estimate of the land share in the US is very close to ours.
        There are a number of studies from the 60’s and 70’s which perform similar

exercises on a variety of countries. Raymond W. Goldsmith collects some of these in
Goldsmith [1985]. He finds land shares in total capital in 1978 that average about 20%
across a group of mostly rich countries. With the exception of Japan at 51%,the figures

range from 12% to 27%.17 This range is once again broadly consistent with the World

Bank data.

        The data from Bernanke and Gurkaynak [2001] puts the heaviest constraints
on the sample size, so that we end up with 53 countries.18 The entire data set is

reported in Appendix Table VII. Capital per worker, k, the relative price Py /Pk , the

total capital share, and the reproducible capital’s share are also plotted against output

per worker, y, in Appendix Figures V, VI, VII, and VIII.
  17
     Japan is not similarly an outlier in the World Bank data. This may reflect the relatively crude
way that urban land values is estimated by the World Bank. Lacking a good cross country measure
of urban land value, they simply take urban land to be worth a fixed value of reproducible capital.
Given the population density of Japan this may substantially understate the value of Japanese urban
land.
  18
     For the calculations corrected for the reproducible capital share, we also lose Hong Kong.


                                                16
II D     M P K Results

In this section we present our four estimates of the M P K. To recap, the naive version,

M P KN , does not account for difference in prices of capital and consumption goods,
and also uses the total share of capital, not the share of reproducible capital. This

calculation is the simplest and will be used as a benchmark for the corrected versions.
M P KL is calculated using the share of reproducible capital rather than the share of

total capital. P M P KN is adjusted to account for differences in prices between capital
and consumption goods, but reverts to the total capital share. Finally P M P KL, the

“right” estimate, includes both the price adjustment and the natural capital adjust-
ment. These four different versions of the implied M P Ks are reported in Appendix

Table VII, and plotted against GDP per worker, y, in Figure I.
       The overall relationship between the naive estimate, M P KN , and income is
clearly negative. However, the non-linearity in the data cannot be ignored: there is a

remarkably neat split whereby the M P KN is highly variable and high on average in
developing countries (up to Malaysia), and fairly constant and low on average among
developed countries (up from Portugal). The average M P KN among the 29 lower

income countries is 27 percent, with a standard deviation of 9 percent. Among the 24
high income countries the average M P KN is 11 percent, with a standard deviation of

3 percent. Neither within the subsample of countries to the left of Portugal, nor in the

one to the right, there is a statistically significant relationship between the M P KN
and y (nor with log(y)).

       This first simple calculation implies that the aggregate marginal product of
capital is high and highly variable in poor countries, and low and fairly uniform in rich

countries. If we were to stop here, it would be tempting to conclude that capital flows

fairly freely among the rich countries, but not towards and among the poor countries.

This looks like a big win for the credit friction answer to the Lucas question.
                                            17
                           MPKN                                                     PMPKN
.5




                                                              .5
                SLV
                PRY
          CIV
.4




                                                              .4
              EGY BWA MUS
      COGBOL MAR
.3




                                                              .3
     BDI             ZAF
                    URY
             COL
              ECU TUN CHL                                                         URY
          PHL      VEN TTO                                                   SLVBWA CHL
                                                                            ECU
                 JOR MEX                                                   PRY
.2




                                                              .2
            PERDZA
          LKA                                HKG                       BOL COL                     SGP IRLHKG
          JAM CRI       MYS                                           CIV PER
                                                                        PHLMAR VEN MEXMUS
     ZMB                             SGP  IRL                                        TTO
                                                                                TUNZAFMYS KOR       ISR
                                                                                                     CAN NOR USA
                PAN             NZL
                           PRTKOR       AUS
                                        NLD
                                      ISR
                                       CAN  NOR                                JOR            NZL
                                                                                                GBR
                                                                                               ESP    AUS
                                                                                                      NLD
                                                                                                     DNK
                                 ESP
                                  GBR
                                  FIN DNK    ITA USA               ZMB JAM    PAN
                                                                            EGY          PRT    FIN        ITA
                                                                                                      AUT BEL
.1




                                                              .1
                                        AUT BEL                               DZA             JPN
                                                                                               SWECHEFRA
                            GRC JPN
                                  SWE  FRA
                                      CHE                           COGLKA CRI
                                                                   BDI                    GRC
0




                                                              0
     0                20000        40000          60000            0           20000        40000             60000
                      Real GDP per worker                                      Real GDP per worker


                           MPKL                                                      PMPKL
.5




                                                              .5
.4




                                                              .4




                SLV
.3




                                                              .3




                           MUS
                   BWA
.2




                                                              .2




             MAR
              EGY
             PRY JOR ZAF                                                     SLV
          PHL     TUNUMEX
                       RY                                                        BWA              SGP
          LKA
      COGJAM            CHL PRTKORESPSGP                                           URY MUS KOR     ISR
.1




                                                              .1




            PER                             IRL                                                        IRL
         BOL COL
        CIV     PAN
                DZA VENTTO
               CRI        MYS       GBR
                                  JPN
                                   SWE
                                          NLD
                                        ISR
                                         DNK
                                          AUT
                                          AUS
                                         FRA
                                    FIN CHE
                                         CAN
                                               ITA USA
                                              BEL
                                              NOR                       PHL
                                                                          PER
                                                                        JAM
                                                                           MAR
                                                                           PRY
                                                                           COL
                                                                               JOR   CHL PRT JPN
                                                                                   MEX
                                                                                    ZAF       ESP
                                                                                               GBRDNK
                                                                                               FIN
                                                                                               SWE
                                                                                TUN MYSGRC NZL CHE
                                                                              PAN
                                                                                                     NLD
                                                                                                     AUT
                                                                                                     AUS
                                                                                                    FRA
                                                                                                    CAN   ITA USA
                                                                                                         BEL
                                                                                                         NOR
              ECU             GRC NZL                                   LKA EGY
                                                                       BOL ECU    VENTTO
     BDI
     ZMB                                                              CIV
                                                                    COG
                                                                   ZMB       CRI
                                                                              DZA
                                                                   BDI
0




                                                              0




     0                20000        40000          60000            0           20000        40000             60000
                      Real GDP per worker                                      Real GDP per worker



                                               Figure I:
                                     The Marginal Product of Capital

             M P KN : naive estimate. M P KL : after correction for natural-capital.
         P M P KN : after correction for price differences. P M KL: after both corrections.
          Source: Heston et al. [2004], Bernanke and Gurkaynak [2001], and World Bank
                                   [2006]. Authors’ calculations.




                                                         18
       Once one accounts for prices and the share of natural capital a different story
emerges. Figure I shows that each of the adjustments reduces the variance of the

marginal product considerably and reduces the differences between the rich and poor
countries. Taking both adjustments together eliminates the variance almost completely
and the rich countries actually have a higher marginal product on average than the

poor countries. Table II summarizes the average marginal products for each of our

calculation for poor and rich countries. The differences between the poor and rich

                                    Table II:
                Average Return to Capital in Poor and Rich Countries

                                  Rich Countries Poor Countries
                     M P KN         11.4 (2.7)     27.2 (9.0)
                     M P KL          7.5 (1.7)     11.9 (6.9)
                     P M P KN       12.6 (2.5)     15.7 (5.5)
                     P M P KL        8.4 (1.9)      6.9 (3.7)

M P KN : naive estimate. M P KL : after correction for natural-capital.
P M P KN : after correction for price differences. P M P KL: after both corrections.
Rich (Poor): GDP at least as large (smaller than) Portugal.
Standard Deviations in Parentheses. Source: Authors’ calculations.

countries are significant for the first three rows of the table. For the case using both
corrections, the difference is only significant at the 10% level.

       Interestingly, with both adjustments there is a positive and significant relation-

ship between P M P KL and output within the low income countries. The very lowest

income countries in our sample have the lowest P M P KL values. This would be con-

sistent with a model where capital flows out of the country were forbidden, and where

some capital flows into the country were not responsive to the rate of return. This may
describe the poorest countries in our sample, where aid flows represent a significant

proportion of investment capital (and all of the inward flow of capital).



                                            19
III     Assessing the Costs of Credit Frictions

The existence of any cross-country differences in M P K suggests inefficiencies in the

world allocation of capital. How severe are these frictions? One possible way to answer
this question is to compute the amount of GDP the world fails to produce as a con-
sequence. In particular, we perform the counter-factual experiment of reallocating the

world capital stock so as to achieve M P K equalization under our various measures.
We then compare world output under this reallocation to actual world output. The

difference is a measure of the deadweight loss from the failure to equalize M P Ks.
       We stress that this is not a normative exercise: our capital reallocation is not a

policy proposal. The observed distribution of output is an equilibrium outcome given

certain distortions that prevent M P K equalization. The point of this exercise is to
assess the welfare losses the world experiences relative to a frictionless first best, not
that the first best is easily achievable by moving some capital around.
       While our M P K estimates are free of functional form assumptions, in order

to perform our counterfactual calculations me must now choose a specific production
function. We thus fall back on the standard Cobb-Douglas workhorse. Industry j in
country i has the production function


                                      β
(12)                         Yij = Zijij Kijαi (Xij Lij )1−αi −βij ,


where Zij is the quantity of natural capital, Kij the reproducible capital stock, Lij

the input of labor, βij is the share of natural capital in sector j in country i and

Xij is a summary measure of technology and is also sector and country specific. The

derivation below makes it clear that to pursue our calculations we must assume that
the reproducible-capital share in country i, αi , is the same across all sectors (though

it can vary across countries).
                                               20
        The marginal product of capital in sector j in country i is


                                               β
(13)                       M P Kij = αi Zijij Kijαi −1 (Xij Lij )1−αi −βij .


Taking into account the relative prices of capital and consumption goods, rates of

return within a country are equalized when

                         Pij     β
(14)      P M P Kij =        αi Zijij Kijαi −1 (Xij Lij )1−αi −βij = P M P Ki        j = 1...J.
                         Pk

Suppose now that capital was reallocated across countries in such a way that P M P Ki

took the same value, P M P K ∗ , in all countries. Assuming for the time being that Zij ,

and Lij are unchanged in response to our counterfactual reshuffling of capital (we will
check this is indeed the case later in the section), the new value of Kij , Kij∗ , satisfies19



                       Pij     β
(15)                       αi Zijij (Kij∗ )αi −1 (Xij Lij )1−αi −βij = P M P K ∗ .
                       Pk

        Dividing (15) by (14) we have

                                           µ              ¶ 1−α
                                                              1
                                               P M P Ki        i
(16)                              Kij∗ =                           Kij ,
                                               P M P K∗

which shows that capital increases or decreases by the same proportion in each sector.

        Earlier we made the conjecture that all adjustment to the equalization of P M P Ks

was through the capital stock, and not through reallocations of labor or natural cap-

ital. Under this conjecture, since the amount of capital per worker changes by the
  19
    For the remainder of this section, expressions relating to P M P K equalization can be simplified
to expressions for M P K equalization by assuming Pk = Py . Calculations will be performed for both
cases.


                                                   21
same factor in each sector, the marginal products of labor and natural capital must do
the same. Hence, even if labor is not a specific factor, as long as its allocation across

sectors depends on relative wages, there will be no reshuffling of workers across sectors.
In particular, our experiment is consistent with wage equalization across sectors, but
also with models in which inter-sectoral migration frictions imply fixed proportional

wedges among different sectors’ wages. The same is true of natural capital.
        We can now aggregate the sectoral capital stocks to the country level:

                                     X µ P M P Ki ¶ 1−αi                    µ               ¶ 1−α
                                                                1                               1
                      X                                                         P M P Ki        i
(17)        Ki∗   =       Kij∗   =                                  Kij =                           Ki
                      j               j
                                               P M P K∗                         P M P K∗


In order to close the model we need to impose a resource constraint. The resource
constraint is that the world sum of counter-factual capital stocks is equal to the existing
world endowment of reproducible capital, or

                            X                  X          µ               ¶ 1−α
                                                                              1
                                                               P M P Ki          i
(18)                                 Ki∗   =       Ki =                              Ki .
                                                               P M P K∗

Taking the values for P M P Ki calculated in the previous section, the only unknown in

(18) is P M P K ∗ , which can be solved for with a simple non-linear numerical routine.

To recap, P M P K ∗ is the common world rate of return to capital that would prevail if
the existing world capital stock were allocated optimally.20


III A       Counterfactual Capital Stocks

With the counterfactual world rate of return, P M P K ∗ , at hand we can use equation

(17) to back out each country’s assigned capital stock when rates of return are equal-
  20
    Removing the frictions that prevent P M P K equalization would almost certainly also lead to an
increase in the world aggregate capital stock. Our calculations clearly abstract from this additional
benefit, and are therefore a lower bound on the welfare cost of such frictions.


                                                          22
ized. As with our initial M P K calculations, four variations are calculated. The base
version, labeled M P KN , is calculated under the assumption that Pk = Py and uses the

total share of capital, not correcting for natural capital (i.e. it sets βij = 0). M P KL is
calculated using the share of reproducible capital rather than the share of total capital.
P M P KN allows for differences in prices. P M P KL includes both the price adjust-

ment and the natural capital adjustment. Figure II plots the resulting counter-factual

distributions of capital-labor ratios against the actual distribution. The solid lines are

45-degree lines. Table III summarizes the change in capital labor ratios under the

various calculations for poor and rich countries.

                                   Table III:
     Average Changes in Equilibrium Capital Stocks under M P K Equalization

                           Unweighted                    Weighted by Population
                Rich Countries Poor Countries        Rich Countries Poor Countries
   M P KN           -12.9%          274.5%               -19.3%         205.8%
   M P KL            -6.2%            86.6%               -5.6%          59.3%
   P M P KN          0.1%            71.8%                -4.9%          52.0%
   P M P KL          0.6%            -10.6%               1.4%          -14.5%

M P KN : naive estimate. M P KL : after correction for natural-capital.
P M P KN : after correction for price differences. P M P KL: after both corrections.
Rich (Poor): GDP at least as large (smaller than) Portugal.
Standard Deviations in Parentheses. Source: Authors’ calculations.

       Not surprisingly, under the naive M P K calculation, most developing countries

would be recipients of capital and the developed economies would be senders. The

magnitude of the changes in capital-labor ratios under this scenario are fairly spectac-
ular, with the average developing country experiencing almost a 300 percent increase.

In the average rich country the capital-labor ratio falls by 13 percent. These figures

remain in the same ball park when weighted by population. The average developing
country worker experiences a still sizable 206 percent increase in his capital endow-

ment. The average rich-country worker loses 19 percent of his capital allotment. The
                                        23
Counterfactual Capital per Worker




                                                                                           Counterfactual Capital per Worker
                                                      MPKN                                                                                      PMPKN
                          300




                                                                                                                     300
                                          BWA
                                                                                                                                                                    SGP
                                                                  HKG
                 200




                                                                                                            200
                                            MUS                                                                                                               HKG
                                        PRY                            SGP                                                                                                  NOR
                                                                             NOR                                                                                 CAN
                                           ECUVEN                                                                                                                 USA
                                                                                                                                                             ISRAUS
                                            URY
                                       SLV ZAF CHL
                                                MEX                NLD                                                                                           NLD ITA
          100




                                                                                                     100
                                                                 AUS
                                                        IRLNZL ISR  USA ITA
                                                                   CAN                                                                BWA
                                                                                                                                       URY            IRL KORESP DNK   BEL
                                                                                                                                                                     AUT
                                                                                                                                                                  FINFRA
                                                           KORESPDNKJPNAUT
                                                                         BEL                                                          ECUCHL             NZL
                                                                                                                                                      GBR SWE JPN          CHE
                                        MARTUN
                                            TTO MYS     GBR         FINFRA CHE
                                           JOR
                                            DZA     PRT       SWE                                                                         VEN
                                                                                                                                           MEXMYS PRT GRC
                                     COGCOL
                                       PHLPER           GRC                                                                        PRY MUS
                                                                                                                                     PER
                                                                                                                                       TTO
                                      EGY
                                      BOL    PAN
                                           CRI
                                         JAM                                                                                      SLV  ZAF
                                                                                                                                   COLTUN
                                                                                                                                        PAN
                                     CIV
                                      LKA                                                                                          MAR
                                                                                                                                  PHL JOR
                                                                                                                                       DZA
                                                                                                                                      CRI
                                     ZMB
                                    BDI                                                                                          BOL
                                                                                                                                 EGY
                                                                                                                                CIV
                                                                                                                                 LKA
                                                                                                                                ZMB
                                                                                                                                COG
                                                                                                                               BDI  JAM
   0




                                                                                              0
                                    0           50           100              150                                              0           50           100               150
                                             Capital per Worker (1000s)                                                                 Capital per Worker (1000s)
Counterfactual Capital per Worker




                                                                                           Counterfactual Capital per Worker



                                                      MPKL                                                                                       PMPKL
                          300




                                                                                                                     300



                                                                                                                                                                    SGP

                                                                        SGP
                 200




                                                                                                            200




                                           MUS

                                                                      NLD ITA                                                                                ISR
                                                                                                                                                                  USA ITA
                                                                                                                                                                 NLD   BEL NOR
                                          BWA              IRL KORESP
                                                                       USA
                                                                  ISR DNK   BEL NOR
                                                                           AUT
                                                                          JPN                                                                             KORESPDNKJPN
                                                                                                                                                                     AUT
          100




                                                                                                     100




                                                                    AUS                                                                               IRL      AUSFINFRA CHE
                                                                                                                                                                 CAN
                                       SLV ZAF MEX         GBR         FINFRA CHE
                                                                      CAN                                                                             GBR SWE
                                                       PRT       SWE                                                                              PRT
                                           JOR             GRCNZL                                                                     BWA
                                        MAR URY
                                           TUN CHL MYS                                                                                 MUS
                                                                                                                                       URY MEX
                                                                                                                                          CHL         GRC
                                                                                                                                                        NZL
                                        PRY
                                          PER
                                         JAM   VEN
                                             PAN                                                                                  SLVPER
                                                                                                                                      JOR     MYS
                                       PHL
                                        COL
                                      EGY
                                      LKA   TTO
                                            DZA
                                           CRI                                                                                     MAR
                                                                                                                                   PRY ZAF
                                                                                                                                        PAN
                                                                                                                                      TUN VEN
                                     COG
                                      BOL
                                     CIV
                                     ZMB   ECU                                                                                    PHL
                                                                                                                                 LKA
                                                                                                                                 EGY
                                                                                                                                 BOL
                                                                                                                                CIV
                                                                                                                                ZMB
                                                                                                                                COG JAM
                                                                                                                                   COL TTO
                                                                                                                                      ECU
                                                                                                                                       DZA
                                                                                                                                      CRI
                                    BDI                                                                                        BDI
   0




                                                                                              0




                                    0           50           100              150                                              0           50           100               150
                                             Capital per Worker (1000s)                                                                 Capital per Worker (1000s)



                                                                      Figure II:
                                          Counterfactual Capital per Worker with Equalized Returns to Capital

                                        M P KN : naive estimate. M P KL : after correction for natural-capital.
                                    P M P KN : after correction for price differences. P M KL: after both corrections.
                                     Source: Heston et al. [2004], Bernanke and Gurkaynak [2001], and World Bank
                                                              [2006]. Authors’ calculations.




                                                                                      24
scatter plots show that despite this substantial amount of reallocation, many devel-
oping countries would still have less physical-capital per worker, reflecting their lower

average efficiency levels (as reflected in the Xij s). Similarly, some of the rich countries
are capital recipients.
        However when we correct the M P K for the natural capital share and relative
prices once again rich-poor differences are dramatically reduced. Either the price ad-

justment or the natural capital adjustment taken alone reduces the averaged weighted

gain in the capital stock to about 50% in the poor countries while the rich countries

lose about 5% of their capital stock. With both corrections in place the poor countries

actually lose capital to the rich countries.


III B     Counterfactual Output

The effect on output of our counter-factual reallocation of the capital stock is easily
calculated. Substituting Kij∗ into the production function (12), we get

                                                                  µ              ¶ 1−α
                                                                                    αi

                         β                                            P M P K∗       i
(19)           Yij∗ =   Zijij (Kij∗ )αi (Xij Lij )1−αi −βij   =                          Yij .
                                                                      P M P Ki

Since all sectorial outputs go up by the same proportion, aggregate output also goes
up by the same proportion, and we have

                                            µ                 ¶ 1−α
                                                                 αi
                                                P M P K∗          i
(20)                                Yi∗ =                             Yi .
                                                P M P Ki

Hence, plugging values for αi , P M P Ki and P M P K ∗ we can back out the counterfac-

tual values of each country’s GDP under our various M P K equalization counterfactu-
als. These values are plotted in Figure III, again together with a 45-degree line. Table

IV summarizes the change in output per worker under the various calculations.

                                                    25
                                       MPKN                                                                        PMPKN
  20 40 60 80




                                                                              20 40 60 80
Counterfactual GDP




                                                                            Counterfactual GDP
                                                          HKG
                                BWA                                                                                                     HKG
                                      MUS                                                                                       SGP          USA
                                                                USA
                                                   SGP IRL                                                                             NOR
                                                                                                                                      IRL
                                                        NOR
                                                      AUS ITA                                                                      CAN
                                                                                                                                    AUS
                                                                                                                                  ISR
                                                                                                                                    NLD  ITA
                                                                                                                                        BEL
                             PRY                      NLD
                                                     CAN
                                                    ISR  BEL                                                                       DNK
                                                                                                                                    AUT
                                                 GBR DNK
                                                      AUT
                                                     FRA                                                      BWA             GBR  FRA
                                    URY
                                      CHL
                                     ZAF
                               SLV MEX         NZL
                                                ESP                                                                          ESP
                                                                                                                            NZL
                                                                                                                              FIN
                                                                                                                              SWECHE
                              ECU VEN  TTO   KOR FINCHE
                                                 SWE
                                               JPN
                                                                                                                URY
                                                                                                                  CHL     KOR
                                                                                                                            JPN
                                  TUN MYSPRT                                                                        MUS
                                           GRC                                                            ECU VEN   MYSPRT
                                                                                                                   TTO
                                                                                                                 MEX    GRC
                             MARJOR
                                DZA                                                                        SLV ZAF
                                                                                                         PRY
                             COL
                              EGY                                                                             TUN
                                                                                                             JOR
                            PER PAN
                               CRI                                                                       COL
                                                                                                         MAR
                                                                                                        PER PAN
                      COG PHL
                         BOL
                          JAM                                                                         PHLEGYDZA
                                                                                                           CRI
                       CIVLKA                                                                        BOL
                                                                                                   CIVLKA
                                                                                                      JAM
                     ZMB
                     BDI                                                                         ZMB
                                                                                                  COG
                                                                                                 BDI
         0




                                                                                     0
                     0            20          40                  60                             0             20          40                    60
                            Real GDP per worker (1000s)                                                  Real GDP per worker (1000s)


                                       MPKL                                                                        PMPKL
  20 40 60 80




                                                                              20 40 60 80
Counterfactual GDP




                                                                            Counterfactual GDP




                                                               USA                                                                SGP          USA
                                                   SGP
                                      MUS               IRLITA
                                                          BEL
                                                         NOR                                                                          IRLITA
                                                                                                                                        BEL
                                                                                                                                       NOR
                                                      NLD
                                                      AUS
                                                    ISR
                                                      AUT                                                                         ISR
                                                                                                                                    NLD
                                                                                                                                    AUS
                                                                                                                                   DNK
                                                                                                                                    AUT
                                                     DNK                                                                           CAN
                                                                                                                                   FRA
                                                 GBRFRA
                                                     CAN                                                                      GBRCHE
                                                 FINCHE
                                                ESP
                                                 SWE
                                               JPN
                                             KOR
                                               NZL
                                                                                                                             ESP
                                                                                                                              SWE
                                                                                                                              FIN
                                                                                                                            JPN
                                                                                                                          KOR
                                                                                                                            NZL
                                  BWA      PRT                                                                      MUSPRT
                               SLV
                                     ZAF
                                     MEXMYSGRC
                                      CHL
                                    URYTTO                                                                    BWA   MYS
                                                                                                                  CHL
                                                                                                                        GRC
                                 JOR
                                  TUN                                                                           URYTTO
                                                                                                                 MEX
                                                                                                                 ZAF
                                   VEN                                                                     SLV VEN
                                                                                                              TUN
                                                                                                             JOR
                             MAR
                             PRYPAN
                                DZA
                              EGY
                               CRI
                             COL                                                                         PRYPAN
                                                                                                            DZA
                              ECU
                            PER                                                                          MAR
                                                                                                           CRI
                                                                                                          EGY
                                                                                                         COL
                                                                                                          ECU
                                                                                                        PER
                          PHL
                          JAM
                          LKA
                         BOL                                                                          PHL
                                                                                                      LKA
                                                                                                      JAM
                                                                                                     BOL
                       CIV
                      COG
                     ZMB                                                                           CIV
                                                                                                  COG
                                                                                                 ZMB
                     BDI                                                                         BDI
         0




                                                                                     0




                     0            20          40                  60                             0             20          40                    60
                            Real GDP per worker (1000s)                                                  Real GDP per worker (1000s)



                                                       Figure III:
                                 Counterfactual Output with Equalized Returns to Capital

                         M P KN : naive estimate. M P KL : after correction for natural-capital.
                     P M P KN : after correction for price differences. P M KL: after both corrections.
                      Source: Heston et al. [2004], Bernanke and Gurkaynak [2001], and World Bank
                                               [2006]. Authors’ calculations.




                                                                       26
                                   Table IV:
   Average Changes in Equilibrium Output per Worker under M P K Equalization

                          Unweighted                             Weighted by Population
                Rich Countries Poor Countries                Rich Countries Poor Countries
   M P KN           -3.0%           76.7%                        -5.5%          58.2%
   M P KL           -0.7%           16.8%                        -1.0%          10.4%
   P M P KN          1.1%           24.7%                        -1.0%          17.4%
   P M P KL          0.7%            0.0%                         0.4%           -2.4%

M P KN : naive estimate. M P KL : after correction for natural-capital.
P M P KN : after correction for price differences. P M P KL: after both corrections.
Rich (Poor): GDP at least as large (smaller than) Portugal.
Standard Deviations in Parentheses. Source: Authors’ calculations.

        Changes in output in our counterfactual world are obviously consistent with the
result for capital-labor ratios. For our naive M P K measure, developing countries tend

to experience increases in GDP, and rich countries declines. The average developing
country experiences a 77 percent gain, while the average developed country only “loses”
3 percent. These numbers fall dramatically when adjustments are made for relative
capital prices and natural capital, with increases of less than 25% in both cases. For

the scenario with both adjustments, average output in the two groups is essentially

unchanged.


III C      Dead Weight Losses

To provide a comprehensive summary measure of the deadweight loss from the failure

of M P Ks to equalize across countries we compute the percentage difference between

world output in the counterfactual case and actual world output, or

                                     P        ∗
                                         i (Y
                                            Pi
                                                  − Yi )
(21)                                                     .
                                                  Yi



                                             27
                                   Table V:
                    World Output Gain from M P K Equalization

                                       No Price Adjustment With Price Adjustment
 No Natural-Capital Adjustment                2.9%                 1.4%
 With Natural-Capital Adjustment              0.6%                 0.1%

Source: Authors’ calculations.

This can be calculated for each of our measures of the marginal product. Table V

summarizes this calculation for our four calculation methods.

       For the naive M P K calculation, the result is in the order of 0.03, or world output
would increase by 3 percent if we redistributed physical capital so as to equalize the
M P K. This number is large. To put it in perspective, consider that the 28 developing

countries in our sample account for 12 percent of the aggregate GDP of the sample.
This result implies that the deadweight loss from inefficient allocation of capital is

in the order of one quarter of the aggregate (and hence also per capita) income of
developing countries.

       Once one adjusts for price differences and natural capital, however, the picture
changes substantially. The natural-capital adjustment alone reduces the dead weight
loss to less than a quarter of the base case. The price adjustment alone reduces the

dead weight losses by over half. Taken together, the dead weight loss is negligible.

       In these calculations, the natural-capital adjustment appears to be of greater

importance than the price adjustment. This was not the case for the M P K calcula-

tions. This is because the capital adjustment reduces the dead weight losses in two

ways. First, like the price adjustment, the natural-capital adjustment tends to reduce

the gap between rich and poor M P K. Unlike the price adjustment, the natural cap-
ital adjustment reduces the share of capital for our deadweight loss calculations for

all countries. This reduces the sensitivity of output to reallocations of capital and

                                            28
                                      Table VI:
                    Counterfactual M P K under M P K Equalization

                                         No Price Adjustment With Price Adjustment
 No Natural-Capital Adjustment                  12.7%                12.8%
 With Natural-Capital Adjustment                 8.0%                8.6%

Source: Authors’ calculations.

reduces the dead weight losses further. This can be seen in Table VI which lists the

counter-factual M P K for each of our cases.

       The main implication of our results thus far is that given the observed pattern
of the relative price of investment goods and accounting for differences in the share
of reproducible capital across countries, a fully integrated and frictionless world cap-

ital market would not produce an international allocation of capital much different
from the observed one. Similarly, as shown in Figure III, once capital is reallocated

across countries so as to equalize the rate of return to reproducible-capital investment
(corrected for price differences and using the proper measure of capital’s share), the

counter-factual world income distribution is very close to the observed one. Hence, it
is not primarily capital-market segmentation that generates low capital-labor ratios in
developing countries. In the next section we expand on this theme.



IV      Explaining Differences in Capital-Labor Ratios

Since we find essentially no difference in (properly measured) M P Ks between poor
and rich countries, we end up siding with Lucas on the (un)importance of international

credit frictions as a source of differences in capital-labor ratios. But our results also call

for some qualifications to Lucas’ preferred explanation, namely that rich countries had

a greater abundance of factors complementary to reproducible capital, or higher levels
of TFP. These factors certainly play a role, but other important proximate causes
                                        29
are the international variation on the relative price of capital and the international
variation in the reproducible-capital share.
        We cannot accurately apportion the relative contribution of prices, capital
shares and other (Lucas) factors without data on each sector’s price Pij , efficiency,

Xij , and natural-capital share, βij . But a rough approximation to a decomposition can
be produced by focusing on a very special case, in which each country produces only

one output good. In this example, clearly, most countries import their capital.21 With

this (admittedly very strong) assumption, we can rearrange equation (15) to read


(22)                                         ki∗ = Πi x Λi ,


where

                                         µ                     ¶ 1−α
                                                                   1
                                                 αi    Py,i                i
(23)                              Πi =               ∗
                                                                               ,
                                              P M P K Pk,i

and

                                         h                         i 1−α
                                                                       1
                                                        1−αi −βi
(24)                              Λi =       ziβi   (Xi )              i
                                                                               ,


where ki∗ is the ratio of reproducible-capital to labor and zi is the ratio of natural-

capital to labor. The first term captures the effect of variation in relative prices and

capital shares on the capital-labor ratio. The second term captures the traditional

complementary factors identified by Lucas. In the simplest case where αi and the price

ratio are assumed to be the same in all countries, all the variance of capital per worker
in a world with perfect mobility would be due to differences in Λ.

        In equation (22) the term Πi is available from our previous calculations, so we
  21
    As recently emphasized by Hsieh and Klenow [2003], the absolute price of capital does not covary
with income.
                                                       30
can , back out the term Λi as ki∗ /Πi . Following Klenow and Rodriguez-Clare [1997] we
can then take the log and variance of both sides to arrive at the decomposition:


(25)      var [log(k ∗ )] = var [log(Π)] + var [log(Λ)] + 2 ∗ cov [log(Π), log(Λ)] .


The variance of log(k ∗ ) for our P M P KL case is 2.46, the variance of log(Π) is 0.82,
the variance of log(Λ) is 0.61, and the covariance term is 0.52. If we apportion the

covariance term across Π and Λ equally this suggests that 54% of the variance in k ∗ is

due to differences in Π and 46% is due to differences in Λ. Each obviously plays a large

role and they are clearly interconnected (the simple correlation between them is 0.73).

This analysis can also be done weighting the sample by population. The results are
very similar with about 50% attributed to each of Π and Λ. It is also possible to look
within Π to determine the relative importance of variation in the share of reproducible
capital and relative capital prices. The result of this variance decomposition suggests

that they are of roughly equal importance.

       These results should come as no large surprise. Hsieh and Klenow [2003] argue

that differences in the price ratio are due to relatively low productivity in the capital
producing sectors in developing countries. Since Λ in our formulation is comprised of

an amalgam of human capital and total factor productivity, it should not be surprising

that low Λ correlates with an unfavorable price ratio. Similarly, the proportion of
output in land and natural resources will tend to be larger in poor countries, simply

because they produce less total output. With rising incomes we would expect to see

that proportion fall. The ultimate cause of differences in capital per worker may
therefore be productivity differences if productivity differences are the ultimate cause

of differences in capital costs and the share of capital. However, failure to account for

these factors will falsely suggest that financial frictions play a large role.

                                             31
V      Time Series Results

In this section we attempt a brief look at the evolution over time of our deadweight

loss measures. The results should be taken with great caution for two reasons. First,
they are predicated on estimates of the capital stock. Since the capital stocks are a
function of time series data on investment, the capital stock numbers become increas-

ingly unreliable as we proceed backward in time. Second, our estimates of capital’s
share of income are from a single year, so changes over time are not reflected. This is

a particular problem in the case of the calculations corrected for natural capital. The
share of natural resources was particularly volatile during this period and this is not

properly accounted for in the results.

        With these important caveats, Figure IV displays the time series evolution of the
world’s deadweight loss from M P K differentials. We find little – or perhaps a slightly
increasing – long-run trend in the deadweight loss from failure to equalize M P KN .
Once prices are accounted for, however, it appears that the size of the deadweight

losses have fallen somewhat over time. Adding in the correction for natural capital
causes the trend to be clearly downward. This provides tentative evidence that the
deadweight loss from failure to equalize financial returns – the cost of credit frictions
– has fallen somewhat over time. This latter result is consistent with the view that
                                                                         22
world financial markets have become increasingly integrated.




  22
    The acceleration in the decline of the deadweight losses during the 1980s may reflect historically
low M P Ks in developing countries during that decade’s crisis. If M P Ks in poor countries were low
the cost of capital immobility would have been less.
                                                 32
3
2
1
0




    1970          1975             1980             1985            1990             1995
                                             year

                                      MPKN                  PMPKN
                                      MPKL                  PMPKL


                                      Figure IV:
           The Dead Weight Loss of M P K Differentials (percent of world GDP)

         M P KN : naive estimate. M P KL : after correction for natural-capital.
     P M P KN : after correction for price differences. P M KL: after both corrections.
      Source: Heston et al. [2004], Bernanke and Gurkaynak [2001], and World Bank
                               [2006]. Authors’ calculations.




                                            33
VI      Conclusions

Macroeconomic data on aggregate output, reproducible capital stocks, final-good prices

relative to reproducible-capital prices, and the share of reproducible capital in GDP
are remarkably consistent with the view that international financial markets do a very
efficient job at allocating capital across countries. Developing countries are not starved

of capital because of credit-market frictions. Rather, the proximate causes of low
capital-labor ratios in developing countries are that these countries have low levels

of complementary factors, they are inefficient users of such factors (as Lucas [1990]
suspected), their share of reproducible capital is low, and they have high prices of

capital goods relative to consumption goods.

       As a result, increased aid flows to developing countries are unlikely to have
much impact on capital stocks and output, unless they are accompanied by a return to
financial repression, and in particular to an effective ban on capital outflows in these
countries. Even in that case, increased aid flows would be a move towards inefficiency,

and not increased efficiency, in the international allocation of capital.



LSE, CEPR, and NBER
Dartmouth College




                                           34
References

Alfaro, L., S. Kalemli-Ozcam, and V. Volosovych, “Why Doesn’t Capital Flow from Rich

    to Poor Countries? An Empirical Investigation,” unpublished, Harvard University,
    2003.

Banerjee, A. and E. Duflo, “Growth Theory through the Lens of Development Eco-
    nomics,” in P. Aghion and S. Durlauf, eds.,     Handbook of Economic Growth,

    North-Holland Press (2005).

Barro, R., “Economic growth in a Cross-Section of Countries,” Quarterly Journal of
    Economics, CVI (1991), 407–443.

Bernanke, B.S. and R.S. Gurkaynak, “Is Growth Exogenous? Taking Mankiw, Romer,
    and Weil Seriously,” in B.S. Bernanke and K. Rogoff, eds., NBER Macroeconomics

    Annual 2001 , MIT Press, Cambridge (2001).

Caselli, F, “Accounting for Cross-Country Income Differences,” in P. Aghion and
    S. Durlauf, eds., Handbook of Economic Growth, North-Holland Press (2005).

Caselli, F. and W.J. Coleman, “The U.S. Structural Transformation and Regional Con-
    vergence: A Reinterpretation,” Journal of Political Economy,       CIX (2001),

    584–616.

Chari, W., P. J. Kehoe, and E. R. McGrattan, “The Poverty of Nations: A Quantitative

    Exploration,” Working Paper 5414, National Bureau of Economic Research, 1996.

Cohen, D. and M. Soto, “Why Are Poor Countries Poor? A Message of Hope which

    Involves the Resolution of a Becker/Lucas Paradox,” Working Paper 3528, CEPR,

    2002.


                                        35
Goldsmith, Raymond W.,      Comparative National Balance Sheets (The University of
    Chicago Press, 1985).

Gollin, D., “Getting Income Shares Right,” Journal of Political Economy, CX (2002),
    458–474.

Gourinchas, P-O. and O. Jeanne, “The Elusive Gains from International Financial Inte-

    gration,” Working Paper No. 9684, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2003.

Heston, A., R. Summers, and B. Aten, “Penn World Table Version 6.1,” October 2004,

    Center for International Comparisons at the University of Pennsylvania (CICUP),

    2004.

Hsieh, C-T. and P.J. Klenow, “Relative Prices and Relative Prosperity,” Working Paper
    No. 9701, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2003.

Jones, C. I., “Economic Growth and the Relative Price of Capital,” Journal of Mone-
    tary Economics, XXXIV (1994), 359–382.

Klein, P. and G. Ventura, “Do Migration Restrictions Matter?,” Manuscript, University
    of Western Ontario, 2004.

Klenow, P.J. and A. Rodriguez-Clare, “The Neoclassical Revival in Growth Economics:

    Has It Gone Too Far?,” in B.S. Bernanke and J.J. Rotemberg, eds.,         NBER

    Macroeconomics Annual 1997 , MIT Press, Cambridge (1997).

Lane, P., “Empirical Perspectives on Long-Term External Debt,” unpublished, Trinity
    College, 2003.

Lucas, R. E. Jr., “Why Doesn’t Capital Flow from Rich to Poor Countries?,” American

    Economic Review , LXXX (1990), 92–96.

                                         36
Mankiw, G., “The Growth of Nations,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,         I
    (1995), 275–326.

Mulligan, Casey B., “Capital, Interest, and Aggregate Intertemporal Substitution,”
    Working Paper 9373, NBER, 2002.

Office of Management and Budget, “Analytical Perspectives, Budget of the United

    States Government, Fiscal Year 2005,” Manuscript, Executive Office of The Pres-

    ident of the United States, 2005.

Reinhart, C. M. and K. S. Rogoff, “Serial Default and the ”Paradox” of Rich-to-Poor

    Capital Flows,” American Economic Review , XCIV (2004), 53–58.

Stulz, R., “The Limits of Financial Globalization,” Working Paper 11070, NBER, 2005.

Taylor, Alan M., “Argentina and the World Capital Market: Saving, Investment, and In-
    ternational Capital Mobility in the Twentieth Century,” Journal of Development
    Economics, LVII (1998), 147–184.

World Bank, Where is The Wealth of Nations? (The World Bank, 2006).




                                         37
                                                                                           NOR
           150000




                                                                                   CHE

                                                                                               BEL
                                                                                                ITA
                                                                       JPN     SGPAUT
                                                                                 FRA
                                                                         FIN                          USA
                                                                                    NLD
                                                                                   CAN
                                                                                   DNK
                                                                                    AUS
                                                                                                HKG
                                                                        ESP
               100000




                                                                         SWE ISR
   Capital Per Worker




                                                                   KOR NZL
                                                              GRC            GBR         IRL

                                                             PRT
50000




                                                      MYS
                                                 MEX
                                               VEN CHL
                                         PAN
                                     ECU
                                         DZA      ZAFTTO
                                             BWAURY
                                           JOR
                                             TUN
                                                       MUS
                                   PER CRI
                                JAM MAR
                                PHL COL
                                     PRY
                                       SLV
                                LKA EGY
                              BOL
                          COG
                         ZMB
                        BDI CIV
           0




                        0                    20000                 40000                               60000
                                                 Real GDP per worker


                                                     Figure V:
                                                 Capital per Worker

                                           Source: Penn World Tables 6.1




                                                        38
                                                                                               CHE
                                                                                                 CAN
                                                                                               ISR
                                                                                           FIN
                   1.2




                                                                                           SWESGPFRA
                                                                                                          BEL   USA
                                                                                         JPN       DNK   NOR
Price of Output Relative To Capital




                                                                                     KOR
                                                                                          ESPGBR    AUS ITA
                                                                                                   AUT
                                                                                  GRC    NZL       NLDIRL
                             1




                                                                                 PRT
                                                                 URYCHL                                   HKG
                                                    PER PAN
                                                      ECU
                                                                        MYS
                   .8




                                          ZMB                     MEX
                                                                VEN
                                                  PHL
                                                        COL   BWA
                                                                      TTO
          .6




                                                 JAM
                                                BOL
                                                        CRI JOR
                                                      PRY
                                                        SLV TUN
                                                  LKA MARDZA    ZAF
                                            CIV                         MUS
.4




                                      BDI               EGY
                                          COG
                   .2




                                      0                        20000                 40000                       60000
                                                                   Real GDP per worker


                                                                      Figure VI:
                                                                     Relative Prices

                                                              Source: Penn World Tables 6.1




                                                                            39
              .6




                                                 ECU   BWA
                                  COG
                                                PRY
                         .5
   Total Capital’s Share




                                                           VEN                               SGP
                                                             MEX
                                           PER
                                                             MUS                                        HKG
                                               SLV
                                             MAR       URY
                                        PHL              CHL
            .4




                                        JAM
                                                 DZA                                                  NOR
                                                    TUN ZAF
                                                  JOR
                                             COL                                KOR
                                                             MYS
                                      BOL                                             NZL
                                                                                       ESP      NLD
                                    CIV                                               JPN      CAN
                                                                                                 AUS
                                                           TTO
.3




                                                                                             ISRAUT
                                                                                        FIN    DNK      ITA
                                  ZMB                                     PRT
                                                  CRIPAN                                           IRL
                                                                                               FRA     BEL    USA
                              BDI                                                        GBR
                                                                                             CHE
                                                 EGY                                    SWE
                                          LKA
                                                                           GRC
              .2




                              0                            20000                 40000                         60000
                                                               Real GDP per worker


                                                                Figure VII:
                                                       Total Capital’s Share of Income

                                        Source: Penn World Tables 6.1, Bernanke and Gurkaynak [2001]




                                                                     40
               .4




                                                                                                SGP


                                                       BWA          MUS
Reproducable Capital’s Share
                         .3




                                                SLV
                                                                                   KOR
                                         JAM         JOR     MEX                         JPN
                                                                                          ESP      NLD
                                             MAR
                                           PER                                                  ISRAUT NOR
                                         PHL                  ZAF                                          ITA
                                                                                                  DNK
            .2




                                                                             PRT           FIN            BEL
                                               PRY     TUNURY                                     FRA
                                   COG                                                      GBR CHEAUSIRL        USA
                                                                 CHLMYS                    SWE CAN
                                                     PAN                      GRC
                                         LKA
                                               COLDZA      VEN                           NZL
                                                CRI
 .1




                                               EGY
                                        BOL    ECU                TTO
                                   ZMBCIV

                               BDI
               0




                               0                           20000                 40000                            60000
                                                               Real GDP per worker


                                                             Figure VIII:
                                                 Reproducable Capital’s Share of Income

                    Source: Penn World Tables 6.1, Bernanke and Gurkaynak [2001], World Bank [2006],
                                                   author’s calculations




                                                                        41
                                                    Table VII:
                                      Data and Implied Estimates of the M P K

             Country     wbcode        y         k    αw     αk    Py /Pk   M P KN   P M P KN   M P KL   P M P KL
            Australia      AUS    46,436   118,831   0.32   0.18    1.07     0.13       0.13     0.07      0.08
              Austria      AUT    45,822   135,769   0.30   0.22    1.06     0.10       0.11     0.07      0.08
             Burundi        BDI    1,226     1,084   0.25   0.03    0.30     0.28       0.08     0.03      0.01
             Belgium       BEL    50,600   141,919   0.26   0.20    1.15     0.09       0.11     0.07      0.08
              Bolivia      BOL     6,705     7,091   0.33   0.08    0.60     0.31       0.19     0.08      0.05
           Botswana       BWA     18,043    27,219   0.55   0.33    0.66     0.36       0.24     0.22      0.14
             Canada        CAN    45,304   122,326   0.32   0.16    1.26     0.12       0.15     0.06      0.07
         Switzerland       CHE    44,152   158,504   0.24   0.18    1.29     0.07       0.09     0.05      0.07
                Chile      CHL    23,244    36,653   0.41   0.16    0.90     0.26       0.24     0.10      0.09
        Cote d’Ivoire       CIV    4,966     3,870   0.32   0.06    0.41     0.41       0.17     0.08      0.03
               Congo      COG      3,517     5,645   0.53   0.17    0.23     0.33       0.07     0.11      0.02
            Colombia       COL    12,178    15,251   0.35   0.12    0.66     0.28       0.19     0.10      0.06
          Costa Rica        CRI   13,309    23,117   0.27   0.11    0.54     0.16       0.08     0.06      0.03




42
            Denmark       DNK     45,147   122,320   0.29   0.20    1.13     0.11       0.12     0.08      0.08
              Algeria      DZA    15,053    29,653   0.39   0.13    0.47     0.20       0.09     0.06      0.03
             Ecuador       ECU    12,664    25,251   0.55   0.08    0.84     0.28       0.23     0.04      0.03
               Egypt       EGY    12,670     7,973   0.23   0.10    0.30     0.37       0.11     0.16      0.05
                Spain       ESP   39,034   110,024   0.33   0.24    1.06     0.12       0.12     0.09      0.09
             Finland        FIN   39,611   124,133   0.29   0.20    1.23     0.09       0.11     0.06      0.08
               France      FRA    45,152   134,979   0.26   0.19    1.20     0.09       0.10     0.06      0.08
     United Kingdom        GBR    40,620    87,778   0.25   0.18    1.07     0.12       0.12     0.08      0.09
              Greece       GRC    31,329    88,186   0.21   0.15    1.03     0.07       0.08     0.05      0.05
          Hong Kong       HKG     51,678   114,351   0.43           0.90     0.19       0.18
              Ireland       IRL   47,977    85,133   0.27   0.18    1.05     0.15       0.16     0.10      0.11
                Israel      ISR   43,795   108,886   0.30   0.22    1.25     0.12       0.15     0.09      0.11
                 Italy      ITA   51,060   139,033   0.29   0.21    1.08     0.11       0.11     0.08      0.08
             Jamaica       JAM     7,692    17,766   0.40   0.26    0.60     0.17       0.10     0.11      0.07
              Jordan       JOR    16,221    25,783   0.36   0.25    0.55     0.23       0.12     0.16      0.09
               Japan       JPN    37,962   132,953   0.32   0.26    1.12     0.09       0.10     0.07      0.08
                                                             Table VII:
                                            Data and Implied Estimates of the M P K (cont.)

                       Country     wbcode         y         k    αw     αk    Py /Pk   M P KN     P M P KN     M P KL     P M P KL
             Republic of Korea       KOR     34,382    98,055   0.35   0.27    1.09     0.12         0.13       0.09        0.10
                     Sri Lanka       LKA      7,699     8,765   0.22   0.14    0.47     0.19         0.09       0.12        0.06
                      Morocco       MAR      11,987    15,709   0.42   0.23    0.49     0.32         0.16       0.18        0.09
                        Mexico      MEX      21,441    44,211   0.45   0.25    0.73     0.22         0.16       0.12        0.09
                     Mauritius       MUS     26,110    29,834   0.43   0.33    0.42     0.38         0.16       0.29        0.12
                      Malaysia       MYS     26,113    52,856   0.34   0.16    0.81     0.17         0.14       0.08        0.06
                   Netherlands       NLD     45,940   122,467   0.33   0.24    1.03     0.12         0.13       0.09        0.09
                       Norway       NOR      50,275   161,986   0.39   0.22    1.14     0.12         0.14       0.07        0.08
                  New Zealand        NZL     37,566    95,965   0.33   0.12    1.04     0.13         0.13       0.05        0.05
                       Panama        PAN     15,313    31,405   0.27   0.15    0.87     0.13         0.11       0.07        0.06
                          Peru       PER     10,240    22,856   0.44   0.22    0.89     0.20         0.18       0.10        0.09
                    Philippines      PHL      7,801    12,961   0.41   0.21    0.68     0.25         0.17       0.13        0.09




43
                      Portugal       PRT     30,086    71,045   0.28   0.20    0.97     0.12         0.12       0.09        0.08
                     Paraguay        PRY     12,197    14,376   0.51   0.19    0.53     0.43         0.23       0.16        0.08
                     Singapore       SGP     43,161   135,341   0.47   0.38    1.19     0.15         0.18       0.12        0.14
                   El Salvador        SLV    13,574    11,606   0.42   0.28    0.51     0.49         0.25       0.32        0.17
                        Sweden      SWE      40,125   109,414   0.23   0.16    1.19     0.08         0.10       0.06        0.07
          Trinidad and Tobago        TTO     24,278    30,037   0.31   0.08    0.62     0.25         0.15       0.06        0.04
                        Tunisia      TUN     17,753    25,762   0.38   0.19    0.52     0.26         0.14       0.13        0.07
                      Uruguay        URY     20,772    29,400   0.42   0.18    0.92     0.30         0.27       0.13        0.12
                 United States       USA     57,259   125,583   0.26   0.18    1.16     0.12         0.14       0.08        0.09
                     Venezuela       VEN     19,905    38,698   0.47   0.13    0.72     0.24         0.17       0.07        0.05
                  South Africa       ZAF     21,947    27,756   0.38   0.21    0.48     0.30         0.14       0.17        0.08
                        Zambia       ZMB      2,507     4,837   0.28   0.06    0.74     0.15         0.11       0.03        0.02

     y: GDP per worker; k: reproducible capital per worker; αw : total capital share; αk : reproducible capital share; Py : final goods
     price level; Pk : reproducible capital price level; M P KN : naive estimate of the M P K; M P KL: corrected for the share of natural-
     capital; P M P KN : corrected for relative prices; P M P KL: both corrections. Authors’ calculations using data from Heston et al.
     [2004], Bernanke and Gurkaynak [2001], and World Bank [2006].
