                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       THE DIFFUSION OF MEXICAN IMMIGRANTS
                     DURING THE 1990s: EXPLANATIONS AND IMPACTS

                                               David Card
                                             Ethan G. Lewis

                                          Working Paper 11552
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w11552


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 2005




We are grateful to Elizabeth Cascio and Christian Dustmann for helpful discussion, and to George Borjas,
Lawrence Katz, and other seminar participants for comments and suggestions. Card’s research was
supported by a grant from the National Institute of Child Health and Development. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

©2005 by David Card and Ethan G. Lewis. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
The Diffusion of Mexican Immigrants During the 1990s: Explanations and Impacts
David Card Ethan G. Lewis
NBER Working Paper No. 11552
August 2005
JEL No. J61

                                           ABSTRACT



Mexican immigrants were historically clustered in a few cities, mainly in California and Texas.

During the past 15 years, however, arrivals from Mexico established sizeable immigrant

communities in many "new" cities. We explore the causes and consequences of the widening

geographic diffusion of Mexican immigrants. A combination of demand-pull and supply push

factors explains most of the inter-city variation in inflows of Mexican immigrants over the 1990s,

and also illuminates the most important trend in the destination choices of new Mexican immigrants

– the move away from Los Angeles. Mexican inflows raise the relative supply of low-education

labor in a city, leading to the question of how cities adapt to these shifts. One mechanism, suggested

by the Hecksher Olin model, is shifting industry composition. We find limited evidence of this

mechanism: most of the increases in the relative supply of low-education labor are absorbed by

changes in skill intensity within narrowly defined industries. Such adjustments could be readily

explained if Mexican immigrant inflows had large effects on the relative wage structures of different

cities. As has been found in previous studies of the local impacts of immigration, however, our

analysis suggests that relative wage adjustments are small.




David Card                                            Ethan G. Lewis
Department of Economics                               Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia
549 Evans Hall, #3880                                 Research Department
UC Berkeley                                           Ten Independence Mall
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880                               Philadelphia, PA 19106
and NBER                                              ethan.g.lewis@phil.frb.org
card@econ.berkeley.edu
        During the 1990's the number of Mexican immigrants living in the United States rose by

nearly five million people. This rapid growth is illustrated by the solid line in Figure 1, which shows

the number of working-age Mexican immigrants recorded in the 2000 Census by year of arrival in

the U.S.1 At the time of the Census Mexican immigrants represented more than 4 percent of the

working age population, nearly double their proportion in 1990. The surge in arrivals from Mexico

was accompanied by a remarkable shift in their residence patterns. In previous decades nearly 80

percent of Mexican immigrants settled in either California or Texas. Over the 1990s, however, this

fraction fell rapidly. As shown by the dotted line in Figure 1, less than one-half of the most recent

Mexican immigrants were living in California or Texas in 2000. Many cities that had very few

Mexican immigrants in 1990 – including Atlanta, Raleigh-Durham, Portland, and Seattle – gained

significant Mexican populations. The arrival of Mexican immigrants to Southeastern cities like

Atlanta is especially interesting because of their potential impact on the labor market prospects of

less-skilled African Americans.

        In this paper we explore potential explanations for the widening geographic distribution of

Mexican immigrants, and examine the impacts of Mexican immigration on local labor markets across

the country. We begin with a descriptive overview of the location choices and other characteristics

of recent Mexican immigrants. Post-1990 Mexican immigrants are similar to earlier cohorts in their

levels of education and English-speaking ability. They differ mainly in their destinations: those who

arrived in the 1990s were less likely to move to Los Angeles (the traditional destination of about

one-third of all Mexican immigrants) and more likely to move to cities in the Southeast, Northwest,

and Mountain states. There is also a shift in industry of employment, with fewer of the recent

arrivals employed in agriculture, and offsetting increases in the fractions employed in construction



        1
          The jagged nature of the line reflects the tendency of Census respondents to report that they arrived
5, 10, 15,... years ago.
(for men) and retail trade (for women).

       We then go on to a more formal analysis of the role of “supply push” and “demand pull”

factors in explaining the diffusion of Mexican immigrants across U.S. cities in the 1990s. Supplies of

potential immigrants were rising over the decade, driven by population growth, falling real wages,

and persistently weak economic conditions in Mexico.2 Historically, new immigrants tend to follow

earlier immigrants from the same country. Thus, we use information on the fraction of Mexican

immigrants in a city in 1980 and 1990 as predictors of the “supply push” component of immigrant

flows. On the demand side, we use predicted county-level employment growth over the 1990s,

extrapolated from trends in the 1980s, as a measure of exogenous employment demand growth.

Both factors are significant predictors of Mexican immigrant inflows, with supply push factors

explaining 75 percent of the inter-city variation in inflow rates over the 1990s, and demand pull

factors explaining another 10 percent.3 By comparison, the relative wages and employment rates of

Mexican immigrants in a city in 1990 are uncorrelated with subsequent inflows.

       The remainder of the paper is focused on understanding how inflows of Mexican

immigrants have affected local labor market conditions. We begin by showing that arrivals of

Mexicans lead to increases in the relative supply of less-educated labor in the local economy. There

is no evidence that the relationship is biased by the endogeneity of Mexican inflows, or that inflows

of recent Mexican immigrants cause outflows of other groups that offset their effects on the skill

distribution in the local economy. We then examine the role of changing industry structure in

explaining the absorption of relatively unskilled population inflows. The Hecksher-Olin (HO)

model of trade suggests that shifts in the relative supply of unskilled labor can be absorbed by


       2
           Real wages in Mexico were about 20 percent lower in 2000 than in 1990. See OECD (2000, p. 32).
       3
           The two components are almost orthogonal so their contributions “add up”.

                                                      2
expanding employment in low-skill-intensive industries, with little or no change in relative wages of

unskilled workers. We develop a simple decomposition that allows us to characterize the fraction of

the excess supply of dropout labor in a local market that has been absorbed by HO-style industry

shifts. We conclude that between-industry shifts account for only a small fraction of the overall

absorption of the extra dropout labor created by Mexican inflows.

        In view of this finding, we turn to the impact of Mexican immigration on the relative wage

structure. We construct estimates of the wage gap in each city between native men with exactly 12

years of schooling and those who did not complete high school, and relate this gap to the relative

supply of dropouts in the local market. Consistent with most of the existing literature (see, e.g.,

Card, 2004) we find that increases in the relative supply of dropouts induced by Mexican

immigration inflows have little effect on relative wages of less-educated natives. The absence of a

large effect on relative wages is especially puzzling given that most of the absorption of the excess

supply of dropout labor created by Mexican immigrant inflows arises within narrowly defined (3-

digit) industries. Evidently, the adjustments needed to accommodate differences in the relative

supply of dropout labor in different markets occur without the intervening mechanism of relative

wage changes. The data do not allow us to tell whether this is because high school dropouts and

high school graduates are nearly perfect substitutes, or as a result of other adjustment processes such

as endogenous technical change.



I. An Overview of Mexican Immigration in the 1990s

a. Census Data

        Our empirical analysis is based on public use data from the 1980, 1990, and 2000 Censuses.

The primary advantages of these data files are sample size and geographic coverage. For example,


                                                   3
the 1980 Census includes 109,628 Mexican immigrants (72% of whom are between the ages of 16

and 65) and identifies more than 300 separate Metropolitan Statistical Areas (MSA’s). The main

disadvantage of the Census files is under-coverage of Mexican immigrants. Calculations by Borjas,

Freeman, and Lang (1991) suggest that the 1980 Census missed approximately 40 percent of

unauthorized Mexican immigrants, leading to a 25% undercount in the overall Mexican immigrant

population.4 Van Hook and Bean (1998) use a similar method to estimate a 30% undercount rate of

unauthorized Mexicans in the 1990 Census and a 20% undercount of all Mexicans.5 The 2000

Census was substantially more successful than earlier ones in counting unauthorized immigrants

(Norwood et al, 2004), leading to undercount rates for unauthorized immigrants on the order of 10

percent (US Citizenship and Immigration Service, 2003), and implying an undercount of total

Mexican immigrants of 6-8%.6 Based on these estimates, we believe that problems caused by the

undercount of unauthorized Mexicans are likely to be relatively modest in our 2000 data, but more

of an issue in interpreting the 1980 and 1990 data.

        With these caveats in mind, we turn to Table 1, which presents information on the

characteristics of working age Mexican immigrants in the 1980, 1990 and 2000 Censuses.7 The



        4
         Estimates of the overall Census undercount rates (based on sets of households that were identified
and interviewed in two separate counts) are 1.2% for the 1980 Census, 1.6% for 1990, and 0.1 to 1.1% for
2000. Estimated undercount rates are higher for Hispanics (e.g. around 5% in the 1990 Census (Hogan,
1993), and 1-4% in the 2000 Census (Elliot and Little, 2004)). Estimates of undercount rates for the
unauthorized population are based on comparisons of birth and/or death rates to population estimates.
        5
          Van Hook and Bean show the sensitivity of their estimates to various assumptions. The 30 percent
undercount rate is based on relatively conservative assumptions. Other assumptions lead to lower undercount
rates, on average.
        6
        Passel (2002) estimates that 80 percent of all Mexican immigrants who arrived in the 1990s were
unauthorized.
        7
          We define Mexican immigrants as Census respondents who report that they are either naturalized
citizens or non-citizens, and who report that their place of birth is Mexico.

                                                     4
demographic characteristics are fairly stable over time, though the average age of Mexican

immigrants and their number of years in the U.S. are rising slowly. There is also a modest upward

trend in average education. Even in 2000, however, 70% report having less than a high school

education, and more than one half reports low or very low English ability.8 The fraction of

Mexican immigrants living in either California or Texas was stable between 1980 and 1990, but as

noted in the introduction the fraction living in California dropped by 14 percentage points over the

1990s. Roughly 90 percent of Mexican immigrants lived in a larger urban area (i.e., and MSA or

CMSA) in 1980 and this rate has not changed much over the past two decades. Finally, the labor

market outcomes of Mexican immigrant suggest relatively constant employment rates, but a more

variable pattern for wages, with declines in both real and relative wages over the 1980s, and a modest

rebound in real wages over the 1990s. These trends are roughly consistent with wage trends for

native dropout workers in the U.S.



b. Inter-cohort Comparisons

        Although comparisons across the Mexican populations in 1980, 1990, and 2000 are

informative, they potentially mask differences between newly arriving and earlier cohorts of

Mexicans. Figures 2-8 compare Mexican immigrants by years of residence in the U.S. in 1990 and

2000. Figure 2 focuses on the fractions living in California and Texas. In 1990 the probabilities of

living in California or Texas were largely independent of the number of years in the U.S. In the

2000 data, however, recent arrivals are much less likely to live in California than earlier cohorts.

These simple comparisons suggest that most of the widening geographic diffusion of Mexican


        8
          Based on observation at an English instruction class for immigrant parents, we suspect that Mexican
immigrants tend to over-report their education. Many immigrants from rural areas attended ungraded schools
with interruptions for work at home, so “years of school” may overstate actual years of full time learning.

                                                     5
immigrants during the 1990s was attributable to the behavior of new immigrants, rather than to the

relocation of older arrival cohorts.

        Figures 3 and 4 compare the fractions of Mexican immigrants with less than a high school

degree and with low English ability. Female immigrants from Mexico have about the same

probability of below-high-school education as males, but have worse language skills. Recent arrivals

of either gender in the 2000 Census have a slightly lower probability of below-high school education

than their counterparts in 1990, perhaps reflecting gains in education for younger cohorts in Mexico.

The levels of low English ability, on the other hand, are very similar in 1990 and 2000.9 Although

we do not present them here, the marital status profiles for men and women are also remarkably

similar in the two Censuses.

        Figure 5 shows mean log hourly wages (in 1999 dollars) by gender and time in the U.S.

There was a modest rise in real wages for more recent arrivals over the 1990s, but not much gain for

longer-term residents. Overall, however, the wage profiles are quite similar in 1990 and 2000. We

have also constructed profiles of employment probabilities (based on the likelihood of reporting

positive weeks of work in the past year). For men the 1990 and 2000 profiles are very close

together, while for women there is a slightly lower employment rate in 2000 for those who have

been in the U.S. for 6-10 years, and not much difference elsewhere.10

        Finally, Figures 6-8 show the fractions of Mexican workers employed in agriculture,

construction, and retail trade. The dominant feature of Figure 6 is the decline in the fraction of

        9
          To the extent that the immigrants who are most likely to be undercounted in the Census are recent
arrivals with low education and language ability, there may be more reporting bias in the 1990 Census data
than the 2000 data. This would tend to mask any actual gains in education or English ability that actually
occurred over the 1990s.
        10
          As with education and language, there may be some correlation between wages and the probability
of under-reporting, especially for recent Mexican immigrants. Assuming this was a bigger problem in 1990,
the observed mean wage trends for recent arrival groups may understate the actual growth that occurred.

                                                     6
recently-arrived immigrants working in agriculture between 1990 and 2000. In 1990 recent

immigrants of both genders were more likely to work in agriculture than long-term residents,

whereas in 2000 the profiles are relatively flat. Looking across major industry aggregations, we

found that the decline in agricultural employment among recent immigrants was offset by rises in

the fraction of employment in construction (for men) and retail trade (for women). In 2000, nearly a

quarter of recent male Mexican immigrants was working in construction (see Figure 7), while about

one-sixth of recent females were working in retail trade (Figure 8). The rises in Mexican

employment in these industries are striking because both sectors also employ relatively large

fractions of low-skilled native workers, raising the obvious concern about labor market competition.



c. Distribution Across Cities

         As we noted in the introduction, one of the most important changes for Mexican

immigrants between 1990 and 2000 was the move out of California. Further information on this

phenomenon is provided in Table 2, which shows the changing fractions of Mexican immigrants in

the 15 traditional destination cities that had the largest numbers of Mexicans in 1980.11 In 1980,

nearly one-third all working age Mexicans were living in Los Angeles. Another 8 percent were living

in Chicago, and roughly 4 percent were living in each of Houston, Orange County, San Diego, and

El Paso. Over the 1980s the shares in Los Angeles and Chicago fell slightly, but as of 1990 the top

five cities still accounted for nearly one-half of all Mexican immigrants. Between 1990 and 2000,

however, the share of Mexican immigrants living in Los Angeles dropped by 10 percentage points,

accounting for most of the fall in the total California share noted in Figure 1 and Table 1. Though


         11
          Throughout this paper, we use as “cities” individual MSA’s and the constituent PMSA’s in
consolidated metropolitan areas. Thus, we treat Los Angeles and Orange County California as separate
“cities”.

                                                    7
the total share in Texas fell by much less, this stability masks a within-state shift from San Antonio

and the smaller border cities (El Paso, McAllen, and Brownsville) to the larger urban centers

(Houston and Dallas).

        Where did the rapidly growing population of Mexican immigrants settle in the 1990s? To

answer this question, we calculated the increase in the number of Mexican immigrants in each MSA

between 1990 and 2000, and then tabulated the cities by their shares of the total increase in Mexican

immigrants. The results for the top 40 cities, which together account for about 80 percent of the

overall growth in the Mexican population, are presented in Table 3.

        The first three columns of the table show the total working age population of each city in

1990, the number of Mexican immigrants in 1990, and the Mexican immigrant fraction of the local

population. The remaining columns present information on the changes in the city between 1990

and 2000, including total population growth (for 16-65 year olds), the growth rate of the Mexican

immigrant population, the increase in the total number of Mexican immigrants living in the city, the

fraction of the national increase in the Mexican population “absorbed” in the city, and finally the

number of post-1990 immigrants living in the city in 2000.

        Although Los Angeles’ share of Mexican immigrants was falling over the 1990s, the first row

of Table 3 shows that the city still absorbed the largest number of Mexican immigrants. In fact, the

Mexican population of Los Angeles grew by 34 percent between 1990 and 2000. Since the total

population of Mexican working age immigrants grew by 114 percent over the decade, however, Los

Angeles would have had to absorb nearly a million Mexicans to maintain its share. In contrast to

Los Angeles, Chicago’s Mexican immigrant population grew at about the national average rate,

implying a near-doubling of the Mexican immigrant density over the 1990s. Dallas and Houston

had even faster growth rates in their Mexican populations, together absorbing nearly 10 percent of


                                                   8
the national rise. Phoenix and Las Vegas – two very rapidly growing cities – also experienced rapid

growth in their Mexican immigrant populations.

         More surprising than these figures are the large numbers of Mexican immigrants absorbed in

Atlanta, New York, and Denver. All three cities are far from the Mexican border and had very low

Mexican population densities in 1990, yet together these cities absorbed over 9% of the total

increase in the Mexican immigrant population. Looking further down the table, Portland Oregon,

Salt Lake City, Seattle, Washington, D.C. and three cities in North Carolina ( Raleigh-Durham,

Greensboro, and Charlotte) also stand out as cities with historically small Mexican immigrant

populations that experienced very rapid inflows over the 1990s. Together these 10 cities account for

412,000 of the rise in the adult Mexican population between 1990 and 2000, or 12% of the national

total.

         Comparisons of the entries in columns 6 and 8 of Table 3 suggest that in most cities the

growth in the total number of working age Mexican immigrants was about the same size as the

number of post-1990 Mexican immigrants living there in 2000. This has two implications. On one

hand, it suggests that the arrival of new Mexican immigrants had little displacement effect on

previous immigrants in the traditional destination cities. On the other, it also implies that most of

the growth in the number of Mexicans in “new” destination cities was attributable to the arrival of

recent immigrants. These impressions are confirmed by the patterns in Figure 9, which plots the

change in the total number of adult Mexican immigrants living in each city between 1990 and 2000

(as a percent of the city’s population in 1990) against the inflow rate of new Mexican immigrants,

which we define as the number of post-1990 Mexican immigrants in the city in 2000 divided by the

city population in 1990. The points for all but two cities lie on or above the 45-degree line,

suggesting that in most cities new Mexican inflows led to equivalent or larger increases in the total


                                                   9
Mexican population.12 Only in Los Angeles and El Paso is there any evidence of displacement of

older Mexican immigrants by new arrivals. In the labeled cities above the 45-degree line, net

inflows of older immigrants complemented the inflows of post-1990 arrivals, amplifying the impact

on local population growth.



II. Modeling the Diffusion of Recent Mexican Immigrants

        In light of this descriptive evidence, we turn to the task of modeling the flows of recent

Mexican immigrants to different cities between 1990 and 2000. Our dependent variable is the

inflow rate of new Mexican immigrants, defined as the number of post-1990 working age Mexican

immigrants observed in a city in the 2000 Census, divided by the working age population of the city

in 1990. Following the traditional taxonomy, we develop a framework for measuring the

contribution of “supply push” and “demand pull” to total immigrant inflows. We measure demand

pull factors by total employment growth in the MSA between 1990 to 2000, derived from County

Business Patterns (CBP) data.13 There is a potential endogeneity problem with this variable, since

immigrant arrivals may stimulate employment growth. Exploiting the persistence in city-specific

employment trends, however, we use employment levels from 1982 to 1990 as instruments for the

1990-2000 employment growth rate. Thus, our demand pull measure is the predicted component of

overall employment growth in the city, based on employment trends in the preceding decade.

        On the supply side, numerous studies have shown that new immigrants tend to go to cities



        12
          The same conclusion emerges when we plot the data for the 150 largest cities in the U.S. Over this
broader set, only 3 cities have notably smaller growth in the total Mexican population than in new Mexican
inflows: Los Angeles, El Paso, and Laredo Texas.
        13
        Except in New England, MSA’s consist of complete counties, so MSA employment is the sum of
employment in the constituent counties. For consistency we use fixed 2000 MSA-county definitions.

                                                     10
where earlier waves of immigrants from the same source country have settled (e.g., Bartel, 1989;

Card, 2001). Thus, we use the density of Mexican immigrants in a city in 1980 and 1990 as proxies

for the magnitude of supply-push immigration flows from Mexico over the 1990-2000 period.

        Estimation results from a series of alternative specifications of the model are presented in

Table 4. The models are estimated on a sample of 142 larger MSA’s that can be consistently defined

on a county basis in the 1980, 1990, and 2000 Censuses.14 The first column of the table reports a

specification that includes only the lagged Mexican immigrant density variables. These supply push

proxies are highly significant, and together explain 78 percent of the variation across cities in the

recent Mexican immigrant inflow rate. The second column reports a model that includes only the

employment growth variable. This is also a significant determinant of new immigrant inflows,

explaining about 10 percent of the intercity-variation. A parallel model estimated by instrumental

variables is presented in column 5. Interestingly, the point estimate of the effect of employment

growth is slightly larger in the IV model, contrary to what might have been expected under the

assumption that the OLS estimate is upward biased by the presence of unobserved factors that

contribute to both overall employment growth and Mexican inflows.15 Finally, the models in

columns 3 and 6 include both the lagged density and employment growth variables. Together the

demand pull and supply push variables explain 86% of the intercity variation in new Mexican

immigrant inflows. Again, the point estimates of the models are not much different between the

OLS and IV specifications.16

        14
           Copies of the computer programs that process the 1980, 1990, and 2000 Census data and construct
the city-level variables are available on request.
        15
          The OLS estimate is probably downward biased by measurement error, and it appears that this
effect dominates any upward endogeneity bias.
        16
         The OLS estimate of the demand coefficient in column 3 is 0.0748, with a standard error of 0.008.
The corresponding IV estimate in column 6 is 0.0675, with a standard error of 0.012.

                                                    11
       Given the large fraction of Mexican immigrants who traditionally migrated to Los Angeles,

and the sharp decline in this fraction over the 1990s, an interesting challenge for our model is to

predict the changing flows to Los Angeles. To address this challenge we re-estimated the model in

column 3, adding a dummy for the Los Angeles observation. The estimated Los Angeles dummy is

!0.025, with a standard error of 0.013, while the point estimates of the other coefficients are

virtually the same as those reported in column 3. Thus, the model over-predicts the inflow rate of

new Mexican immigrants to Los Angeles (predicted inflow rate = 0.096; actual = .071), though the

magnitude of the prediction error is just on the margin of the range that would be expected by

chance. Moreover, the Los Angeles observation is not a large enough outlier to have any affect the

coefficient estimates. The model in column 3 predicts that Los Angeles would have attracted about

558,000 new Mexican immigrants over the 1990s, compared to the actual inflow of 413,000. By

comparison, if Los Angeles had maintained its 1990 share of Mexican immigrants, it would have

attracted 961,000 new Mexican immigrants (an inflow rate of 0.165).17 Thus, the decline in the share

of Mexican immigrants moving to Los Angeles in the 1990s is largely explained by a combination of

slow employment growth in the city and the pattern of the coefficients on lagged immigrant shares,

which indicate a tendency for cities with a longer history of Mexican immigration to have slower

growth in new arrivals.

       Although the simple supply push and demand pull proxies used in the models in columns 3

and 6 explain much of the variation in new Mexican immigrant inflow rates, other factors may also

affect the destination choices of potential migrants. An obvious consideration is the labor market

success of earlier cohorts of Mexican immigrants in a particular city. We used 1990 Census data to



       17
         Los Angeles had 27.9% of all working age Mexican immigrants in 1990. According to the 2000
Census there were 3,445,000 working age Mexicans who arrived after 1990 in the U.S. in 2000.

                                                  12
estimate the average employment rate and mean log wage of Mexican male immigrants in each city

in 1989 (adjusted for the characteristics of the immigrant populations in each city).18 We then

included these as additional explanatory variables in the models in columns 4 and 7 of Table 4. The

results suggest that new immigrants tend to go to cities where Mexicans earned higher wages in

1990, although the estimated effects are imprecise. The estimated employment effects are even less

precise, and quite small in magnitude. Overall these variable add little to our basic specification.

           The models in Table 4 are estimated using unweighted OLS and IV methods. We have also

estimated the same specifications using weighted OLS and IV, with the MSA population in 1990 as a

weight. The estimated coefficients from the weighted models are similar to the estimates from the

unweighted models, and lead to very similar conclusions about the explanatory power of the supply

push and demand pull variables. As in the unweighted models, the weighted IV estimates of the

employment growth effect are very close to the weighted OLS estimates, giving no indication of an

endogeneity problem.

           We conclude that a simple model that includes demand pull and supply push factors

provides a relatively good description of the destination choices of new Mexican immigrants over

the 1990s. A model with just three parameters explains 86% of the observed inter-city variation in

new Mexican immigrant inflow rates. The model cannot fully explain the sharp downturn in the

share of Mexican inflows to Los Angeles in the 1990s, but it predicts about 75% of the observed

decline.



III. Impacts of Mexican Inflows


           18
            To estimate these adjusted outcomes, we fit models for log hourly wages, and the event of working
last year, that included education, age, years in the U.S., an indicator for low English ability, and unrestricted
city dummies. We then use the city dummies as measures of relative wages and employment probabilities.

                                                        13
a. Effects on the Relative Supply of Low-Education Labor

        Having documented the relatively large inflows of Mexican immigrants to many cities in the

1990s, we now turn to analyzing the effects of these inflows. A first question is whether inflows of

Mexican immigrants lead to any shift in the skill mix of local populations. Many models of local

labor market equilibrium have a constant-returns-to-scale feature which implies that population

inflows only affect wages and employment to the extent that they shift the relative supply of

different skill groups.19

        As a starting point, Figure 10 plots the change in the fraction of dropouts in the population

of each major MSA between 1990 and 2000 against the inflow rate of new Mexican immigrants to

the city. If 70% of recent Mexican arrivals have less than a high school education, and Mexican

inflows are orthogonal to all other characteristics in a city, then one would expect the points in

Figure 10 to lie along a line with slope 0.7. For reference we have graphed a line with this slope in

the Figure. While there is considerable variation in the scatter of points, there is a strong positive

relation between Mexican inflows and the change in the dropout share, with a slope that is a little

flatter than the reference line.

        Table 5 presents a series of regression models that examine more formally the link between

Mexican immigrant inflows and the share of low-education workers in a city. The dependent

variable for the models in the first two columns is the fraction of dropouts among adult residents of

a city in 2000, while in columns 3-5 the dependent variable is the change in the share of dropouts

between 1990 and 2000. Looking first at the simple model in column 1, each percentage point

increase in the inflow rate of new Mexican immigrants over the 1990s is estimated to raise the


        19
         Strictly speaking, such a feature requires perfectly elastic supplies of capital to different cities, and
no shortage of land within a city. Arguably both features are true for many MSA’s, though not necessarily for
high density MSA’s like Los Angeles or New York.

                                                       14
fraction of dropouts by 1.29 percentage points. This estimate is too large to represent a causal effect

of the Mexican inflow. The “problem” is that inflows tend to be larger in cities that have had more

Mexican immigrants in the past, who also contribute to the stock of low-educated residents in the

city. This fact is illustrated by the model in column 2, which also includes the Mexican inflow rate

over the 1980s. Inflows over both decades contribute to the stock of dropout labor in 2000,

confounding a model like the one in column 1.

        Arguably, a better specification relates the change in the dropout share to the inflow rate of

new Mexican immigrants. As shown by the models in columns 3 and 4, in such a specification each

percentage point increase in the inflow rate of new Mexican immigrants is estimated to raise the

fraction of dropouts in a city by 0.5 points. This is slightly lower than would be expected under the

hypothesis that 70% of new Mexican immigrants are dropouts, and that there is no correlation

between Mexican inflows and other changes in city demographics. Interestingly, the inflow rate of

immigrants in the 1980s has no effect on the change in dropout shares between 1990 and 2000,

providing a simple specification check for the first-differenced model.

        A concern with the models in columns 3 and 4 is that Mexican immigrants may be attracted

to cities where there is an unusually high rate of growth in demand for less educated labor. If that is

the case, and if less-educated natives (or less-educated immigrants from other countries) are

attracted by the same demand factors, then the measured effect of Mexican inflows on the change in

the dropout share may overstate their true impact. Such a bias can be reduced or eliminated by

using the supply push variables (i.e., the historical fractions of Mexican immigrants in the city) as

instruments for the inflow rate of new Mexican immigrants over the 1990s. We implement this

procedure in the model in column 5. At the same time, we instrument employment growth in the

city with the lagged employment variables used in Table 4. The resulting coefficient estimates are


                                                   15
not very different from the OLS estimates, and provide no evidence that endogeneity of Mexican

immigrant inflows leads to an overstatement of the effect of these flows on the relative fraction of

dropout labor in a city. On balance, we conclude there is robust evidence that inflows of Mexican

labor increase the share of dropouts in a city, with each percentage point increase in the inflow rate

of recent immigrants leading to a one-half percentage point higher dropout share in 2000.



b. Industry Structure and the Absorption of Mexican Labor

        Since inflows of Mexican labor increase the pool of less-educated labor in a city, it is

interesting to ask how these workers are absorbed by local employers. One possibility, suggested by

the Hecksher-Olin (HO) model of international trade, is that the industry structure in a city adapts

to the relative supply conditions in the local labor market. Indeed, under certain conditions, changes

in industry structure can fully accommodate differences in the relative supply of different skill

groups in a given city with no change in the relative wage structure. In this section we use the

decomposition method of Lewis (2003) to evaluate the role of HO-style adjustments in absorbing

differences in the fraction of low education workers in different cities.

        The decomposition starts with an identity that expresses the overall fraction of dropouts

employed in a given city, sd(c), as a weighted sum of the industry shares in the city, times the dropout

intensity in each industry:

(1)     sd(c) = 1/N(c) 3i Ndi(c)

                = 3i Ni(c)/N(c) Ndi(c)/Ni(c )

                = 3i 8i(c) sdi(c) ,

where N(c) is total employment in city c, Ndi(c) is the number of dropouts employed in industry i in

city c, Ni(c) is total employment in industry i in city c, 8i(c) /Ni(c)/N(c) is the employment share of


                                                     16
industry i in city c, and sdi(c) = Ndi(c)/Ni(c ) is the share of dropout workers in industry i in city c. It

follows that the gap between sd(c) and the national average fraction of dropouts, sd, can be written as

the sum of a “between industry component” B representing shifts in the relative fractions of

different industries in the city, a “within industry component” W, representing shifts in the relative

fraction of dropout workers in each industry, and an interaction component I:

(2) sd(c) - sd = B(c) + W(c) + I(c),

where

        B(c)     = 3i sdi [ 8i(c) ! 8i ]

        W(c)     =      3i 8i [ sdi(c) ! sdi ]

        I(c)     = 3i [ 8i(c) ! 8i ] × [ sdi(c) ! sdi ] .

Under the idealized conditions of the Hecksher-Olin model, all of the variation in the share of

dropout labor across cities can be absorbed by expansion or contraction of high-dropout-intensity

industries (i.e., via the B(c) term), with no city-level variation in relative wages or the dropout

intensity of any particular industry.20

        We use 2000 Census data on employment classified by 3 digit industry to compute the terms

in equation (2) for each of 150 larger MSA’s. We then performed a series of cross-city regressions

of the form:

(3a)    B(c)     = aB      + bB [ sd(c) - sd] + eB(c)

(3b)    W(c)     = aw      + bW [ sd(c) - sd] + ew(c)

(3c)    I(c)     = aI     + bI [ sd(c) - sd] + eI(c) .

Since equation (2) holds as an identity, the coefficients bB , bW, and bI sum to 1. A strict version of


        20
           These conditions include infinitely elastic supplies of capital, perfectly integrated product markets,
and the existence of at least one industry that produces a tradeable good or service that has a dropout
intensity that exceeds the maximum dropout share in any city.

                                                        17
the HO model implies bB = 1.

        Figure 11 plots the between-industry component B(c) against the excess fraction of dropouts

in each of the 150 larger MSA’s. For reference, note that if changing industry structure accounted

for the absorption of dropouts in cities with high dropout shares the points would lie along a line

with slope 1. Although the points suggest an upward-sloping relationship, the slope is relatively

modest, suggesting that changing industry structure accounts for only a small share of the

absorption of dropouts. Indeed, the OLS estimate of bB, reported in the first column of Table 6, is

0.22, and is significantly below 1. By contrast, Figure 12 plots the within-industry component W(C)

against the excess fraction of dropouts in each city. This component is more highly correlated with

the dropout share, and many of the city observations are tightly clustered along the 45-degree line.

The estimate of bW , shown in column 2 of Table 6, is 0.76. Though not shown in a figure, the

interaction terms are relatively small, and essentially uncorrelated with differences across cities in the

share of dropout workers. Consistent with this, the estimate of bI in column 3 of Table 4 is 0.02

(with a very small R-squared =0.03).

        The MSA’s that show some evidence of significant between-industry adjustment are labeled

in Figures 11 and 12. Interestingly, most of these MSA’s are comprised of counties in California

with substantial agricultural employment. Since agriculture relies on the availability of land

resources, it is debatable whether variation in the employment share of agriculture represents a

reaction to abundant supplies of less-educated labor. Rather, it seems more likely that the relative

supplies of less-educated labor in these MSA’s are driven by the availability of farm jobs.

        The framework of equation (2) can be used to examine the contribution of the changing

scale of specific industries to the absorption of local supplies of dropout labor. For example, the

contribution of industry i is sdi [ 8i(c) ! 8i ], which is the excess employment share of the industry


                                                   18
in city c relative to its national average share, multiplied by the average dropout intensity of the

industry. Columns 4-6 of Table 6 show estimates of models similar to (4a), focusing on the

absorption contributions of agriculture, textiles apparel and footwear industries, and a set of low-

skilled service industries.21 The estimates suggest that these 3 industry clusters account for most of

the between industry effect observed in column (1): agriculture alone accounts for nearly one-half.

Figure 13 plots the between-industry component of absorption of dropout labor in different cities

excluding agriculture, while Figure 14 shows the absorption contributions of agriculture industries and

textiles and apparel industries. Overall, though there is some evidence that textiles and apparel

manufacturing tends to cluster in cities with moderately high dropout shares, and that agricultural

employment is higher in cities with very high dropout shares, the results in Table 6 and Figures 14

suggest that most of the absorption of unskilled labor across cities occurs within industries rather

than between.

        Similar conclusions were reached by Lewis (2003), who examined changes in the absorption

of workers in 4 education groups over the 1980-1990 period. Lewis used Census data to estimate

first-differenced versions of equation (3a) for each skill group.22 He also compared OLS estimates

to IV estimates that used immigrant inflows based on historical immigration patterns as instruments

for the changes in the relative shares of each skill group. As in the 2000 cross-section, the industry

composition effects over the 1980-1990 period are only weakly related to local skill-group-specific

population growth. Lewis’ estimates of bB for manufacturing industries (which are arguably best

        21
          We include textiles, apparel, knitting mills, footwear, and leather industries as apparel, and the
following as “low skilled services”: building services, landscaping services, carwashes, landscaping, dry
cleaning and laundry services, private household services, and other personal services.
        22
           One difference is that Lewis regresses the between-industry effects on the population share of the
skill group in the local labor market, rather than the employment share. An advantage of a first differenced
approach is that it eliminates the confounding caused by permanent factors like differences in the amount of
agricultural land in an MSA.

                                                        19
able to respond to local factor availability) are very close to 0, while his estimates for all industries

range from 0 to 0.08. He also reports parallel specifications in which the dependent variable is the

within-industry relative employment term. These are much more strongly correlated with relative

population growth, accounting for 90 percent of the adjustment to skill-group specific relative

supply shocks.

        As a final exercise, we conducted a parallel analysis focusing on the absorption of Mexican

immigrants. The relation between the within-industry absorption component and the share of

Mexican workers in the local labor market is plotted in Figure 15, while regression models similar to

the models for dropout workers are reported in columns 7-12 of Table 6. The results reinforce our

conclusions based on an analysis of dropout labor. In particular, over 90 percent of the adjustment

to differences in the local availability of Mexican labor is explained by differences in the utilization

of Mexican labor within 3-digit industries. Surprisingly, there is almost no evidence that availability of

Mexican immigrant labor stimulates low-skill service employment.

        Taken as a whole, the results in this section suggest that HO-style changes in industry

structure play a relatively small role in explaining how cities have been able to absorb inflows of

relatively unskilled Mexican immigrants over the 1990s. Contrary to our initial expectations, most of

the inflows appear to be absorbed by city-specific within-industry increases in use of unskilled labor.



c. Relative Wage Adjustments

        The observation that variation in the relative supply of dropout labor is mainly absorbed by

changes in utilization within industries points to the potential importance of relative wage

adjustments in response to inflows of Mexican labor. We analyze relative wages in the framework of

a conventional CES production function. The results in the last section suggest that we can ignore


                                                    20
differences across industries and focus on a “one industry” model. Specifically, consider a

production function for a single local output good:

        y = [ 3j (ejNj) (F!1)/F] F/(F!1)

where Nj is the number of people employed in skill group j, ej is a relative productivity shock, and F

is the elasticity of substitution between labor types. Given a set of wage rates wj for different skill

groups, the relative labor demand curve between any two skill groups, say d=dropout labor and

H=high school graduate labor, can be written as

        log (Nd/NH) = !F log (wd/wH) + (F!1) log (ed/eH) .

This equation shows that employers can be induced to increase the relative utilization of dropout

labor by reducing the relative wage of dropout workers. Inverting the relative demand curve leads

to a simple estimating equation that relates the relative wage gap between high school graduates and

dropouts in a city to the relative supply of the two types of workers:

(4)     log (wH/wd) = !1/F log (NH/Nd) ! (F!1)/F log (eH/ed) .

        As has been recognized in the immigration literature, a problem for the estimation of a

model like (4) is that local relative demand shocks may raise relative wages and attract differential

inflows of skilled versus unskilled workers. To address this concern, we consider a first-differenced

version of (4) that abstracts from any permanent characteristics of a city that may affect the relative

demand for less-skilled labor. We also consider IV estimates of the first differenced model, in which

we use the supply push variables (lagged Mexican immigrant densities in the city) to instrument the

change in the relative supply of dropout labor in a city.

        Table 7 presents estimation results for equation (4), based on data for 145 larger MSA’s. We

measure the dependent variable as the difference between regression-adjusted mean log wages for

native male workers in a city with exactly 12 years of schooling, and those with less than 12 years of


                                                   21
schooling. Following the recent inequality literature (e.g., Katz and Murphy, 1992) we measure the

supply of high school workers in a city by the number of people with a high school diploma, plus ½

of the number who have between 13 and 15 years of completed schooling. We similarly measure

the supply of dropout workers as a simple count of the number with less than a high school

education. The models are estimated by weighed OLS and IV, using 1990 population counts as

weights.

        The results for the OLS models in columns 1-3 suggest that there is not a large or

statistically significant relationship between the relative wages of high school dropouts and their

relative supply in different cities, although the point estimate of the relative supply effect in the first-

differenced model is negative. We also consider a specification in column 4 that adds employment

growth in the city as an additional explanatory variable. This has a modest negative effect on the

wage gap, suggesting that relative wages of dropouts are higher in rapidly growing cities, though the

coefficient is not significant at conventional levels. Adding this variable has little impact on the

estimated supply effect.

        Before turning to the IV results it is instructive to look at the data in Figures 16 and 17,

which illustrate the relationship between inflows of new Mexican immigrants to a city and the

relative supply (Figure 16) and relative wages (Figure 17) of dropout labor. Figure 16 establishes

that there is a strong impact of Mexican inflows on the relative supply of dropout versus high school

labor. Given the models in Table 4 suggesting that much of the variation in Mexican inflows can be

explained by supply push factors, there is a strong presumption that our IV strategy will have a

reasonable “first stage”. Figure 17, on the other hand, suggests that there is not much correlation

between high-school/dropout wage gap and the inflow rate of Mexican immigrants. The overall

scatter of the points is slightly positively sloping (consistent with the idea that an increase in the


                                                    22
relative supply of dropouts lowers their relative wages), but close inspection suggests that only a

handful of points contribute to the slope.

        The simple IV specification in column (5) of Table 7 yields an estimate of the effect of

relative supply that is somewhat less precise than the corresponding OLS model, but no more

negative in magnitude. The same conclusion emerges from the model in column 6, in which we

treat both the change in relative supply and employment growth as endogenous. It does not appear

that increasing supplies of dropout labor arising from the predictable component of inflows of

Mexican immigrants have much effect on the relative wage structure in a city.

        We have also estimated a number of variants of the models in Table 7. In one variant, we

added a control for the change in the relative number of college versus high-school educated

workers to the first-differenced specification in column 4. This variable has a marginally significant

positive effect on the high-school-dropout wage gap (coefficient=0.15, standard error=0.07) but its

addition does not have any impact on the coefficient of the variable measuring the relative supply of

dropouts, or on the employment growth effect. We also estimated the models using unweighted

OLS and IV. The coefficient estimates from the unweighted models are somewhat less precise, but

show a similar pattern to the results in Table 7. For example, the estimated relative supply effect

from the first-differenced specification (4) is -0.07 (with a standard error of 0.05). Finally, we

considered a specification in which the supply of high school workers was narrowly defined to

include only those with exactly 12 years of schooling. This leads to a slightly bigger coefficient on

the relative supply variable. For example, the estimate corresponding to the specification in column

4 is -0.06, with a standard error of 0.04. Overall, there is not much evidence that the relative supply

of dropout labor in a city has much impact on dropout relative wages.




                                                   23
d. Interpretation

         Taken as a whole, our findings with respect to the impacts of Mexican immigration present a

puzzle. Inflows of Mexican immigrants appear to raise the relative supply of low-education labor in

a city. Contrary to a simple trade-style model, however, shifts in the in relative supply of low-

education labor across cities do not lead to systematic expansions or contractions in dropout-

intensive industries. Rather, most of the variation in the relative supply of dropout labor is absorbed

by changes in dropout intensity within narrowly defined industries. Even more surprisingly,

differences in dropout intensity of employment do not seem to be strongly related to the relative

wages of dropout workers. Thus, it is hard to explain the variation in dropout intensity across cities

as variation along a relative demand curve.

         We believe there are (at least) two possible explanations for these findings. One is that

dropout workers – and Mexican immigrants in particular – are close to perfect substitutes for high-

school educated workers. If this is true, then inflows of Mexican immigrants affect relative wages

for a much broader group than just high school dropouts. Further work is needed to carefully

examine the effects of Mexican immigration on the broader wage structure. The proportional

impacts of Mexican inflows on the relative supply of labor with up to 12 years of schooling (or even

up to 15 years of schooling) are considerably smaller than their impacts on the relative supply of

dropout labor, so if this hypothesis is true, concerns over the negative impacts of Mexican

immigrants on low-wage natives may be overstated.

         A second possibility is that employers adapt to the relative supply of different skill groups in

their local market without the “signals” of relative wage changes. Acemoglu’s (1998) model of

endogenous technological change, for example, suggests that firms will innovate in a direction to

take advantage of more readily available factors, even in the absence of relative wage changes. Lewis


                                                    24
(2004) presents some direct evidence for an endogenous technological change mechanism, using

data on the number of advanced technologies adopted by manufacturing plants in the late 1980s and

early 1990s. He finds that controlling for very detailed (4 digit) industry effects, the adoption of

advanced technologies by individual plants is significantly slowed by the presence of a greater

relative supply of unskilled labor in the local labor market. More work is needed to understand how

firms choose which technologies to use, and whether the choice is influenced by the relative

availability of different skill groups, particularly low-skilled immigrants.



IV. Conclusions

        Mexicans are the largest single group of immigrants in the U.S., representing about one-third

of all immigrants and more than 4% of the country’s working age population. Until the last decade,

Mexican immigrants were geographically clustered in a relatively small number of cities. In 1990,

nearly a half of all working age Mexicans were living in just 5 U.S. cities, and 70 percent were living

in only 15 cities. During the 1990s, however, arrivals from Mexico established sizeable immigrant

communities in many “new” cities, including Atlanta, Denver, Portland, and Raleigh-Durham.

These immigrants are changing the face of the new destination cities and setting the stage for many

years of future inflows.

        In this paper we present some simple evidence on the causes and consequences of the

widening geographic diffusion of Mexican immigrants. A combination of demand-pull and supply

push factors explains 85% of the variation across major cities in the rate of Mexican inflows during

the 1990s, and helps illuminate the single most important trend in the destination choices of new

Mexican immigrants – the move away from Los Angeles.

        Like their predecessors, recent Mexican immigrants have relatively low levels of education.


                                                    25
We show that inflows of Mexican immigrants lead to systematic shifts in the relative supply of low-

education labor in a city, opening up the question of how different local labor markets are adopting

to substantial differences in relative supply. One possibility – suggested by the conventional

Hecksher Olin model of international trade – is that these differences are accommodated by shifts in

industry composition. Despite the theoretical appeal of this hypothesis, we find it has limited

empirical relevance: most of the differences across cities in the relative supply of low-education

labor (or Mexican labor) are absorbed by changes in skill intensity within narrow industries. Such

adjustments could be readily explained if Mexican immigrant inflows had large effects on the relative

wage structures of different cities. As has been found in previous studies of the local impacts of

immigration, however, our analysis suggests that relative wage adjustments are small. Thus, we are

left with the “puzzle” of explaining the remarkable flexibility of employment demand in different

cities to local variation in supply. Given the continuing pace of Mexican immigration, the next

decade should provide even more evidence on the ways that local economies adjust to shifts in

relative supply.




                                                  26
                                            References


Acemoglu, Daron. “Why Do New Technologies Complement Skills? Directed Technical Change
and Wage Inequality.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 114 (November 1998): 1055-1089.

Altonji, Joseph G., and David Card “The effects of immigration on the labor market outcomes of
less-skilled natives”. In John M. Abowd and Richard B. Freeman, eds., Immigration, Trade, and the
Labor Market. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 1991.

Bartel, Anne. “Where Do the New U.S. Immigrants Live?” Journal of Labor Economics 7 (October
1989): 371-391.

Borjas, George, Richard B. Freeman, and Kevin Lang. “Undocumented Mexican-born Workers in
the United States: How Many, How Permanent? In John M. Abowd and Richard B. Freeman, eds.,
Immigration, Trade, and the Labor Market. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 1991.

Card, David. "Immigrant Inflows, Native Outflows and the Local Labor Market Impacts of Higher
Immigration." Journal of Labor Economics, 19 (January 2001).

Card, David. “Is the New Immigration Really So Bad?” IZA Discussion Paper #1119, Bonn: IZA,
April 2004.

Card, David and John E. DiNardo. “Do Immigrant Inflows Lead to Native Outflows?” American
Economic Review 90 (May 2000).

Katz, Lawrence and Kevin M. Murphy. “Changes in Relative Wages, 1963-1987: Supply and
Demand Factors.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 107 (February 1992): 35-78.

Lewis, Ethan G. “Local Open Economies within the U.S. How do Industries Respond to
Immigration?” Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Working Paper (December 2003).

Lewis, Ethan G. “ The Effect of Local Skill Mix on New Technology Adoption in U.S.
Manufacturing.” Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Unpublished Working Paper (December
2004).

Norwood, Janet et. al. The 2000 Census: Counting Under Adversity. Washington DC: National
Academy of Sciences, 2004.

Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development. OECD Economic Surveys 1999-2000:
Mexico. Paris: OECD, 2000.

Passel, Jeffrey. “New Estimates of the the Undocumented Population in the United States.”
Migration Information Source. Washington DC: Migration Policy Institute, May 2002.

United States Department of Citizenship and Immigration Services. “Estimates of the

                                                27
Unauthorized Immigrant Population Residing in the United States: 1990 to 2000.” Unpublished
Paper Dated January 2003. Available at:
http://uscis.gov/graphics/shared/aboutus/statistics/Ill_Report_1211.pdf .

Van Hook, Jennifer and Frank D. Bean. “Estimating Underenumeration Among Unauthorized
Mexican Migrants to the United States: Applications of Mortality Analyses.” In Mexican Ministry of
Foreign Affairs and U.S. Commission on Immigration Reform, Migration Between Mexico and the
United States, Research Reports and Background Materials. Mexico City and Washington DC: Mexican
Ministry of Foreign Affairs and U.S. Commission on Immigration Reform. 1998.




                                               28
Table 1: Characteristics of Mexican Immigrants in 1980, 1990, and 2000


                                      1980           1990           2000
Percent Female                         46.5           44.2           43.7

Age Distribution:
Percent Under 30                       47.2          45.5           39.9
Percent 31-50                          40.9          44.2           49.2
Percent 31-50                          11.9          10.3           10.9

Distribution of Years in US:
0-5 Years                              30.0          26.3           25.0
6-10 Years                             25.2          20.0           19.1
10 or more Years                       44.7          53.6           55.9

Education:
Percent < 12 Years Schooling           76.7          74.6           70.2
Mean Years of Schooling                 7.4           8.1            8.4
Percent Low English Ability            54.6          50.3           52.3

Geographic Distribution:
Percent in California                  58.0          58.4           44.9
Percent in Texas                       22.2          21.2           19.5
Percent in MSA                         92.8          91.3           90.1

Labor Market Outcomes:
 Percent Employed Last Year:
  Men                                  85.9          85.7           83.9
  Women                                49.4          53.7           52.9
 Mean Hourly Wage (1999$)
  Men                                 14.22         11.61          12.89
  Women                               11.06          9.68          11.07
 Mean Log Wage Gap Relative
 to Other Workers (x100):
  Men                                 -30.6          -42.6          -41.2
  Women                               -17.0          -29.5          -33.2

Percent of Total Population            1.13         2.16            4.11
 (Age 16-65)
Sample Size                          83,628      174,364         373,909
Notes: Based on tabulations of 1980-2000 Censuses.
Table 2: Geographic Concentration of Mexican Immigrants


                                    1980             1990   2000

Percent of Mexican Immigrants (Age 16-65) Living In:
Los Angeles                        31.7            27.9     17.4
Chicago                             7.9              5.4     5.5
Houston                             4.4              4.1     4.4
Orange County Ca                    4.1              6.0     4.7
San Diego                           3.9              4.1     3.1
El Paso                             3.9              2.7     1.6
San Fransisco/Oakland               2.5              2.3     2.4
Dallas/Fort Worth                   2.3              3.3     4.7
McAllen                             2.1              1.7     1.5
San Antonio                         2.0              1.5     1.1
San Jose                            1.7              1.7     1.5
Brownsville                         1.6              1.9     0.8
Ventura County Ca                   1.6              1.4     1.1
Fresno                              1.4              1.6     1.6
Riverside/San Bernardino Ca         1.3              4.1     4.1

Share of Top 5                      51.9             47.5   35.1

Share of Top 15                     72.3             69.7   55.5


Notes: Based on tabulations of 1980-2000 Censuses.
City definitions correspond to 1980 definitions.
Table 3: Growth in Overall and Mexican Immigrant Populations, 1990 to 2000


                                                                             Changes from 1990 to 2000:
                                                                Adult      Mexican
                          Working Age Population in 1990       Population Immigrant Growth in    Cumulative Number of
                                       Mexican     Percent      Growth     Growth    Number      Percent of Post-1990
                           Total      Immigrants Mex Imms        (%)        (%)     Mex Imms Total Rise Mex Imms

  1   Los Angeles         5,785,200      973,120      16.8          5.8        33.5   326,260        9.5     413,140
  2   Chicago             4,170,420      186,800       4.5          9.8       119.8   223,800       15.9     182,560
  3   Phoenix             1,268,280       52,400       4.1         62.1       363.9   190,700       21.5     135,640
  4   Dallas              1,693,060       85,320       5.0         36.6       215.6   183,960       26.8     153,240
  5   Houston             1,908,400      137,320       7.2         26.2       131.3   180,300       32.0     147,220
  6   Riverside/SB Ca     1,444,480      142,620       9.9         27.8       112.6   160,560       36.6      89,860
  7   Orange County       1,687,500      208,000      12.3         13.1        69.7   144,900       40.8     139,200
  8   Los Vegas             470,200       15,240       3.2        113.4       615.8    93,840       43.6      52,360
  9   San Diego           1,603,060      144,440       9.0         11.1        63.0    90,980       46.2      74,960
 10   Atlanta             1,757,700        7,320       0.4         41.7      1076.5    78,800       48.5      66,180
 11   New York City       4,520,040       28,140       0.6         13.8       270.2    76,020       50.7      67,040
 12   Denver              1,018,560       12,620       1.2         25.5       585.4    73,880       52.8      54,260
 13   Oakland             1,379,320       46,500       3.4         13.7       152.2    70,780       54.9      52,780
 14   Fresno                396,560       54,320      13.7         41.4       113.7    61,780       56.7      45,260
 15   Fort Worth            920,880       30,240       3.3         10.6       178.3    53,920       58.2      41,700
 16   Austin Tx             518,400       16,060       3.1         60.9       322.0    51,720       59.7      36,900
 17   San Jose            1,048,420       59,660       5.7          8.0        86.0    51,280       61.2      49,380
 18   McAllen Tx            202,860       60,960      30.1         45.5        84.1    51,240       62.7      35,900
 19   Tulare County Ca      171,560       31,800      18.5         67.4       154.3    49,080       64.1      28,800
 20   Montery County Ca     224,860       36,000      16.0         43.2       131.5    47,340       65.5      31,420
 21   Bakersfield           318,120       32,480      10.2         22.4       124.8    40,540       66.6      25,060
 22   Portland              885,080        9,320       1.1         35.1       424.3    39,540       67.8      30,820
 23   Ventura County Ca     437,260       48,200      11.0          9.3        76.8    37,020       68.9      28,920
 24   San Francisco       1,030,900       32,720       3.2         12.6        91.0    29,760       69.7      28,740
 25   Raleigh-Durham        469,180          880       0.2         78.0      3156.8    27,780       70.5      23,360
 26   San Antonio           841,060       51,400       6.1          4.2        53.4    27,420       71.3      26,240
 27   El Paso               351,640       93,900      26.7          5.2        28.3    26,580       72.1      32,140
 28   Greensboro NC         729,680        1,140       0.2          8.8      2287.7    26,080       72.8      21,420
 29   Salt Lake City        575,160        3,700       0.6         23.4       670.3    24,800       73.6      18,960
 30   Sacramento            941,920       22,040       2.3          6.6       112.4    24,780       74.3      19,200
 31   Santa Barbara         251,580       27,460      10.9         15.5        88.1    24,200       75.0      21,640
 32   Tucson                399,780       23,880       6.0         28.7       100.8    24,060       75.7      16,900
 33   Seattle             1,204,960        3,360       0.3         18.0       695.8    23,380       76.4      17,140
 34   Washington DC       2,610,900        7,860       0.3         25.1       271.3    21,320       77.0      18,260
 35   Stockton Ca           298,380       26,380       8.8         19.5        79.9    21,080       77.6      18,800
 36   Charlotte NC          785,040          900       0.1         12.7      2313.3    20,820       78.2      17,660
 37   Yuma Az                59,120       12,920      21.9         59.5       158.5    20,480       78.8      10,600
 38   Modesto Ca            231,440       21,460       9.3         22.0        91.4    19,620       79.3      13,420
 39   Santa Rosa            224,040        8,840       4.0         40.2       217.7    19,240       79.9      13,700
 40   Vallejo Ca            302,080       11,560       3.8         10.2       159.2    18,400       80.4      13,500
Table 4: Regression Models for Growth in Recent Mexican Immigrant Population



                                                Estimated by OLS                                    Estimated by IV

                                       (1)          (2)         (3)            (4)             (5)            (6)        (7)

Mexican Population Share, 1990          1.33        --           1.34         1.34             --              1.34       1.34
                                      (0.12)                   (0.09)       (0.09)                           (0.09)     (0.09)

Mexican Population Share, 1980         -1.16        --          -1.18        -1.18             --             -1.18      -1.18
                                      (0.18)                   (0.14)       (0.14)                           (0.14)     (0.14)

Employment Growth, 1990-2000           --            0.09        0.07         0.08              0.12           0.07       0.07
                                                   (0.02)      (0.01)       (0.01)            (0.03)         (0.01)     (0.01)

Mean Log Wage of Mexican               --           --          --            0.47             --             --          0.35
 Men in 1990 (x100)                                                         (0.43)                                      (0.45)

Relative Employment Rate of            --           --          --           -0.12             --             --         -0.06
 Mexican Men in 1990 (x100)                                                 (1.10)                                      (1.16)

R-squared                               0.78         0.11        0.86          0.86             0.10          0.86       0.86

First Stage F-statistic ( 9 d.f.)      --           --          --             --              13.40         14.81      13.06


Notes: All models estimated on sample of 142 larger cities with Census data for 1980-2000, and matching employment data from
County Business Patterns for 1982-2000. Dependent variable is number of recent (post-1990) adult Mexican immigrants in city
in 2000, divided by population in 1990. Instruments for employment growth 1990-2000 are log employment counts in 1982-1990.
Mean log wage and relative employment rate for city in 1990 are regression adjusted for characteristics of Mexican male
workers in the cty.
Table 5: Regression Models for Level or Change in Fraction of Dropouts in Local Population


                                                    Models for Fraction of             Models for Change in Fraction of
                                                     Dropouts in 2000:                 Dropouts Between 1990 and 2000:

                                                     Estimated by OLS                   Estimated by OLS              IV
                                                       (1)          (2)                    (3)         (4)             (5)

Relative Growth in "New" (Post-1990) Mexican             1.29         0.89                  0.49          0.49          0.52
 Immigrants (1990-2000)                                (0.11)       (0.19)                (0.04)        (0.10)        (0.05)

Relative Growth in "New" (Post-1980) Mexican           --             0.69                 --             0.01         --
 Immigrants (1980-1990)                                             (0.20)                              (0.10)

Employment Growth, 1990-2000                            --           -0.09                 --             0.00          0.02
                                                                    (0.03)                              (0.01)        (0.01)


R-squared                                               0.51          0.64                  0.44         0.44           0.41



Notes: All models estimated on sample of 144 larger cities with Census data for 1980-2000, and matching employment
data from County Business Patterns for 1982-2000. Dependent variable is fraction of dropouts in adult population in
city in 2000 (columns 1-2) or the change in the fraction of dropouts in the adult population from 1990 to 2000 (columns 3-5).
Model in column (5) is estimated by instrumental variables, using as instruments the fraction of Mexicans in the city
in 1980 and 1990 and the log of employment in the MSA in 1982-1990.
Table 6: Regression Models Measuring Cross-City Absorption of Excess Dropout Workers or Mexican Immigrants


                               Absorption of Excess Fraction of Dropout Workers:                Absorption of Excess Fraction of Mexican Immigrants:

                                                            Sector-Specific Absorption:                                        Sector-Specific Absorption:
                             Within   Between Inter-                  Textiles Low-Skill        Within   Between Inter-                  Textiles Low-Skill
                             Industry Industry action       Agricult. Apparel Services          Industry Industry action       Agricult. Apparel Services
                                (1)       (2)     (3)           (4)      (5)        (6)             (7)      (8)     (9)          (10)     (11)      (12)

Excess Fraction of               0.76      0.22      0.02      0.09      0.05       0.03            0.92      0.06      0.01       0.04     0.01      0.01
Dropouts or Mexican            (0.02)    (0.02)    (0.01)    (0.02)    (0.01)     (0.01)          (0.01)    (0.01)    (0.01)     (0.01)   (0.00)    (0.00)
Immigrants

R-squared                        0.84      0.37      0.03      0.17      0.24      0.33            0.96      0.25      0.01       0.14     0.13      0.41




Note: All models estimated across 150 larger cities, using 264 industry cells per city. Regressions are weighted by city size.
Table 7: Regression Models for Wage Gap Between High School and Dropout Native Male Workers



                                                  Estimated by OLS                               Estimated by IV
                                        2000         1990      Change: 1990-2000                Change: 1990-2000
                                         (1)          (2)         (3)         (4)                  (5)          (6)

Log Relative Supply (High School          0.01        -0.03        -0.04         -0.05               0.00        -0.04
vs. Dropout Labor)                      (0.01)       (0.01)       (0.04)        (0.04)             (0.07)       (0.06)

Employment Growth, 1990-2000             --           --           --            -0.06              --           -0.01
                                                                                (0.04)                          (0.05)


R-squared                                 0.00         0.04         0.01         0.02               0.00          0.00


Notes: All models estimated on sample of 145 larger cities with Census data for 1980-2000, and matching employment
data from County Business Patterns for 1982-2000. Dependent variable is gap between regression adjusted mean
log wage of high school male natives in city and regression adjusted mean log wage of dropout male natives in city.
Instruments in column (5) are fraction Mexican immigrants in adult population of city in 1980 and 1990. Instruments
in column (6) are fraction of Mexican immigrants in adult population in 1980 and 1990, and log of city-level employment
in 1982-1990.
Figure 1: Number and Location of Mexican Immigrants, By Arrival Year

                   700,000                                                                  0.9


                   600,000
                                                                                            0.8




                                                                                                  Fraction in California or Texas
                   500,000
Number of People




                                              Fraction in California
                                                                                            0.7
                   400,000                    or Texas (right scale)


                   300,000
                                                                                            0.6

                   200,000

                                                                                            0.5
                                          Size of Cohort
                   100,000                (left scale)


                        0                                                                   0.4
                         1935 1940 1945 1950 1955 1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995
                                                           Year of Arrival
Figure 2: Growth in Mexican Immigrant Population: Recent Arrivals and Total Change



                                                     25
  Change in Mexican Immigrants/1990 Population (%)




                                                                              Las Vegas               Monterey Ca
                                                     20



                                                                                           Fresno
                                                                             Merced
                                                     15




                                                     10

                                                                                 El Paso

                                                                        Los Angeles             Laredo
                                                      5




                                                      0
                                                          0   5                    10                    15                   20   25
                                                              Number of Post-1990 Immigrants in City in 2000/1990 Population (%)
Figure 3: Location of Mexican Immigrants, by Years Since Arrival

                             0.7


                             0.6


                             0.5
Fraction of Arrival Cohort




                                                                         In California, 1990
                             0.4                                         In California, 2000
                                                                         In Texas, 1990
                                                                         In Texas, 2000
                             0.3


                             0.2


                             0.1


                              0
                                   0-3   4-5   6-8   9-10       11-15      16-20      21-25    26-30   31-40
                                                         Years Since Arrival
      Figure 4: Fraction of Mexican Immigrants with Less than High School Education by
                                      Years Since Arrival
                                         0.85

                                                                                                        Men 1990
                                                                                                        Women 1990
Fraction Without High School Education




                                         0.80                                                           Men 2000
                                                                                                        Women 2000


                                         0.75



                                         0.70



                                         0.65



                                         0.60
                                                0-3   4-5   6-8   9-10       11-15      16-20   21-25       26-30    31-40
                                                                      Years Since Arrival
                    Figure 5: Fraction of Mexican Immigrants with Low English by Years Since Arrival


                                             0.85
Fraction With Low English Speaking Ability




                                             0.75                                                    Men 1990
                                                                                                     Men 2000
                                                                                                     Women 1990
                                             0.65
                                                                                                     Women 2000


                                             0.55



                                             0.45



                                             0.35



                                             0.25
                                                    0-3   4-5   6-8   9-10       11-15      16-20   21-25   26-30   31-40
                                                                          Years Since Arrival
                                Figure 6: Mean Log Hourly Wages of Mexican Immigrants by Years Since Arrival


                                2.7

                                2.6               Men 2000

                                2.5               Men 1990
Mean Log Hourly Wage (1999 $)




                                2.4               Women 2000

                                2.3               Women 1990

                                2.2

                                2.1

                                 2

                                1.9

                                1.8

                                1.7
                                      0-3   4-5         6-8      9-10       11-15      16-20   21-25      26-30   31-40
                                                                     Years Since Arrival
                 Figure 7: Fraction of Mexican Immigrants in Agriculture, by Years Since Arrival

                                   0.30

                                                              Men 1990                Women 1990
                                   0.25
                                                              Men 2000                Women 2000
Fraction Employed in Agriculture




                                   0.20



                                   0.15



                                   0.10



                                   0.05



                                   0.00
                                          0-3   4-5   6-8   9-10       11-15      16-20    21-25   26-30   31-40
                                                                Years Since Arrival
Figure 8: Fraction of Mexican Immigrants in Construction, by Years Since Arrival

                                    0.30

                                    0.28
                                                                                             Men 1990
                                    0.26
Fraction Employed in Construction




                                                                                             Men 2000
                                    0.24

                                    0.22

                                    0.20

                                    0.18

                                    0.16

                                    0.14

                                    0.12

                                    0.10
                                           0-3   4-5   6-8   9-10       11-15      16-20   21-25    26-30   31-40
                                                                 Years Since Arrival
          Figure 9: Fraction of Mexican Immigrants in Retail Trade, by Years Since Arrival


                                    0.20



                                    0.18
Fraction Employed in Retail Trade




                                    0.16                                                    Women 2000

                                                                                            Women 1990
                                    0.14



                                    0.12



                                    0.10



                                    0.08
                                           0-3   4-5   6-8   9-10       11-15      16-20   21-25   26-30   31-40
                                                                 Years Since Arrival
Figure 10: Inflow Rate of Mexican Immigrants and Change in Fraction of Dropouts

                                   0.06


                                   0.04
  Change in Fraction of Dropouts




                                   0.02


                                   0.00


                                   -0.02


                                   -0.04


                                   -0.06


                                   -0.08
                                        0.00   0.02   0.04    0.06     0.08    0.10    0.12    0.14     0.16   0.18   0.20
                                                             Inflow Rate of Recent Mexican Immigrants
Figure 11: Contribution of Within-Industry Component to Absorption of Dropouts


                                    0.25


                                    0.20
  Excess Dropout Intensity in MSA




                                                                                                                  McAllen Tx
                                     0.15
                                                                    Los Angeles

                                                               El Paso
                                     0.10                                                      Bakersfield Ca
                                                            Miami                                                   Visalia Ca

                                                                                                     Fresno Ca
                                    0.05                                                             Salinas Ca

                                                                                            Hickory NC
                                    0.00                                                   Stockton Ca

                                                                                  Modesto CA
                                    -0.05


                                    -0.10
                                         -0.1   -0.05   0           0.05             0.1            0.15          0.2            0.25
                                                        Excess Fraction of Dropouts in MSA
Figure 12: Contribution of Between-Industry Component to Absorption of Dropouts


                                                  0.25
  Excess of Dropout-Intensive Industries in MSA




                                                  0.20


                                                   0.15


                                                   0.10                                                                    Visalia Ca

                                                                                Hickory NC            Bakersfield Ca
                                                  0.05                                                       Fresno Ca

                                                                                                             Salinas Ca    McAllen Tx

                                                  0.00
                                                                                                   Los Angeles


                                                  -0.05


                                                  -0.10
                                                       -0.1   -0.05   0        0.05          0.1            0.15          0.2           0.25
                                                                      Excess Fraction of Dropouts in MSA
Figure 13: Contribution of Between-Industry Component to Absorption of Dropouts
                              Excluding Agriculture

                                                  0.25
  Excess of Dropout-Intensive Industries in MSA




                                                  0.20


                                                   0.15


                                                   0.10

                                                                                                 Hickory NC
                                                  0.05


                                                  0.00


                                                  -0.05


                                                  -0.10
                                                       -0.1   -0.05   0        0.05        0.1           0.15   0.2   0.25
                                                                      Excess Fraction of Dropouts in MSA
Figure 14: Contribution of Between-Industry Component to Absorption of Dropouts
                    Agriculture and Textiles/Apparel Industries

                                                  0.25
  Excess of Dropout-Intensive Industries in MSA




                                                  0.20        Agriculture

                                                              Textiles and Apparel
                                                   0.15

                                                                                                                                 Visalia Ca
                                                   0.10
                                                                                                                Salinas Ca
                                                                                               Bakersfield Ca
                                                  0.05                                                              Fresno Ca


                                                  0.00


                                                  -0.05


                                                  -0.10
                                                      -0.10   -0.05         0.00        0.05            0.10     0.15           0.20          0.25
                                                                               Excess Fraction of Dropouts in MSA
Figure 15: Within Industry Component of Absorption of Mexican Immigrant Workers

                                     0.35

                                     0.30
                                                                                                                                  McAllen
 Fraction Absorbed Within Industry




                                     0.25                                                                                     Yuma


                                     0.20

                                      0.15                                                             Salinas
                                                                                              Merced
                                                                                                                 Visalia
                                      0.10                                                  Fresno
                                                                                            Yakima
                                     0.05
                                                                             Bakersfield
                                     0.00

                                     -0.05

                                     -0.10
                                         -0.10   -0.05   0.00    0.05      0.10      0.15       0.20       0.25            0.30        0.35
                                                           Excess Fraction of Mexican Immigrants in City
Figure 16: Inflow Rate of Mexican Immigrants and Change in Relative Supply of Dropout
                                       Labor


                                          0.5

                                          0.4
  Change in Log Rel. Supply of Dropouts




                                          0.3

                                          0.2

                                           0.1

                                          0.0

                                          -0.1

                                          -0.2

                                          -0.3

                                          -0.4
                                              0.00   0.02   0.04   0.06    0.08     0.10     0.12         0.14   0.16   0.18   0.20
                                                                      Inflow Rate of Mexican Immigrants
Figure 17: Inflow Rate of Mexican Immigrants and Change in Relative Wage of Native
                                   Male Dropouts

                                                 0.4
  Change High School/Dropout Wage (Native Men)




                                                 0.3


                                                 0.2


                                                  0.1


                                                 0.0


                                                 -0.1


                                                 -0.2


                                                 -0.3


                                                 -0.4
                                                     0.00   0.02   0.04   0.06       0.08      0.10       0.12       0.14   0.16   0.18   0.20
                                                                                 Inflow Rate of Mexican Immigrants
