                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        GLOBALIZATION AND EMERGING MARKETS:
                              WITH OR WITHOUT CRASH?

                                               Hélène Rey
                                             Philippe Martin

                                          Working Paper 11550
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w11550


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 2005




We thank Daniel Cohen, Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, Gene Grossman, Galina Hale, Olivier Jeanne, Enrique
Mendoza, Richard Portes, Lars Svensson, Aaron Tornell as well as participants at many seminars for very
helpful comments on a previous version. We also thank Graciela Kaminsky and Sergio Schmukler for the
stock market data. Rachel Polimeni provided excellent research assistance. This paper is part of a research
network on ‘The Analysis of International Capital Markets: Understanding Europe’s Role in the Global
Economy’, funded by the European Commission under the Research Training Network Programme (Contract
No. HPRNOE1999OE00067). The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by Philippe Martin and Hélène Rey. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Globalization and Emerging Markets: With or Without Crash?
Philippe Martin and Hélène Rey
NBER Working Paper No. 11550
August 2005
JEL No. F3, F4

                                           ABSTRACT



This paper develops a theory of crisis based on the demand side of the economy. We analyze the

impact of financial and trade globalizations on asset prices, investment and the possibility of

self-fulfilling financial crashes. In a two-country model, we show that financial and trade
globalizations have different effects on asset prices, investment and income in the emerging market

and in the industrialized country. Whereas trade globalization always has a positive effect on the

emerging market, financial globalization may not, especially when trade costs are high. For

intermediate levels of financial transaction costs and high levels of trade costs, pessimistic

expectations can be self-fulfilling and may lead to a collapse in demand for goods and assets of the

emerging market. Such a crash in asset prices is accompanied by a current account reversal, a drop

in income and investment and more market incompleteness. We show that countries with lower

income are more prone to such demand-based financial crashes. Our model can replicate the main

stylized facts of financial crashes in emerging markets. Our results suggest that, to reduce the risk

of financial crashes, emerging markets should liberalize trade in goods before trade in assets.



Philippe Martin                                       Hélène Rey
University of Paris 1 and PSE                         Department of Economics
48 Boulevard Jourdan                                  Woodrow Wilson School
75014 Paris                                           Princeton, NJ 08544
FRANCE                                                and NBER
martin-p@enpc.fr                                      hrey@princeton.edu
1     Introduction
Do emerging markets reap the benefits of financial globalization, enjoying increased investment and a
better ability to diversify risk? Or do they face a higher likelihood of financial crash as more capital
flows in?
    The empirical literature supports both possibilities. On the one hand, a number of papers in
          1
finance       show that financial opening in emerging markets leads to a decrease in the cost of equity
capital and can have a positive eﬀect on domestic investment. On the other hand, a voluminous
literature surveyed by Aizenman (2002) emphasizes the risks of liberalization and the vulnerability of
emerging market financial systems to capital mobility2 . Wyplosz (2001) finds that external financial
liberalization is considerably more destabilizing in developing countries than in developed economies.
Kaminski and Schmukler (2001) show that stock markets become more volatile in the three years
following financial liberalization but stabilize in the longer run.
    Interestingly, recent empirical work shows that goods trade openness also influences the frequency
of crashes in emerging markets, but in the opposite direction to financial openness. Cavallo and
Frankel (2004) find that trade openness (instrumented by gravity variables) reduces the vulnerability
of countries to sudden stops. The Argentina of the 1990s is often presented as a typical example of a
financially open economy relatively closed to goods trade. It has suﬀered heavily from sudden stops
(see Calvo et al. (2003), Calvo and Talvi (2004) and Cavallo (2004)).
    These contradictory eﬀects of financial and trade globalizations are illustrated in Table A. We
report the average number of financial crashes per year for developed and emerging economies, dividing
each group along the dimensions of financial and trade openness3 . It is noteworthy that all Latin
American countries (except Panama and Jamaica), whether financially open or not, are in the closed
trade group. Table A suggests that opening to capital movements is very positively correlated with
the frequency of crashes for emerging markets but not for industrialized countries. Trade openness,
however, is associated with a large decrease in the frequency of crashes for emerging markets4 . Hence,
according to Table A, being an emerging market open to financial flows while closed to goods flows
maximizes the frequency of crashes.
   1 See for example Bekaert et al. (2001), Henry (2000) and Chari and Henry (2002). The macroeconomic literature

finds more tenuous evidence that financial opening contributes to long-term growth. See Edwards (2001) and McKenzie
(2001), for example.
   2 See for example Rossi (1999), Demirgüc-Kunt and Detragiache (1998), Kaminsky and Reinhart (1999).
   3 More precisely, developed countries are defined as those with GDP per capita above South Korea. A crash is defined

as a monthly drop in the stock index (in dollars) larger than two standard deviations of the average monthly change.
We divided the sample in periods for which countries were financially open and financially closed following Kaminsky
and Schmukler (2001). Hence, among our 62 countries (34 emerging countries) 31 appear twice as they changed status
during the sample years. We then divided each group in terms of their openness to trade. We define the average openness
ratio during the period considered as the average of exports plus imports over GDP. We call open (respectively closed)
a country whose openness ratio is above (respectively below) the median of its group. The trade openness ratio cut-oﬀ
for financially open emerging countries is 63% of GDP. For the group of financially closed countries, the trade openess
ratio cut-oﬀ is 54%. The Appendix posted at http://www.princeton.edu/~hrey/ provides more details on the data, the
periods considered and the way we classify financially open and financially closed economies.
   4 This is not the case for developed countries, but for them the frequency of crises remains low overall.




                                                          1
                        Table A: Frequency of crashes, financial and trade openness


                                           Developed                      Emerging

                                                       Trade in goods
                                    more closed   more open     more closed    more open
               Financially closed       .07            .10          .35              .15
               Financially open         .05            .14          .76              .57


   The contribution of our paper is to present a general framework in which these contradictory eﬀects
of financial and trade liberalizations can be reconciled. We can also make sense of the diﬀerential
impact of financial globalization on emerging markets and developed economies. We emphasize the
key role of demand and market size in driving both the positive eﬀect of financial integration on an
emerging economy and its negative consequences.
   In our model, the world consists of one emerging market and one developed economy which diﬀer
only in their productivity level. In both countries, entrepreneurs operating in monopolistic goods
markets decide whether or not to finance risky fixed-sized investments, sell shares of these investments
on the stock exchange, and acquire shares in other risky ventures developed at home or abroad.
Entrepreneurs may turn pessimistic and expect low levels of aggregate investment. Due to home bias in
goods trade, negative prospects regarding investment translate into low expected income and demand
for goods, low profits and hence low demand for domestic assets. This validates their pessimistic priors
and deters them from developing risky investments. The home bias in financial markets in turn implies
that the fall in income in the emerging market also leads to a fall in domestic asset demand and prices.
In this equilibrium, asset prices and investment collapse, income decreases and a capital flight occurs
since domestic agents buy shares in the developed country stock exchange. The circular causality
is magnified if trade costs are high since firms’ profits and dividends in more closed economies are
more dependent on the level of local demand. They are therefore more at risk when expectations turn
pessimistic.
   The likelihood of a crash is higher at an intermediate degree of financial segmentation. When
financial markets are perfectly integrated, no financial home bias exists and arbitrage equates asset
prices, so that local income conditions do not alter the cost of capital in the emerging market. Sym-
metrically, if financial asset markets are very segmented internationally, emerging market agents have
no choice but to invest at home. This rules out capital flight and multiple equilibria, at the cost of
ineﬃciency in capital markets.
   In our setting, financial globalization increases asset prices, investment and income in the emerging
market, but only when international trade costs are low. When emerging markets start opening their
financial account but are closed to trade in goods, they are more prone to financial crashes. This
comes chiefly from their having a lower income than developed countries and from their dependence


                                                   2
on local demand due to market segmentation. The demand-based mechanism also implies that our
model has the potential of generating quick recovery in the aftermath of crises.
    Our work is related to the literature on financial crises in emerging markets and sudden stops. Calvo
(1998) explores the role of credit frictions to explain sudden stops. Mendoza (2004) and Mendoza and
Smith (2002, 2004) show within an equilibrium business cycle framework that small productivity
shocks can trigger sudden stops in the presence of credit constraints when an economy is highly
leveraged5 . Aghion et al. (2004) also use a model with credit frictions and find that countries with
intermediate levels of domestic financial development and free capital movements are more prone to
macroeconomic volatility. In contrast to these papers and most of the existing literature, however, a
financial crisis in our model does not come from the existence of credit constraints on capital markets
and/or balance sheet eﬀects (as in Krugman (1999), Caballero and Krishnamurthy (1998), Christiano
et al. (2000), Schneider and Tornell (2004), Chang and Velasco (2001), Paasche (2001) and Cespedes
et al. (2004)). Neither is it caused by moral hazard (as in McKinnon and Pill (1999) and Corsetti
et al. (1999)). Instead, in our set up, the crisis is driven by a collapse in demand when goods and
financial markets are segmented by trading costs and asset markets are incomplete. Our theory is
therefore complementary to the existing literature on financial crisis6 . Our model has multiple rational
expectations equilibria, like in Chang and Velasco (2001), for example, where internationally illiquid
banks may be subject to a run. But in our set up self-fulfilling expectations operate through investment
behavior and endogenously incomplete asset markets. Our framework has clear and important policy
implications: only once emerging markets are well-integrated in world goods market should they
increase significantly their degree of financial openness. We make this point in a formal model, where
any degree of frictions on the goods and financial markets and their interactions can be analyzed.
    We present the model in Section 2. Section 3 describes the properties of the equilibrium in "normal
times" while Section 4 investigates the conditions necessary for a financial crash to occur. Section 5
performs a quantitative evaluation of our model. Finally, we draw some conclusions in Section 6.


2       Model
Ours is the only model known to us that analyzes jointly home market eﬀects in goods and asset
markets and their interactions. Firms sell a monopolistic good in international markets where trade is
costly. They also sell claims on their expected (risky) profits on international stock markets segmented
by financial trading costs. Our modeling strategy is simple enough to handle both types of frictions
in a tractable way.
   5 See also Mendoza (2002) and the survey of Arellano and Mendoza (2003). For a view of Asian crises based on

implicit fiscal liabilities, see Burnside et al (2001). Matsuyama (2004) presents a model in which borrowing constraints
interact with financial globalization to produce an endogenous degree of inequality across otherwise identical countries.
   6 We emphasize that the other channels studied in the literature may be important as well to explain emerging market

crises. Our model is certainly compatible with all of them.




                                                           3
    Technology and trading costs
     There are two countries, E (emerging) and I (industrialized), and two periods. All decisions are
taken in the first period. At the beginning of the first period, L identical agents per country are each
endowed with one unit of labor and one firm. There are two sectors: a perfectly competitive constant
returns to scale sector with zero trade cost, which serves as the numeraire, and a monopolistically
competitive sector with iceberg trade costs τ T . Transport costs and trade policies both aﬀect τ T . Each
firm corresponds to one variety, so that the total number of varieties in the world is 2L. Both sectors
use labor as their only input. The only diﬀerence between the two countries is labor productivity,
which we assume equal in both sectors and higher in the industrialized country than in the emerging
market. Free intersectoral labor mobility, perfect competition and free trade in the CRS good imply
that wage rates wI (in the industrialized country) and wE (in the emerging market), are equal to the
marginal productivity of labor. In the monopolistic good sector, labor productivity is also given by
wI and wE , so that the marginal cost of production in numeraire units is equal in both countries.
    In the monopolistically competitive sector, firms earn operating profits in the first period. To create
a diversification incentive both at the national and the international level, we introduce a simple source
of uncertainty. This will induce agents to diversify in equilibrium their ownership of firms7 . We assume
that first period profits of monopolistic firms do not always materialize in dividends to shareholders
in the second period. Without firm specific investments, these profits vanish, due for example to
mismanagement at the firm level. When investment is performed by the firm, profits are distributed
to shareholders with some positive probability. The price of a share which is a claim to risky profits
is given by pE . The total cost of investment is F + 12 zE
                                                         2
                                                           Q, where zE is the number of investments
undertaken by a firm in the emerging market and Q is the price of the investment good8 . The marginal
cost of undertaking investments rises as the firm decides to do more investments. In addition, a fixed
cost F has to be paid to start investing. We assume that this fixed cost is paid individually by each
investor to all other agents in the economy so that aggregate income is not aﬀected by it9 . The value
of a firm is therefore the expected payoﬀ of the investment πE = pE zE − 12 zE
                                                                             2
                                                                               Q − F. The investment
good is produced with a Cobb-Douglas production function with a share (1 − a) for labor and a for
the composite good made of all varieties of the monopolistic sector (see below).
    In the second period, there are N exogenous and equally likely states of nature, and the realization
is revealed at the beginning of that period after all decisions have been taken. As in Acemoglu
and Zilibotti (1997) and Martin and Rey (2004), the technology implies that each investment gives
dividends (the operating profits of the first period) in only one state of nature. In all other states
of nature, the operating profits of the first period become zero. The payoﬀ structure is such that an
   7 Foreign agents cannot operate production technologies in the domestic country, hence there is no FDI in our model.

They can however invest in claims to domestic risky profits (see below).
   8 Industrialized country agents face a similar investment cost function. We discuss in the working paper version

Martin and Rey (2002) how our results would be aﬀected by a more general convex cost function.
   9 If the fixed cost has an impact on aggregate income, the main results of the model are unaﬀected. However, the

results are analytically less tractable.



                                                          4
investment in country E yields dE if the corresponding state of the world is realized and 0 otherwise.
Hence, investments in the two countries have ex-ante expected dividends, dE /N and dI /N . All risky
claims to operating profits are traded on the stock market at the end of period one, so that each
claim corresponds to an Arrow-Debreu asset. This gives agents in both countries a strong incentive
to diversify and buy shares of both foreign and domestic investments. We assume that the number
of states of nature N is large enough so that N > Z w where Z w = L(zE + zI ) is the total number of
investments/assets issued in the world. N − Z w is therefore the endogenous degree of incompleteness
of financial markets. No duplication occurs in equilibrium so that each investment/asset in the world
is unique10 . This modelling introduces a simple incentive for agents to diversify their portfolios across
firms in an otherwise standard monopolistic competition framework in the goods market.
    At the end of the first period, consumption takes place and shares are sold on each of the stock
markets. These shares can be traded internationally, but an agent in either country who wants to buy
assets in the other market must pay a financial trading cost. This cost, essential for our results, may
capture government regulations on capital flows, diﬀerences in regulations in accounting, banking and
commission fees, exchange rate transaction fees and information costs. The presence of these costs
translate into a home bias in asset transactions and holdings11 . We denote the transaction costs
on financial assets τ F and assume that they take the form of an iceberg cost. This implies that the
transaction fee is paid in shares. Agents have to buy (1 + τ F ) > 1 units of shares to receive one
share12 . We interpret financial globalization as a process through which these transaction costs are
reduced.

    Utility and budget constraints
    We assume that the utility of an agent in each country is given by the non-expected utility function
introduced by Epstein and Zin (1989) and Weil (1990). This allows the intertemporal elasticity of
substitution (which we assume to be 1 for simplicity) to be diﬀerent from the coeﬃcient of relative
risk aversion 1/ε . In the emerging market, the utility of a representative agent is given by:

                                                            "                      # 1−1/ε
                                                                                       1
                                      h           i          XN
                                                                 1
                        E(UE ) = ln c1−µ µ
                                     EY CE1           + β ln       cE2 (n)1−1/ε                                       (1)
                                                             n=1
                                                                 N

where cE2 (n) denotes the second period consumption in one of the N states of the world and E is the
   1 0 This is because as long as some states of nature have not been covered, the price of an asset associated with these

states will always be higher than if the agent were to replicate an existing investment/asset. This could obviously lead
to some exercise of monopolistic power in the asset market, but we assume that investment developers do not exploit
it. The issue of “financial” monopolistic competition in this type of framework is dealt with in Martin and Rey (2004),
who show that it creates another source of financial home bias.
   1 1 There is strong empirical evidence for home bias and for the role of such costs in generating at least part of the

bias. See Portes and Rey (2005) for the importance of information costs and Mendoza and Smith (2004) for another
model featuring trading costs on asset markets.
   1 2 Iceberg transaction costs are borrowed from the trade and geography literature. See Martin and Rey (2004) for

a more precise description. This modelling allows the elasticity of substitution between assets to be the same for all
agents and does not require the formal introduction of an intermediation sector. Gordon and Bovenberg (1996) use
a similar type of proportional transaction cost on capital flows and focus on the cost of acquiring information about
foreign countries.



                                                            5
expectation sign. cEY is the consumption of the CRS good with a share 1 − µ in the utility function
while µ is the share of the composite good CE1 made of all varieties produced in the world:

                                                                      1−1/σ
                                                                          1

                                         XL              L
                                                         X
                                CE1    =   cEi1 1−1/σ +   cEj1 1−1/σ                                                               (2)
                                             i=1                      j=1

σ > 1 is the elasticity of substitution between goods, while cEi1 and cEj1 are the consumptions of
domestic and imported varieties in period 1. This composite good is used both for consumption and
investment in projects.
    The first-period budget constraint of an agent in E is:


                              L
                              X                         L
                                                        X                      Lz
                                                                               X  E           LzI
                                                                                              X
          yE    = cEY1 +             vEi cEi1 +           (1 + τ T )vIj cEj1 +      pEk sEk +     (1 + τ F )pIl sEl                  (3)
                              i=1                       j=1                        k=1                 l=1
                = wE + πE + T

where yE is the emerging market per-capita income of the first period, vEi is the price of the ith variety
produced in the E market and vIj is the price of the jth variety produced in the I market and πE is the
investment payoﬀ. Asset prices are denoted by pEk and pIl and sEk and sEl are demands for shares
of risky investments developed in the emerging market and in the industrialized country respectively.
T is the transfer (in equilibrium equal to F ). The budget constraint in the industrialized country is
analogous. In period 2, income and consumption come only from dividends of shares purchased in the
first period. Hence, the budget constraint for an agent in E is:


                        cE2 = dE sEk , if k ∈ [1, LzE ] ; dI sEl if l ∈ [1, LzI ]; 0 otherwise                                       (4)

We can therefore rewrite the utility of an agent in the emerging market as:


                                                                    "Lz                                                    # 1−1/ε
                                                                                                                               1
                  h             i               1                    X  E                       LzI
                                                                                                X
                       1−µ µ                                                        1−1/ε                          1−1/ε
    E(UE ) = ln       cEY CE1       + β ln          1      + β ln           (dE sEk )       +         (dI sE l )                     (5)
                                             N 1−1/ε                 k=1                        l=1

The utility and budget constraint of an agent in the industrialized country are symmetric. In the
second period, this utility function is similar to the one introduced by Dixit and Stiglitz to represent
preferences for diﬀerentiated products. In fact, ε can be interpreted as the elasticity of substitution
between assets. In what follows, we impose ε > 1 to have financial home bias and realistic asset
demands13 . This restriction on ε mirrors the standard assumption in the diﬀerentiated products
literature that the elasticity of substitution between diﬀerent varieties σ is greater than 1. This re-
striction also implies that assets are substitutes rather than complements as in Acemoglu and Zilibotti
  1 3 See Section 3 below. The demand for foreign assets decreases with transaction costs τ
                                                                                                F for any ε. But using
iceberg trading costs (paid for in shares) implies that the demand inclusive of transaction costs (which determines the
equilibrium on the stock market) would increase with τ F if ε were to be smaller than 1.



                                                                     6
(1997).14 Imposing ε > 1 has the additional benefit of ruling out any problem for the states in which
consumption is zero in the second period due to market incompleteness.15
    Agents in both countries choose consumption (cEY , CE1 and cIY , CI1 ) and firms choose investment
(the number of investments per firm are zE and zI ) at the beginning of the first period. They form
expectations about the number of investments in which other firms will engage, since this will have
an impact on the price of the assets they will sell at the end of the first period. As investments are
ex-ante symmetric, the demands for each asset in a given country are identical16 . We call sEE (sEI )
the demand for shares of a “typical” asset in the E (I) market by an emerging market agent. Similarly,
we denote by cEE and cEI the first period demand by an emerging market agent for a good produced
in E and I respectively. Because of symmetry, within each country, all assets have the same price
denoted by pE and pI respectively. Since marginal costs in units of the numeraire are equal to 1 in
both countries, and the elasticity of substitution between varieties σ is the same for consumers and
firms, all firms in the world choose the same price for the monopolistically competitive goods. That
price, equal to the marginal cost multiplied by the mark-up, is given by vE = vI = σ/ (σ − 1) .For
notational simplicity, we drop the expectational sign in what follows.

    Definition of Equilibrium
    An equilibrium is defined by a set of good and asset prices [vE , vI , pE , pI ], consumption and in-
vestment allocations [CE1 , CI1 , cEY , cIY , zE , zI , cE2 (n), cI2 (n)] and portfolio shares [sEE , sEI , sII , sIE ]
such that:
i) [CE1 , cEY , sEE , sEI , cE2 (n)] maximize UE subject to E’s budget constraints (equations (3) and (4))
taking prices as given.
ii) [CI1 , cIY , sII , sIE , cI2 (n)] maximize UI subject to I’s budget constraints (the analogue of equations
(3) and (4)) taking prices as given.
iii) [vE , vI , zE , zI ] maximize profits and the investment payoﬀs of firms taking prices and investment
decisions of other firms as given. A firm invests if and only if its expected investment payoﬀ πi =
pi zi − 12 zi2 Q − F is non-negative for i = {E, I}17 .
iv) Asset markets clear: LsEE + L(1 + τ F )sIE = 1 and LsII + L(1 + τ F )sEI = 1.
v) The world resource constraint is verified which implies:
   £                                                                            ¡    ¢           ¤
 L cEY + cIY + LcEE + LcEI (1 + τ T ) + LcII + LcIE (1 + τ T ) + 12 (zE
                                                                      2
                                                                        + zI2 )Q σ−a
                                                                                  σ    + dE + dI
    = L (wE + wI ) 18
vi) Expectations are rational.

  1 4 In  section 5, we review the existing empirical estimates for ε : they range from 1 to 12.
  1 5 When    we introduce a safe asset (see Section 5) this issue of course does not arise any longer.
   1 6 In each country, agents are diﬀerent in the sense that they hold diﬀerent assets but they choose identical portfolios

and consumption patterns.
   1 7 We focus on symmetric equilibria in which all or no firms in a country invest. Equilibria in which only a portion of

firms invest are studied in the working paper version Martin and Rey (2002).
   1 8 We have used the cost minimization programme of firms to derive their demands for the investment good.




                                                             7
3       When things go well

We first solve the model in the optimistic case, when firms of the emerging market expect others to
invest in a positive number of projects. We define q = pE /pI as the relative asset price and d = dE /dI
as the relative dividend. The budget constraints and the first order conditions of an emerging market
agent imply the optimal consumption demands:


                                                                   (1 − µ)yE
                                                           cEY =
                                                                    (1 + β)
                                                                                                  −σ
                                  µ (σ − 1) yE              µ (σ − 1) yE (1 + τ T )
                           cEE =                   ; cEI =                                                    (6)
                               Lσ(1 + β) [1 + φT ]             Lσ(1 + β) [1 + φT ]
                     βyE 1    £                     ¤−1           βyE    (1 + τ F )−ε (q/d)ε−1
            sEE   =            zE + φF zI (q/d)ε−1      ; sEI =
                    1 + β LpE                                    1 + β LpI [zE + φF zI (q/d)ε−1 ]
where 0 ≤ φT = (1+τ T )1−σ ≤ 1 is a measure of trade openness and φF = (1+τ F )1−ε ≤ 1 is a measure
of financial openness. The demand for foreign shares (sEI ) decreases with financial transaction costs.
                                                                                                       19
    At the optimum, the marginal cost of investing equals the marginal benefit: zE Q = pE                   . The
demands for shares sEE and sEI increase with income and decrease with the total number of invest-
ments/assets. Analogous conditions hold for the industrialized country. For all firms in the economy
to invest, the expected payoﬀ must be positive: pE zE − 12 zE
                                                            2
                                                              Q = 12 p2E /Q ≥ F .
    We normalize the number of shares so that the stock market equilibria in the two countries (in-
clusive of shares that are used to pay the transaction costs) can be written for each asset as:

                                              µ                                        ¶
                                       1 β              yE            yI φF (q/d)1−ε
                       1 =                                        +                                           (7)
                                      pE 1 + β zE + zI φF (q/d)ε−1 zI + zE φF (q/d)1−ε
                                              µ                                        ¶
                                      1 β               yI           yE φF (q/d)ε−1
                       1 =                                        +
                                      pI 1 + β zI + zE φF (q/d)1−ε zE + zI φF (q/d)ε−1
There are L (zE + zI ) such equilibrium conditions. In the parenthesis, the first term represents the
demand coming from domestic agents and the second term foreigners’ demand (inclusive of transaction
costs). These equations imply a financial home-market eﬀect: local income has a more important
impact on the local asset market than foreign income, as long as φF is less than 1, i.e. as long as some
transaction costs exist.
    The dividends of the second period are the operational profits of the first period. Hence they are
equal to sales (to consumers and firms) divided by the elasticity of substitution as in any model of
monopolistic competition:
                                                                         ¡ 2         ¢
                                                    µ (yE + yI φT )   1 a zE + φT zI2 Q
                                      dE      =                     +                                         (8)
                                                   σ(1 + β)(1 + φT ) 2     σ(1 + φT )
                                                                         ¡ 2       2
                                                                                     ¢
                                                    µ(yI + yE φT )    1 a zI + φT zE   Q
                                      dI      =                     +
                                                   σ(1 + β)(1 + φT ) 2     σ(1 + φT )
                                    a               −a
 19 Q                           σ
        = a−a (1 − a)a−1       σ−1
                                          [L(1 + φT )] σ−1 is the price of the investment good.


                                                                    8
These equations imply a trade home-market eﬀect: local income and investment have a more important
impact on sales and profits of local firms than foreign income and investment, as long as φT is less
than 1, i.e. as long as trade costs exist. Because our theoretical argument requires only one source
of trade home-market eﬀect, we assume from now on that a = 0, so that the investment good only
requires labor, Q = 1 and profits only come from sales to consumers. This allows us to derive all
results analytically. We come back to the more general case with a > 0 in the quantitative section.

3.1     Equilibrium relationship between asset prices, dividends and income
        shares

As world income is fixed20 , and the two countries have the same size, it proves convenient to define
sY = yE /(yE + yI ) as the share of the emerging market in world income. From the budget constraint
and the optimal investment rule, we get the first equilibrium relation between the relative income and
the relative asset price q, which we call the yy schedule:

                                              sw (2 + β)           β
                                       sY =              +                                                           (9)
                                               2 (1 + β)   2(1 + β)(1 + q −2 )
where sw = wE /(wE + wI ) < 1/2 is the share of the emerging market wage income in the world wage
income. The equilibrium yy relation implies that an increase in the relative asset price q generates an
increase in relative income sY . The reason is that emerging market investments are sold at a higher
price and more investments are started.
   Using the optimal investment rule, equation (7) of the stock market equilibrium gives:

                                            sY (1 − φ2F ) + qφF (q/d)1−ε + φ2F
                                       q=                                                                           (10)
                                             φF (q/d)ε−1 + q − sY q(1 − φ2F )
If φF = 1 (zero transaction costs on asset trade) then q = d1−1/ε . This implies quite intuitively that
without any financial segmentation, the relative price of assets depends only on the relative dividend
and the elasticity of substitution but not on local demand.
   Using (8), we can derive the relative dividend as:

                                                     sY (1 − φT ) + φT
                                                d=                                                                  (11)
                                                      1 − sY (1 − φT )
If φT = 1 (zero transaction costs on goods trade) then d = 1. This implies, also quite intuitively, that
in the case of perfect goods market integration operating profits and therefore dividends do not depend
on local incomes. An increase in the relative income of the emerging market raises local demand more
if there is home bias in goods. In turn, the surge in local demand increases relative operating profits
and dividends. Lower trade costs raise relative profits and d as long as sY < 1/2.
 2 0 From                                                                 β
            the stock market equilibria we obtain that pE zE + pI zI =       (y + yI ). Using the optimal investment rule
                                                                         1+β E
                                                                         2L(1+β)
and the definition of world income, we therefore have L(yE + yI ) =        2+β
                                                                                 (wE + wI ). Hence total world income in
the first period is fixed.




                                                            9
   Together, (10) and (11) provide a non-linear relation between the share of income in the emerging
market sY and the relative asset price q. We call this positively sloped relation the qq schedule. Two
eﬀects are at work: first, an increase in income raises demand (mostly) for locally produced goods due
to home bias in trade (φT < 1) thereby increasing profits and dividends (trade home-market eﬀect).
This, in turn, increases the demand for assets and their relative price. Second, an increase in income in
the emerging market leads to an increase in saving which, as long as markets are segmented (φF < 1),
falls disproportionately on domestic assets (financial home-market eﬀect). This also increases the
relative price of emerging market assets.

3.2    Globalization and asset prices

In this section we show that trade and financial liberalizations may have very diﬀerent eﬀects on asset
prices and income. Whereas increasing trade openness is always positive, opening the capital account
has an ambiguous eﬀect.
   On Figure 1, we illustrate the equilibrium as the intersection of the yy and qq schedules. The
relative price of assets q is less than 1 as long as the financial or goods markets are not perfectly
integrated (φF 6= 1 or φT 6= 1) and sw < 1/2. The diﬀerence in asset price is higher, the larger
the diﬀerential in productivity. The two curves cross only once, so that only one “good” equilibrium
exists. Trade integration (an increase in φT ) is easily analyzed. As long as sw < 1/2, the fall in trade
costs implies a rightward shift of the qq curve (∂sY /∂φT < 0 for a given q along the qq curve). The yy
curve, meanwhile, is unaﬀected. The eﬀect, shown on Figure 1, is an increase of the emerging market
relative asset price and income share, for any level of financial integration.
   Intuitively, lower trade costs increase profits and dividends of firms in the emerging market: from
(11), ∂d/∂φT > 0 as long as sY < 1/2. This in turn increases the demand for emerging market
assets and their relative price, which generates a rise in relative income. Due to the convexity of the
investment cost function, the total number of assets is increasing in q. Hence trade integration also
alleviates financial market incompleteness, as measured by N −Z w , and therefore reduces the volatility
of consumption in the second period.
   In contrast, a fall in financial transaction costs has an ambiguous eﬀect on asset prices, relative
income and market incompleteness. We give in Appendix I the exact condition for which an increase
in φF (increase in financial openness) leads to a rise in q. A suﬃcient condition is that the relative
return of the emerging market asset d/q is more than 1. Interestingly, this will be the case for low
enough trade costs. The condition is verified, for example, in the extreme case of perfect goods market
integration, as d = 1 and q < 1 (whenever financial integration is not perfect). Intuitively, in that case,
financial opening enables agents in the industrialized country to buy the cheaper emerging market
assets. For high trade costs, however, the profits of emerging markets firms are lower than in the
industrialized country, making emerging market assets relatively unattractive. The relation between
asset prices and financial liberalization is U -shaped, so that financial opening may actually lead to a


                                                    10
                            sY
                     1/2




                                                                   YY



                                   qq
                                                  qq’                             q
                                         1/ε    1−1/ ε                        1
                           φF1/ εφT1−1/ε φF φ'T



                        Figure 1: Trade liberalization, income and asset prices


decrease in the demand for emerging market assets (capital outflows), a decrease of their price and
more market incompleteness. These two possibilities are illustrated in Figure 2.
   Trade and financial integration have potentially opposite eﬀects in the emerging market, and they
interact in an interesting way. Weak trade integration generates lower asset prices and income in the
emerging market and may imply a depressing eﬀect of financial integration on asset prices.


3.3    Globalization and the current account

We now study the impact of globalization on the first-period current account of the emerging market.
The current account is the diﬀerence between the country’s production and the market value of
investment and consumption :

                                   µ                      ¶            µ                 ¶
                                            2      yE             β        wE − wI q 2
                       CAE = L yE −        zE   −             =L                                      (12)
                                                  1+β            1+β         1 + q2
The current account deteriorates as the relative asset price in the emerging market increases. Hence
trade integration (an increase in φT ) always implies an increase in the current account deficit. Financial
integration (an increase in φF ) also leads to a current account deficit if trade costs are not too high.
In that case (see previous section), liberalizing capital movements generates net capital inflows in the
emerging market as agents in the industrialized economy take advantage of the lower asset prices in
the emerging market. If trade and financial transaction costs are suﬃciently low, the emerging market
current account is in deficit in normal times.

                                                         11
        sY                      The low trade costs case
1/2




                                                 A          B

                 yy
                               qq
                                                     qq’
                                                                     q
                                       1/ ε                      1
              φF 1/ ε φT 1−1/ ε φ 'F          φT 1−1/ ε
        sY                      The high trade costs case
1/2




                                                            yy
                               B                      A



               qq
                      qq’
                                                                     q

 φF 1/ ε φT 1−1/ ε φ'F1/ ε φT 1−1/ ε                             1




  Figure 2: Financial liberalization, income and asset prices




                                        12
4     Self-fulfilling expectations and financial integration: when
      things go wrong
Until now, we focused on the equilibrium in which there is positive investment in both countries.
However, the decision to invest depends on the expected price of assets at the end of the period and
therefore on the strategies of all other firms. We now investigate under what conditions a crash driven
by self-fulfilling expectations can occur. We define a crash as an equilibrium in which no single firm
has an incentive to invest given that no other firm is investing. The condition for this to happen is
E(πEc ) = E(pEc zEc − 12 zEc
                          2
                             − F ) ≤ 0 where the index c denotes the crash equilibrium. In that case,
the expected asset price is low enough that no firm deviates from the zero-investment equilibrium21 .
    Expected aggregate income in the emerging market in a crash is E(LyEc ) = LwE since expected
financial wealth is zero. This aﬀects the expected relative demands for assets in the emerging and
industrialized economies. Using the stock market equilibrium (7), we show that the expected relative
asset price in crash is:

                                              ³       ´             1/ε
                                    sw (2 + β) φ1 − φF + 2(1 + β)φF 
                                                                                       dc1−1/ε
                                                     F
                            qc =                                                                                       (13)
                                                     2(1 + β)                   

where we drop the expectation operator from now on. The relative price decreases with financial
globalization at low levels of φF and then increases with globalization for higher levels of φF . The
relative dividend is given by:

                                              sw (2 + β) (1 − φT ) + 2(1 + β)φT
                                       dc =                                                                            (14)
                                                2(1 + β) − sw (1 − φT )(2 + β)
    In a crash, the emerging market relative dividend increases with lower trade costs on goods markets
and with labor productivity in the emerging market.
    A crash occurs if the expected payoﬀ of investing is negative:

                                                  β
                                        πEc =        (wE + wI )qc2 − F < 0                                             (15)
                                                 2+β
The investment payoﬀ is U -shaped as a function of φF . Inequality (15) can therefore be satisfied for
intermediate levels of financial transaction costs.
    Multiple equilibria exist if and only if:

                                                                q2
                                                      qc2 <                                                            (16)
                                                              1 + q2
  21 z
      Ec in this condition is the investment that would be done by a single “pessimistic” firm if it anticipates that no
other firm will invest. The optimal investment rule zEc = E(pEc ) still applies. This firm is small (L is large) so that its
decision does not aﬀect aggregate income or investment.




                                                            13
This guarantees that, for a given set of parameter values, a “good” equilibrium exists whenever zE > 0
and a crash equilibrium exists whenever zEc = 0.22 23
    For this condition to be verified, the fall in price during a crash must be large enough. Using (13),
it can be checked that the crash equilibrium cannot occur in the absence of capital flows (φF = 0) as
qc goes to infinity because agents can save only by buying domestic assets24 . This puts a floor on the
demand for domestic assets and on their expected price since capital flight is impossible. At the other
end, in a situation without frictions (φF = φT = 1), then qc = 1, so arbitrage implies that agents
in the industrialized country would rush to buy the assets in the emerging market in the event of a
crash. This rules out the possibility of a crash in the emerging market altogether. Hence, a crash is
possible only for intermediate levels of the financial frictions and for high enough levels of trade costs.
    Circular causation is at work. If firms believe that other firms will undertake no investment, then
they expect aggregate income in the emerging market at the end of the period to be low. Lower
expected income entails lower savings and a lower demand for assets. When financial markets are
segmented and assets are imperfect substitutes, this fall in demand for assets aﬀects local assets
disproportionately. This in turn generates a low relative asset price in the emerging market (financial
home bias eﬀect). Trade costs magnify this eﬀect since a crash that lowers income in the emerging
market also lowers demand for goods. This falls more than proportionately on goods produced in the
emerging market, so that expected operating profits in the emerging market also fall. This home bias
in trade in goods also contributes to the fall in dividends and asset prices.
    Is the emerging market more vulnerable to a financial crash than the industrialized economy? We
can compare the payoﬀ level of a single “pessimistic” investor in the emerging market (zEc = 0) given
in equation (15) to its analogue in the industrialized country (zIc = 0). We find that πIc > π Ec as
long as φT or φF < 1.The “pessimist” payoﬀ function of the industrialized country is always above the
emerging market one. Due to the dual home bias (in trade and finance), the demand for assets in the
rich market, even when depressed by pessimistic expectations, is always higher than in the emerging
market. This implies a higher price for assets even when bad times are expected: the industrialized
country can never be as pessimistic about its own demand -and therefore its asset prices- as the
emerging market. Hence, if the productivity diﬀerential is suﬃciently high, the industrialized country
can never experience a crash. The negative relation between income per capita and the vulnerability
to crashes appears only when countries are suﬃciently open to capital movements, a fact that accords
well with Table A.
    The analysis of asset prices in a crash also shows that countries more open to trade in goods (larger
φT ) are less vulnerable to financial crashes. Indeed, these countries’ operating profits and dividends
 2 2 As  mentioned before, we are limiting our analysis to symmetric equilibria in which all investors in each country
behave similarly.
  2 3 In the absence of an equilibrium selection device, our model has nothing to say about the transition between

equilibria. We also cannot perform meaningful welfare comparisons. These drawbacks are common to all mutiple
equilibrium models.
  2 4 This also implies that an equilibrium where both countries are in crash is not possible.




                                                         14
                           π


                                                        π Ie ( z Ie = 0 )


                                         π Ee ( z Ee = 0 ), low trade cos ts

                  0


                                π Ee ( z Ee = 0 ), high trade cos ts


                      0                                                         1
                                                                                       φF


                          Figure 3: The possibility of a crash and transaction costs


(equation (14)) are less dependent on local income and therefore less aﬀected by the crash. Hence, the
crash itself is less likely. This implies that the set of parameters for which a crash occurs is smaller
for countries more open to trade. We therefore find a fundamental asymmetry in the eﬀect of trade
and financial openness on the vulnerability of countries to financial crashes. Whereas trade openness
unambiguously decreases this vulnerability, financial openness may increase it.
   Figure 3 depicts payoﬀ functions in crash as a function of financial openness φF . Crashes can
occur in the area below the zero line, whose exact position depends on the level of F . For a given
level of trade openness, countries with higher levels of productivity (higher wages) are less vulnerable
to crashes. For a given level of productivity, countries that are more open to trade in goods are less
vulnerable to crashes.
   A financial crash in the emerging market is characterized by low asset prices, investment, income
and consumption (both in first and in second periods). The total number of assets at the world level
decreases since it is an increasing function of q. Hence, both market incompleteness and the volatility
of second-period consumption are higher. It can be shown that per-capita income in the emerging
market is lower in a financial crash (wE ) than in autarky.
   Contrary to what occurs in the "good" equilibrium, the emerging market experiences a current
account surplus given by LwE /(1 + β). In a crash, agents can only buy foreign assets from the
industrialized country to save and diversify risk, so that capital flight occurs.




                                                          15
5       Quantitative analysis
This section assesses the potential of our demand-based theory of financial crisis to match key stylized
facts of emerging market crashes, such as a drop in asset prices, income collapse and current account
reversal. Table I (taken from Mendoza and Smith (2004)) reproduces data for four emerging markets,
Argentina, Korea, Mexico and Russia. Table II presents the parameter values used in the calibrations.
Panel A of Table III provides the quantitative implications of the exact model we described in the
previous sections. We call it the "Stylized Model". And indeed since our model is quite stylized, we
augment it by adding two realistic features to get our "Baseline Model" (Panel B of Table III): 1)
Agents have access to a safe low return technology that gives a pay-oﬀ in a fraction α of the states
of nature covered in normal times, i.e. without a crash. We experiment with diﬀerent degrees of
international tradability of this technology. We interpret our safe technology as any alternative way
used by agents to save their income during financial crises, such as purchases of durable goods or
cash hoardings. 2) We allow for limited participation in the stock market. Neither of these two new
features alters significantly the qualitative properties of our model nor do they change the fundamental
mechanisms presented in the previous sections. But they notably improve the quantitative properties
of our model. Appendix II provides the key equations of this augmented model.25 26

5.1      Calibration

The most important parameters of our model are the trade costs τ T , financial costs τ F , ratio of wages
wE
wI ,   elasticities of substitution for goods σ and assets ε and the share of households participating in
the stock market which we denote as γ. The interaction of trade costs and financial costs is key to
get plausible quantitative results. A period is a quarter. The values of the parameters we use are
discussed below and summarized in Table II.

5.1.1     Trade costs

We base our estimates of trade costs τ T mainly on Anderson and van Wincoop (2004) (AW henceforth).
According to these authors, "the pure international component of trade barriers, including transport
costs and border barriers but not local distribution margins is estimated to be in the range of 40-80%
for industrialized countries." The estimate is based on both direct evidence and indirect evidence
stemming from the gravity literature. This estimate roughly breaks down as a 21% transportation
cost, a 8% policy barrier, a 7% language barrier, a 14% currency barrier, a 6% information cost
barrier and a 3% security barrier. We pick 20% as the low estimate of our trading costs on the goods
  2 5 They are not analytically solvable, unlike their counterparts of sections 2-4, but carry the same eﬀects and intuitions.

This is why we chose to discuss the more stylized model in the core of the paper and present this more general version
in the quantitative section. The programme used to solve the model is available from the authors.
  2 6 Ultimately, it could be of interest to quantify an infinite horizon version of the model, but this would require an

equilibrium selection mechanism to pick the crash or no crash equilibrium in the multiple equilibrium region. We leave
this for future work due to the complexity of the task.




                                                             16
market; this roughly corresponds to the pure transport cost estimate of AW. We choose 80% as our
upper estimate and 40% as our base case.
    Crises are accompanied by the collapse of trade credits, increased exchange rate uncertainty, in-
formation asymmetries and higher insurance costs. All these elements are exogenous to our model.
Unfortunately we do not have any reliable estimates of the increase in trade costs in crisis time to
calibrate our model precisely27 . We assume in our stylized model of Table III (Panel A, lines 1-3,5)
that trade costs are invariant between normal and crisis times. Then, in the baseline model of Table
III, Panel B and in Panel A, line 4 we assume that trade costs, both on imports and exports, increase
in crisis time by 10 percentage points from their base value τ T in normal times. We call this the trade
disruption case.

5.1.2      Financial costs and limited participation

The choice of an estimate for financial transaction costs is more diﬃcult, as there is no consensus in
the literature. Financial costs should include the cost of government regulations on capital flows, of
diﬀerences in regulations in accounting, banking and commission fees, foreign exchange transaction
fees and most importantly, information costs between emerging markets and industrialized countries.
Reviewing the literature, Heaton and Lucas (1996 p. 467) argue that for the US equity market
"transaction costs as high as 5% are reasonable". Given the lack of precise data for emerging markets,
we choose again a wide interval of transaction costs ranging from 1% to 10% with a base case set at
5%.
    During crises however, volatility on the foreign exchange market increases, there is more infor-
mation asymmetry and adverse selection. International financial transaction costs are therefore also
likely to increase28 . We take this possibility into account and call it the financial disruption case. In
that scenario, financial costs go from our baseline case of 5% in normal times to 6%. We also allow for
the case of joint financial and trade disruption, where both financial and trade costs increase during
a crash.
    Data on limited stock market participation is not available for emerging markets. For the United
States, Vissing-Jorgensen (2002) documents household participation rates in the stock market of 36%
in 1994. We pick this number as our baseline case.
  2 7 Ma and Cheng (2003) document the disruption of trade during a financial crisis. Using a gravity equation framework

they find a significant decline in trade flows, even after controlling for economic fundamentals. Their analysis does not
allow a precise quantification of the eﬀect however. In the narrower case of sovereign defaults, Rose (2005) and Martinez
and Sandleris (2004) also document a decrease in trade flows even after controlling for fundamentals.
  2 8 For example, for the forex market alone, the 1998 IMF International Capital Markets report mentions that : "Prior

to the crisis, bid-ask spreads on these (Asian) currencies had been similar, perhaps modestly higher, than those for
the major currencies. Following the crisis, these spreads widened by factors of between 6 (ringgit) and 13 (rupiah),
implying, for example, a hefty 1.7 percent average cost of carrying out a rupiah-dollar transaction on the spot market
since the crisis, rising on occasion to as much as 10 percent. Higher volatility and transaction costs were also associated
with a drying up of liquidity".




                                                            17
5.1.3    Elasticities, relative wages and manufacturing shares

We pick an elasticity of substitution for goods of 5 in the base case, in the middle of the range of
the estimates of the trade literature. We experiment with values of 4 and 10, thereby covering the
estimates surveyed in AW. We calibrate the elasticity of substitution between assets using Wurgler
and Zhuravskaya (2002). They report the results of several studies as well as their own estimates for
US stocks. The elasticity ranges from 1 (Shleifer, 1986) to their own: 6, 8 and 12 depending whether
stocks have close substitutes or not. Given that the important elasticity in our context is the one
between equities of the emerging market and equities of the industrialized country, which are less
substitutes than domestic ones, we choose a rather low elasticity for the base case, i.e. 5. We also
experiment with 8 and 3.
                                     wE
    We calibrate the wage ratio      wI   between the emerging market and the industrialized country at 1/5.
The Bureau of Statistics of the US Department of Labor (2002) reports hourly compensation costs for
production workers in manufacturing for a selected group of countries. For Mexico and Brazil, these
were 12% of the US. For Korea these amounted to 42% and for Asian NIEs, 34%. We experiment
with 1/8 in the low case and 1/3 in the high case.
    We choose µ and a, the share of the manufactured good in the utility function and in the production
function of the investment good to be equal to 0.4. This number is usually the one picked in the trade
literature for the share of the manufacturing sector. We experiment with higher (0.6) and lower (0.3)
values too29 .

5.1.4    Safe technology

We set α to 1 in the base case implying that agents are able to use the safe technology to save during
the crash for all states of nature covered in a non-crash equilibrium. We also experiment with low
levels of α (0.1), implying that the "safe asset" gives a dividend in 10% of the states of the world
covered in normal times. We also vary the degree of tradability of the safe asset, from non traded to
subject to the same transaction costs as the other assets. We set the discount rate β to 0.99 in the
base case. We calibrate the safe technology parameters in order to match the risk premium at 5%
(annualized). The latter is defined as the expected diﬀerence in return between a risky asset in the
emerging market and the safe technology. The return of the safe technology is low enough that agents
who have access to financial markets have no incentive to use it in absence of a crash.

5.2     Results

We are interested by the change in three variables summarizing the state of the economy: equity
prices in dollars, the current account relative to income, and income30 .
  2 9 The other constraint is that the non- manufacturing sector should always exist in both countries. This requires that

µ and a not be too large.
  3 0 Quarterly data on GDP is not available for these countries. Industrial production is therefore used as a proxy for

income. In our model, income and consumption are perfectly correlated due to the log utility, so we do not report



                                                           18
    We start with a calibration of the exact stylized model described in sections 2 to 4 of the paper.
There is no safe technology and no limited participation. All parameters are set to their base value of
Table II.1. Furthermore, trading costs and financial costs are taken equal in normal and crisis times.
The only diﬀerence is that the investment sector uses manufactured goods so that a is not equal to zero.
Results are displayed in Table III (line 1). The stylized model has qualitatively correct predictions.
High enough trade costs insure that the emerging market assets dividends are dependent on local
conditions, which in turn makes possible self-fulfilling demand collapses. Conversely when trade costs
are reduced to 20%, for example, the possibility of a crash is eliminated. Also, multiple equilibria do
not exist whenever financial costs are higher than 60%. These results confirm the interactions between
trade and financial costs that we put forward in the theoretical section.
    Quantitatively, the model is able to generate large drops in asset prices (-22.8%) but produces a
far too large drop in income (-30.7%). The reason is that in the crash, the entire financial wealth of
the emerging market is wiped out. Since all our agents participate in the stock market, this generates
a dramatic drop in aggregate income. The stylized model generates capital inflows into the emerging
market in tranquil times and outflows in crisis times. But it produces too large current account
reversals (from -11.7% of GDP in normal times to +34.5% in crisis times). This comes in particular
from the absence of a safe technology: during the crisis, emerging market agents can save only by
purchasing foreign risky assets, implying large capital outflows. In lines 2-5 of Table III, we alter
the stylized model by adding each time only one of the following features: safe technology; limited
participation; increase in trade costs during the crisis (trade disruption); increase in financial costs
during the crisis (financial disruption).
    If we add the safe technology (line 2), we do not change much the drop in asset price nor the collapse
in output; but the swing in the current account is lower, which helps bring the model somewhat closer
to the data31 . Adding limited participation to the stylized model (only 36% of households participate
in the stock market) decreases the eﬀect of financial wealth on the economy (line 3). The drop in asset
price is smaller because in this case 64% of the economy is eﬀectively insulated from the crash. In
contrast, if we introduce trade disruption (line 4), we are now able to match the data as far as the drop
in asset price is concerned (-29.5%) but the drop in output and the current account reversal are still
too extreme. This dramatic eﬀect on the asset price comes from the decrease in profits of the emerging
market firms which have to rely even more on domestic demand in crisis times. The ensuing decrease
in dividends is magnified by the income eﬀect and creates a sharp drop in the emerging market asset
price. The same type of mechanism, i.e. an increased reliance on domestic demand to sell assets in
crisis times, explains the eﬀect of financial disruption on asset prices (line 5), but quantitatively the
changes in consumption.
  3 1 Adding a safe technology makes possible the existence of crashes in autarky, since it may not be worthwhile for

agents to invest in risky assets if everyone else coordinates on the safe technology. This does not alter however the logic
behind the existence of multiple equilibria for intermediate levels of financial costs. Emerging market agents now invest
both in foreign risky assets and in the safe asset during crashes. In this experiment the safe technology is non-traded.




                                                            19
eﬀect is much smaller.
   Our baseline model incorporates all these features. Panel B of Table III (line 6) presents the model
when the safe technology, limited participation, trade and financial disruption are all present at the
same time. All the parameters have been set to their base value of Table II.1 and II.2. As before,
the only diﬀerence between the emerging market and the developed economy is their productivity
level. This baseline model is closer to the data. Asset prices drop by 20.5%, income by 13.1% and the
current account goes from -4.1% in normal times to +11.3% in crisis times, i.e. a reversal of 15.4 pts
of income32 .
   We now subject the baseline model to sensitivity experiments. If the safe technology is inter-
nationally tradable, the current account reversal becomes smaller. For example, if 30% of the safe
projects are internationally tradable (with the same transaction costs as other assets), then (see line
7), the current account reversal is only 8.8 points of GDP because the emerging market sells these
assets to the industrialized country. The drops in asset price and income remain similar because the
international tradability of the safe asset leads the industrialized country to buy less of both risky
assets in a crash so that their relative price does not change much.
   In lines 8 to 11, we perform some sensitivity analysis on the magnitude of the frictions. Varying
financial costs (high and low cases in Table II.2) aﬀects mainly the magnitude of the current account
reversal. Changing trade costs alters both the domain of existence of multiple equilibria and the
magnitude of the crash. Because higher trade costs in the goods market generate lower asset prices
and income in both the no crash and the crash equilibria, they may lead to a smaller crash (line 10).
However, lower trade costs always make the domain of multiple equilibria smaller: with trade costs at
20%, a crash is not possible (line 11). A higher productivity diﬀerential between the rich country and
the emerging market exacerbates all the characteristics of the crash since our mechanisms are based
on demand: a relatively poorer emerging market will experience ceteris paribus a sharper drop in
asset prices and income and a larger current account reversal (lines 12-13). If the diﬀerence in wage
between the emerging market and the industrialized country is small enough, the possibility of a crash
disappears. This is the case if wE is only 50% smaller than wI . This confirms that our mechanism is
able to explain why emerging markets are more prone to crashes than high income countries.
   A high elasticity of substitution across assets tends to increase the extent of the crash (lines
16-17). Since the transformations of the financial costs φF = (1 + τ F )1−ε and of the trade costs
φT = (1 + τ T )1−σ are the eﬀective measures of financial and trade openness in the model, an increase
in ε is like an increase in τ F . An increase in σ is also analogous to a increase in τ T but it also decreases
profits in the monopolistic sector and therefore the role of demand on dividends. Hence the eﬀect of
σ on the magnitude of the crash is ambiguous (lines 14-15).
   In lines 18-19, we check that the manufacturing sector share does not change the results. We have
also checked that changing the risk premium, the discount factor or the number of states covered by
 3 2 We   have checked that the industrialized country cannot be subject to a crash with these parameters.


                                                           20
the safe technology, α do not alter our results.
    In lines 20-21, we find that higher participation on stock markets, which can be interpreted as
a higher dependence of the economy on financial wealth, leads to larger crashes, income drops and
current account reversals.
    Overall, our baseline model matches the stylized facts of Table I reasonably well. In order to get a
smaller current reversal we would need some degree of international tradability of the safe technology
(see line 7). There are diﬀerent plausible mechanisms to get a larger drop in asset prices with similar
drops in income and current account reversals. First, a larger trade disruption (trade costs increasing
from 40% to 60% in crash) would generate a 26.9% crash in asset prices. Similarly, a high degree of
financial disruption (transaction costs increase from 5% to 15% in crash) also generates a larger crash
(-23.7%). Finally, the model is flexible enough to allow for domestic trade costs on goods markets.
If we assume that those trade costs go from 0 to 20% in crisis time, this alone, would generate a
crash of -25.8%. Domestic trade and international trade disruptions reinforce each other so that we
can generate sharp drop in asset prices with relatively small levels of trade disruption in domestic and
international markets. These results underline the necessity of doing more research investigating the
time-varying dimension of goods and financial market trading costs across normal and crisis times.
This is one the main lessons of our quantitative analysis.


6     Conclusion

Our model puts forward a demand-based mechanism of crisis in emerging markets where segmentation
of the goods and asset markets plays a key role. Our framework is the first one, to our knowledge,
that analyses jointly home market eﬀects in the financial and goods markets and their interactions.
Relatively high trade costs on the goods market make profits and dividends very dependent on domes-
tic demand. Financial globalization makes coordination on capital flight possible. Emerging market
income itself depends on investment, which is aﬀected by asset prices, in turn dependent on domestic
income and demand. This circularity makes our demand channel quantitatively powerful. Our mech-
anism of financial crisis is very general since it is at work whenever there is a sizable diﬀerence in
income between countries and there are trading costs in goods and financial markets.
    We see our approach as complementary to existing views on the links between financial globaliza-
tion and crises. So far the literature has emphasized that financial globalization, by making borrowing
on world financial markets easier, strengthens market failures prevalent in emerging markets. In par-
ticular, moral hazard and credit constraints have been shown to facilitate the advent of financial
crises. Our paper shows that such market failures are not a necessary condition for emerging markets
to become vulnerable to a crash when capital flows are liberalized. Trade costs on international trade
in goods and assets will themselves generate that vulnerability.



                                                   21
    Both the potential benefit of globalization (in terms of cost of capital, investment and income) and
the higher vulnerability of emerging markets to a crash come from the same factor that diﬀerentiates
emerging markets and industrialized countries in our model: their productivity and income level.
The higher vulnerability is not necessarily due to bad institutions, bad incentives (bailouts) or bad
exchange rate regimes. This is not to say that these problems do not constitute important channels
through which financial globalization can make emerging markets more vulnerable to a financial
crisis33 . The existing literature has logically recommended policies addressing the informational and
institutional frictions at the origin of the credit market imperfections it describes. More transparency,
better information, better banking regulation have been advocated. Similarly, currency mismatches
in fixed exchange rate regimes are listed as prime suspects to explain crises of these countries. Our
paper shows that these policies and institutional changes may not be suﬃcient to prevent crises in
intermediate income countries and that financial crises may be a more general phenomenon for those
economies. An important policy implication of our model is that trade openness has a beneficial
role, since it mitigates the dependence of the emerging market on domestic demand and decreases the
domain of existence of multiple equilibria. Our results suggest that, to reduce the risk of financial
crashes, emerging markets should liberalize their trade account before their capital account. Although
such a prescription is sometimes heard in policy circles, we believe our paper is the first analytical
work giving a clear economic rationale to support it.
  3 3 The inclusion of credit constraints on investment in our model would certainly reinforce the possibility of a crash as

the fall in asset prices would reduce the value of collateral. For an interesting investigation of the links between credit
market frictions and moral hazard see Durdu and Mendoza (2004).




                                                            22
   Table I: Crises in four         RealEquityP rices                  Current Account/GDP                  Ind.P roduction
   Emerging Economies                   (% change)                       (% points change)                     (% change)

 Argentina (94.4-95.1)            -27.82                             4.05                                -9.26
 Korea (97.4-98.1)                -9.79                              10.97                               -7.20
 Mexico (94.4-95.1)               -28.72                             5.24                                -9.52
 Russia (98.3-98.4)               -59.37                             9.46                                -5.20

Note: Real equity prices are deflated by the CPI, except Russian equity prices which are in U.S. dollar terms. The change

in the current account to GDP ratio for Argentina corresponds to the second quarter of 1995. Industrial production for

Korea and Russia are annual rates (Source Mendoza and Smith 2004).




                                     Subst.       Subst.                                     Risk                      manuf.
   Table II.1         W ages                                          Discount                             saf e
                                       Goods         assets                                premium                      share
   Parameters         wE /wI                                                 β                                 α
                                          σ            ε                                       rpE                          µ, a

 Base case           1/5           5             5                   0.99                 1.05            1           0.4
 High                1/3           10            8                   −                    1.10            −           0.6
 Low                 1/8           4             3                   0.95                 1.02            0.1         0.3



            Table II.2                          F inancial cost                  T rade cost         P articipation
             Frictions                                     τF                        τT                    γ

           NO CRISIS           Base case       5%                            40%                 36%
                               High            10%                           80%                 50%
                               Low             1%                            20%                 10%
           CRISIS              Base case       6%                            50%                 36%
                               High            12%                           100%                50%
                               Low             1.2%                          25%                 10%




                                                                23
                           TABLE III: Quantitative Results



                                         ∆q           ∆CAE /yE          ∆yE
     Panel A
                                     asset price    current account    income

1    Stylized model                 −22.8%         +46.2 pts          −30.7%
2    with safe technology           -22.4%         +36.5 pts          -30.7%
3    with limited participation     -12.1%         +19.7 pts          -13.1%
4    with trade disruption          -29.5%         +46.2 pts          -30.7%
5    with financial disruption      -23.2%         +46.2 pts          -30.7%


     Panel B

6    Baseline model                 −20.5%         +15.4 pts          −13.1%
7    tradable safe asset            -20.1%         +8.8 pts           -13.1%
8    high τ F                       -20.8%         +13.9 pts          -12.7%
9    low τ F                        -20.2%         +16.8 pts          -13.5%
10   high τ T                       -18.9%         +8.1 pts           -6.9%
11   low τ T                        no crash
12   low wE /wI                     -21.1%         +20.3 pts          -15.8%
13   high wE /wI                    -20.0%         +11.7 pts          -11.5%
14   high σ                         -17.1%         +5.9 pts           -5.0%
15   low σ                          -18.5%         +19.0 pts          -16.3%
16   high ε                         -20.9%         +13.0 pts          -11.8%
17   low ε                          -18.3%         +19.1 pts          -15.6%
18   high µ, a                      -20.5%         +15.4 pts          -13.1%
19   low µ, a                       -20.6%         +15.5 pts          -13.1%
20   high participation             -23.1%         +20.8 pts          -17.5%
21   low participation              -14.1%         +4.6 pts           -3.9%




                                         24
   Appendix I: The eﬀect of financial liberalization on emerging market asset prices
   An increase in φF only aﬀects the qq curve. It will lead to an increase in q if the intersection point
of the qq curve and the Y Y curve shifts right when φF increases. This will be the case if :
                                       h                    i
          ∂sY                        q (q/d)ε−1 − (q/d)1−ε − 2φF (1 − sY )
                    =           ¡        ¢           h                    i                          <0
          ∂φF q=q                                                             (1−φ2T )
                      (1 + q 2 ) 1 − φ2F + (ε − 1) φF q 2 (q/d)−ε + (q/d)ε [1−s (1−φ             2
                                                                                    Y     T )]

A suﬃcient condition for this ratio to be negative and therefore q to increase with an increase in φF
is that q/d < 1.
   Appendix II: Key equations of the model used in the quantitative section.
   The model includes a safe asset which gives a dividend in a share α of the states of the world
covered in normal times, has a return r and a price per . We also introduce a parameter γ describing
the extent of participation in the stock market (only 1 − γ households participate). The stock market
equilibrium with limited participation in normal times becomes:
                    µ                                                                          ¶
                β                 yE − γwE                       (yI − γwI ) φF (q/d)1−ε
      pE =                                              +
              1 + β (1 − γ) zE + (1 − γ) zI φF (q/d)ε−1 (1 − γ) zI + (1 − γ) zE φF (q/d)1−ε
                    µ                                                                          ¶
                β                  yI − γwI                     (yE − γwE ) φF (q/d)ε−1
      pI =                                              +
              1 + β (1 − γ) zI + (1 − γ) zE φF (q/d)1−ε    (1 − γ) zE + (1 − γ) zI φF (q/d)ε−1

   Income in the emerging market in normal times is now given by yE = wE + (1 − γ) p2E /2.
   In crash, the stock market equilibrium becomes:
                µ                                                                                        ¶
            β                          (1 − γ)wE                            (yIc − γwI ) φF (qc /dc )1−ε
pEc =                                                                     +
          1 + β (1 − γ) αzE (rpEc /dEc )ε−1 + (1 − γ) zIc φF (qc /dc )ε−1           (1 − γ) zIc
                µ                                                                      ¶
            β      yIc − γwI                  (1 − γ)wE φF (qc /dc )ε−1
pIc =                        +
          1 + β (1 − γ) zIc (1 − γ) αzE (rpEc /dEc )ε−1 + (1 − γ) zIc φF (qc /dc )ε−1

   The value of the emerging market demand of the safe asset in a crash is:

                            βwE                          (rpEc )ε−1
                   bEEc =
                            1 + β (1 − γ) αzE (rpEc )ε−1 + (1 − γ) zIc φF (pEc dIc /pIc )ε−1


   The dividends are given by equation (8) adjusted for limited participation and its symmetric in
crash.




                                                      25
References
 [1] Acemoglu, D. and F. Zilibotti (1997), “Was Promotheus Unbound by Chance? Risk, Diversifica-
    tion and Growth”, Journal of Political Economy, 105, 709-751.

 [2] Aghion, P., Bachetta, P. and A. Banerjee (2004), “Financial Development and the Instability of
    Open Economies", Journal of Monetary Economics 51, 1077-1106.

 [3] Aizenman, J. (2002), “Financial Opening: Evidence and Policy Options", NBER WP 8900.

 [4] Anderson, J. and E. van Wincoop (2004), “Trade costs", Journal of Economic Literature, Sep-
    tember, 42, 691-751.

 [5] Arellano, C. and E. Mendoza (2003), “Credit Frictions and ‘Sudden Stops’ in Small Open
    Economies: An Equilibrium Business Cycle Framework for Emerging Markets Crises,” in Dy-
    namic Macroeconomic Analysis” S. Altug, J. Chadha and C. Nolan eds.,Cambridge University
    Press, Cambridge.

 [6] Bekaert, G, C. Harvey and R. Lundblad (2001), “Does Financial Liberalization Spur Growth?",
    NBER WP 6724, 1-63.

 [7] Burnside, C. M. Eichenbaum and S. Rebelo (2001), “Prospective Deficits and the Asian Currency
    Crisis", Journal of Political Economy, December.

 [8] Caballero, R. and A. Krishnamurthy (1998), “Emerging Market Crises: An Asset Markets Per-
    spective,", NBER WP 6843.

 [9] Calvo, G. (1998), “Capital Flows and Capital-Market Crises: The Simple Economics of Sudden
    Stops,” Journal of Applied Economics, vol.1, 35-54.

[10] Calvo G., Izquierdo A. and L-F. Meja (2004), “On the Empirics of Sudden Stops: the Relevance
    of Balance-Sheet Eﬀects", NBER Working Paper 10520.

[11] Cespedes L., R. Chang. and A. Velasco (2004), “Balance Sheets and Exchange Rate Policy,”
    American Economic Review,94 , 1183-1193.

[12] Chang, R. and A. Velasco (2001), “A Model of Financial Crises in Emerging Markets,” Quarterly
    Journal of Economics, 116, 489-517.

[13] Chari, A. and P. Henry (2002), “Capital Account Liberalization: Allocative Eﬃciency or Animal
    Spirits?", NBER working paper 8908.

[14] Corsetti, G., P. Pesenti and N. Roubini (1999), “Fundamental Determinants of the Asian Crisis:
    The Role of Financial Fragility and External Imbalances”, in T. Ito and A. Krueger (eds.),



                                                26
    Regional and Global Capital Flows: Macroeconomic Causes and Consequences, Chicago, IL:
    University of Chicago Press.

[15] Christiano L., Gust C. and J. Roldos (2000), “Monetary Policy in a Financial Crisis” forthcoming
    in Journal of Economic Theory.

[16] Demigüc-Kunt A. and E. Detragiache (1998), “Financial Liberalization and Financial Fragility”,
    IMF Working Paper.

[17] Durdu C. B. and E. Mendoza (2004), “Are Asset Price Guarantees Useful for Preventing Sud-
    den Stops?: A Quantitative Investigation of the Globalization Hazard-Moral Hazard Trade-oﬀ”,
    forthcoming Journal of International Economics.

[18] Edwards, S. (2000), “Capital Mobility and Economic Performance: Are Emerging Economies
    Diﬀerent?" UCLA working paper.

[19] Gordon, R. and L. Bovenberg (1996), “Why Is Capital so Immobile Internationally? Possible
    Explanations and Implications for Capital Income Taxation", American Economic Review, 86,
    5, 1057-75.

[20] Heaton J. and D. Lucas (1996), “Evaluating the Eﬀects of Incomplete Markets on Risk Sharing
    and Asset Pricing", Journal of Political Economy, vol. 104, no 3, 443-487.

[21] Henry, P. B., (2000), “Do stock market liberalizations cause investment booms?", Journal of
    Financial Economics, 58(1-2), 301-334.

[22] IMF, various years, “Annual Report on Exchange Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions".

[23] IMF International Capital Markets September 1998—II. The Asian Crisis: Capital Markets Dy-
    namics and Spillover at <http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/icm/icm98/pdf/file02.pdf>

[24] Kaminsky G. and C. Reinhart, (1999) “The Twin Crises: The Causes of Banking and Balance-
    of-Payments Problems”, American Economic Review, 89 (3), p 473-500.

[25] Kaminsky G. and S. Schmukler, (2001), “On Booms and Crashes: Financial Liberalization and
    Stock Market Cycles", Mimeo.

[26] Krugman, P. (1999), “Balance Sheets, the Transfer Problem, and Financial Crises,” in Isard,
    Razin and Rose, eds., International Finance and Financial Crises: Essays in Honor of Robert
    Flood, 31-56, Boston, Kluwer Academic Publishers.

[27] Ma, Z. and L. Cheng, (2003), “The Eﬀects of Financial Crises on International Trade," NBER
    Working Paper No. w10172




                                                 27
[28] Mckenzie, D. (2001), “The impact of capital controls on growth convergence”, Journal of Eco-
    nomic Development, 26(1), June.

[29] Martin P. and H. Rey (2002), “Financial Globalization and Emerging Markets: with or without
    Crash?", NBER Working Paper 9288.

[30] Martin P. and H. Rey (2004), “Financial Supermarkets: Size Matters for Asset Trade”, Journal
    of International Economics, December.

[31] Martinez J. and G. Sandleris (2004), “Is it Punishment? Sovereign Defaults and the Declines in
    Trade", mimeo, Columbia University.

[32] Matsuyama (2004), “Financial Market Globalization, Symmetry-Breaking and Endogenous In-
    equality of Nations", Econometrica, Vol.72, No. 3 (May), 853-884.

[33] McKinnon, R. and H. Pill (1999), “Exchange-Rate Regimes for Emerging Markets: Moral Hazard
    and International Overborrowing", Oxford Review of Economic Policy 15(3)

[34] Mendoza, E. (2002), “Credit, Prices and Crashes: Business Cycles with a Sudden Stop", in
    Preventing Currency Crises in Emerging Markets, Frankel, Jeﬀrey and Sebastian Edwards eds.
    Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

[35] Mendoza, E. (2004), “Sudden Stops in an Equilibrium Business Cycle Model with Credit Con-
    straints: A Fisherian Deflation of Tobin’s Q, mimeo, University of Maryland.

[36] Mendoza, E. and K. Smith (2002), “Margin Calls, Trading Costs and Asset Prices in Emerging
    Markets: The Financial Mechanics of the ‘Sudden Stops’ Phenomenon”, NBER Working Paper
    No 9286.

[37] Mendoza, E. and K. Smith (2004), “Quantitative Implication of A Debt-Deflation Theory of
    Sudden Stops and Asset Prices”, NBER Working Paper No 10940.

[38] Paasche, Bernhard (2001), “Credit Constraints and International Financial Crises,” Journal of
    Monetary Economics, vol. 28, 623-650.

[39] Obstfeld, M. and K. Rogoﬀ, (2001), “The Six Major Puzzles of International Macroeconomics
    Solved”, NBER Macro Annual.

[40] Portes, R. and H. Rey (2005) “The Determinants of Cross-Border Equity Flows", Journal of
    International Economics, Volume 65, Issue 2, 269-296, March.

[41] Rose, A. (2005) “One Reason Countries Pay their Debts: Renegotiation and International
    Trade.", Journal of Development Economics, forthcoming.




                                                28
[42] Rossi, M. (1999), “Financial Fragility and Economic Performance in Developing Countries: Do
    Capital Controls, Prudential Regulation and Supervision Matter?”, IMF Working Paper 99/66.

[43] Schneider, M. and A. Tornell, (2004), “Balance Sheet Eﬀects, Bailout Guarantees and Financial
    Crises," Review of Economic Studies 71, 3, 883-913.

[44] Shleifer, A. (1986), “Do Demand Curves for Stocks Slope Down?”, Journal of Finance 41, 579-
    590.

[45] US Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics (2002), International Comparisons of
    Hourly Compensation Costs for Production Workers in Manufacturing, revised data for 2002,
    http://www.bls.gov/fls/hcompreport.htm.

[46] Weil, P. (1990), “Non-expected Utility in Macroeconomics”, Quarterly Journal of Economics,
    volume 105, issue 1, 29-42.

[47] Wurgler and E. Zhuravskaya (2002), “Does Arbitrage Flatten Demand Curves for Stocks?”,
    Journal of Business, October.

[48] Wyplosz C. (2001), “How Risky is Financial Liberalization in the Developing Countries?”, CEPR
    DP 2724.




                                               29
