NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

VEHICLE CHOICES, MILES DRIVEN AND
POLLUTION POLICIES
Ye Feng
Don Fullerton
Li Gan
Working Paper 11553
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11553
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2005

We are grateful for financial support from Japan’s Economic and Social Research Institute (ESRI), and for
suggestions from Chunrong Ai, Frank Convery, Stephen Donald, Hilary Sigman, Dan Slesnick, Ken Train,
Sarah West, and Cliff Winston. This paperi s part of the NBER’s research program in Public Economics.
Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the ESRI or the National Bureau of
Economic Research. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by Ye Feng, Don Fullerton and Li Gan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Vehicle Choices, Miles Driven, and Pollution Policies
Ye Feng, Don Fullerton and Li Gan
NBER Working Paper No. 11553
August 2005
JEL No. D12, H23, Q58
ABSTRACT

Mobile sources contribute large percentages of each pollutant, but technology is not yet
available to measure and tax emissions from each vehicle. We build a behavioral model of household
choices about vehicles and miles traveled. The ideal-but-unavailable emissions tax would encourage
drivers to abate emissions through many behaviors, some of which involve market transactions that
can be observed for feasible market incentives (such as a gas tax, subsidy to new cars, or tax by
vehicle type). Our model can calculate behavioral effects of each such price and thus calculate car
choices, miles, and emissions.
A nested logit structure is used to model discrete choices among different vehicle bundles.
We also consider continuous choices of miles driven and the age of each vehicle. We propose a
consistent estimation method for both discrete and continuous demands in one step, to capture the
interactive effects of simultaneous decisions. Results are compared with those of the traditional
sequential estimation procedure.

Ye Feng
Department of Economics
University of Texas
Austin, TX 78712-1173
yfeng@eco.utexas.edu
Don Fullerton
Department of Economics
University of Texas
Austin, TX 78712-1173
dfullert@eco.utexas.edu

Li Gan
Department of Economics
University of Texas
Austin, TX 78712
gan@eco.utexas.edu

The standard case for market-based incentives requires a tax or price on each unit
of emissions. Each form of abatement is then pursued until the marginal cost of reducing
pollution matches the tax per unit of pollution, and the resulting combination of abatement
technologies minimizes social costs (Pigou, 1920). For vehicles, a tax on emissions could
induce drivers to: (1) buy a newer, cleaner car, (2) buy a smaller, more fuel efficient car,
(3) fix their broken pollution control equipment, (4) buy cleaner gasoline, (5) drive less, (6)
drive less aggressively, and (7) avoid cold start-ups. 1 Moreover, economic efficiency
requires different combinations of these methods for different consumers: some lose little
by switching to a smaller car, some could easily walk, and some just pay the tax.
Yet the technology is not available to measure each car’s emissions in a reliable
and cost-effective manner. On-board diagnostic equipment is imperfect, and it is costly to
retrofit millions of vehicles (Harrington and McConnell, 2003). Remote sensing is less
expensive and has been used to identify high-polluting vehicles, but it cannot measure
emissions clearly enough to tax each car.2 Moreover, vehicle emissions are important. In
2001, vehicles in the U.S. contributed 27 percent of volatile organic compounds (VOC), 37
percent of nitrogen oxides (NOx), and 66 percent of carbon monoxide (CO) emissions.3
For these reasons, vehicle emission policies have relied almost solely on mandates:
refineries must make clean gasoline, and new cars must meet required emission standards.4
These command and control (CAC) policies miss the opportunity to reduce social costs by
harnessing individual incentives, however, as the mandated combination of abatement
methods is unlikely to match the combination that households would choose if faced with a
tax on emissions. In fact, the cost of abatement using such mandates can be several times
the minimum cost achieved by using an emissions tax (Newell and Stavins, 2003).
While the inability to measure emissions may preclude a vehicle emissions tax, it
does not preclude any use of incentives. Those who sell new or used cars or light-trucks
1

Heeb et al (2003) find that cold start emissions rates (in g/km traveled) exceed stabilized emissions rates by
a factor of two to five, depending on the pollutant. Sierra Research (1994) finds that a car driven aggressively
has carbon monoxide emissions that are almost 20 times higher than when driven normally.
2

See Sierra Research (1994). Remote sensing in Texas (http://www.tnrcc.state.tx.us/air/ms/vim.html#im3)
and Albuquerque NM (http://www.cabq.gov/aircare/rst.html) is used in 2005 to identify polluting vehicles.

3

See http://www.bts.gov/publications/transportation_statistics_annual_report/2004/. We focus on local
pollutants, where emission rates depend on car characteristics. In contrast, CO2 is linked directly to gas use.

4

In the U.S., new cars face emission standards of .254 grams/km of HC’s, 2.11 grams/km of CO, and .248
grams/km of NOx. Light trucks face a variety of weaker standards, but all are scheduled to become more
stringent. These figures pertain to a test in the U.S. with a cold start-up phase, a transient phase at different
speeds, and a hot start phase, for a total distance of 18 km at an average speed of 34 km/h.

can collect tax on vehicle characteristics that are associated with emissions, or provide
subsidy for vehicles with low emissions. Most states charge annual registration fees that
can be made to depend on vehicle characteristics. Such policies might reduce emission
rates, while changes in the gasoline tax can reduce miles driven.5
What vehicle characteristics or behaviors should be targeted by a tax or subsidy?
How would consumers react to those new incentive instruments? How much would each
tax reduce emissions? To address these questions, we build a general purpose model of
discrete choices by households about how many cars to own and what types of cars to own,
plus continuous choices about how far to drive. In our model, we embrace individual
heterogeneity.

We estimate all decisions simultaneously, and we use the estimated

parameters to predict the effects of certain price changes on choices and on emissions.
Several existing papers explore market incentives that could be used in place of a
tax on emissions.6 In addition, several papers estimate models of the discrete choice among
vehicle bundles (including number, size, and age categories).7 Some models estimate the
demand for gasoline or for vehicle miles traveled (VMT) as functions of price and income
(as reviewed in Harrington and McConnell, 2003). As well, we note that other models
predict emissions. 8 A major contribution of our research, then, is to include all such
choices simultaneously. In general, we capture the effect of any price change on each
household’s choices about the number of vehicles to buy, the type and age of each, the
consequent emissions rates, miles driven, and the consequent total emissions.
In a two-step procedure, Dubin and McFadden (1984) estimate a discrete choice
model (for household appliances) and use the predicted shares to correct for endogeneity in
the estimation of a continuous choice (usage hours).

Others extend this model to the

discrete choice among vehicle bundles and a continuous choice of miles (e.g. Goldberg,
1998, and West, 2004). Yet, a single set of parameters appear both in the indirect utility
5

A new higher gas tax may be politically unlikely, yet it is still worth studying to know its power as an
emissions-reduction tool. And even if governments are unlikely to use tax dollars to pay for the various
subsidies we study here, these incentives might instead be provided to drivers by private companies that want
to purchase “offsets” – reductions in vehicle emissions to offset their increases from stationary sources. For
all of these reasons, we find it important to study specific incentives to drivers.
6

For examples, see Eskeland and Devarajan (1996), Innes (1996), Kohn (1996), Train et al (1997), Plaut
(1998), Sevigny (1998), and Fullerton and West (2000, 2002).
7

See McFadden (1979), Mannering and Winston (1985), Train (1986), Brownstone et al (1996), Goldberg
(1998), Brownstone and Train (1999), West (2004), and other papers reviewed in McFadden (2001).
8

For example, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (U.S. EPA, 1998, p.3-68) discusses the use of
EPA’s MOBILE5a model or California’s EMFAC7F model.

-2-

function used to estimate discrete choices and in continuous demands.

Using this

sequential procedure, the estimated parameters of the continuous demand are not
constrained to match the same parameters in the estimated discrete choice model.
Relative to this literature, we make a number of contributions. First, we capture the
simultaneity of these decisions by proposing a method for consistent estimation of both
discrete and continuous choices in one step, yielding a single set of parameters. In other
words, whereas the Dubin-McFadden method corrects for selection of vehicle on the
choice of miles, our simultaneous procedure also allows for heterogeneity in actual fuel
demand to affect the choice of vehicle.9 Second, we allow for two continuous choices of
miles – in each vehicle of a two-vehicle household. These choices are bundle-specific.10
Third, we allow for an additional continuous choice of the age of each vehicle. Fourth, we
use the estimated parameters not only to predict changes in choices about vehicles and
miles, but also how those choices affect emissions.11
For several reasons, we deviate from discrete vehicle types used in prior literature
(including age and size categories). First, we have no need to model the choice among
hundreds of vehicle types, as in prior studies of manufacturer product differentiation, since
all cars in a given year are made to a single emission rate standard. Second, a different,
weaker emission standard has applied to “sports utility vehicles” (SUV, for short, but
defined here to include all light trucks and vans). Emission rules for new vehicles do not
depend on engine size. We therefore model the choice between car and SUV, rather than
engine size. Even for older vehicles, when we use data described below in separate
regressions for cars and SUV’s, we find that engine size is not an important determinant of
emission rates. Third, those regressions find that vehicle age is very important for emission
rates. We wish not to lose information by aggregation into finite age categories (e.g. new
9

Hanemann (1984) proposes a method to estimate these demands simultaneously, but his method does not
consider unobserved individual heterogeneity – a key factor in the Dubin-McFadden model. Our model
captures the individual unobserved heterogeneity. Bento et al (2005) and Bhat (2005) are also working on
models with simultaneous discrete and continuous choices.
10

With a higher price of gas, some households might drive fewer miles in their SUV and more in their car.
We do not estimate separately the miles in each vehicle, but we do estimate a change for the (Car, SUV)
bundle that can differ from the (Car, Car) bundle. Other papers have estimated substitution between vehicles
within the family, but they treat the vehicles as given rather than chosen. Greene and Hu (1985) find that this
kind of substitution occurs to a large extent in some households, while Sevigny (1998) finds small effects.
11

Our household responses represent market outcomes only if supply curves were horizontal. The simulation
of a change in the price of getting a car that is one year newer can be interpreted as a new local tax or subsidy
in a small open jurisdiction that can import more of those newer cars at a constant price. However, our
demand system could be combined with some other estimates of supply to calculate equilibrium outcomes.

-3-

vs. old). Age is a continuous variable, and the choice of vehicle age is a continuous
demand that affects emissions.12 If a household in our model chooses to own two vehicles,
then it has four continuous choices: age of each vehicle and miles to drive each vehicle.13
Age is normally measured in years, of course, but our model requires a price that
does not depend on the amount demanded. The price of age is not linear, because owning
a brand-new car costs more depreciation per year than owning an old car. Instead of using
age in years, we therefore construct a continuous choice variable called “Wear” that
measures the fraction of the vehicle that has depreciated (between 0 and 1). A constant
rate of depreciation means that Wear is a nonlinear function of age, but then the price per
unit of Wear does not depend on its amount. This constant price is estimated for each
vehicle type using hedonic price regressions below. Next, in order to separate this choice
of vehicle attribute from the choice of vehicle, we assume that the discrete choice is about
a brand-new “concept vehicle.” Then the household gets reimbursed by the price of Wear
for accepting an older car. In other words, in our model, a household makes simultaneous
decisions about which concept vehicles, how old, and miles to drive.
As it turns out, results for all continuous demands are broadly similar for the
sequential and simultaneous models. For discrete choices, however, our simultaneous
model finds substantially larger effects from a change in the gas price per mile, income, or
vehicle-specific costs. Signs of some elasticities are reversed. In other words, householdspecific heterogeneity does affect discrete choices.
The next section describes a behavioral choice model for one-vehicle households
and then extends it to consider two-vehicle bundles.

It also presents a new method

designed for jointly estimating all discrete and continuous choices. Section II describes
data sources and provides summary statistics, while III provides estimation results for both
discrete and continuous demands. Section IV compares elasticities, and V concludes.
I. The Model and Estimation
In our model, an agent representing each household faces a discrete choice among
a finite number of vehicle bundles. The nesting structure is shown in Figure 1. One
12

Older vehicles have higher emissions both because older vintages were produced to weaker standards and
because pollution control equipment deteriorates with age. Panel data would be required to distinguish these.
13

Fullerton and West (2000) also simulate effects of incentives in a model of heterogeneous households’
continuous choices of car size, car age, and VMT, but they use calibrated rather than estimated parameters.
That model avoids discrete choices, but it considers only one car per agent. In our model, we estimate
discrete choices to consider the household’s number of vehicles.

-4-

choice is the number of vehicles (0, 1, or 2), and another choice for each vehicle is the
type of vehicle (a car or an SUV). We thus have six final bundles, as shown in the figure
and listed in Table 1. Other choices important for emissions of each vehicle are the
continuous choice about vehicle miles traveled (VMT) and vehicle age. To obtain a
choice variable with a linear price, we construct “Wear” as the fraction of the vehicle
used up by depreciation. It is calculated for each car in our sample by assuming 20%
depreciation per year, so Wear = 1 – (1 – 0.2)age. Thus, a new car has Wear = 0.

Figure 1: Nesting Structure for Choice among Vehicle Bundles

Then, since choice of age is considered separately, each discrete vehicle bundle
must be defined in a way that is independent of age. For this reason, we define each
“concept” vehicle as a bundle of attributes of a brand-new vehicle (car or SUV). The
household must pay the price of that brand-new vehicle (the “capital cost”), but then it gets
back some money for accepting Wear on that vehicle (the “reimbursement” price of Wear).
Our demand system now has several distinguishing characteristics.

First, it

incorporates all of these discrete and continuous choices simultaneously. Second, some
unobserved characteristics might affect both kinds of choices. For example, an agent
who lives far from work may drive more and thus prefer a larger, more comfortable car.
Yet, a more comfortable car may increase the satisfaction of driving and thus induce the
driver to drive more. Third, many households have two cars with multiple continuous
choices. Consequently, the substitution structure in VMT and Wear among different
vehicles is important in order to understand the effects of policy on driving behavior.
-5-

Since the discrete choice in Dubin and McFadden (1984) involves only two
alternatives, that paper can use a simple logit model.

Our model has six choices,

however, and so we require a more general logit structure. We use the nested logit. The
next sub-section describes the simple case for households with only one vehicle, and the
second subsection considers multi-vehicle households.

In the third and fourth sub-

sections, we discuss the estimation procedure and elasticity calculations.
A. Our Model of Car Choice and Miles Driven
This description starts with the choices of VMT and Wear, assuming that a onecar household has already chosen vehicle number-and-type bundle i. Given bundle i, an
agent’s direct utility is a function of VMT, Wear, and another consumption good c. That
is, U = U (VMTi , Weari , ci ) . Given income y, the budget constraint is given by:

pg
MPGi

VMTi − qiWeari + ci = y − ri ,

(1)

where pg is the price of gasoline (in dollars per gallon), and MPGi is fuel efficiency (in
miles per gallon), so that pi ≡ pg/MPGi is the marginal price per mile in the ith vehicle
bundle. The “reimbursement” price of Wear for vehicle type i is denoted as qi. The
price of the other consumption good is normalized to be 1. The annualized capital cost of
the concept-vehicle bundle is ri. Thus, gasoline is the only cost per mile, whereas capital
cost is a fixed cost of each bundle.14 The indirect utility for bundle i is a function of
household income and prices, denoted as V(y-ri, pi, qi,).
One common way to obtain the indirect utility function is to use parametric demand
and then solve a system of partial differential equations using Roy’s identity (Hausman,
1981). For comparability with other studies, we want VMT demand as a log-linear
function of the price per mile pi, available income y – ri, and a vector of observed sociodemographic variables x. We then add the reimbursement price qi to that equation to get:

ln(VMTi ) = α Vi + α ip pi − α q qi − β ( y − ri ) + x'
γ +η ,

(2)

where η represents an agent-specific unobserved factor (see below). Also, we assume
ri = ( + )ki,

(3)

14

Time variation in gasoline prices may cause time variation in used vehicle prices. Our use of cross-section
data helps avoid this problem.

-6-

where ki is the total capital value of bundle i (depreciated or market value), δ is the
annual rate of further depreciation in value, and

represents the interest and maintenance

cost. When we plug (3) into (2) and integrate, the implied indirect utility is:
Vi =
where

1

1

β

exp(−

i
0

+ β y − β 1 k i − x'
γ−

) − α1

i
p

exp(α ip pi − α q qi ) + ε i ,

(4)

= ( + ).15 This equation includes an extra additive error εi that is bundle-

specific. As in the usual discrete choice model, this error term represents the difference
between true individual utility at choice

i

and the calculated utility level. 16 For

households who choose the no-vehicle bundle #6, continuous variables such as pi, qi, and
VMTi are unobservable. Implicitly, we assume that these households may purchase a
bicycle or a fare card for public transportation with a fixed fee, similar to the capital cost ki.
With no cost per mile or of Wear, their second exponential term in (4) is 1.0. Their capital
cost ki is unobserved, so β1ki and

6
0

are not separately identifiable. Since we allow for a

choice-specific intercept, however, we combine both terms into one constant,

6
0

.

Note that the simple addition of α q qi to equation (2) dictates the form of indirect
utility in (4). This indirect utility then implies specific forms for both demands:17
pi − α q qi − y + β 1 k i + x'
γ +η

(5a)

(

(5b)

ln(VMTi ) =

i
V

+

ln(Weari ) =

i
W

+ ln α q / α ip + α ip pi − α q qi − y + β 1 k i + x '
γ +η

i
p

)

This specification has pros and cons.

One limitation is the use of specific

functional forms, but these log-linear forms are comparable to prior literature and allow
for two different demand functions (5a,b) that are consistent with a single indirect utility
function (4). An advantage of this specification is that it allows the price of Wear (qi)
to enter the VMT demand, and price of VMT (pi) to enter the Wear demand, but a
15

Our model provides estimates of
and 1, and these can be used to calculate ( + ), but we do not
provide separate estimates of and . Some of our steps below require an assumption about , and we use
20 percent for this purpose. Estimates of the depreciation rate for automobiles range from 33% (Jorgenson,
1996) or 30% (Hulten and Wykoff, 1996) to 15%, the rate implicit in the vehicle depreciation schedule
currently used by the Bureau of Economic Analysis. We use 20% because it falls between these bounds.
16

Also, because of this integration, note that the intercept in (4) may be different from the intercept in (2).

17

More general demand functions such as translog demand or the almost ideal demand system imply much
more complicated indirect utility functions that could not be estimated. Also, note that no-vehicle households
have zero marginal prices, so they have constant miles traveled (conditioned on observed socio-demographic
variables and total income). Thus, no continuous demand equations are needed for these households.

-7-

i

limitation is that the expression

ppi –

qqi

enters both demands the same way.18 Also,

both continuous demands have the same income effect,

. A more general model could

not be estimated. Note, however, that we have added generality where it matters most.
In particular, the price per mile has a bundle-specific coefficient (

i

p),

to allow for

different effects on the demand for miles in each type of vehicle. Thus a gas tax might
decrease miles in an SUV more than in a car, in a way that depends on fuel efficiency,
and the change in miles of a two-car household can differ from the change in miles of a
household with two SUV’s (or one car and one SUV).
B. Two-Vehicle Households

So far, the model above considers only one vehicle, but many households have two
vehicles and thus two continuous choices of miles and two continuous choices of Wear.
We have the observed VMT and Wear for each vehicle, so we can incorporate all four
continuous choices.19 The direct utility for a two-vehicle household choosing bundle i is
U(VMTi1, VMTi2, Weari1, Weari2, ci). The budget constraint is given by:
pg
MPGi1

VMTi1 +

pg
MPGi 2

VMTi 2 − qi1 (Weari1 ) − qi 2 (Weari 2 ) + ci = y − ri ,

(6)

where qij are reimbursement prices for Wear in the two vehicles of bundle i (j = 1, 2).
Also, pij ≡ pg/MPGij is the price per mile using the jth car of bundle i. We consider the
indirect utility function as follows:
Vi =

1

β

(

exp −

i
0

+ y − β 1 k i − x'
γ−

)−

1

α

i
p1

exp(α ip1 p i1 + α ip 2 p i 2 − α q1 q i1 − α q 2 q i 2 ) + ε i

(7)

The indirect utility in (7) is similar to (4) except for two extra terms related to the
second vehicle’s gasoline price pi2 and reimbursement price qi2. By Roy’s identity, given
that the household has chosen bundle i in (7), the four continuous demands are:
ln(VMTi1 ) =

i
V1

+

i
p1

p i1 +

i
p2

pi 2 − α q1 qi1 − α q 2 qi 2 − y + β 1k i + x'
γ +η

(8a)

18

Thus, a change in pi must have the same effect on Wear that it has on miles. We tried other models,
including one where indirect utility has separate terms exp( ippi) and exp( qqi), so that pi would have no
effect on Wear, and qi would have no effect on VMT. That model would not converge, and anyway it is
restrictive by assuming no cross-price effects. We also tried models with more coefficients, to relax these
restrictions, and we tried many starting points, but only the model in (4) and (5) could be estimated
simultaneously for discrete and continuous choices (especially for two-vehicle bundles considered below).
19

Another interesting question is about each household member’s choice of miles driven (in either car), but
we have no such data. As described below, we have only data on miles driven in each vehicle.

-8-

ln(VMTi 2 ) = α Vi 2 + ln(α ip 2 / α ip1 ) + α ip1 pi1 + α ip 2 pi 2
− α q1 qi1 − α q 2 qi 2 − βy + β 1 k i + x'
γ +η

(8b)

ln(Weari1 ) = αWi 1 + ln(α q1 / α ip1 ) + α ip1 pi1 + α ip 2 pi 2
− α q1 qi1 − α q 2 qi 2 − βy + β 1 k i + x'
γ +η

(8c)

ln(Weari 2 ) = αWi 2 + ln(α q 2 / α ip1 ) + α ip1 pi1 + α ip 2 pi 2
− α q1 qi1 − α q 2 qi 2 − βy + β 1 k i + x'
γ +η

(8d)

These demands generalize those of a one-vehicle household in (5) by including
terms for pi2 and qi2 (and so we refer to (8) for “all” demands). The demand for VMTi2
is symmetric to VMTi1 in explanatory variables, but it is non-linear in parameters of both
pi1 and pi2. The demands for Wearij ( j= 1, 2) are similarly defined.
C. A Procedure to Estimate Discrete and Continuous Demands Simultaneously

Note that the same parameters appear in both discrete and continuous choice
functions, yet previous literature has estimated these choice models separately. Often the
estimates for the same parameters are different not only in magnitude but also in sign. In
this sub-section, we propose a procedure for simultaneous estimation of bundle choice,
vehicle age, and miles driven. We start with separate discussion of car choice and miles
driven, and then how we combine them in a single estimation procedure.
Following McFadden’s random utility hypothesis, vehicle bundle i is chosen if
and only if: Vi

Vj for all j

i. The unconditional expected share for bundle i then is:

S i = Pr(Vi > V j , ∀j ≠ i | η ) f (η )dη ,

(9)

where Si is the share choosing bundle i, and f( ) is the probability density function of
the agent-specific error η. We are now in a position to describe the importance of η. On
the one hand, individual heterogeneity represented by η could directly affect the choice of
bundle. On the other hand, observed demands for VMT and Wear are conditional on
that choice. Since the choice of vehicle bundle is endogenous, the estimated demands for
VMT and Wear could be biased if the influence of η in (9) is ignored. In the model of
Dubin and McFadden (1984), the error term

can be cancelled out from the inequality

{Vi>Vj, ∀ j i}, which simplifies the calculation of probabilities (that is, the integration
-9-

over η in equation (9) is not necessary). In such a model, η appears only in the
continuous demands, so this individual heterogeneity does not affect the choice of vehicle
bundle directly. They can estimate the discrete model with error

i

for each bundle, and

then, given predicted bundle shares, they estimate the continuous choices with errors η.
Yet, our purpose here is to retain individual-specific heterogeneity η and its effect
on bundle choice. Thus, the evaluation of probabilities in our model involves integration
over all error components ( , ), where

=( 1,

2,

… , J), and where J is the number of

i

are assumed to be distributed with a

possible vehicle bundles. In our model, the

generalized extreme value (GEV) distribution, and η follows an unknown distribution
with a zero mean across individuals. Conditional on η, we integrate over the GEV
distribution to obtain conditional choice probabilities as a general nested logit model:
Pr (Vni > Vlm , ∀m ≠ i, ∀n, l η ) =

exp(Vi λn )
K
l =1

(

(

j∈Bk

)

exp(V j λn )

)

exp(V j λl )
j∈B
l

λn −1

λl

,

(10)

where n and l represent nests, i is an alternative within nest n, m is an alternative
within nest l, K is the total number of nests, and Bl (l = 1, …, K) represents a nested
subset of alternatives. Our nesting structure is illustrated in Figure 1.
We also integrate over the distribution of η to obtain unconditional probabilities.
The literature offers no guidance on the distribution of the
difficulty in estimation, we let
search for the

.20 To reduce the numerical

be uniformly distributed in the interval [- , ]. We

that yields a likelihood function with the largest value.21

As pointed out by Dubin and McFadden (1984), the random error

does not have

a zero mean conditional on each chosen bundle, due to the endogeneity of bundle choice.
This can be seen clearly if we rewrite equations (8a-d) into a more convenient form for
estimation (using just equation 8a, as an example):

αVj1d ij +

ln(VMTi1 ) =
j

α pj1 p j1d ij +
j

− α q1
20

j

q j1d ij − α q 2
j

Dubin and McFadden (1984) assume
explicit conditional expectation.

α pj 2 p j 2 d ij

q j 2 d ij − βy + β1
j

k j d ij + x'
γ +η

(11a)

j

has a particular form of mean and variance, in order to derive an

21

This search yields
equal to 0.65. Since the estimation of the logit model requires integration over the
individual heterogeneity term , our model is a mixed logit model (McFadden and Train, 2000).

-10-

where dij is a choice indicator variable equal to one when i = j, and where equations
(11b-d) are analogous. The random error η is correlated with the choice indicators dij.
Dubin and McFadden (1984) suggest sequential estimation to solve this endogeneity
problem (a procedure later adopted by Goldberg (1998) and West (2004)). First, the
discrete choice model is estimated and the predicted probabilities are calculated. They
then suggest three alternative methods that yield consistent estimates of parameters for
continuous demands: the instrumental variable method (IV), the reduced form method
(RF), and the conditional expectation correction method (CE). They derive the correction
terms in terms of probabilities for the CE method based on the assumption of an i.i.d.
extreme value distribution of εi. However, since we assume a GEV distribution of εi,
these correction terms cannot be used in our model. We want a method that can be used
both for sequential estimation and for our simultaneous estimation, in order to compare
them, and so we employ the RF method. Taking expectation of (11a) over η, we have:

αVj1S nj +

ln(VMTn1 ) =
j

α pj1 p j1Snj +
j

− α q1

α pj 2 p j 2 Snj
j

q j1Snj − α q 2

q j 2 S nj − βy + β1

j

j

k j Snj + x'
γ + un1

(12a)

,

j

where Snj is the probability of individual n choosing vehicle bundle j from (9), un1 is
an additional error to represent the difference between observed VMT and predicted VMT,
and where (12b-d) are analogous (not shown here). The sequential RF method applies
least squares to (12a-d), except that the shares Snj are replaced by estimated shares Ŝnj
from the discrete choice model. In contrast, we estimate (9) and (12a-d) simultaneously.
Since the same parameters appear in both discrete and continuous choice functions,
we propose a joint estimation method to capture this simultaneity. In particular, we obtain
a set of parameters that maximize the following objective function:
F (Θ y, p1 , p2 , q1 , q2 , k , x) = − Σ (ln(VMT1 ) − f1 ) 2 − Σ (ln(VMT2 ) − f 2 ) 2
n

n

− Σ (ln(Wear1 ) − g1 ) − Σ (ln(Wear2 ) − g 2 ) + Σ ln L
2

n

2

n

,

(13)

n

where f1, f2, g1, and g2 represent the right hand sides (without the random error un1) of
the four equations (12a-d), lnL is the log likelihood function of the nested logit, and
represents the set of parameters to be estimated by maximizing equation (13).

-11-

As is consistent with Dubin and McFadden (1984) and other papers in this
literature, the maintained hypotheses are that the utility functional form is correct and that
consumers maximize it.

Under these hypotheses, our procedure produces consistent

estimates of parameters. The reasoning is as follows: if the components of (13) were
maximized separately, and if some single set of parameters were the solution to all those
separate maximizations, then this set of parameters would also maximize the combined
objective function. To compare the results, we estimate our model by both the sequential
method and the simultaneous estimation method.
D. Elasticities

Once we obtain the parameter estimates, we are ready to calculate elasticities. To
see the marginal effects of prices on indirect utility, and therefore on bundle choice, we use
equation (7) to obtain explicit formulas for those derivatives. First, define

exp( )

exp(α ip1 pi1 + α ip 2 pi 2 − α q1qi1 − α q 2 qi 2 ) . Then:
∂Vi
= − exp(⋅) ,
∂pi1

α p2
∂Vi
= − i exp(⋅)
∂pi 2
α p1

(14a)

∂Vi α q1
=
exp(⋅) ,
∂qi1 α ip1

∂Vi α q 2
=
exp(⋅)
∂qi 2 α ip1

(14b)

i

and the marginal effects of income or capital cost on utility take similar forms:
∂Vi
= exp(−α 0i + βy − β1ki − x'
γ −η )
∂y

(15a)

∂Vi
β
= − 1 exp(−α 0i + βy − β1ki − x'
γ −η )
∂ki
β

(15b)

Then we derive the elasticity of choice i with respect to a change in variable zj
(where zj may be any of the price variables, income y, or capital cost kj):
∂S i z j ∂S i ∂V j z j
⋅ =
⋅
⋅
∂z j S i ∂V j ∂z j S i

(16)

Since these formulas involve the unconditional probability of vehicle bundle i,
calculating each bundle elasticity requires integration over
VMT elasticites do not involve integration over

. In contrast, calculations of

. For bundle i (i = 1, …, 5), the own-

and cross-price elasticities of VMT demand are calculated by:
-12-

eVi 1 p1 =

∂ ln (VMTi1 )
= α ip1 pi1 = eVi 2 p1 ,
∂ ln pi1

eVi 2 p 2 =

∂ ln (VMTi 2 )
= α ip 2 pi 2 = eVi 1 p 2
∂ ln p i 2

(17)

The elasticities of demand for Wear with respect to its price have a similar form:
eWi 1q1 =

∂ ln (Wear i1 )
∂ ln (Wear i 2 )
= −α q1q i1 = eWi 2 q1 , eWi 2 q 2 =
= −α q 2 q i 2 = eWi 1q 2
∂ ln q i1
∂ ln q i 2

(18)

We can also calculate the income elasticity, given by:
i
eVy
=

∂ ln(VMTi1 ) ∂ ln(VMTi 2 )
=
= − βy ,
∂ ln y
∂ ln y

(19)

and the total capital cost elasticity, given by:
i
=
eVk

∂ ln(VMTi1 ) ∂ ln(VMTi 2 )
=
= β1ki .
∂ ln ki
∂ ln ki

(20)

In equations (16) – (20), elasticities are typically evaluated at each bundle’s mean
values of y and k, the bundle average of gas prices per mile (p1 and p2) and the bundle
average of reimbursement prices (q1 and q2).
II. Data and Summary Statistics

In order to analyze household choice of vehicles, miles driven, and vehicle Wear,
we need micro-data on household characteristics, household income or expenditures, and
detailed information about household-owned vehicles such as the number of vehicles,
miles driven in each, and vehicle characteristics (including miles per gallon, MPG, and
emissions per mile, EPM). No single data set contains all such information.
The Consumer Expenditure Survey (CEX) provides data on household income,
characteristics, and household-owned vehicles. 22

For each household, we aggregate

expenditures over four quarters, taking demographic data and detailed vehicle information
from their last quarter in the survey. We use the CEX from 1996 to 2000, supplemented
with the corresponding OVB file (Owned Vehicles Part B Detailed questions). This OVB
file includes data on each vehicle type, make, year, number of cylinders, purchase
expenses and financing, time since purchase, mileage, gasoline expenditure, and other
information. We keep only households that satisfy several criteria. First, expenditures
22

The CEX data are collected by the Bureau of Labor Statistics of the U.S. Department of Labor through
quarterly interviews of selected households throughout the U.S. Each household is interviewed over five
consecutive quarters. Each quarter, 20% of households complete their last interview and are replaced by new
households. For CEX data, see http://elsa.berkeley.edu or http://www.icpsr.umich.edu/.

-13-

must be reported consecutively for four quarters in the CEX of 1996-2000. Second, the
household must possess the same number of vehicles during these four quarters. Third, we
remove households that own more than two vehicles.23 We also remove households that
have vehicles other than automobiles or SUV’s (defined to include light trucks or vans).
Finally, we are left with 9027 households, of which 2077 own no vehicles, 4211 own one
vehicle, and 2739 own two vehicles. We use yearly total expenditure as a proxy for yearly
income of each household. Table 2 defines all the variables used in estimations.
Summary statistics are shown in Table 3 for major household characteristics by
vehicle bundle. This table shows significant variations in household characteristics across
the number of vehicles and bundles. For example, larger households especially with more
kids have more vehicles and prefer SUVs. Wealthier households (as measured by total
yearly expenditures) possess more vehicles. Households with more workers or income
earners have more vehicles. Households with male heads are inclined to have SUVs.
Next, fuel price data are obtained from the ACCRA cost-of-living index for 19962000. This index compiles quarterly data for approximately 300 cities in the United States.
It also lists average gasoline price for each city for each survey quarter. Since the CEX
reports region and state of residence instead of city for each household, we average the city
gas prices to obtain a state price for each calendar quarter. For those states reported in the
CEX, but not reported in the ACCRA index, we use the average region price as a
substitute. Then we assign a gas price to each CEX household based on the state of
residence, CEX quarter, and year.
Some of the variables in our model require calculations or additional sources of
data. We now describe these extra calculations.
(1) Wear: The vehicle’s age is derived by taking the year of the survey minus the
year the vehicle was made. We then assume 20% annual depreciation, and calculate Wear
as the percentage of the vehicle’s value that has wasted away (given all the vehicle
characteristics unchanged except vehicle age). Wear ranges from zero for a new car, to
Wear = 1 for a very old car. Specifically, Wear = 1 – (1 – 0.2)age .
(2) Capital value of the vehicle:

The vehicle’s year of purchase and reported

purchase price (pp) are available in the OVB file, but we want an estimate of current
23

In the CEX of 1996-2000, 18.4% of households own more than two vehicles. Some of these households
may have a vehicle for business, whereas our model of household choice assumes utility maximization.

-14-

market value (cmv). We calculate the number of “years since purchase” (ysp), and we
subtract depreciation for each year, again using 20% as the annual rate of depreciation. The
formula is cmv = pp×(1–0.2)ysp. We then estimate a simple hedonic price regression:
cmv = a0 + a1cyl + a2im + b0 (1 − Wear ) + b1 (Wear × cyl ) + b2 (Wear × im )

(21)

where a0 through a2, and b0 through b2 are parameters. The variable cyl denotes the
number of cylinders, while im is a dummy variable indicating if the vehicle is imported.24
Wear is included in the regression to capture the effects of vehicle age on market value.
Using a sub-sample of the CEX that has all necessary variables, we run separate
regressions for cars and SUV’s and report the results in Table 4. Then, for the value of
each brand new “concept” vehicle (with Wear = 0), we use:
kˆ = aˆ 0 + aˆ1cyl + aˆ 2 im + bˆ0

.

(22)

where â0 through â2 and b̂0 are estimates of parameters in (21).

(3) The price of Wear: First, we calculate the extra amount paid for a car with no
wear on it (Wear = 0) compared to a very old car with the same characteristics (Wear = 1).
From (21), that difference is

(bˆ − bˆ cyl − bˆ im).
0

1

2

Then, q is the annual reimbursement

price of Wear, that is, the amount saved during a year by an owner who accepts one whole
unit of Wear (an old car instead of a new car). Since a very old car does not depreciate
any further, the amount saved is the depreciation during the year from holding a new car.

(

)

Again assuming 20% depreciation, we have: q = 0.2 bˆ0 − bˆ1cyl − bˆ2im .
(4) Fuel Efficiency: The EPA reports miles per gallon (MPG) of new vehicles, but
we need it for vehicles of all ages. The CEX does not contain this information, so we
estimate MPG using data of the California Air Resources Board (CARB, 1997 and 2000).25
Their first sub-sample is “series 13”, from November 1995 to March 1997, in which the
CARB tested a total of 345 passenger cars, light-duty trucks, and medium-duty vans. The
second sub-sample is “series 14”, from November 1997 to August 1999, which includes
24

The CEX does not include the vehicle’s nation of origin, so we create the im dummy using information on
manufacturer and model. We also tried other vehicle characteristics in the regression, such as indicators for
automatic transmission, power steering, and air conditioning, but the estimates are not significant. Inclusion
of these variables does not raise adjusted R2 and can result in negative predictions of cmv.
25

For MPG of new cars, http://www.fueleconomy.gov/feg/index.htm is a website of the US Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA) and the Department of Energy. The EPA also provides the historical fuel economy
of new vehicles at http://www.epa.gov/otaq/mpg.htm or at http://www.epa.gov/otaq/tcldata.htm.

-15-

332 vehicles (but which reports only 327 vehicles). In total, we use 672 vehicles. We
regress MPG against vehicle characteristics in the CARB and then use those estimated
coefficients to predict MPG for each vehicle in the CEX. The estimation results are shown
in Table 5, where a 4-cylinder SUV is the omitted category. This table shows that fuel
efficiency decreases with vehicle age and with engine size, both for cars and for SUV’s.
Given the same vehicle age and engine size, MPG is higher for cars than for SUV’s.
(5) Emissions per mile (EPM): For the same sample of 672 used vehicles, the
CARB tests for several pollutants. Following Fullerton and West (2000), we weight each
pollutant by estimates of its damages, with the highest weight on nitrous oxides (NOX,
0.495), followed by hydrocarbons (HC, 0.405), and carbon monoxide (CO, 0.10). Results
appear in Table 5. Cars pollute less than SUV’s because they were produced under stricter
standards.

Older vehicles pollute more, both because newer vintages faced stricter

standards and because pollution control equipment deteriorates over time.26
(6) Vehicle Miles Traveled (VMT): The OVB file provides cumulative miles on
each vehicle, but we need yearly miles driven. We had planned to match households
across quarters, take the latest odometer reading minus the earliest one, divide by the
number of quarters between readings, and multiply by four. Unfortunately, however, some
later odometer readings are less than the earlier ones, and many readings are missing.
Therefore, we propose a different procedure to get VMT. For a one-car household, we take
observed annual expenditure on gasoline, divide by the price per gallon to get number of
gallons, and then multiply by MPG to get miles. For a two-vehicle household, we only
know the total gasoline expenditure, so we need to allocate it between the two vehicles.
Only for this allocation do we use the difference in odometer readings between quarters.27
(7) Vehicle bundles: As listed in Table 1, vehicle choices are classified into six
categories according to the number and type of vehicles. For bundle 4, with one car and
one SUV, the car is always identified as the first vehicle. For bundles 3 and 5, the first
vehicle is identified as the one with higher yearly VMT. If two vehicles have the same
26

For vehicles in our sample, the calculated EPM is 1.89 grams/mile for the average car and 3.56 for the
average SUV. It also increases to 6.94 grams/mile for a very old vehicle (with Wear =1).
27

If the difference in odometer readings is positive for both vehicles, then we divide it by MPG to obtain an
estimate of each vehicle’s gas consumption. Each gasoline amount divided by their sum gives shares, used
to allocate the observed total gas consumption. Each vehicle’s gallons divided by MPG yields VMT. If the
difference in odometer readings is positive only for one vehicle, we use this figure as VMT1 and calculate
gasoline used in this vehicle. Then total gasoline minus gas used in this vehicle is residual gas, allocated to
the other vehicle. Dividing this residual gas by MPG yields VMT2. If the difference in odometer readings is
positive for neither vehicle, then we do imputations based on households with similar characteristics.

-16-

yearly VMT, the identification is random. If VMT is missing, then the vehicle with an
earlier purchase year is taken as the first vehicle. If the purchase year and miles-driven are
both missing, the identification is random.
III. Estimation Results

The model described in Section I is estimated by both the sequential and the
simultaneous estimation methods. The mean values of key variables are reported by
bundle in Table 6. We average the values within each bundle for each bundle-specific
variable except gas price per mile. Gas price per mile is calculated by dividing gas price
per gallon by a bundle-specific MPG listed in Table 1. Thus, gas prices per mile vary both
within and between bundles. The presence of collinearity between the fixed effects α0i (i
= 1, …, 6) and the bundle-specific variables such as ki (i = 1, …, 5) forces us to
normalize the fixed effect of bundle one ( α 01 ) to zero. To facilitate the estimation, we
also normalize y in units of 10,000 dollars, ki in units of 1,000, and q1 and q2 in units
of 100 dollars. Accordingly, we multiply Wear1 and Wear2 by 100 to keep the total
amount of reimbursement unchanged in the budget constraint.
Notice that bundle 3 and bundle 5 each contains two vehicles of the same type,
while bundle 4 consists of one car and one SUV. When the retail gas price increases, all
gas prices per mile are affected in bundle-specific ways because MPG depends both on
vehicle age and type (car or SUV). As revealed by Table 1, MPG is more type-specific
than bundle-specific. Thus, we expect that the gas price parameters of car bundles 1 and 3
are quite close to one another, as are those of SUV bundles 2 and 5. For a household with
one car and one SUV (bundle 4), however, we wish to allow more substitution. In our
estimation, we assign one parameter α C1 to the gas price of the only car in bundle 1 and
first car in bundle 3 (and α C 2 to the second car). We assign one parameter α S1 to the
only SUV in bundle 2 and first SUV of bundle 5 (and α S 2 to the second SUV). Then we
4
4
assign two gas price parameters to bundle 4: α p41 (= α CAR
) for the car and α p4 2 (= α SUV
)

for the SUV. Results from the sequential estimation are discussed first.
We follow the procedure suggested by Dubin and Mcfadden (1984), but at the first
stage we estimate a nested logit structure instead of a multinomial logit model. The
traditional ML method is employed. The RF method is adopted at the second stage
because the correction terms derived by Dubin and Mcfadden are inappropriate for the
-17-

GEV error structure. In the second stage we estimate four continuous demand equations
jointly (only two equations for the one-vehicle bundles), using an objective function
similar to equation (13) except that the last term is removed. We constrain parameters to
be constant across bundles except those for gas prices and constant terms. The estimation
results are reported in the first two columns of Table 7, under “sequential estimation”.
For the discrete choice model in the first column of Table 7, the estimates of α C1
and α S1 are significant at the 1% level, while those of α C 2 and α S 2 are not statistically
4
4
significant. The estimates of α p41 (= α CAR
) and α p4 2 (= α SUV
) are both significant at the

0.01 level. All of them are negative as expected. The Wear coefficients α q1 and α q 2 are
also different from zero at the 0.01 level. The parameter λn (n = 1,2) measures the degree
of independence of the errors of alternatives in nest n. In our model, the estimates of λ1
and λ2 are 0.814 and 0.066, respectively, both significant at the 0.01 level.28
Since all the estimates of α p1 and α p 2 are negative, equations (14) indicate that
the marginal effects of gas prices per mile are negative. As consistent with expectation, an
increase in gas price reduces household utility. Since the coefficient on the reimbursement
price q1 is negative, the marginal effect on utility is positive as expected. A higher
reimbursement price means more money back to the household for accepting a given
vehicle age or level of Wear. However, the coefficient on q2 has unexpected sign. Since
estimates of

and

1

are both negative and significant, equations (15) indicate that the

marginal effect of capital cost is negative while that of income is positive.
We then use those discrete choices from the first column to estimate the continuous
demands shown in the second column. A glance down the second column indicates that
most of estimated coefficients are quite different from the corresponding estimates in the
first column. Yet the parameters in the second column are the same parameters as in the
first column, even from the same model, as the continuous demands are supposed to be
consistent with a particular indirect utility function. For example, the estimated coefficient
on income is −1.408 in the first column and +1.134 in the second column. Both have small
errors, and so they are significantly different from each other, even though they are the
28

If λn ∀n are within the range of zero to one, then “the model is consistent with utility maximization for all
possible values of the explanatory variables” (Train, 2003, p.85). Since our are significantly less than one,
the errors within each nest are correlated, evidence in favor of nesting rather than MNL.

-18-

same parameter of the same model. Many price coefficients also differ significantly in
magnitude (and the two estimates of

q2

differ in sign).

Next, the model is estimated by the simultaneous estimation procedure proposed in
Section I.C. The point of this procedure is to capture household-specific heterogeneity in
both discrete and continuous choices. The two types of choices are connected by the same
parameters and the same random error term η appearing in both. 29 In contrast, in the
sequential procedure, the bundle choice affects continuous demands (and not vice versa).
The simultaneous estimates are reported in the last column of Table 7.
All ten estimates of coefficients on key variables have the expected signs, and all
but two are significantly different from zero. Yet, for many parameters, the estimate
differs from both estimates obtained by sequential estimation. For example, the capital
cost coefficient (β1) from the simultaneous model (–0.405) is smaller in magnitude than
either that of the logit model (–0.671) or the continuous demand model (–0.456). The
estimates of coefficients on demographic variables vary with the estimation method, not
only in magnitude but also in sign. For most price variables, however, the estimate from
the simultaneous model is between the two estimates from sequential estimation, which
suggests that the simultaneous model might provide more “reasonable” coefficients. These
coefficients cannot really be compared directly, however, and so we turn to elasticities.
IV. Elasticity Comparisons

Bundle choice elasticities are presented in Table 8.

The upper panel shows

elasticities from the sequentially estimated model, but our discussion will start with the
elasticities in the lower panel from the simultaneously estimated model. Each entry in the
table is not an elasticity with respect to each price in the model, as it might be difficult to
interpret an elasticity such as the change in the probability of holding bundle 3 (two cars)
for a change in the price p1 for gas in the first car only. Instead, we calculate the
simultaneous effect on all choices for a change in the price of gasoline. In the lower part
of Table 8, the first row shows that a 1% increase in the price of gas would decrease most
the probability of holding bundle 4 with a car and an SUV (by 0.793%) while increasing
the share holding bundle 3 with two cars (by 0.695%). In other words, these households
29

The standard deviation for x' is about 0.086 within a bundle, and for y is about 0.78 within a bundle,
so the finding that
has a range (-0.65,0.65) reflects a significant amount of individual heterogeneity.
Therefore, introducing individual heterogeneity is expected to make a difference in parameter estimates.

-19-

sell the SUV for a second car instead. This change is driven by the high price of driving an
SUV with low fuel efficiency.30 In contrast, using results from the sequential method in
the top panel, the price of gas has little effect on any bundle share.
Given vehicle age, a higher reimbursement price q for Wear of a particular bundle
means more money back to the household and thus higher probability of choosing that
bundle. Again, however, it is difficult to interpret a change in the price q1 for the first car
with no change in q2 for the household’s second car. Instead, we show effects of a change
in q for all vehicles (or for all cars only, or all SUV’s only). Rather than raising

q,

policymakers may want to reduce q by taxing old vehicles or by subsidizing the purchase
of a new vehicle, in order to reduce emissions. Table 5 above shows that emissions per
mile (EPM) are higher for SUV’s than for cars, and rise with either vehicle’s age.
For the simultaneous model in the lower part of Table 8, the second row shows that
a 1% tax on Wear (lower q for all vehicles) would decrease the probabilities of holding all
bundles except bundle 5 (SUV, SUV). In the next row, a tax on the age only of cars would
decrease the reimbursement for wear on cars, qcar, and switch households out of cars and
into bundle 2 with an SUV and bundle 5 with two SUV’s. Conversely, the next row shows
that a tax on the age only of SUV’s that lowers qsuv would induce a switch out of bundles
2 and 5 with just SUV’s, and into bundles with cars.31
The discrete-choice-only model in the top half of the table shows results for q
where effects on SUV bundles are unreasonably large and sometimes the wrong sign. A
tax that lowers qsuv would encourage the purchase of two SUV’s.
Back to the lower panel for the simultaneous model, the choice elasticities with
respect to y indicate that households with more income switch from holding no car
(bundle 6) to one car (bundle 1), and those with a single SUV (bundle 2) seem to add a car
(bundle 4). Additional income reduces the share with two cars (bundle 3). These results
are inconsistent with the discrete-choice model, where the only bundle with a positive
income elasticity is bundle 2 with one SUV.

30

This reasoning is confirmed by the choice elasticities with respect to p1 and p2 separately. For bundle 4,
a 1% higher price per mile in the car reduces the probability of choosing that bundle by 0.37%, while a 1%
higher price per mile in the SUV (p2) reduces the probability of choosing that bundle by 0.81%. Thus, the
gas consumption of the SUV has twice as much impact as that of the car.
31

This tax on age of SUV’s might actually cut emissions in two ways: by inducing a switch from SUV’s to
cars (Table 8), and by inducing a switch from older SUV’s to newer SUV’s (Table 9 below).

-20-

We next look at an increase in capital cost in the lower panel of Table 8. Since this
change effectively reduces available income, we see that each capital cost elasticity has the
opposite sign as that bundle’s income elasticity. With higher capital costs, households
seem to shift primarily out of two-vehicle bundles with at least one SUV (4 and 5) into
bundles with two cars (bundle 3) or only one SUV (bundle 2). While it does not make
sense to increase the capital cost only for the first car of a two-car household, it might
make sense to increase the capital cost only of cars relative to SUV’s or vice versa (to
represent a vehicle-type tax). The next row of Table 8 shows that if the increase in capital
cost pertains only to cars, then it decreases the shares of the two bundles that have only
cars. If it pertains only to SUV’s, however, then it has large effects that decrease the shares
of all three bundles with SUV’s. Such a policy could clearly reduce emissions (given the
EPM in Table 5). The 1% higher cost of an SUV means 13.7% less of bundle 4, which
seems too large, but it means that the share falls two percentage points (from 14.5% of all
households in Table 6 to 12.5% of all households). The discrete-choice-only model in the
top part of Table 8 produces elasticities with smaller magnitudes, except that the bundle 5
elasticity has the wrong sign (higher ksuv lead to more households with two SUV’s).
The sequential model uses predictions of discrete choices to estimate continuous
demands, for which elasticities are shown in the top half of Table 9. These are “short run”
elasticities, in the sense that car choices are fixed and only continuous choices like driving
distances may change (Goldberg, 1998).32 Again, we focus primarily on simultaneously
estimated elasticities in the bottom panel. In the first row, all elasticities for VMT1 with
respect to gasoline price are negative, as expected, for all bundles. (For this demand, the
sequential model produces similar results.) The next row of Table 9 shows the effects of a
1% increase in the reimbursement price, q, on Wear. These elasticities are all positive, as
expected: households choose older vehicles when they get higher reimbursement for
holding an old vehicle. Conversely, a tax on vehicle age that reduces q by 10% would
reduce desired Wear by about 1.2 to 1.4% (assuming the desired cars were available).33
The table also shows similar effects of changing q just for cars, or just for SUV’s.
Next, consider income and capital cost elasticities.

Due to the symmetric

specification of demand functions, a 1% change in y or k has the same effect on both
32

Panel data would be required to distinguish the effects of lags from contemporaneous price changes.

33

In Table 6, the average Wear of 0.75 corresponds to 6.2 years of age, so a 1.2% decrease in Wear means
a decrease of about one month of age. In the sequential model, the same 10% lower q affects desired age of
one-vehicle bundles by one-tenth as much, and desired ages of two-vehicle bundles by three times as much.

-21-

VMT and Wear (whether for the first vehicle or the second). In the simultaneous model,
income elasticities are positive as expected. One percent more income would increase
driving distances by about 1% to 1.5% for all bundles. In contrast, the sequential model
implies income elasticities that are all negative and large (-2.6 to -4.0). The capital cost
elasticities are negative as expected, for both models.
The specific form for utility in equation (4) means a specific form for demands in
equations (5), where ln(VMT) and ln(Wear) both depend on

i

p pi

–

q q i.

In other

words, the parameter that determines the important effect of gas price on miles (
necessarily drives the less-important effect of the gas price on choice of

i

p)

also

Wear.

Similarly, the own-price effect of q on Wear also drives the cross-price effect of q on
VMT. We note this fact, but we do not mean to emphasize these cross-price elasticities.
Finally, the last column in Table 9 reports the percentage change in total emissions
when each variable increases by 1%. In the simultaneous model, for example, a 1%
increase in all gasoline prices would reduce total emissions by 0.136%, while a tax on age
that reduces q by 1% would reduce total emissions by 0.434%.34 The largest elasticities
are from income and capital cost: 1% higher income raises total emissions as expected, by
4.246% (but in the sequential model would reduce emissions by 11.47%!) A 1% increase
in capital cost reduces total emissions by about 8% in either model.
In the simultaneously estimated model, the coefficients are affected by all discrete
and continuous choices. The model imposes more constraints on the estimates. Thus, if
those constrained estimates are plugged into the likelihood function for either part of the
sequential procedure, then the likelihood is not as high as for that portion of the sequential
procedure. However, the sequentially estimated model yields two sets of estimates for the
same parameters. The finding that these estimates are not consistent with each other raises
questions about whether the behavioral model is correctly specified.
V. Conclusion

This paper focuses on incentive effects of price changes that might be associated
with policies to reduce vehicle emissions. We provide a model of household behavior that
incorporates both the discrete choice of vehicle type, with different fuel efficiencies and
34

These are also short run elasticities, with no change in the number or type of vehicles. Notice that the
percentage change in emissions from a change in p is more than twice the change in driving distance,
because the higher p also reduces demand for Wear (which also reduces emissions). The change in q
also affects both VMT and Wear in the same direction, enlarging the effect on emissions.

-22-

emission rates, and continuous demands for miles driven. Because emission rates depend
directly on vehicle age, we also model vehicle age as a continuous choice. To model the
effect of prices on the choice of vehicle age, we establish a choice of “concept vehicle”
that is separate from the choice of “Wear”. Using hedonic price regressions, we quantify
the price of Wear. Then, after the discrete choice among concept vehicles, both VMT
and Wear become continuous variables that enter utility.
Yearly household data are obtained from the CEX of 1996 – 2000, supplemented
with fuel efficiency estimates from the CARB, and gas prices from the ACCRA cost of
living indexes. First, like many others, we follow the sequential procedure suggested by
Dubin and McFadden (1984). This procedure generates two different sets of estimates for
the same set of parameters, which we argue is inconsistent with maintained hypotheses
about the utility function and utility maximization. We then propose and implement a
simultaneous method for consistent estimation of both discrete and continuous choices in
one step. Results from the simultaneous estimation differ significantly both in signs and
magnitude from both sets of estimates obtained by sequential estimation.
We find that a higher price of gasoline would shift households out of the Car-SUV
pair and into the bundle with two cars. It also would reduce miles driven. Both of these
changes reduce emissions. A tax on vehicle age would induce shifts to newer vehicles
with less “Wear”, and would also shift families out of bundles with an SUV. Both of these
changes also reduce emissions. Similarly, a tax on SUV’s would shift families into cars
and reduce emissions. The size of these shifts is important information for environmental
policy. Rather than pin down the exact size of the important parameters, however, this
paper points to important problems with existing methods and suggests an alternative
approach with more internal consistency.

References

Bento, Antonio, Lawrence Goulder, Emeric Henry, Mark Jacobsen, and Roger von Haefen.
“Efficiency and Distributional Impacts of U.S. Policies to Reduce Automobile
Pollution”, Working Paper, Department of Economics, Stanford University (2005).
Bhat, Chandra. “A Multiple Discrete-Continuous Extreme Value Model: Formulation and
Application to Discretionary Time-Use Decisions,” Working Paper, Department of
Civil Engineering, University of Texas at Austin (2005).
Brownstone, David and Kenneth Train. “Forecasting New Product Penetration with
Flexible Substitution Patterns,” Journal of Econometrics 89 (1999), 109-29.
-23-

Brownstone, D., D.S. Bunch, T.F. Golob, and W. Ren. “A Vehicle Transactions Choice
Model for Use in Forecasting Demand for Alternative-Fuel Vehicles,” Research in
Transportation Economics 4 (1996), 87-129.
California Air Resources Board. Test Report of the Light-Duty Vehicle Surveillance
Program, Series 13, Project Number 2S95C1 (September 1997).
California Air Resources Board. Report of the Results of the Vehicle Surveillance
Program 14 , Project Number 2S97C1 (March 2000).
Dubin, Jeffrey and Daniel McFadden. “An Econometric Analysis of Residential Electric
Appliance Holdings and Consumption,” Econometrica 52:2 (March 1984), 345-62.
Eskeland, Gunnar and Shantayanan Devarajan. Taxing Bads by Taxing Goods: Pollution
Control with Presumptive Charges, Washington, DC: The World Bank (1996).
Fullerton, Don and Sarah West. “Tax and Subsidy Combinations for the Control of Vehicle
Pollution,” NBER Working Paper No. 7774, Cambridge, MA (2000).
Fullerton, Don and Sarah West. “Can Taxes on Vehicles and on Gasoline Mimic an
Unavailable Tax on Emissions?” Journal of Environmental Economics and
Management 43 (January 2002), 135-57.
Goldberg, Pinelopi. “The Regulation of Fuel Economy and the Demand for ‘Light
Trucks’,” Journal of Industrial Economics 46:1 (March 1998), 1-33.
Greene, David L. and Patricia Hu. “The Influence of the Price of Gasoline on Vehicle Use
in Multi-vehicle Households,” Transportation Research Record 988 (1985), 19-24.
Hanemann, W. Michael. “Discrete/Continuous Models of Consumer Demand,”
Econometrica 52:3 (May 1984), 54-62.
Harrington, Winston and Virginia McConnell. “Motor Vehicles and the Environment,” in
H. Folmer and T. Tietenberg, eds., The International Yearbook of Environmental
and Resource Economics 2003/2004, Northampton, MA: Edward Elgar (2003).
Hausman, Jerry A. “Exact Consumer’s Surplus and Deadweight Loss,” American
Economic Review 71:4 (September 1981), 662-76.
Heeb, Norbert, Anna-Maria Forss, Christian Saxer, and Patrick Wilhelm. “Methane,
Benzene and Alkyl Benzene Cold Start Emission Data of Gasoline-Driven
Passenger Cars Representing the Vehicle Technology of the Last Two Decades,”
Atmospheric Environment 37 (2003), 5185-95.
Hulten, Charles R. and Frank C. Wykoff. “Issues in the Measurement of Economic
Depreciation,” Economic Inquiry 34 (January 1996): 10-23.
Innes, Robert. “Regulating Automobile Pollution Under Certainty, Competition, and
Imperfect Information,” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 31
(September 1996), 219-39.
Jorgenson, Dale W. “Empirical Studies of Depreciation.” Economic Inquiry 34 (January
1996), 24-42.
Kohn, Robert E. “An Additive Tax and Subsidy for Controlling Automobile Pollution.”
Applied Economics Letters 3 (July 1996), 459-62.

-24-

Mannering, Fred and Winston, Clifford. “A Dynamic Empirical Analysis of Household
Vehicle Ownership and Utilization,” Rand Journal of Economics 16:2 (Summer
1985), 215-36.
McFadden, Daniel. “Quantitative Methods for Analyzing Travel Behavior of Individuals:
Some Recent Developments,” in David Hensher and P. Stopher, eds., Behavioral
Travel Modeling, London: Croom Heml (1979), 279-318.
McFadden, Daniel. “Disaggregate Behavioural Travel Demand’s RUM Side: A 30-Year
Retrospective,” in Hensher, ed., Travel Behavior Research: The Leading Edge.
London: Pergamon (2001).
McFadden, Daniel and Kenneth Train. “Mixed MNL Models for Discrete Response,”
Journal of Applied Econometrics 15:5 (2000), 447-70.
Newell, Richard G. and Robert N. Stavins, “Cost Heterogeneity and the Potential Savings
from Market-Based Policies,” Journal of Regulatory Economics 23:1 (January
2003), 43-59.
Plaut, Pnina. “The Comparison and Ranking of Policies for Abating Mobile-Source
Emissions,” Transportation Research D 3 (July 1998), 193-205.
Pigou, Arthur C. The Economics of Welfare, London: MacMillan (1920).
Sevigny, Maureen. Taxing Automobile Emissions for Pollution Control. Cheltenham, UK
and Northhampton, MA: Edward Elgar Publishing Ltd. (1998).
Sierra Research. “Analysis of the Effectiveness and Cost-Effectiveness of Remote Sensing
Devices.” Report SR94-05-05, prepared for the U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency, Sacramento, CA: Sierra Research (1994).
Train, Kenneth. Qualitative Choice Analysis: Theory, Econometrics, and an Application to
Automobile Demand, Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press (1986).
Train, Kenneth. Discrete Choice Methods with Simulation, Cambridge, United Kingdom:
Cambridge University Press (2003).
Train, Kenneth, William B. Davis and Mark D. Levine. “Fees and Rebates on New
Vehicles: Impacts on Fuel Efficiency, Carbon Dioxide Emissions, and Consumer
Surplus,” Transportation Research E 33 (1997), 1-13.
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. Technical Methods for Analyzing Pricing
Measures to Reduce Transportation Emissions, Washington, DC (1998).
West, Sarah. “Distributional Effects of Alternative Vehicle Pollution Control Policies,”
Journal of Public Economics 88:3-4 (March 2004), 735-57.

-25-

Table 1. Vehicle Bundle Descriptions and Statistics

Bundle

# of
Vehicles

First
Vehicle

Second
Vehicle

# of
Households

MPG of
First
Vehicle

MPG of
Second
Vehicle

1

1

Car

--

3469

21.37

--

2

1

SUV

--

742

16.76

--

3

2

Car

Car

1181

21.88

21.55

4

2

Car

SUV

1305

21.51

16.53

5

2

SUV

SUV

253

17.04

16.50

6

0

--

--

2077

--

--

Note: The number of households is from the consumer expenditure survey (CEX),
and miles per gallon (MPG) is calculated from CARB data described below.

-26-

Table 2. Variable Definitions

Variable

Definition

y

Household’s yearly expenditure

k

Total capital cost of a vehicle bundle

p1

Gas price per mile of the first vehicle

p2

Gas price per mile of the second vehicle

q1

Unit price of Wear of the first vehicle

q2

Unit price of Wear of the second vehicle

VMT1

Miles driven in the first vehicle

VMT2

Miles driven in the second vehicle

Wear1

Continuous variable to measure the wear of the first vehicle

Wear2

Continuous variable to measure the wear of the second vehicle

Famsize

Number of members in a household

Earnr

Number of income earners in a household

Kids

Number of children less than 18 in a household

Drivers

Number of household members 16 years old and over

Metro

A dummy variable: one if the household resides inside a
Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA), and zero otherwise

Pop4

A dummy variable: one if the household lives in an area with a
population of more than 4 million, and zero otherwise

Urban

A dummy variable: one if the household lives in an urban area,
and zero otherwise.

Age

Age of household head

White

A dummy variable: one if the household head is white, and
zero otherwise

Male

A dummy variable: one if the head is male, zero otherwise

Educ

A dummy variable: one if the head has education higher than
high school, zero otherwise

Northwest

A dummy variable: one if in the Northwest, zero otherwise

Midwest

A dummy variable: one if in the Midwest, zero otherwise

South

A dummy variable: one if in the South, zero otherwise

West

A dummy variable: one if in the West, zero otherwise

-27-

Table 3. Summary of Household Statistics by Vehicle Bundles

Characteristics
# of households
household size
% with kids
# of kids
# > 15 years old
# of workers
% heads male
age of head
% heads white
% heads educ >
high school
% in area with
pop.> 4 million
expenditures
total gas cost

1 (Car)
3469
1.92
23.87
0.44
1.52
0.85
40.10
55.24
82.07

Number of Vehicles
1
2
2 (SUV) 3 (C,C)
4 (C,S)
742
1181
1305
2.30
2.65
2.94
33.56
33.62
43.98
0.73
0.56
0.89
1.63
2.13
2.12
1.08
1.43
1.49
63.07
65.54
71.80
48.22
51.84
49.45
87.60
83.32
89.04

5 (S,S)
253
3.44
62.45
1.42
2.13
1.58
77.47
45.24
92.89

0
6 (none)
2077
1.98
26.05
0.55
1.48
0.70
33.22
55.66
67.89

52.15

52.29

66.05

57.01

57.31

34.33

28.37

19.41

30.48

22.68

18.58

38.61

22754.
648.

24574.
920.

35472.
1103.

33812.
1279.

34246.
1398.

17795.
--

Table 4. Hedonic Price Regressions

Dependent
Variable: cmv
constant (a0)
cyl (a1)
import (a2)
1-Wear (b0)
Wear×cyl (b1)
Wear×import (b2)
R2
# of obs.

Cars

SUVs
Standard
Error
1806.08
288.44
894.32
3272.66
546.49
1719.28

Coefficient
1444.64
3150.55
2371.11
-2179.03
-3184.92
-998.07
0.49
793

Standard
Error
2702.42
411.23
1584.27
4996.71
763.85
2800.80

Coefficient
-1220.52
1993.56
1417.36
8973.32
-1459.66
-658.35
0.51
510

-28-

Table 5: Estimation of Miles Per Gallon (MPG) and Emissions Per Mile (EPM)

Independent
Variable
constant
cyl6
cyl8
age
age2
car
cyl6 × car
cyl8 × car

Dependent Variable

MPG
Coefficient
Standard
Error
24.021
-4.395
-7.948
-0.419
0.006
4.262
-1.439
-1.149

R2
F-value
# of obs.

0.496
0.483
0.581
0.049
0.002
0.410
0.560
0.655

EPM
Coefficient
Standard
Error
-0.597
1.103
3.548
0.285
0.003
-0.589
-0.661
-2.819

0.7598
299.997
672

0.663
0.645
0.777
0.065
0.002
0.548
0.749
0.875
0.4095
65.775
672

Table 6. Mean Values of Key Variables Involved in Estimation

Variable
% of households
VMT1
VMT2
price of gas 1 (p1)
price of gas 2 (p2)
vintage1
vintage2
Wear1
Wear2
price of Wear1 (q1)
price of Wear2 (q2)
expenditure (y)
capital cost (k)
capital cost 1
capital cost 2

1 (Car)
38.43
11799.
-0.058
-8.62
-0.76
-15572.
-22754.
17224.
17224.
--

2 (SUV)
8.22
12977.
-0.074
-8.24
-0.73
-18010.
-24574.
20187.
20187.
--

Bundle
3 (C,C)
4 (C,S)
13.08
14.46
15283.
10513.
5554.
10771.
0.056
0.057
0.057
0.075
7.63
7.89
9.02
8.50
0.72
0.73
0.77
0.73
15363.
15686.
15301.
18133.
35472.
33812.
34157.
37684.
17125.
17337.
17032.
20348.

-29-

5 (S,S)
2.80
16151.
5358.
0.072
0.075
6.87
8.78
0.68
0.75
18052.
18105.
34246.
40551.
20232.
20319.

6 (none)
23.01
----------17795.
----

Table 7. Estimation Results
Parameters
p11, p31 ( α C1 )
p32 ( α C 2 )
p21, p51 ( α S1 )
p52 ( α S 2 )
4
p41 ( α CAR
)

p42 ( α

4
SUV

)

q1 ( α q1 )
q2 ( α q 2 )
y (β )
k ( β1 )

Sequential Estimation
Continuous
Nested Logit
Demands
-0.246**
-0.460**
(0.025)
(0.070)
-0.045
-0.238*
(0.033)
(0.143)
-0.237**
-0.927**
(0.028)
(0.054)
-0.011
-0.453
(0.049)
(0.380)

Simultaneous
Estimation
-0.433**
(0.073)
-0.045**
(0.008)
-0.526**
(0.105)
-0.013
(0.080)

-0.240**

-0.374**

-0.399**

(0.024)

(0.143)

(0.062)

-0.084**

-1.331

-0.662**

(0.022)

(1.582)

(0.103)

-0.012**

-0.370E-03

-0.004**

(0.003)

(0.002)

(0.001)

0.010**

-0.010**

-0.219E-36

(0.001)
-1.408**
(0.086)
-0.671**
(0.108)

(0.002)
1.134**
(0.134E-03)
-0.456**
(0.034)

(0.936E-36)
-0.420**
(0.001)
-0.405**
(0.023)

Choice specific:
constant 2 ( α 02 )
constant 3 ( α 03 )
constant 4 ( α 04 )
constant 5 ( α 05 )
constant 6 ( α 06 )
Demand-Specific:
constant 1 ( α V 1 )
constant 2 ( α V 2 )
constant 3 ( α W 1 )
constant 4 ( α W 2 )

-1.403**
(0.278)
4.219**
(0.516)
5.057**
(0.650)
2.401**
(0.685)
-2.045**
(0.383)

0.645**
(0.035)
1.860 **
(0.031)
2.063**
(0.051)
2.320**
(0.062)
-0.948**
(0.132)

9.578**
(0.179)
7.361**
(0.187)
9.346*
(5.007)
5.147**
(0.176)
(continued on the next page)
-30-

0.302**
(0.087)
0.805**
(0.088)
2.580**
(0.298)
5.114**
(1.259)

Table 7. Estimation Results (cont’d)
Famsize

0.332
0.072**
0.058**
(0.542)
(0.002)
(0.001)
Earnr
0.270**
0.067**
0.032**
(0.067)
(0.001)
(0.183E-03)
Kids
0.510
0.081**
-0.031**
(0.527)
(0.002)
(0.001)
Drivers
0.190
0.060**
-0.041**
(0.535)
(0.001)
(0.001)
Metro
-0.552**
-0.012**
0.012**
(0.123)
(0.002)
(0.474E-03)
Pop4
-0.340**
-0.013**
0.012**
(0.085)
(0.001)
(0.290E-03)
Urban
-0.441**
-0.058**
0.105**
(0.161)
(0.002)
(0.001)
Age
0.046**
-0.007**
0.004**
(0.003)
(0.290E-04)
(0.128E-04)
White
0.056
0.136**
0.097**
(0.091)
(0.001)
(0.386E-03)
Male
0.057
0.109**
0.004**
(0.085)
(0.001)
(0.240E-03)
Educ
0.020
0.058**
0.036**
(0.072)
(0.001)
(0.263E-03)
Northwest
0.244
0.042**
0.046**
(0.179)
(0.001)
(0.386E-03)
Midwest
0.401**
0.064**
0.059**
(0.173)
(0.001)
(0.380E-03)
South
-0.726**
-0.150**
0.072**
(0.121)
(0.001)
(0.374E-03)
λ1
0.814**
0.138**
(0.053)
(0.006)
λ2
0.066**
0.103**
(0.003)
(0.005)
Log Likelihood
-28917.8
-786857
-0.310E+07
* indicates 0.10 significance level, and ** indicates 0.05 significance level.

-31-

Table 8. Elasticities of Discrete Choices for each Variable

Bundle
Variable

1 (Car)

2 (SUV)

3 (C,C)

4 (C,S)

5 (S,S)

6 (none)

p

0.015

-0.106

0.006

-0.177E-03

0.034

--

q

-0.207

3.618

-0.116

-0.033

-6.077

--

qcar

1.530

-6.318

0.139

0.127

-3.470

--

qsuv

-1.737

9.937

-0.255

-0.160

-2.603

--

y

-0.106

0.591

-0.042

-0.006

-0.011

-0.006

k

0.086

-0.427

0.061

0.008

-0.303

--

kcar

-0.008

0.127

0.056

-0.944

4.336

--

ksuv

0.110

-0.413

0.134

-1.099

4.703

--

Sequential: a

Simultaneous:

b

p

0.009

-0.073

0.695

-0.793

0.020

--

q

0.025

0.193

0.066

0.283

-0.001

--

qcar

0.177

-0.966

0.151

0.352

-0.147

--

qsuv

-0.153

1.159

-0.085

-0.069

0.146

--

y

0.341

-1.203

-0.818

0.634

0.010

-0.074

k

-0.321

0.390

1.655

-6.319

-0.377

--

kcar

-1.229

7.315

-13.021

7.345

1.263

--

ksuv

0.908

-6.925

14.676

-13.665

-1.640

--

a

Calculation based on estimates in column 1 of Table 7.

b

Calculation based on estimates in column 3 of Table 7.

-32-

Table 9. Short-Run Elasticities of Continuous Demands

Bundle

Total

1 (Car)

2(SUV)

3 (C,C)

4 (C,S)

5 (S,S)

Emissions c

p

-0.026

-0.066

-0.038

-0.117

-0.098

-0.211

q

0.012

0.013

0.306

0.360

0.362

0.631

qcar

0.012

--

0.306

0.012

--

0.368

qsuv

--

0.013

--

0.349

0.362

0.263

y

-2.581

-2.788

-4.024

-3.836

-3.885

-11.472

k

-1.570

-1.840

-3.113

-3.434

-3.695

-8.746

Variable
Sequential: a

Simultaneous: b
p

-0.024

-0.037

-0.026

-0.070

-0.038

-0.136

q

0.122

0.141

0.120

0.123

0.141

0.434

qcar

0.122

--

0.120

0.123

--

0.293

qsuv

--

0.141

--

7.933E-36

0.141

0.141

y

0.956

1.032

1.490

1.420

1.438

4.246

k

-1.397

-1.637

-2.770

-3.056

-3.288

-7.783

Each entry is the elasticity of VMT or Wear, in the first or second vehicle, with
respect to each variable.
a

Calculation based on estimates in column 2 of Table 7.

b

Calculation based on estimates in column 3 of Table 7.

c

The last column is the percent change in total emissions, E = EPM×miles,
adding over all vehicles in all bundles, for a one percent change in each variable.

-33-

