                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      THE IMPACT OF CHILD SSI ENROLLMENT ON HOUSEHOLD OUTCOMES:
    EVIDENCE FROM THE SURVEY OF INCOME AND PROGRAM PARTICIPATION

                                             Mark Duggan
                                       Melissa Schettini Kearney

                                          Working Paper 11568
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w11568


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 2005




The authors are grateful to the National Institute of Child Health and Development for supporting
this research. Duggan also thanks the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation for support. The authors gratefully
acknowledge helpful comments from David Autor, Bill Evans, Allison Schettini Evans, Michael Greenstone,
Hillary Hoynes, Phil Levine, James Poterba, Seth Sanders, Lucy Schmidt, and seminar participants
at the Brookings Institution, Georgetown, MIT, the NBER Summer Institute, Northwestern, and the
Urban Institute. We thank Paul Davies and Clark Pickett from the Social Security Administration for
providing us with data on SSI recipients, applications, and awards. Sarah Bohn, Dwyer Gunn, Rebecca
Kahane, Jillian Popadak, and Daniel Theisen provided outstanding research assistance. Duggan can
be contacted at: University of Maryland, Department of Economics, College Park, MD 20742 duggan@econ.umd.edu.
Kearney can be contacted at: Brookings Institution, 1775 Massachusetts Ave NW, Washington, D.C.
20036 mkearney@brookings.edu. All errors are our own.

© 2005 by Mark Duggan and Melissa Schettini Kearney. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Impact of Child SSI Enrollment on Household Outcomes: Evidence from the Survey
of Income and Program Participation
Mark Duggan and Melissa Schettini Kearney
NBER Working Paper No. 11568
August 2005, Revised October 2006
JEL No. H35,I12,I32,I38, J21

                                              ABSTRACT

The federal Supplemental Security Income (SSI) program has become a primary source of cash assistance
for low-income families with children in the United States, with 1.04 million children currently receiving
SSI benefits and 6 percent of children in a household with some SSI income. In this paper we use data
from the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP) to investigate the impact that child SSI
enrollment has on household outcomes such as poverty, household earnings, and health insurance
coverage. The longitudinal nature of the SIPP allows us to control for unobserved differences across
households by measuring outcomes in the same household in the months leading up to and immediately
following a child's first enrollment in SSI. Our regression analyses demonstrate that for every $100
increase in household SSI income, total household income increases by roughly $72, reflecting some
modest offset of other transfer income and conditional household earnings. Our analyses further demonstrate
that child SSI enrollment is associated with a statistically significant and persistent reduction in the
probability that a child lives in poverty of roughly 11 percentage points. Additional analyses suggest
that program enrollment has virtually no impact on health insurance coverage because most new SSI
recipients have health insurance from Medicaid or another source at the time of enrollment.

Mark Duggan
University of Maryland
Department of Economics
3115L Tydings Hall
College Park, MD 20742
and NBER
duggan@econ.bsos.umd.edu

Melissa Schettini Kearney
Department of Economics
University of Maryland
3105 Tydings Hall
College Park, MD 20742
and NBER
kearney@econ.umd.edu
I. Introduction

         The federal Supplemental Security Income (SSI) program provides cash assistance to more than

7.1 million aged, blind, and disabled persons in the U.S. who are below federally mandated income and

asset limits. In terms of total spending it is now second only to Medicaid among means-tested programs

with more than $38 billion in 2004 expenditures. The number of individuals receiving SSI benefits has

grown substantially during the past fifteen years, from 4.59 million in December of 1989 to 7.14 million

by November of 2005. The increase in SSI receipt over this period has been especially rapid among

children under the age of 18, with their ranks increasing from 0.26 to 1.04 million. The result of this

growth, along with an increase in SSI enrollment among adults with children, is that 6 percent of children

now reside in a household with SSI income. This is more than double the corresponding share in 1990.

         Our main goal in this paper is to investigate the impact of a child's enrollment in SSI on key

outcome measures such as poverty, parental earnings, and health insurance coverage. Identification of a

causal impact of program participation is inherently difficult for at least three reasons. First, as with other

means-tested programs, a family's eligibility for the program is determined in part by a family's economic

circumstance. Cross-sectional comparisons of households with and without SSI benefits would therefore

potentially be biased by some amount of reverse causation. Furthermore, a child must have a medically

determinable physical or mental impairment in order to qualify for SSI benefits. Having a child with a

disability may exert an independent effect on a parent's optimal labor supply or other decisions, making it

difficult to disentangle the effect of the program from this potentially confounding factor. And finally,

SSI is a federal program that exhibits almost no variation across states or other geographic areas. Thus

whereas previous research has exploited cross-state variation in benefit amounts and eligibility criteria to

identify the effect of other means-tested programs such as AFDC, Medicaid, and food stamps, such an

empirical strategy is unlikely to succeed in this context. 1


1
 Some states do supplement the federal SSI benefit. But these supplements are quite small for children and
accounted for just 3 percent of all SSI benefits paid during the 2005 calendar year. The corresponding share for
adults was 13 percent, and thus the supplements are a more useful source of variation in program incentives for this
group. See Neumark and Powers (1998, 2000) for analyses that exploit the cross-state heterogeneity in state


                                                         2
         To surmount these obstacles to identification, we exploit longitudinal data from the Survey of

Income and Program Participation (SIPP) that enables us to observe household outcomes in the months

leading up to and immediately following a child's first enrollment in the SSI program. This strategy

allows us to control for unobserved, time-invariant differences across households that might bias cross-

sectional estimates. The key identifying assumption of this approach is that the precise timing of the

award of SSI benefits to the child is not correlated with other changes that influence the household

outcome being studied. Note that this strategy would not be appropriate for studying the causal effect of

most other government expenditure programs, such as unemployment insurance, TANF, or social

security, as enrollment in those programs would often be precipitated by a discrete change in the

employment status or health of adults in the household.

         But in the case of child SSI enrollment, this strategy seems appropriate for two reasons. First, the

vast majority of children awarded SSI benefits have a chronic rather than an acute condition.2 Thus it is

not the case that most children apply for the program after a discrete change in health status, which might

itself influence parental labor supply or other outcome variables of interest. Instead, children are likely to

apply after learning about the program from a welfare caseworker, a physician, an advocacy group, or a

school counselor (Bound et al, 1998; Garrett and Glied, 2000; Kubik, 1999). Second, there is typically a

substantial lag between the initial application for SSI benefits and the eventual award (if one is made),

with this lag averaging 4.3 months for awardees under the age of 18.3 This lag occurs both because the

Social Security Administration (SSA) must determine a child's eligibility for the program and because the

state Disability Determination Service (DDS) must decide whether the child has a "medically

supplements for adult SSI recipients to identify the impact of the program on the labor supply and savings of near
elderly individuals.
2
  For example, in 2003 approximately 67 percent of children awarded SSI benefits had a mental disorder as their
primary diagnosis and fewer than two percent qualified because of an injury or a disease of the circulatory system.
3
  The length of the time lag will depend both on the SSA and on the state DDS. As described on the SSA website,
after a child disability report is formally submitted to SSA, “We review it to make sure all of the information is
complete. We may contact you for missing or unclear information; We will contact you to complete a formal
application for benefits, if you haven't already done one; We send the child's forms to the State office that
determines if the child is disabled under Social Security law; The State office requests medical records from the
hospitals, doctors, and other treatment sources and information from the child's teachers, schools, and other people
whom you listed as having information about the child's illnesses, injuries or conditions; The State office then
reviews all the information it obtains."


                                                          3
determinable physical or mental impairment or combination of impairments that causes marked and

severe functional limitations" (SSA, 1998).

         One potential concern with this approach is that a family might apply for child SSI benefits

because of a change in circumstances. For example, a parent might apply for the program after losing his

or her job or in response to a decline in the child's health. Failing to account for this could lead to a

biased estimate of the impact of SSI enrollment. But because of the longitudinal nature of our data, we

can investigate whether there are changes in outcome variables of interest such as earnings, poverty

status, and health insurance coverage in the months leading up to the first receipt of SSI benefits and thus

avoid erroneously assigning a causal interpretation to any observed change in outcomes.4

         Previous work on child SSI participation has documented the shifting of children from the Aid to

Families with Dependent Children (AFDC) program to the SSI program during the 1990s (Kubik 1999,

2003; Garrett and Glied, 2000; Schmidt and Sevak, 2004). The only paper of which we are aware that

investigates the relationship between child SSI participation and individual-level outcomes other than

program participation is Kubik (1999). Kubik exploits the variation across states in the potential financial

gain to a family from moving a child from AFDC to SSI. Using data from the National Health Interview

Survey (NHIS), he documents that in the four years following the 1990 liberalization, female-headed

households in states with higher potential SSI gains were more likely to identify that their child suffered

from a health impairment (in particular a mental health impairment), to take their child to a doctor, and to

report that their child needs special education.5

         This paper builds on the previous literature by asking how enrollment of a child in SSI affects

household-level economic outcomes. We begin our empirical analysis with an investigation of the


4
  An alternative approach would be to instrument for SSI benefit receipt with the level of state supplementation of
the federal SSI benefit. Neumark and Powers (1998, 2000) implement such a strategy in their studies of the effect of
SSI participation on pre-retirement savings and labor supply among the near elderly. However, as noted above, this
is not as appropriate in the context of child SSI participation because state SSI supplements for children are very
small and vary little over time. The authors’ attempts at such an IV approach produced estimates that were very
imprecisely estimated.
5
  Using data from the March CPS, Kubik also finds that a family's receipt of SSI benefits has a negative effect on the
probability that the head of the family works. But as he points out, it is not possible to separately identify the effect
of child and adult SSI participation, which is potentially problematic as we discuss below.


                                                           4
demographic and institutional determinants of SSI child participation using data for all households with

children from the 1992, 1993, 1996, and 2001 SIPP surveys. This presents a picture of what types of

households are enrolling children in the SSI program and how they differ from other households without

a child on the program.

        The remainder of the paper focuses on the estimation of the impact of child SSI enrollment on a

number of household outcomes. Our first set of findings demonstrates that the enrollment of a child on

SSI leads to an increase in total household unearned income of $1,650 defined over a four-month period,

compared to an increase in total SSI income of $1,747. (Outcomes are defined in the SIPP over a survey

“wave”, which constitutes a four-month period.) These estimates imply that the increase in SSI income

greatly exceeds any offsetting reduction in transfer income from other programs such as TANF and food

stamps. Looking at household earnings, we find no statistically significant changes in the level of

earnings, the probability of positive household earnings, or log earnings conditional on positive earnings.

However, the pattern of coefficients and the results for alternate estimation samples, suggests that there

might be some decrease in conditional earnings on the order of 5 to 10 percent. Total household income

increases by an average of approximately 22 percent after a child enrolls in SSI.

        Our next set of findings demonstrates that the enrollment of a child on SSI leads to a statistically

significant, substantial, and persistent reduction in the probability that a household lives in poverty. We

find a statistically significant reduction of 10.8 percentage points in the probability that a household is in

poverty following enrollment of a child in SSI. This stems in large part from an effect on deep poverty,

which we define to be less than 50 percent of the poverty line. Because the typical child receiving SSI has

one or more siblings, our estimates suggest an even larger effect on the number of children in poverty.

The observed increase in family income need not have implied a reduction in poverty rates for two

reasons. First, although SSI is a means-tested program, a child can still qualify for the program even if

his/her family income is substantially above the poverty line. For example, a family with one parent and

two children could have earnings of more than $30,000 per year and yet still receive SSI benefits. Second,

it is an empirical question as to whether the increase in transfer income associated with SSI participation,


                                                       5
net of any offsetting decrease in earned or other income, is sufficient to lift a family out of poverty.

         Our final set of estimates focuses on the impact of SSI participation on the health insurance

coverage of children. Because SSI recipients are immediately eligible for health insurance through the

Medicaid program in most states, it is plausible that child SSI enrollment leads to an increase in health

insurance coverage among children. We find little evidence to support this conjecture. While Medicaid

coverage does increase substantially among children following SSI enrollment, most of the children who

were not already on Medicaid had private health insurance just prior to enrollment in SSI. Taken together,

our results suggest that the growth of SSI enrollment has substantially lowered poverty rates among

affected children but that it has had little impact on labor supply or health insurance coverage.



II. Background

A. The Growth in SSI Enrollment among Children

         The first cash payments from the Supplemental Security Income program were disbursed in

January of 1974, when 51 state-level programs that had assisted low-income aged, blind, and disabled

adults were consolidated into one federal program.6 In its first year, more than 60 percent of the 4.0

million SSI recipients were above the age of 65 and less than two percent were under the age of 18. Thirty

years later in November of 2005, there were approximately 2.0 million elderly adults, 4.1 million aged 18

to 64, and more than 1.0 million children receiving SSI benefits. The growth in SSI enrollment has made

it much more important as a source of cash assistance for low-income families with children. In 1989

there were 15.7 times more families on AFDC than with a child on SSI.7 But by 2004 that ratio had fallen

to just 2.2. As we demonstrate below, if one accounts for adult SSI enrollment, then the receipt of SSI

benefits is now more common than TANF receipt among households with children.

         Much of the increase in child SSI participation was precipitated by the February 1990 Supreme


6
 See Daly and Burkhauser (2003) for more details on the SSI program, its history, and a review of the SSI literature.
7
 According to tabulations performed by Paul Davies at the Social Security Administration at the request of the
authors, approximately 19% of child SSI recipients have a sibling on the program. We multiply the number of
children on SSI by (0.81 + (0.19 / 2)) to approximate the number of families with one or more children on SSI.


                                                         6
Court decision in Sullivan v. Zebley, which had the effect of liberalizing the medical eligibility criteria for

children to qualify for SSI. In the seven years following that decision, the number of children on SSI

increased by 260 percent to more than 955,000. This represented an increase from 0.4 to 1.4 percent of

all children between the ages of 0 and 17.8 This period of rapid growth represented a sharp break in the

slight upward trend prior to Zebley: during the four years from 1985 to 1989 the number of children on

SSI increased by only 37,500. Figure 1 plots the percentage of children on SSI from 1985 to 2005 and

Figure 2 plots the percentage of children applying for or awarded SSI through 2004. As revealed by this

latter figure, there was a noticeable increase in applications and awards after the Zebley ruling, with these

two series peaking in 1994 and 1993, respectively.

           Previous research has demonstrated that in the years following this liberalization of the medical

eligibility criteria for SSI enrollment by children, there was substantial shifting of children from the

AFDC program to the SSI program. In states where the child SSI benefit exceeded the marginal AFDC

benefit associated with that child, a family receiving AFDC income had an incentive to move an eligible

child from AFDC to SSI, as a child could not legally receive benefits from both programs. Furthermore,

as AFDC was jointly funded by states and the federal government and SSI is federally funded (though

some states choose to supplement state benefits) it was also in the states’ financial interest to move

eligible children from AFDC to SSI. Kubik (1999, 2003) and Garrett and Glied (2000) provide evidence

that both individuals and states responded to these incentives and that substantial shifting occurred.

Schmidt and Sevak (2004) provide evidence that female-headed households in states aggressively

pursuing welfare reform in more recent years were more likely to have SSI income.

           The growth in SSI receipt after the Zebley decision was driven primarily by an increase in the

number of children qualifying for the program because of a mental disorder. Press accounts and

anecdotes of children being “coached” to display behavioral disorders in order to be determined medically

eligible for SSI led to a concern that the disability standard for children had become too lenient. Perhaps

partly in response to this concern, the 1996 Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation

8
    The fraction of children affected was even higher given that the average child SSI recipient has 1.4 siblings.


                                                             7
Act (PRWORA) legislation required SSA to use a stricter standard of disability for child SSI applicants

and to reevaluate the eligibility status of almost one-third of recipients (Kubik, 1999).9 This put an end to

the rapid growth in child SSI participation. Nearly 100,000 children were terminated from the rolls in

1997 (with most deemed "no longer disabled") because of this legislation and the number on SSI

remained roughly constant during the subsequent three years. Notably, SSI receipt among children

started to increase again in 2000, growing by more than 4 percent per year through November of 2005.

As Figure 1 demonstrates, the fraction of children now receiving SSI is greater than it was before the

1997 tightening induced by PRWORA.

B. SSI Program Parameters and Rules

         Eligibility requirements and federal payment standards for SSI are uniform nationwide, though

states have the option to supplement the federal SSI payment. To be medically eligible for SSI, a child

must have a medically determinable impairment and the impairment(s) must be severe. A severe

impairment is defined by the SSA as one that is more than a slight abnormality or a combination of slight

abnormalities that causes more than minimal functional limitations. The SSA process determines an

impairment(s) to cause "marked and severe functional limitations if it meets or medically equals the

severity of a set of criteria for an impairment in the [SSA] listings, or if it functionally equals the listings.”

Furthermore, this impairment(s) must be expected to last for at least 12 months or result in death. This

medical determination is made by state Disability Determination Services offices.10

         In 2005 the maximum federal SSI payment was $579 monthly for an individual and in June of

that year the average child SSI benefit was $517. This number reflects an average federal payment of

$502. Though fifteen states supplement child SSI benefits, these supplements account for just three



9
  The 1996 legislation created a separate definition of disability for children, thus eliminating the requirement that
the child standard be of comparable severity to the adult standard. The law also eliminated references to maladaptive
behaviors in the Listing of Impairments for children and discontinued the use of individualized functional
assessments for children. PRWORA also made the eligibility criteria for legal immigrants and struck alcoholism
and drug addiction from the list of diagnoses with which individuals could qualify for SSI. See Karoly, Klerman,
and Rogowski (2004) for a more detailed discussion of PRWORA's effects on the SSI program.
10
   In future work we hope to exploit variation across states and/or offices in the likelihood of a medical
determination conditional upon application, but have not yet been able to obtain the necessary data.


                                                          8
percent of total SSI spending for children. Since 1975, the maximum federal SSI benefit has increased

with the CPI each year to account for increases in the cost of living.

        Adults are generally not eligible for SSI if they have assets in excess of $2,000. Certain resources

are excluded, most commonly a home, an automobile, household goods, and life insurance. For eligible

adults, the federal SSI payment is based on the individual’s countable income. The first $20 of unearned

or earned monthly income is excluded, as is the first $65 of monthly earnings plus one-half of any

earnings above $65. In the case of a child SSI recipient, some of the income and assets of certain family

members living in the same household are “deemed” to the recipient. Payments from AFDC/TANF to

other household members are excluded from deeming, as are foster care payments, food stamps, and

EITC benefits to anyone in the household. Household income that is used by another public assistance

program to determine the payment amount to someone other than the SSI recipient is also excluded from

deeming. There is also an allowance for each ineligible child as well as a parental living exclusion.

        In the 2005 calendar year an eligible child in a one-parent family would receive the maximum

SSI benefit with parental monthly earnings up to $1,243 if there were no other children in the household,

$1,533 if there was one other child, and $1,823 if two other children in the household.11 These numbers

illustrate that parents of children on SSI can have relatively high levels of earnings while still collecting

the maximum SSI benefit for their child. The phase-out rate of benefits is 50 percent and thus a parent

with two children (one of whom is on SSI) could earn up to $2,691 per month ($32,292 per year) before

SSI benefits would reach zero. If instead the parent was the one on SSI, benefits would begin to phase

out once the recipient's monthly earnings exceeded $85. Thus labor supply incentives are quite different

if a child rather than an adult is on SSI.




11
   As an example, consider a family in 2005 with two children and one parent that had only two sources of family
income: an SSI payment to one child and $1500 in monthly earnings. The SSA first deducts $290 for the other
child’s monthly allowance, $20 for the general income exclusion, and $65 for the earnings exclusion. One-half of
the remaining $1125 in earnings is excluded, bringing deemed income to $562.50. The parental living allowance of
$579 would then be subtracted, leaving zero income deemed to the child and thus he would qualify for the
maximum benefit. If instead the family consisted only of the parent and eligible child, there would be no monthly
allowance for another child. Thus $128.50 would be deemed, resulting in an SSI payment of $450.50.


                                                        9
III. Evidence from the SIPP on SSI benefit receipt

A. The Growing Importance of SSI Relative to Welfare

        In this section we present information on household receipt of SSI and AFDC/TANF income

based on data from the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP). The SIPP is the primary

source of publicly available data on participation in government expenditure programs12 and is the only

source of data that reliably distinguishes between child and adult SSI receipt.13 This is especially

important for our analysis because the effect of the program on labor supply incentives is very different if

a child rather than an adult is enrolled. The first SIPP survey was conducted in 1984 and additional

surveys were launched in each year until 1993. More recent SIPP surveys have been conducted in 1996,

2001, and 2004.14 In every survey, households were interviewed three times a year and each wave of the

survey collected information about the previous four months. In a typical survey approximately 38

percent of households had one or more children under the age of 18 in the first wave.

        In Table 1 we summarize data on SSI and AFDC/TANF benefit receipt for all households with at

least one child under the age of eighteen from the first wave of the 1990, 1993, 1996, 2001, and 2004

SIPP surveys. In all of our analyses we focus on households rather than families because of the likelihood

that economic resources of one family in the household will to some extent spill over to the other. This

data paints a stark picture of how the delivery of cash assistance to low-income families with children has

changed over the past 15 years. As shown in the table, between 1990 and 1996, the percent of children in

households with welfare income climbed on net from 10.3 to 11.4 percent, while the percent with SSI

income climbed from 2.8 percent to 5.1 percent. By 2004, the percent of children in households with SSI

12
   One reason why the SIPP is considered to be the most reliable source of individual-level data on participation in
government expenditure programs is that the survey is conducted three times per year and thus individuals need only
recall their program participation during the preceding four months (Ham and Shore-Shepard, 2005).
13
   Starting in 2001, Current Population Survey (CPS) data began recording whether SSI income received by a
respondent was on behalf of a disabled or blind child. However, authors’ tabulations of this data imply that the CPS
substantially understates the fraction of SSI recipients who are children.
14
   The first ten surveys each followed a nationally representative sample of approximately 20,000 households for
three years, or nine four-month “waves”. Thus during the period from 1984 to 1993 there were typically three
surveys ongoing at any time. The 1996 survey followed a sample of 36,730 households for four years (12 waves)
and the 2001 survey followed a sample of 35,106 households for three years (9 waves). As with most longitudinal
surveys there is some attrition in the SIPP, though the Census adjusts person and household weights in each wave to
account for differential attrition by observable characteristics.


                                                        10
income reached 6.0 percent, while the number in households with welfare income fell by more than half

to 4.9 percent. It thus appears to be true that there are now more children living in households with SSI

income than living in households with TANF income. These data also suggest that the recent growth in

SSI has to some extent offset the dramatic decrease in welfare caseloads.

         Table 1 also shows that in 1990, average AFDC benefits among AFDC families were 10 percent

greater than average SSI benefits among SSI families ($2,127 compared to $1,939 during the four month

period).15 By 2004, the reverse was true, with average SSI benefits approximately twice as large as TANF

benefits among recipient households ($2,342 versus $1,178). This change was largely driven by the fact

that SSI benefit amounts are inflation-adjusted whereas welfare benefits are not. Thus both because of the

more generous benefits and because of the greater fraction of households enrolled, SSI has become a

much larger source of cash assistance than TANF for households with children.

B. The Demographic Determinants of Household SSI Receipt

         In this section we explore which observable household characteristics are related with program

participation. We estimate probit models predicting receipt of child SSI benefits, and for the sake of

comparison, adult SSI benefits and welfare (AFDC or TANF) benefits. Our sample consists of the 42,170

households with a child under the age 18 in the first wave of the pooled 1992, 1993, 1996, and 2001 SIPP

surveys. We begin with the 1992 version of the SIPP because it is the first survey year to differentiate

between child and adult SSI receipt.16 The public-use 2004 survey data does not include state identifiers

so we do not include that data in our analyses. In this pooled sample, the percentage of households with a

child receiving SSI benefits in one or more months is 1.6 percent; the percent receiving adult SSI is 2.6

percent, and the percent receiving welfare (AFDC or TANF) is 8.5 percent.

         Our regression model is specified as follows, with j, k, and t indexing households, states, and

15
   Dollar values cited here and elsewhere in the paper are inflation adjusted to 2003 dollars using the Consumer
Price Index for all urban consumers (CPI-U).
16
   For children under the age of 15 who are receiving SSI benefits the income will be reported as SSI child income
for an adult in the household (the unit of observation in the SIPP is a person-month). Thus if there are multiple
children in the household under age 15 it is not possible to determine which one is receiving SSI. For children who
are 15-17 years old, SSI benefits will either be reported as child SSI income for an adult in the household or as adult
SSI income for the child.


                                                          11
years, respectively:

         AnyChildSSI jkt = β 0 + β1Kids jkt + β 2 Boys jkt + β 3 MomOnly jkt + β 4 DadOnly jkt +
[1]      β 5 Neitherjkt + β 6 LessHighSchool jkt + β 7 SomeCollege jkt + β8CollegeGrad jkt +
         β 9 Black jkt + β10 Hisp jkt + β11GenAFDC jkt + β12 SSISuppkt + μt + ε jt

The variable Kidsjkt controls for the number of children in the household between the ages of 0 and 17.

All else equal this should be positively related with the probability of having a child on SSI. The variable

Boysjkt is separately included because boys are much more likely than girls to receive child SSI benefits.17

as they are substantially more likely to have mental and behavioral disorders. The model also controls for

the presence of one or more parents in the household, the education level of the more educated parent (or

guardian if no parent is present), and the race and ethnicity of the children. The variable GenAFDCjkt is

intended to capture the effect of the benefit generosity of the state’s welfare program. It is defined as the

maximum AFDC or TANF benefit in state k in year t given the size of family j.18 The variable SSISuppkt

is an indicator that equals one if state k supplemented child SSI benefits in year t and zero otherwise.19

The model also includes indicator variables for year to control for any time effects shared across

households.

         Column (1) in Table 2 reports the mean values of all the explanatory variables included in the

regression model. Column (2) reports the estimated marginal effects of these variables on the likelihood

of child SSI benefits in the household. The results summarized in column (2) indicate that the likelihood

of child SSI benefits is significantly positively related with the number of children in a household and

increases in the number of boys in the household. This is not surprising as boys constitute a larger share

of the overall SSI child caseload, in particular owing to the greater documented prevalence of mental

disorders among boys. The estimated positive coefficients on MomOnly, DadOnly, and Neither imply that

children living in a household with two parents are significantly less likely to receive SSI than their


17
   There is substantial evidence from the fields of child and clinical psychology that boys are more likely than girls
to experience mental disorders.
18
   We approximate this as the number of children plus the number of parents in the household.
19
   The AFDC/TANF and SSI supplement data were obtained from various years of the publications Overview of
Entitlement Programs and State Assistance Programs for SSI Recipients, respectively.


                                                          12
counterparts in families headed by one parent or by a guardian that is not the parent. The estimated

marginal effects also imply that children with less educated parents are statistically significantly more

likely to receive SSI benefits, controlling for other demographic characteristics.

         Interestingly, the generosity of welfare benefits in a household’s state of residence is a

statistically significant negative determinant of whether the household receives child SSI benefits. This

corroborates the findings of Garrett and Glied (2000) and Kubik (1999), discussed above. The data also

indicate that a child is more likely to receive SSI when living in a state that supplements the federal

benefit.20 The estimated marginal effects on Black and Hispanic imply that conditional on other

household characteristics, black children are significantly more likely to receive SSI benefits than white

children, but Hispanic children are not. And finally, the estimates for the coefficients on the three year

indicator variables (1992 is omitted) confirm a significant increase in child SSI receipt over time.

         For the sake of comparison and contrast, columns (3) and (4) present analogous estimates for

adult SSI receipt and AFDC/TANF receipt among households with children. For the receipt of adult SSI

benefits, neither the number of children nor the number of boys is significantly related to program

participation. The financial generosity of the state’s AFDC/TANF program is also not significantly

related with adult SSI receipt. These findings, which contrast with the results from the first specification,

suggest that the corresponding estimates for child SSI enrollment are not simply capturing the influence

of omitted characteristics of residents of a state that influence SSI receipt generally rather than child

enrollment specifically. They also serve to bolster our confidence that the SIPP is accurately recording

whether household SSI benefits are due to child or adult program participation. The coefficient estimates

for family structure, education of the parent, race and ethnicity of the children, and year effects are

qualitatively similar to those for child SSI receipt.

         The results presented in the final column show that household structure, parental education, and

the race and ethnicity of the children have a similar relationship with the likelihood of AFDC/TANF


20
  Specifying this variable with the dollar amount of supplementation instead of an indicator variable for
supplementation also yields positive point estimates, though these are not statistically significant.


                                                         13
receipt as they do with child SSI receipt. But three differences with the child SSI results are worth noting.

First, whereas the number of children is significantly positively related with AFDC/TANF receipt, the

relationship is not significantly stronger for households with relatively many boys. Second, while child

SSI receipt is negatively determined by AFDC/TANF generosity, the opposite is true for welfare receipt.

And finally, the estimates for the year indicators demonstrate that AFDC/TANF receipt fell from the first

to the final survey year while the opposite is true for SSI. These results suggest that while many family

characteristics similarly determine SSI and welfare receipt, there are some important differences as well.



IV. Estimating the Causal Effect of Child SSI Receipt on Household Outcomes

         We now turn our attention to estimating the impact of child SSI participation on household

outcomes, including earned income, total income, poverty status, and health insurance coverage. Our

empirical strategy is to exploit the longitudinal nature of the SIPP to determine whether there is a break in

household outcomes corresponding to the period in which the household first receives child SSI benefits.

For this analysis we use longitudinal data from the 12 waves (48 months) of the 1996 SIPP and the 9

waves (36 months) of the 2001 SIPP. Each of the 1996 and 2001 surveys contains a sample of more than

35,000 households. In the pooled data from 1996 and 2001, there are 20,949 households with one or more

children under the age of fifteen in wave one and who are still present in wave two of the survey.21 Of

these, 998 report the receipt of child SSI benefits in one or more waves.22 It is important to note that by

examining data from 1996 and 2001, we are focusing on a period that follows the rapid growth in child

SSI participation from 1989 to 1996. It also means that we are examining data from the post-welfare

reform period.

A. Mean Outcomes for Households with Children

21
   After the first wave individuals may separate from the initial households to form new households though for the
purposes of our analysis we combine information in each wave for all individuals in the same wave one household.
If an individual joins the SIPP in a subsequent wave (e.g. because of marriage) then this individual is attached to the
same wave one sample unit as others in his/her current household.
22
   Though there is a variable in the 1992 and 1993 SIPP surveys indicating whether a child and/or an adult is
enrolled in SSI, this variable is almost always missing after the first wave. These earlier years of survey data are thus
not reliable sources of data for our empirical strategy.


                                                          14
        Table 3 provides summary statistics for households with children with benefits from child SSI,

adult SSI, or AFDC/TANF in the first wave of the 1996 and 2001 surveys. With respect to our outcome

variables of interest, there are substantial differences between households with a child on SSI and those

receiving some AFDC/TANF income. These differences are noteworthy because these two means-tested

programs serve fairly similar populations. Households with children and with an adult on SSI are quite

different from these two groups, with approximately 20% fewer children on average and 40% more

adults. Of course, differences in average outcomes are not sufficient to shed light on the causal effect of

either program; they merely help to motivate the regression analyses that follow.

        Children in households with child SSI income are less likely than those on AFDC to live in

poverty, with this difference especially pronounced for deep poverty, which we define to be less than 50

percent of the poverty line. While 34 percent of households with children on AFDC were in deep poverty,

just 6 percent of families with a child on SSI were. These lower poverty rates are to some extent driven by

the much higher average earnings among households with a child on SSI though also by the more

generous benefits. In 1996, average earnings were $1,028 greater ($4,735 versus $3,707) during the four-

month period in households with a child on SSI than in households with some AFDC income. These

differences could be partially attributable to differences in labor supply incentives given that the incentive

for a parent to work was much greater if his/her child was on SSI than if the family was on AFDC.23 The

differences in average earnings were even larger in 2001. This was true even though TANF incorporates

work requirements and more generous earnings disregards than AFDC. This suggests that at least part of

the difference in earnings may be mechanical or driven by differences in the characteristics of recipients

of the two programs.24



23
   For example, a single parent with one child could have earned more than $1000 per month before the child's SSI
benefits would decline. The tax rate on benefits in the phase-out region would be 50 percent. In most states the
earnings disregard for AFDC would have been much lower and the effective tax rate on earnings much higher. See,
for example, the case of Pennsylvania summarized in Table 7-3 of the 1998 Overview of Entitlement Programs.
24
   There are of course many other possible explanations for these differences. For example, given the sharp decline
in AFDC/TANF receipt the average characteristics of those receiving welfare benefits may have changed
substantially during this five year period. Additionally a much smaller fraction of households with a child on SSI
are also receiving traditional welfare benefits. This may partially explain the increase in earnings for this group.


                                                        15
        A third notable difference between the two groups is that the fraction of households with food

stamp benefits is substantially greater among welfare households than households with child SSI benefits-

88.4 versus 47.1 percent in 1996 and 82.4 versus 31.0 percent in 2001. This is consistent with the

hypothesis that SSI benefits may to some extent crowd out other transfer income. In terms of health

insurance coverage, children in households with child SSI income and AFDC income look very similar in

1996. The percent of children with Medicaid coverage is 87.1 percent and 87.8 percent, respectively; the

percent with any health insurance coverage is 94.2 percent and 93.0 percent. This is much greater than

the rate of health insurance coverage among all children in the U.S., with approximately 14 percent

reporting that they were without health insurance in the first wave of both surveys. This potentially

suggests that participation in either program is an effective means at increasing health insurance coverage

among children. The 2001 data suggest larger differences, with the percent of SSI children with Medicaid

having fallen to 68.6 percent. One conjecture as to why this is the case is that fewer households with child

SSI income also receive welfare income in 2001, as compared to 1996, and it was the link to the welfare

system that may have kept the family enrolled in Medicaid.25

        The differences summarized here suggest that the enrollment of a child on the SSI program may

have a substantial effect on household outcomes such as earned income, total income, poverty, and health

insurance coverage. However, given that families with higher incomes can be eligible for SSI, it is not

obvious how much of these differences are mechanical (i.e., a reflection of program rules) or simply the

result of other differences between the two groups. For example Powers (2003) finds that children’s

health (which will be correlated with child SSI receipt) exerts an important effect on parental labor supply

decisions, especially for female-headed households. This motivates the empirical analyses that follow.

B. Empirical Specification

        As discussed above, cross-sectional comparisons of households with and without child SSI

benefits would almost certainly confound any effects on household outcomes due to program

25
  An alternative explanation is that some households enrolled in private Medicaid managed care plans may report
private health insurance rather than Medicaid in the survey, as Medicaid managed care grew substantially in the U.S.
from 1996 to 2001 (Duggan, 2004).


                                                        16
participation with selection effects and/or the independent effect of having a disabled child in the

household. To overcome this identification problem, we exploit the longitudinal nature of the SIPP to

explore whether the enrollment of a child on SSI leads to a discernable shift in family outcomes. We are

able to control for household fixed effects in our empirical model to capture any time-invariant

differences across households in the sample.26

         To attribute a causal interpretation to any observed change in outcomes, even with the inclusion

of household fixed effects, it must be the case that other factors that influence the outcome variable Y are

not changing at precisely the same time that the child enrolls in SSI. Though such an assumption would

not be appropriate for an examination of the effects of many other transfer programs, it seems defensible

in the present setting for two reasons. First, the overwhelming majority of children enrolled in SSI have a

chronic rather than an acute condition. It is therefore unlikely that the severity of the child’s illness –

which could have an independent effect on household outcomes - would change discontinuously at

precisely the time that the award is made. Second, it seems unlikely that parents would alter their labor

supply in anticipation of SSI benefits as the majority of applications are denied and even in those cases

when an application is accepted, there is a substantial lag between initial application and receipt of

benefits. 27 Fortunately, we need not rely on these assumptions holding absolutely. An important

advantage of the SIPP data is that we can actually observe whether household outcomes change

noticeably in the months leading up to SSI benefit receipt compared to earlier periods.

         Our two main estimation equations are specified as follows:

         [2]      Y jt = β 0 + β1I ( POST _ SSI ) jt + ΓX jt + μ j + ρt + ε jt


26
   This strategy is similar to the approach taken by Currie and Thomas (1995) in their study of health insurance
effects using longitudinal data from the National Longitudinal Survey. An alternative strategy that we have
explored is using the generosity of AFDC/TANF benefits in the state or the presence of a state SSI supplement to
instrument for child SSI enrollment. Unfortunately given the relatively low fraction of children on SSI, the limited
effect of both variables on SSI enrollment, and the number of households in the SIPP, we do not have sufficient
statistical power to use this strategy for estimating the effect of child SSI.
27
   We might be concerned about an “Ashenfelter dip” driving selection into the program – if parents apply to enroll
their child on SSI when they experience a negative shock in economic circumstances, we might observe a bounce
back of their economic situation when the child finally begins to receive benefits. This might lead us to erroneously
attribute to child SSI participation. Comparing household outcomes in the months leading up to SSI benefit receipt
to outcomes in earlier months will help determine if this type of phenomenon is driving any of our results.


                                                           17
and

         Y jt = β 0 + β1I ( PRE _ MONTHS _ 5 − 8) jt + β 2 I ( PRE _ MONTHS _ 1 − 4) jt +
[3]      β 3 I ( FIRST _ SSI ) jt + β 4 I ( POST _ MONTHS _ 1 − 4) jt +
         β 5 I ( POST _ MONTHS _ 5 − 8+) jt + ΓX jt + μ j + ρt + ε jt

in which j indexes households and t indexes waves.28 We begin by estimating these equations for all

20,949 households from the pooled 1996 and 2001 SIPP surveys with one or more children between the

ages of 0 and 14 in wave one and that are still present in the second survey wave. We test the robustness

of our findings by estimating the equations on alternative analysis samples, for example by including only

households that ever enroll a child on SSI or only on households that report having a disabled child.

        If our identifying assumptions hold, then the estimated coefficient on POST_SSI in equation (2)

will capture the average effect of SSI enrollment on the outcome variable of interest for those households

that enroll a child in SSI. Estimation of equation (3) enables us to observe trends in the dependent

variable in both the pre and post SSI enrollment period. The variables PRE_MONTHS_1-4 and

PRE_MONTHS_5-8 are set equal to one in the wave immediately before and two waves before the first

wave of child SSI enrollment, respectively. The variable FIRST_SSI is equal to one in the first wave of

child SSI benefit receipt and zero otherwise; POST_MONTHS_1-4 is an indicator variable for the wave

immediately following the first wave with child SSI enrollment; and POST_MONTHS_5-8+ equals one

in all subsequent waves. This variable remains equal to one even if the child exits the program.

        The model controls for household fixed effects μ j to difference out unobserved, time-invariant

differences across households. An important household characteristic that is changing over time, and

hence not controlled for with household fixed effects, is the age composition of children. We thus include

a vector X jt of the number of individuals in five different age ranges (0-5, 6-11, 12-14, 15-17, and 18

plus years). The regression model also includes indicator variables for 21 waves – twelve for the 1996

28
   We define a household based on wave one household, so if a household were to split in a later wave, the data for
all splintered households would be aggregated to the original household in all subsequent waves. We use waves
rather than months as our time period because of the well-documented “seam bias” in the SIPP. This term is used to
describe the much higher rate of employment, insurance, and other transitions between waves than within waves.
Because of this it is not clear that month-to-month variation is as reliable as wave-to-wave variation.


                                                        18
survey and nine for the 2001 survey. These are included to capture any changes over time in the outcomes

variable of interest that are common across households and unrelated with SSI enrollment.

        It is important to emphasize that this empirical strategy identifies the average effect of child SSI

enrollment only for those households that enroll a child in the program. This may differ substantially from

the corresponding effect for households with children not on SSI, either those who applied and were

rejected or those who never applied. In particular, the fact that these households have disabled children

suggests that their response to program benefits or incentives may be quite different from the response

that would be found were SSI to be expanded to households with healthier children. Our estimated effects

in the analyses that follow should therefore be interpreted as the average effect for households with a

child on SSI. This effect is commonly referred to in the program evaluation literature as the average

effect of treatment on the treated (Heckman et al, 2001).



V. The Effect of Child SSI Participation on Household Outcomes

A. Unearned Income

        We begin our investigation of the effect of child SSI enrollment by estimating the average change

in transfer income in households that enroll a child in SSI. Table 4 presents the results from Ordinary

Least Squares (OLS) estimation of equations (2) and (3). The first two panels report results for Yjt defined

as total SSI benefits, which is the sum of child and adult benefits received by household members. The

latter definition allows us to consider that some children on SSI will reach the age of 18 during our study

period or that some households may not correctly identify their SSI income as child versus adult income

in every wave. The estimated coefficient on POST_SSI implies a statistically significant increase in total

SSI income of $1,747 per wave (standard error of 91), or $436 per month. The coefficients on the

variables PRE_MONTHS_1-4 and FIRST_SSI indicate a sharp increase of $2,088 a wave, or $522 per

month, in the wave of enrollment. The estimated coefficients on the FIRST_SSI and two POST variables

show a downward trend, presumably reflecting attrition from the program and perhaps some increase in

underreporting over time.


                                                     19
        The results presented in the next four panels demonstrate to what extent this substantial increase

in SSI transfer income leads to a decrease in other forms of transfer income. In the final columns of the

table we present the estimated impact on total unearned income. We begin by looking for changes in

AFDC/TANF income that correspond to the time of enrollment of a child on SSI. Recall that an

individual cannot legally receive benefits from both programs. Hence, if a child in a family on welfare

enrolled in SSI, the family’s AFDC/TANF benefit should fall as a result. The estimated impacts are

indeed negative, though not nearly as large in magnitude as the increase in SSI income. The estimated

coefficient on the POST_MONTHS_5-8+ indicator, which is perhaps the most reliable indicator of the

long-term adjustment of program participation, is the most negative: a $241 decrease per wave (standard

error of 73), or $60 per month. The estimated impact of child SSI enrollment on the probability of any

welfare receipt (not shown) is 8.4 percentage points or, as estimated in equation (3), 14.1 percentage

points in the period more than eight months after enrollment.

        The next two columns report the results for estimation of the impact of SSI enrollment on the

dollar value of in-kind assistance received through the Food Stamp Program (FSP) and Women, Infant,

and Children (WIC) program. If the increase in SSI income exceeds any reduction in other income then

the family’s dollar amount of food stamp transfers would potentially decline as well. The coefficient

estimates are negative and increasingly so over time, but the long term decrease in food stamp plus WIC

income (as captured by the POST_MONTHS_5-8+) is less than a tenth of the long term increase in SSI

income. The final panel suggests that the net impact on total household unearned income, defined as total

household income minus total household earnings, is an average increase of $1,650 per wave (standard

error of 160), or $412 per month.

B. Total Household Earnings and Income

        Having established that total unearned income increases by an average of roughly $400 per month

after child SSI enrollment, we now investigate to what extent this is offset (or augmented) by a change in

earnings and what the net change in total household earnings is. A large body of previous research has

investigated the labor supply incentives of the AFDC and TANF programs. Only one paper of which we


                                                    20
are aware considers the effect of child enrollment in SSI on labor supply. Kubik (1999) uses CPS data to

investigate whether the labor supply of single women with children and with some household SSI income

is different from their observably similar counterparts with no household SSI benefits.29 He uses

differences across states in the incentive to apply for SSI to instrument for program enrollment and his

findings suggest that SSI reduced parental labor supply. But as mentioned above, the CPS does not

differentiate between child and adult SSI receipt and the disincentive to work is much greater if the adult,

rather than the child, is the SSI participant. Therefore, Kubik’s conclusion that child SSI receipt reduces

labor supply could simply reflect the effect of adult SSI enrollment.30

         As described above, average earnings in households with a child on SSI are substantially greater

than in households with welfare income. This could be a mechanical reflection of higher break-even

levels for the SSI or reflect the fact that children on SSI are more likely to live with both parents.

Alternatively, it might reflect the fact that the program’s rules do not discourage earnings as explicitly as

the rules of pre-reform AFDC. It might also be the case that the labor supply decisions of parents with

disabled children are more complicated than the traditional labor supply model posits. An increase in

transfer income to these households might have a negative income effect; in particular, it might enable a

parent to stay home to care for the child. On the other hand, it might allow a parent to buy specialized

child care thereby “freeing up” their time for work outside the home. In other words, both the sign and the

magnitude of the effect of child SSI enrollment on household earnings is theoretically ambiguous.

         The first six columns of Table 5 report the results of OLS estimation of equation [2] where Yjt is

defined as an indicator for whether the household has positive earnings, the natural logarithm of

household earnings, and the level of household earnings. The regression-adjusted estimates in the first



29
   Neumark and Powers (2004) investigate the effect of SSI on the labor supply of near elderly individuals. Once an
individual reaches the age of 65, he/she can become eligible for the program even without a disability if income and
assets are sufficiently low. Their findings suggest that people strategically reduce their labor supply as they
approach the age of 65 to qualify for benefits.
30
   As Kubik (1999) notes, “it is not possible to separate the effects of net SSI benefit generosity on the probability of
SSI receipt of children and parents using the variation created by the interaction of the AFDC and SSI benefit
schedules.” According to our SIPP data, households with children and with some SSI income are actually more
likely to have an adult rather than a child SSI recipient.


                                                           21
two columns suggest that child SSI enrollment has little impact on this extensive margin of labor supply.

The statistically insignificant point estimate of .005 (standard error of .016) implies a 0.5 percentage point

increase in this probability after a child enrolls in SSI. The next two columns summarize the results from

analogous specifications of the log of earnings, thereby dropping observations with earnings less than or

equal to zero. The statistically insignificant estimate for the POST SSI coefficient of -.023 in column (3)

suggests a 2.3 percent decline in earnings among those working. However, the pattern of coefficients in

the estimation of equation [3] suggests that there is potentially a decline in the period of child SSI

enrollment. The estimated coefficient on PRE_MONTHS_1-4 is 0.001 (standard error of 0.055) and the

estimated coefficient on FIRST_SSI is –0.100 (standard error of 0.62). Though not statistically significant,

this difference is pronounced. However, it does not persist over time, as shown by the positive estimate of

.058 for the POST_MONTHS_5-8+ coefficient. Estimates for the level of earnings are qualitatively

similar, with a modest decline in the first wave of enrollment but some recovery in subsequent waves.

        The absence of a substantial reduction in earnings, coupled with the large increase in total transfer

income, suggests a substantial increase in total household income. The regression-adjusted effects

reported for total household income in the final two panels of Table 5 confirm this prediction. Columns

(7) and (8) present the estimated effects for total household income in levels and columns (9) and (10)

present the estimated effects for the dependent variable defined as the natural logarithm of total household

income. The simple pre-post estimate suggests an increase of $1,265 (standard error of 350), which is

more than 72 percent of the corresponding estimate for total SSI income. In the more descriptive

equation, the estimated coefficient on PRE_MONTHS_1-4 is -106 (standard error of 478) and the

estimated coefficient on FIRST_SSI is $1,455 (standard error of 502), suggesting a change in income of

$1,561 per wave, or $390 per month corresponding to the wave of child enrollment in SSI. The estimated

impact on total household income is higher in the next four months and is subsequently less.

        We next estimate equations [2] and [3] for the dependent variable defined as the log of total

household income. This specification has two advantages: the effect of outliers on the OLS estimate is

mitigated and changes can be interpreted as proportional changes. The results from this specification


                                                      22
demonstrate a statistically significant increase in household income of 21.9 percent (e0.198 – 1) following

child enrollment in SSI. The pattern of coefficients estimated for equation [3] suggests little change in

total income in the months preceding enrollment, but a statistically significant increase post child SSI

enrollment in the range of 20 and 25 percent, with the impact decreasing slightly over time.

C. Poverty

        We now turn our attention to the effect of child SSI enrollment on economic well-being as

measured by poverty status. The findings from the preceding two sections suggest that SSI benefits

increase household income by an average of 72 cents on the dollar. Despite this, it is possible that the

program does little to reduce poverty. First, if children awarded SSI benefits are not initially in poverty

then they cannot be lifted out of it. On the other hand, if children awarded SSI live in households with

very little income or if it offsets some other sources of income, then the increase in transfer income might

not be sufficient to lift them out of poverty.

        In Table 6 we report the results for estimation of equations [2] and [3] for several different

measures of poverty. The first three panels of results report estimated coefficients for Yjt defined as an

indicator variable for whether household j’s total income in wave t is below the poverty threshold, below

50 percent of the poverty threshold, and above 200 percent of the poverty threshold, respectively. The

next panels in columns (7) and (8) define the dependent variable as the number of children in household j

living below the poverty threshold. And finally, the last two panels in columns (9) through (12) report the

results for Yjt defined as the number of people in household j living below the poverty threshold and

above 200 percent of the poverty threshold, respectively. The poverty threshold is the census poverty

threshold of income in the year for a household and is provided in the SIPP given the number of adults

and children. We adjust the threshold to correspond to recorded income in the SIPP, which is defined over

a four-month period. We define the number of children and people in poverty as the number of children

and people in the household multiplied by an indicator for whether total household income is below the

relevant poverty threshold.

        The estimated effects reported in Table 6 demonstrate that child SSI participation does


                                                     23
substantially lower poverty. Specifically, the regression-adjusted pre-post comparison reported in column

(1) suggests that the probability that a household’s income is below the poverty line falls by 10.8

percentage points (standard error of 1.8) following the child’s enrollment in SSI. This effect is persistent,

as the coefficient estimates from the more descriptive specification reveal. The likelihood that a

household is in poverty two waves after child SSI enrollment is 10.4 percentage points lower than it is

three waves prior to enrollment (standard error of 2.4). The next two columns explore whether the effect

is driven by a reduction in deep poverty, defined as less than 50 percent of the poverty line. The estimates

in columns (3) and (4) reveal that it is, with deep poverty falling by almost 7.6 percentage points

(standard error of 1.7) following the first receipt of child SSI benefits. This effect also appears to be

persistent.

        As mentioned above, many non-poor households are income-eligible for the SSI program. It is

therefore plausible that the program not only reduces poverty, but also increases the income of families

further up in the income distribution. The results reported in columns (5) and (6) provide support for this

effect, with the probability that a household’s income is more than twice its reported poverty line

increasing by 8.1 percentage points. As was true for both poverty and deep poverty, this effect is

persistent.

        In the next two columns we explore the effect of SSI enrollment on the number of children in

poverty. These specifications consider that many child SSI recipients have one or more siblings who are

not on the program and hence the impact on the number of children might be greater than the impact on

households. The estimated impacts reported in columns (7) and (8) suggest that the number of children

lifted out of poverty is twice as large as the number of households. The effect is even greater for the

number of people in poverty and the number of people with household incomes more than twice the

poverty level. According to the estimates presented in columns (9) and (11), for every 100 children who

are awarded SSI benefits, roughly 37 people are lifted out of poverty and 28 see their household incomes

increase to more than twice their poverty level. Again, these effects appear to be persistent.

D. Health Insurance Coverage


                                                      24
         When a child enrolls in the SSI program, he typically becomes eligible for health insurance

through the Medicaid program.31 It might therefore be the case that child SSI enrollment increases health

insurance coverage. Consider a child who was previously not covered by health insurance. When he

enrolls in SSI, and hence Medicaid, there should be a one-for-one increase in both Medicaid and health

insurance coverage.32 However, if a child who enrolls in SSI was already insured through Medicaid then

we would see no impact on either Medicaid or on health insurance. Or, he might have previously been

covered through private health insurance or through another government program, in which case his

enrollment in Medicaid would have no effect on the probability of health insurance coverage. This latter

example would provide a possible mechanism through which Medicaid enrollment could crowd out other

health insurance coverage.33

         Table 7 presents our estimates for the effect of child SSI enrollment on the number of children in

the household with Medicaid34, with any health insurance, and with private health insurance. Columns 1,

4, and 7 report the results from estimating equation [2] on these three outcome variables. The statistically

significant point estimate of 0.099 in column 1 implies that for every 100 children awarded SSI benefits,

approximately 10 become newly eligible for Medicaid benefits. The fact that the point estimate is much

less than one is not surprising when one considers that more than 60 percent of children in these

households were on Medicaid in the wave before the first receipt of SSI benefits. The corresponding

estimate for the number of children with any health insurance is less than half as large and statistically

insignificant. Taking the ratio of the two point estimates, it appears that just 41 percent of those children


31
   In forty out of fifty-one states, SSI recipients are automatically eligible for Medicaid. Eleven states use more
restrictive criteria when determining Medicaid eligibility (SSA, 2004).
32
   If that child has siblings who were eligible for Medicaid but not covered, his enrollment in SSI could potentially
lead the family to learn of their Medicaid eligibility and enroll the other children in the household in Medicaid. In
that case, we could observe an increase in Medicaid and health insurance coverage of greater than one-for-one.
33
   In the seminal paper on the topic, Cutler and Gruber (1996) evaluated the impact of the Medicaid program
expansions of the late 1980s and early 1990s and estimated take-up rates among the newly eligible of 24 percent and
crowd-out propensities of about 7 percent. Subsequent papers have found smaller rates of both take-up and crowd-
out. Shore-Sheppard (2005) revisits the Cutler and Gruber approach and finds crowd-out propensities of close to
zero. It is worth noting that the take-up and crowd-out rates associated with child SSI participation need not be
similar to those associated with the Medicaid expansions.
34
   If a child is enrolled in the Children's Health Insurance Program (CHIP) then we code them as being covered by
Medicaid.


                                                         25
made eligible for Medicaid were previously without health insurance.

        As previous work has noted, one possible effect of Medicaid enrollment is a reduction in private

health insurance coverage (Cutler and Gruber, 1996). The specification summarized in column (7)

investigates this possibility by testing whether private insurance coverage declines following the first

receipt of SSI benefits. The point estimate of -.037 suggests that there may be some crowdout, though the

estimate is not statistically significant.

        The summary statistics presented in Table 3 suggest that the effect of child SSI enrollment on

health insurance coverage may differ in the latter part of our study period. As the table shows, Medicaid

enrollment is substantially lower and private insurance coverage is much higher among families with a

child on SSI in early 2001 than in early 1996. This may to some extent reflect the decline in TANF

enrollment among households with a child on SSI (from 34.3 to 14.5 percent), which has reduced the

number of children categorically eligible for Medicaid. To investigate whether the effect is different in

the latter part of our study period, we interact the POST_SSI indicator with two survey indicators. The

results for these specifications are summarized in columns 2, 5, and 8. Interestingly while the estimated

effect on Medicaid coverage is substantially greater for the 2001 sample, there is no corresponding

difference for any health insurance coverage. This is apparently because SSI enrollment has, according to

the significantly negative estimate of -.145 in column 8, significantly reduced private health insurance

coverage among children in the more recent part of our study period.

        Columns (3), (6), and (9) of Table 7 explore the pattern of changes in health insurance coverage

in the months leading up to and immediately following the first receipt of SSI benefits. Consistent with

the previous results, the estimated effect for Medicaid is much larger than for any health insurance

coverage. But the effect on Medicaid appears to be short-lived, as the point estimate for the

POST_MONTHS_5-8+ coefficient is small and statistically insignificant. Taken together, this set of

results suggests that enrollment of a child on SSI has little effect on the health insurance coverage of

children in affected households. This is partially driven by the fact that more than 82 percent of children

in these households already had health insurance from another source in the wave prior to enrollment.


                                                     26
VI. Robustness of Findings to Alternative Analysis Samples

         The results presented so far use all 20,949 households with children in the first wave of the 1996

and 2001 versions of the SIPP to estimate the effect of child SSI enrollment. We include all households

rather than only those with a child on SSI to control for macroeconomic conditions and related factors

that may lead to changes over time in earnings, poverty, and health insurance coverage that are unrelated

to the SSI program. One potential concern with this approach is that, even though our identification

strategy primarily exploits within-household variation in SSI enrollment, our "control group" may be too

broad. Trends in earnings for very high income households or for households without any disabled

children may, for example, be very different from those for children who apply for and/or eventually

receive SSI benefits. If this were true, it could bias our estimates.

         To gauge the potential importance of this issue, in Table 8 we summarize the results from

additional specifications in which we use five alternative analysis samples. The first column lists the

estimates summarized above in Tables 4 through 7 for the POST_SSI indicator. In column (2) we present

an analogous set of results for households that ever report receiving or applying for SSI benefits.35 This

reduces the number of households in our sample from 20,949 to 2,715. The pattern of estimates is quite

similar and suggests that SSI enrollment leads to a significant reduction in child poverty, a significant

increase in Medicaid coverage, and has little effect on the extensive margin of household labor supply.

The most notable difference in the estimates exists in the log(earnings) specification, with the results for

the more narrowly defined sample suggesting that enrollment of a child on SSI reduces conditional

earnings by approximately 11 percent. This decline is not nearly sufficient, however, to offset the

increase in unearned income, with total household income estimated to increase by more than 17 percent.

The estimated effect for health insurance coverage is also marginally significant for this sample, though

the point estimate is just half as large as the corresponding estimate for Medicaid coverage.

         In the specifications that are summarized in column (3), we include only those households that


35
  In the first wave of the SIPP, individuals who are not receiving SSI are asked whether they have ever applied for
SSI benefits. This variable is unfortunately not asked in every wave.


                                                         27
report having an activity-limited child with a disability between the ages of 6 and 14.36 Because some of

the children on SSI are outside of this age range and because some parents may not report their children's

conditions, more than half of the households with a child on SSI are not in this sample. As a result the

standard errors increase in all specifications but the pattern of results is quite consistent with the previous

ones. In the next column we include all households either reporting a disability in their child or who have

a child enrolled in SSI during our study period. The estimates are quite similar to those in column three

and suggest that enrollment of a child on SSI reduces poverty and increases Medicaid coverage but has

little impact on either household earnings or the number of children without health insurance.

           The specifications summarized in the final two columns include only those households that report

having a child on SSI at some point during the survey, with column 5 including those enrolled in the first

wave and column 6 excluding them. The pattern of estimates is quite similar to the ones using alternative

control groups in the previous four columns. In all six specifications the estimate for poverty is

significantly negative and the estimated effect on Medicaid coverage is significantly positive. The

estimated effect for the presence of any household earnings is small and precisely estimated, ranging from

a low of -.006 to a high of .012. It therefore appears that enrollment of a child on SSI does not lead to a

significant change in labor force participation. The estimates for conditional earnings are all negative and

range from implying a 2 to a 13 percent decline.

           Given the similarity of the estimates across the different sets of specifications, our initial set of

findings appears to be robust. The growth in SSI enrollment has substantially improved the material well-

being of families with disabled children while having very little impact on household earnings or health

insurance coverage.

VII. Discussion

           In this paper we have documented the growing importance of the federal SSI program as a source

of cash assistance for low-income families with children. Our investigation of the impact of SSI on

household outcomes suggests that this rise in child SSI participation may have played an important role in

36
     This question is asked only during the fifth wave of the SIPP.


                                                            28
maintaining the material well-being of low-income families with children since the changes to the federal

AFDC/TANF program that were implemented in 1996. Our analysis of household-level SIPP data finds

that child SSI participation increases total household income by an average of approximately $316 per

month, or 20 percent. This is accomplished by a substantial increase in transfer income that is only

partially offset by a reduction in other transfer income and earnings. Put differently, for every 100 dollars

in SSI income transferred to a family, total income increases by more than 72 dollars. Our findings

suggest that enrollment of a child in the program has little impact on the extensive margin of labor supply,

but the pattern of coefficients over time and across various samples suggests that there might be an offset

of conditional earnings on the order of 5 to 10 percent. While we usually consider an offset of earnings to

be a negative consequence of transfer programs, to the extent that parents are reducing their earnings to

stay home and provide care for a disabled child, any offset of earnings might actually be considered in

line with child SSI program goals.

        Furthermore, the data suggest that SSI participation is targeted at families such that there is a

substantial decrease in poverty. Our analysis suggests that the probability that a household lives in

poverty falls by 10.8 percentage points when a child enrolls in SSI and that this reduction in poverty is

driven by a reduction in severe poverty, defined as having household income of less than 50 percent of

the census poverty threshold. The data suggest that for every 100 children who enroll in SSI, 22 children

and 37 people are lifted out of poverty and an additional 28 people see their incomes increase to more

than twice the poverty line. These results suggest that the increase in child SSI enrollment over the past

15 years has potentially played a large role in lowering child poverty rates. Aggregating these effects to

the national level, our findings suggest there are approximately 160,000 fewer children in poverty than

there would have been absent the increase in child SSI enrollment since 1989.

        The data do not indicate a significant effect of SSI participation on health insurance coverage,

though there is some evidence of a significant increase in the number of children receiving Medicaid.

This set of findings has two important implications. First, though SSI participation entitles a child to

Medicaid coverage, it does not appear to be an effective way to increase health insurance coverage among


                                                     29
low-income children. Second, the SIPP data indicate that the majority of children who enrolled in SSI

were already receiving Medicaid. This suggests that the average cost of enrolling a child on SSI is much

lower than the sum of cash benefits plus Medicaid expenditures would imply. Given that Medicaid

expenditures for SSI recipients are substantially larger than cash benefits paid, this is an important fact.37

        There are two important limitations to this paper that deserve mention. First, our empirical

results shed light on the impact of child SSI enrollment for those families with children who are awarded

benefits. To the extent that those whose applications are denied or those who do not apply for the program

are different that the households who do enroll a child in the program, the results here will not generalize.

That is, instead of representing the average treatment effect of child SSI receipt, our estimates capture the

average effect on those who receive this treatment. Similarly, it is important to note that the function of

SSI as an anti-poverty program is limited to households with a child having a severe health impairment.

        Second, because the SIPP includes only three or four years of longitudinal data, our estimates will

not capture the long run impact of child SSI receipt. Future work should investigate the long-run effects

of the program, in particular because the average duration on SSI is longer than on traditional welfare.

Future work should also investigate additional measures of family well-being, including how families use

the additional income that they receive from the SSI program. Recent work has explored the effect of

changes in income resulting from welfare reform and changes in tax policy on measures of well-being

such as consumption and educational attainment (Meyer and Sullivan, 2004; Dahl and Lochner, 2005).

There has been very little work of this type for SSI despite the growing importance of this program.

        Current trends suggest that the significance of the SSI program for disadvantaged children will

continue to grow while the receipt of TANF benefits declines, with the number of children on TANF

falling by 13.1percent from 2000 to 2004 while SSI receipt among children increased by 17.3 percent

during the same period. Thus more work to understand the effects of the Supplemental Security Income

program and its interaction with other government programs is clearly warranted.


37
   Total Medicaid spending for SSI recipients was greater than $150 billion in 2003. Thus average Medicaid
spending for individuals on SSI is approximately four times greater than average cash benefits.


                                                       30
References

Bound, John, Sherrie Kossoudji, and Gema Ricart-Moes. 1998. "The Ending of General Assistance and
       SSI Disability Growth in Michigan." In Growth in Disability Benefits: Explanations and Policy
       Implications, ed. Kalman Rupp and David Stapleton, 223-248. Kalamazoo, MI: W.E. Upjohn
       Institute for Employment Research.

Currie, Janet and Duncan Thomas. 1995. “Medical Care for Children: Public Insurance, Private
         Insurance, and Racial Differences in Utilization.” The Journal of Human Resources 30(1): 135-
         162.

Cutler, David and Jonathan Gruber. 1996. “Does Public Insurance Crowd out Private Insurance?”
        Quarterly Journal of Economics 111(2): 391-430.

Dahl, Gordon and Lance Lochner. 2005. "The Effect of Family Income on Child Achievement: Evidence
       from the Earned Income Tax Credit." University of Rochester mimeo.

Daly, Mary and Richard Burkhauser. 2003. “The Supplemental Security Income Program.” In Means-
       Tested Transfer Programs in the United States, ed. Robert A. Moffitt, 79-139 Chicago: The
       University Press.

Duggan, Mark. 2004. “Does Contracting Out Increase the Efficiency of Government Programs? Evidence
      from Medicaid HMOs.” Journal of Public Economics (December): 2549-2572.

Garrett, Bowen, and Sherry Glied. 2000. “Does state AFDC generosity affect child SSI participation?”
         Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 19(2): 275-95.

Ham, John and Lara Shore-Shepard. 2005. "The Effect of Medicaid Expansions for Low-Income Children
       on Medicaid Participation and Private Insurance Coverage: Evidence from the SIPP." Journal of
       Public Economics 89(1): 57-83.

Heckman, James, Justin Tobias, and Edward Vytlacil. 2001. “Four Parameters of Interest in the
      Evaluation of Social Programs.” Southern Economic Journal 68(2): 211-223.

Karoly, Lynn A., Jacob Alex Klerman and Jeannette A. Rogowski, "Effects of the 1996 Welfare Reform
        Changes on the SSI Program," in Rebecca M. Blank and Ron Haskins, eds., The New World of
        Welfare, Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution Press, 2001, pp. 482-499.

Kubik, Jeffrey. 1999. “Incentives for the identification and treatment of children with disabilities: The
        Supplemental Security Income program.” Journal of Public Economics 73(2): 187-215.

Kubik, Jeffrey. 2003. “Fiscal Federalism and Welfare Policy: The Role of States in the Growth of Child
        SSI.” National Tax Journal 56(1): 61-79.

Meyer, Bruce and James Sullivan. 2004. “The effects of welfare and tax reform: the material well-being
       of single mothers in the 1980s and 1990s.” Journal of Public Economics 88(7-8): 1387-1420.

National Academy of Social Insurance. 1995. Restructuring the SSI Disability Program for Children and
       Adolescents. Report from the Committee on Childhood Disability to the Disability Policy Panel
       of the NASI.



                                                     31
Neumark, David, and Elizabeth Powers. 2004. "The Effect of the SSI Program on Labor Supply:
      Improved Evidence from Social Security Administrative Files." Social Security Bulletin 65(3):
      45-60.

Neumark, David, and Elizabeth Powers. 2000. “Welfare for the Elderly: The Effects of SSI on Pre-
      Retirement Labor Supply,” Journal of Public Economics: 51-80.

Neumark, David, and Elizabeth Powers. 1998. “The Effect of Means-Tested Income Support for the
      Elderly on Pre-Retirement Saving: Evidence from the SSI Program in the U.S.,” Journal of
      Public Economics: 181-206.

Powers, Elizabeth. 2003. "Children's Health and Maternal Work Activity: Estimates under Alternative
       Disability." Journal of Human Resources 38(3): 522-556.

Schmidt, Lucie and Purvi Sevak. 2004. “AFDC, SSI, and Welfare Reform Aggressiveness: Caseload
       Reductions vs. Caseload Shifting." Journal of Human Resources 39(3): 792-812.

Shore-Sheppard, Lara. 2005. “Stemming the Tide? The Effect of Expanding Medicaid Eligibility on
       Health Insurance.” NBER Working Paper 11091.

U.S. House of Representatives, Committee on Ways and Means. various years. Overview of Entitlement
       Programs. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.

U.S. Social Security Administration. 2002. SSI Annual Statistical Report.
       http://www.ssa.gov/policy/docs/statcomps/ssi_asr/2002

U.S. Social Security Administration, various years. Annual Statistical Supplement. Washington, D.C.:
       SSA, Office of Research, Evaluation, and Statistics.

U.S. Social Security Administration, various years Children Receiving Supplemental Security Income,
       Washington, D.C.: SSA, Office of Research, Evaluation, and Statistics.

U.S. Social Security Administration, various years State Assistance Programs for Supplemental Security
       Income Recipients, Washington, D.C.: SSA, Office of Research, Evaluation, and Statistics.

U.S. Social Security Administration, various years Supplemental Security Income Recipients by State and
       Country, Washington, D.C.: SSA, Office of Research, Evaluation, and Statistics.




                                                   32
                                         Figure 1: Percentage of Children Ages 0-17 Enrolled in SSI: 1985-2005

                     1.50%




                     1.25%




                     1.00%
% of Children 0-17




                     0.75%




                     0.50%




                     0.25%




                     0.00%
                             1985 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005
                                                                               Year
                     Figure 2: Percentage of Children Applying for or Awarded SSI 1985-2004

0.9%



0.8%



0.7%



0.6%



0.5%


0.4%



0.3%



0.2%



0.1%



0.0%
       1985 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004
                                                        Year
   Table 1: SIPP Data on Receipt of SSI and AFDC/TANF in Households with Children: 1990-2004
      Household-level Variables              1990         1993         1996          2001         2004
     % Households with Any SSI               2.5%         3.4%         4.4%          4.4%         5.4%
% Households with any AFDC / TANF            8.6%        11.2%         9.2%          3.9%         4.1%
       % Children with any SSI               2.8%         4.3%         5.1%          4.7%         6.0%
  % Children with Any AFDC / TANF           10.3%        14.0%         11.4%         4.8%         4.9%
     Avg SSI Benefit | Any SSI = 1         $1,939        $2,085       $2,268       $2,273        $2,342
 Avg AFDC / TANF Ben | Any A/T = 1         $2,127        $1,978       $1,680       $1,249        $1,178
 Ratio of SSI to AFDC / TANF dollars         0.23         0.33          0.66         2.06         2.60
   # Households with Children < 18           8523         7530         13918        12913        15541

Data includes information from the first wave of the Survey of Income and Program Participation in each
year for households with one or more children under the age of 17. All expenditure amounts are inflation-
adjusted to 2003 dollars using the CPI-U. Statistics are calculated using either the household or person
weights in each year.
           Table 2: Determinants of SSI & AFDC / TANF Receipt among Families with Children
                                              (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)
                                             Mean           Child SSI         Adult SSI      AFDC / TANF
Number of Children 0-17                       1.92          0.0042***          0.0015          0.0102***
                                             (1.02)          (.0007)           (.0010)          (.0013)
Number of Boys 0-17                           0.98           0.0013*           -0.0006          0.0003
                                             (0.87)          (.0007)           (.0010)          (.0014)
Mom Only Present                             0.239          0.0080***         0.0093***        0.0799***
                                             (.422)          (.0015)           (.0018)          (.0058)
Dad Only Present                             0.034           0.0054*          0.0102***        0.0273***
                                             (.177)          (.0030)           (.0028)          (.0046)
Neither Mom nor Dad Present                  0.038          0.0072***         0.0253***        0.0641***
                                             (.179)          (.0023)           (.0033)          (.0064)
Less than High School Graduate               0.102          0.0095***         0.0222***        0.0462***
                                             (.302)          (.0019)           (.0034)          (.0048)
Some College                                 0.319          -0.0036***       -0.0104***        -0.0159***
                                             (.466)           (.0009)          (.0015)           (.0024)
College Graduate                             0.289          -0.0088***       -0.0160***        -0.0457***
                                             (.453)           (.0014)          (.0013)           (.0039)
AFDC / TANF Ben in hundreds of $             5.172           -0014***           -.0006          .0050***
                                            (2.328)           (.0004)          (.0009)           (.0009)
State SSI Supplement for Kids                0.368          0.0035***                           0.0040
                                             (.482)          (.0014)                            (.0068)
State SSI Supplement for Adults              0.453                            0.0073***
                                             (.498)                            (.0029)
Black                                        0.156          0.0075***         0.0159***        0.0288***
                                             (.362)          (.0009)           (.0024)          (.0034)
Hispanic                                     0.122           -0.0012           0.0005           0.0050
                                             (.326)          (.0020)           (.0038)          (.0068)
Year = 1993                                  0.241            0.0019           0.0019           0.0028
                                             (.427)           (.0016)          (.0028)          (.0030)
Year = 1996                                  0.245          0.0060***         0.0103***         0.0011
                                             (.429)          -0.0021           (.0027)          (.0039)
Year = 2001                                  0.251          0.0052***         0.0111***        -0.0270***
                                             (.433)          (.0021)           (.0035)           (.0034)
Sample size                                 42,170            41,355           41,355           41,355
Mean of Dep Var                                -              0.0156           0.0258           0.0849
Pseudo R-squared                               -              0.1141           0.0985           0.3167
Sample consists of all 42,170 households from wave one of the 1992, 1993, 1996, and 2001 versions of
the SIPP with one or more children under the age of 18. Column (1) reports the mean and standard
deviation for each of the explanatory variables. Columns (2), (3), and (4) report the coefficient estimates
from a probit specification characterizing the probability of receipt of child SSI, adult SSI, and
AFDC/TANF benefits, respectively. The numbers reported represent marginal effects. Standard errors
adjusted for clustering by state are included in parentheses. All specifications are weighted by the
household weight in wave one of the SIPP. Approximately 2 percent of observations are not included in
the specifications because the state of residence variable is missing.
Table 3: Households with Children and with AFDC/TANF, SSI Child, and/or SSI Adult Benefits
                                      1996 SIPP Wave 1                  2001 SIPP Wave 1
                                 SSI Child SSI Adult    AFDC      SSI Child SSI Adult    TANF
# Households                        299       458       1453         252       435        546
Weighted % of Households           1.9%      2.9%       9.2%        1.8%      3.1%       3.9%
Avg # Kids 0-17                    2.58      2.06        2.38       2.25      1.97        2.40
Avg # Adults 18-64                 1.77      2.33        1.75       1.85      2.33        1.71
Avg # Adults 65+                   0.07      0.28        0.05       0.07      0.22        0.07
% with Both Parents               37.1%     42.5%      22.3%       34.8%     38.6%      20.1%
% with Mom Only                   50.7%     38.1%      66.0%       48.8%     42.1%      65.2%
% with Dad Only                    2.1%      6.0%       2.1%        5.2%      2.5%       2.6%
% with Neither                    10.1%     13.4%       9.5%       11.2%     16.8%      12.1%
Avg H-Hold Earnings               $4,735    $6,821     $3,707      $6,266    $7,419     $3,364
Avg Total H-Hold Income           $9,072   $11,508     $6,611     $10,654 $12,023       $5,938
% with Any SSI Kid                100.0%    14.3%       7.0%       100.0%    17.3%       6.9%
% with Any SSI Adult              22.3%     100.0%     10.7%       29.5%     100.0%     17.3%
% with Any AFDC/TANF              34.3%     33.6%      100.0%      14.5%     21.4%      100.0%
% with Any Food Stamp             47.1%     52.1%      88.4%       31.0%     45.3%      82.4%
Avg SSI Income                    $2,689    $2,365      $384       $2,735    $2,438       $540
Avg AFDC / TANF Income             $526      $499      $1,680       $141      $237      $1,249
Avg Food Stamp Income              $444      $477      $1,017       $241      $342        $804
Avg Social Security - Adult        $399      $864       $245        $473      $801        $287
Avg Social Security - Kid          $187      $180        $67        $249      $158        $64
All Other Income                   $536      $779       $528        $790      $970        $434
Poverty Ratio 0-49%                6.0%      8.2%      33.9%        7.1%      9.1%       34.0%
Poverty Ratio 50-99%              34.4%     32.6%      34.3%       21.5%     27.5%      34.1%
% Kids with Medicaid              87.1%     62.9%      87.8%       68.6%     64.1%      84.8%
% Kids with Private Health Ins    22.4%     27.9%      13.4%       35.7%     35.7%      21.3%
% Kids with any Health Ins        94.2%     83.6%      93.0%       86.6%     84.4%      89.7%

Table summarizes information for households with one or more children under the age of 18 in the
first wave of the 1996 and 2001 Survey of Income and Program Participation and with income from
either the SSI or AFDC/TANF programs. SSI Child and SSI Adult columns summarize information for
households with one or more children (0-17) and with one or more adults (18+), respectively,
receiving SSI benefits. The AFDC and TANF columns summarize information for households with
some AFDC or TANF income in 1996 or 2001. Dollar figures are adjusted to 2003 dollars using the
CPI-U. Household data is weighted using the SIPP household weights to account for non-random
sampling.
                                        Table 4: The Impact of Child SSI Enrollment on Household Transfer Income

                                                        Total Welfare                              Total Food Stamps      Any Food Stamps         Total Unearned
                             Total Household SSI           Income           Any Welfare Income          plus WIC               or WIC                 Income
                                (1)         (2)          (3)        (4)        (5)         (6)        (7)         (8)       (9)        (10)       (11)        (12)
POST SSI                     1747***                  -134***               -.084***                 -81***                -.025                1650***
                              (91)                      (47)                 (.019)                   (28)                 (.021)                (162)
PRE MONTHS 5-8                             175**                   -54                   -0.018                   6                   0.047*                  196
                                            (73)                   (34)                  (.020)                  (36)                 (.025)                 (210)
PRE MONTHS 1-4                            226***                  -112**                -0.048**                 -22                  .059**                 580***
                                           (64)                    (52)                  (.023)                  (38)                 (.029)                 (201)
FIRST WAVE WITH                           2314***                 -112**                -.056**                  -59                  0.038                 2334***
CHILD SSI                                  (116)                   (52)                  (.023)                  (39)                 (.029)                 (231)
POST MONTHS 1-4                           2096***                  -117*                -.064**                 -81**                 0.019                 2135***
                                           (122)                    (70)                 (.025)                  (39)                 (.030)                 (233)
POST MONTHS 5-8+                          1556***                 -241***               -.141***               -102***                -.016                 1582***
                                           (107)                    (73)                 (.025)                  (38)                 (.030)                 (226)
R-Squared                     0.707      0.713         0.696     0.696        0.673      0.673       0.716     0.716       0.718      0.718      0.642      0.635
Mean, Std. Dev.                   115, 626                 83, 416               .054, .227             134, 409              .173, .379            1669, 3277

 Sample consists of all 20949 households from the 1996 and 2001 versions of the SIPP with one or more children between the ages of 0 and 14 in wave one
 and who are still present in wave two. Unit of observation is a household-wave and there are 195871 observations in all cases. All specifications include
 20949 household and 21 wave*year fixed effects. The explanatory variable POST SSI is equal to one in the first wave that the child is eligible for SSI and in
 all subsequent waves and is zero otherwise. The even-numbered columns have indicators for the wave of the first SSI enrollment along with two pre and post
 variables. The dependent variable in columns 1 and 2 equals one if there is a child receiving SSI in that wave in the household and zero otherwise. The
 variable in the next two columns is defined similarly except it is equal to one if there is any SSI recipient. The last explanatory variable is (inflation-adjusted)
 SSI income for the household in the wave. Standard errors are clustered by household and included in parentheses.
                          Table 5: The Impact of Child SSI Enrollment on Earnings and Household Income
                                                                                               Total Household       Log(Total Household
                             Any Earnings          Log(Earnings)      Household Earnings           Income                 Income)
                             (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)         (6)        (7)         (8)         (9)         (10)
POST SSI                   0.005                 -0.023                  -385                 1265***                 .198***
                           (.016)                (.043)                 (322)                  (350)                   (.029)
PRE MONTHS 5-8                        -0.020                0.044                   -487                    -291                   0.026
                                      (.020)                (.052)                 (479)                   (534)                   (.038)
PRE MONTHS 1-4                        -0.032                0.001                   -686                    -106                   -0.013
                                      (.022)                (.055)                 (418)                   (478)                   (.044)
FIRST WAVE WITH                       -0.026                -0.100                 -879*                  1455**                  .222***
CHILD SSI                             (.023)                (.062)                 (451)                   (502)                   (.039)
POST MONTHS 1-4                       -0.002                -0.084                  -419                  1716**                  0.219***
                                      (.023)                (.066)                 (529)                   (577)                   (.040)
POST MONTHS 5-8+                      -0.004                0.058                   -740                   842*                   0.181***
                                      (.022)                (.058)                 (457)                   (499)                   (.038)
     R-Squared             0.612      0.612      0.736       0.736     0.725      0.725        0.721      0.699       0.696       0.696
    Sample size           195,871 195,871       182,289 182,289       195,871 195,871         195871     195871      194,979     194,979
   Mean, Std. Dev.            .937, .244            9.596, .908          19307, 19259            20977, 19426            9.633, .885

Sample consists of all 20949 households from the 1996 and 2001 versions of the SIPP with a child between the ages of 0 and 14 in the
first wave of the survey and who are still present in wave two. Unit of observation is a household-wave and the number of observations
is listed for each specification. This is sometimes less than 195871 if the dependent variable is a log measure because values less than
or equal to zero will be missing. All specifications include 20949 household and 21 wave*year fixed effects. The variable POST SSI is
equal to one in the first wave that the child is eligible for SSI and in all subsequent waves and is zero otherwise. The even-numbered
columns have indicators for the wave of the first SSI enrollment along with two pre and post variables. The dependent variables are total
household earnings (specifications 1 and 2), an indicator for any household earnings (3 and 4), the log of household earnings (5 and 6),
total household income (7 and 8), and the log of total household income (9 and 10). Standard errors are clustered by household and
i l d di            h
                                                          Table 6: The Impact of Child SSI Enrollment on Poverty
                                                                                                 Number of Children in     Number of People in      Number of People >
                              In Poverty           < 50% of Poverty         > 200% of Poverty         Poverty                  Poverty               200% of Poverty
                           (1)         (2)          (3)           (4)        (5)         (6)         (7)         (8)          (9)        (10)         (11)        (12)
POST SSI                -0.108***                -.076***                  0.081***               -.216***                -0.374***                 .284***
                          (.018)                  (.017)                    (.017)                 (.056)                   (.086)                   (.074)
PRE MONTHS 5-8                        -0.016                    -0.013                  0.001                   0.004                   -0.048                   0.057
                                      (.026)                    (.021)                  (.026)                  (.075)                  (.123)                   (.114)
PRE MONTHS 1-4                        0.006                      0.002                  0.002                   0.049                   0.050                    0.052
                                      (.026)                     (.023)                 (.025)                  (.080)                  (.126)                   (.122)
FIRST WAVE WITH                      -.119***                   -.102***               .066***                 -.208***                -0.410***                0.225**
CHILD SSI                             (.025)                     (.021)                 (.025)                  (.074)                   (.116)                  (.115)
POST MONTHS 1-4                      -.109***                   -.076***               .079***                 -.186**                 -.370***                 .301***
                                      (.026)                     (.021)                 (.025)                  (.086)                  (.130)                   (.114)
POST MONTHS 5-8+                     -.104***                   -.067***               .090***                 -.197**                 -.344***                 .363***
                                      (.024)                     (.021)                 (.024)                  (.080)                  (.123)                   (.109)
R-Squared                 0.592        0.592      0.477        0.477        0.662        0.662      0.662        0.662      0.607       0.607        0.670        0.670
Mean, Std. Dev.               .142, .349              .056, .230                .628, .483              .340, .975             .633, 1.626              2.452, 2.122

  Sample consists of all 20949 households from the 1996 and 2001 versions of the SIPP with a child between the ages of 0 and 14 in the first wave of the SIPP and
  who are still present in wave two. Unit of observation is a household-wave and there are 195871 observations in all cases. All specifications include 20949
  household and 21 wave*year fixed effects. The explanatory variable in the odd-numbered columns is equal to one in the first wave that the child is eligible for SSI
  and in all subsequent waves and is zero otherwise. The even-numbered columns have indicators for the wave of the first SSI enrollment along with two pre and post
  variables. The dependent variables are an indicator for whether the household is below the poverty line in the wave (specifications 1 and 2), an indicator for being
  less than 50 percent of the poverty line (3 and 4), the number of children in poverty (5 and 6), the number of children less than 50 percent of poverty (7 and 8), and
  the number of people less than 50 percent of poverty in the household (9 and 10). Standard errors are clustered by household and included in parentheses.
                                       Table 7: The Impact of Child SSI Enrollment on Health Insurance Coverage
                                   Number of Children on Medicaid            Number of Children with Health Ins           Number of Children with Priv HI
                                    (1)            (2)           (3)           (4)            (5)           (6)           (7)            (8)           (9)
POST SSI                          0.099*                                      0.040                                      -0.026
                                  (.058)                                      (.047)                                     (.049)
POST SSI * 1996 SAMPLE                           0.036                                      0.045                                      0.058
                                                 (.081)                                     (.068)                                     (.060)
POST SSI * 2001 SAMPLE                           .189**                                     0.033                                      -.145*
                                                 (.082)                                     (.061)                                     (.083)
PRE MONTHS 5-8                                                 -0.018                                     -0.029                                     -0.039
                                                               (.067)                                     (.068)                                     (.061)
PRE MONTHS 1-4                                                 0.049                                      -0.002                                     -0.057
                                                               (.078)                                     (.066)                                     (.071)
FIRST WAVE WITH CHILD                                          .284***                                    0.104                                      -0.069
SSI                                                             (.076)                                    (.066)                                     (.068)
POST MONTHS 1-4                                                .214**                                     0.057                                      -0.081
                                                               (.085)                                     (.072)                                     (.070)
POST MONTHS 5-8+                                               -0.015                                     -0.012                                     -0.035
                                                               (.079)                                     (.066)                                     (.068)
R-Squared                          0.739         0.739         0.740          0.783         0.783          0.783         0.773         0.773          0.773
Mean, Std. Dev.                               0.420, 1.000                               1.706, 1.151                               1.359, 1.152

  Sample consists of all 20949 households from the 1996 and 2001 versions of the SIPP with a child between the ages of 0 and 14 in the first wave of the
  SIPP and who are still present in wave two. Unit of observation is a household-wave and there are 195871 observations in all cases. All specifications
  include 20949 household and 21 wave*year fixed effects. The explanatory variable for the specification summarized in columns 1, 4, and 7 is equal to
  one in the first wave that the child is eligible for SSI and in all subsequent waves and is zero otherwise. In specifications 2, 5, and 8, this variable is
  interacted with two dummy variables reflecting each of the survey years. Specifications 3, 6, and 9 have indicators for the wave of the first SSI enrollment
  along with two pre and post variables. The dependent variables are the average number of children ages 0-17 on Medicaid in the wave (specifications 1 -
  3), the average number of children with health insurance (4-6), and the average number of children reporting that they have private health insurance.
  Standard errors are clustered by household and included in parentheses.
                                 Table 8: Sensitivity of Results to Alternative Control Groups
                                                                                        Child SSI
                                           All H-holds   Ever Apply or Disabled        or Disabled                     Child SSI
                                           w/Children    Receive SSI Child 6-14?       Child 6-14?      Child SSI      Switchers
                                                (1)           (2)         (3)              (4)             (5)            (6)
(1)         Household Earnings               -385           -473            -340           -215             19            114
                                             (322)          (339)           (659)          (359)          (367)          (423)
(2)            Any Earnings                  0.005          -0.006         0.010          0.005          -0.002          0.012
                                             (.016)         (.016)         (.031)         (.016)         (.017)          (.020)
(3)      Log(Household Earnings)             -0.023         -.116**        -0.049         -0.045        -.130***        -0.090
                                             (.043)          (.045)        (.086)         (.044)         (.050)         (.058)
(4)       Total Household Income            1265***        1131***         1573**        1495***         2012***        1965***
                                             (350)          (369)           (721)         (386)           (409)          (468)
(5)    Log(Total Household Income)           .198***        .169***        .221***        .205***        .232***        .227***
                                              (.029)         (.030)         (.048)         (.030)         (.033)         (.038)
(6)        Household in Poverty            -0.108***       -.085***       -.117***       -.109***       -.117***        -.119***
                                             (.018)         (.018)         (.035)         (.018)         (.020)          (.023)
(7)     Household < 50% of Poverty          -.076***       -.068***       -.097***       -.083***       -.102***        -.100***
                                             (.017)         (.017)         (.032)         (.017)         (.018)          (.020)
(8)    Household > 200% of Poverty           .081***        .053***        .087***        .076***        .068***        .067***
                                              (.017)         (.018)         (.033)         (.018)         (.020)         (.023)
(9)       # of Children in Poverty          -.216***       -.158***       -.290***       -.221***       -.229***        -.244***
                                             (.056)         (.057)         (.112)         (.056)         (.060)          (.067)
(10)       # of People in Poverty           -.374***       -.270***        -.375**       -.375***       -.401***        -.430***
                                             (.086)         (.089)          (.088)        (.088)         (.093)          (.104)
(11)   # of People > 200% of Poverty         .284***        .146**         .286*          .233***        .191**         .232**
                                              (.074)        (.075)         (.157)          (.076)        (.084)         (.099)
(12)    # of Children with Medicaid          .099*          .143***        0.206          .115**        0.253***       0.157***
                                             (.058)          (.057)        (.141)         (.058)         (.062)         (.071)
(13) # of Children with Health Insurance     0.040          .078*          0.114          0.057          0.114**         0.077
                                             (.047)         (.048)         (.112)         (.048)          (.051)         (.061)
(14)    # of Children with Private HI        -0.026         -0.006         0.039          0.020          0.017           0.052
                                             (.049)         (.049)         (.115)         (.049)         (.052)          (.063)
              # of Households                20949           2715           1727           2215            753            375
             # of Observations              195871          26005          17431          22105           7388           3790

Table provides point estimates and standard errors (in parentheses) for the coefficient on POST SSI from specifications
analogous to those in the odd-numbered columns of Tables 4-7. Each coefficient estimate reported in the table is from a
different specification. Unit of observation in each specification is the household-wave. All specifications include household
and wave fixed effects and are weighted using the SIPP household weights in each wave.
