                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              THE RETURNS ON HUMAN CAPITAL:
                                GOOD NEWS ON WALL STREET
                                IS BAD NEWS ON MAIN STREET

                                              Hanno Lustig
                                        Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh

                                         Working Paper 11564
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w11564


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 2005




The authors would like to thank Andy Atkeson, Hal Cole, Robert Hall, Hugo Hopenhayn, Chad Jones, Martin
Lettau , Francis Longstaff, Sydney Ludvigson, Alex Michaelides, Tobias Moskowitz, Laura Veldkamp, and
the participants of the UCLA brown bag lunch, the NYU macro-finance reading group and macrolunch,
seminar participants at the University of California at Berkeley, Stanford, USC, Pompeu Fabra, the LSE, and
the Bank of England, and participants of the NBER Summer Institute Asset Pricing Meetings. We have
benefitted from conversations with John Heaton and Tano Santos about related ideas. We are especially
grateful to John Campbell and Lars Peter Hansen for detailed comments. The views expressed herein are
those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by Hanno Lustig and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
The Returns on Human Capital: Good News on Wall Street is Bad News on Main Street
Hanno Lustig and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh
NBER Working Paper No. 11564
August 2005
JEL No. G1

                                            ABSTRACT




We use a standard single-agent model to conduct a simple consumption growth accounting exercise.
Consumption growth is driven by news about current and expected future returns on the market
portfolio. The market portfolio includes financial and human wealth. We impute the residual of
consumption growth innovations that cannot be attributed to either news about financial asset returns
or future labor income growth to news about expected future returns on human wealth, and we back
out the implied human wealth and market return process. This accounting procedure only depends
on the agent's willingness to substitute consumption over time, not her consumption risk preferences.
We find that innovations in current and future human wealth returns are negatively correlated with
innovations in current and future financial asset returns, regardless of the elasticity of intertemporal
substitution. The evidence from the cross-section of stock returns suggests that the market return we
back out of aggregate consumption innovations is a better measure of market risk than the return on
the stock market.



Hanno Lustig                                            Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh
Department of Economics                                 Department of Finance
UCLA                                                    New York University
Box 951477                                              44 W 4th Street
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1477                              Suite 9-190
and NBER                                                New York, NY 10012
hlustig@econ.ucla.edu                                   svnieuwe@stern.nyu.edu
1    Introduction

Starting with the seminal work by Breeden (1979) and Lucas (1978), much of the work in
dynamic asset pricing asks whether observed aggregate consumption growth can explain
or deliver financial returns like the ones we observe in the data (Grossman and Shiller
(1981) and Hansen and Singleton (1983)). Mehra and Prescott (1985) point out that a
very high degree of risk aversion is needed to reconcile a high equity premium with a
low covariance between consumption growth and returns. Kandel and Stambaugh (1990)
extend this analysis to the conditional moments of returns and consumption growth, and
they reach the same conclusion. We turn this question on its head: Starting from observed
returns on financial assets, what restrictions does the standard single agent model impose
on the joint distribution of the market returns and aggregate consumption growth?
    Following Roll (1977)’s critique, the literature has recognized the importance of in-
cluding human wealth returns as part of the market return (e.g. Shiller (1995), Campbell
(1996), and Jagannathan and Wang (1996)), but only the cash flow component of human
wealth returns is observed, not the discount rate component. This paper uses observed
aggregate consumption to learn about the human wealth returns. A standard single-agent
model puts tight restrictions on the joint distribution of market returns and aggregate
consumption. We exploit these restrictions to account for aggregate consumption growth,
and we impute that part of consumption innovations not due to news about financial asset
returns to human wealth returns.
    To do so, we confront a single agent with the observed market returns on US household
wealth and back out her implied consumption innovations. These consumption innova-
tions are determined by news about current returns and by news about future expected
returns on the market portfolio. The effect of news about future market returns on con-
sumption depends only on how willing this agent is to substitute over time, not on her
risk preferences (Campbell (1993)). If her portfolio only includes financial wealth, the
model-implied consumption innovations are radically different from those in the data. The
agent’s consumption innovations are at least ten times too volatile relative to US aggre-
gate consumption innovations and the implied correlation of her consumption innovations
with news about stock returns is at least four times higher than in the data. Even when
the intertemporal elasticity of substitution (EIS ) is zero, there is just not enough mean
reversion in stock returns to reconcile the moments of consumption and returns. We call
this the consumption correlation and volatility puzzle.



                                            2
      These two moments of aggregate consumption growth are also at the heart of Mehra and
Prescott (1985)’s equity premium puzzle. However, the volatility and correlation puzzles
only depend on the agent’s willingness to transfer consumption between different periods
in response to news about future returns, while the equity premium puzzle only depends
on the agent’s aversion to consumption bets. We show that, in a model with only financial
wealth, there is no value of the EIS that closes the gap between the model and the data,
but large values definitely make matters worse.
      We interpret this failure as a market return measurement problem, and we explicitly
introduce human wealth in our single agent’s portfolio, following the example of Campbell
(1996) and Jagannathan and Wang (1996). In a first step, we show that a model in which
the expected returns on human wealth and financial wealth are perfectly correlated, like
Campbell (1996)’s, cannot come close to matching the consumption moments in the data.
Models in which the expected return on human wealth is constant, like Shiller (1995)’s, or,
in which the expected return on human wealth is perfectly correlated with expected labor
income growth, like Jagannathan and Wang (1996)’s, do better, but these still over-predict
the volatility of consumption innovations and their correlation with financial returns.
      In a second step, we conduct a basic consumption growth accounting exercise. We im-
pute that part of the consumption innovations that cannot be attributed to news about
current or future financial returns to the returns on human wealth. This approach con-
structs a process for the expected return on human wealth that exactly matches the mo-
ments of aggregate consumption innovations in the data. We find that (1) good news about
current returns in financial markets is bad news about current returns in labor markets,
regardless of the EIS, and (2) the implied total market return is negatively correlated with
the returns on financial wealth if the EIS is smaller than one.
      The negative correlation between financial and human wealth returns has a cash-flow
component and a discount rate component. First, with respect to the cash flows, we find
that good news about future labor income growth is bad news for the future growth rate
of pay-outs to securities holders. This is a feature of the data. Second, with respect to
the discount rates, positive innovations to future risk premia on financial wealth tend to
coincide with negative innovations to expected future returns on human wealth. This is
what comes out of our consumption growth accounting exercise. The negative discount
rate correlation for these two assets is not surprising. Santos and Veronesi (2004) were the
first to analyze these composition effects on risk premia in a two-sector model1 .
  1
      Consider a simple example of the composition effect. In a two-tree Lucas endowment model with



                                                  3
    In a third step, we extend the analysis to time-varying wealth shares. Time-variation
in the human wealth share enables our model to match observed consumption moments
with less volatile human wealth returns.
    While Campbell’s work aimed to substitute consumption out of the asset pricing equa-
tions, we actually obtain better measures of market risk when the market return is forced
to be consistent with the moments of aggregate consumption. We revisit the Roll cri-
tique, and ask whether our consumption-consistent capital asset pricing model improves
the pricing of assets in the cross-section. Using our model-implied market returns and
model-implied consumption, we find that our model produces the lowest pricing errors for
size and value stock portfolios among the models that include human wealth in the market
portfolio. Growth stocks provide better insurance against future human capital risk and
therefore trade at a risk discount relative to value stocks.
    But there is even more compelling evidence against the stock market return as a measure
of the market return, that does not depend on the investor’s preferences at all: The budget
constraint dictates that over very long horizons consumption growth and the market returns
coincide. However, in US data, news about long-run consumption growth and market
returns are negatively correlated if the market portfolio only includes financial wealth, and
the long-run returns are much more volatile than long-run consumption growth. Once
human wealth is added to the market portfolio, they line up much better; the correlation
increases to .7 at annual frequencies. Nonetheless, the long-run, model-implied market
return is still more volatile than long-run consumption growth, another manifestation of
the equity volatility puzzle of LeRoy and Porter (1981) and Shiller (1981). To address this
shortcoming, we back out cash-flow news about human wealth from consumption growth
-instead of labor income growth- data by imposing this long-run restriction, and, as before,
we find the discount rate on human wealth that best matches the short-run moments
of consumption. This exercises confirms our main findings: To match the properties of
consumption in the data, the returns on financial and human wealth must be strongly
negatively correlated.


Other Explanations We attribute the component of aggregate consumption growth
that is not accounted for by financial asset returns to human wealth returns. Other labels
come to mind for this residual. In the paper, we consider four in detail, and we find that
i.i.d dividend growth and log preferences, when the dividend share of the first tree increases, its expected
return must go up to induce investors to hold it despite its larger share. Because the overall price-dividend
ratio stays constant, the expected return on the second tree has to decrease (see Cochrane, Longstaff, and
Santa-Clara (2004)).


                                                     4
the usual fixes either worsen the consumption volatility and correlation puzzles, or do not
help. First, if the agent’s preferences display external habit formation as in Campbell
and Cochrane (1999), the volatility and the correlation puzzles cannot be resolved unless
through heteroscedasticity in the market return. In a second step, we test for this possibil-
ity by checking if our consumption growth residual predicts the future volatility of stock
returns, and it does not. Nor does it forecast the volatility of consumption innovations or
their covariance with financial returns. Third, we argue that heterogeneity makes matters
worse in the empirically relevant case where financial asset holders have a higher EIS. If we
want to match these moments of aggregate consumption, then the consumption of stock-
holders and non-stockholders has to be really negatively correlated, and this presents a
serious challenge to limited participation explanations of asset pricing puzzles (Heaton and
Lucas (1996) and Guvenen (2003)). Fourth, we found the same consumption correlation
and volatility puzzles in annual and bi-annual data, which casts doubt on consumption
adjustment cost explanations.
       Finally, the omission of housing wealth may lead to the erroneous interpretation of the
residual as a human wealth return. When we include housing wealth into the portfolio of
the investor, the residual has the same properties as in the model without housing wealth.


Related Literature While there is a huge literature on the risk-return trade-off in fi-
nancial markets, the role of risk is usually ignored when economists model human capital
investment decisions. Palacios-Huerta (2001) is the first to focus on this trade-off in la-
bor markets; he uses individual labor-income based measures of human capital returns.2
We use the information in aggregate consumption innovations instead to learn about the
aggregate human wealth returns.
       Bansal and Yaron (2004) deliver a consumption and dividend process that can match
expected returns on financial wealth by imputing a key role to long-run consumption risk.
Instead, we back out a human wealth return process that implies the right aggregate
consumption behavior. Vissing-Jorgensen and Attanasio (2003) also use Campbell (1996)’s
framework to estimate the EIS and the coefficient of risk aversion using household-level
data. They conclude that the EIS of stockholders is likely to be above one, but they do
not match the model-implied consumption volatility and correlation moments with those
   2
    Palacios-Huerta measures returns on human capital as the proportional increase in earnings per year
from the last year of schooling. He does not take into account the effect of revisions on future labor income
and discount rates. Two related papers are Palacios-Huerta (2003a) and Palacios-Huerta (2003b)).




                                                     5
in the data. Our paper adds these two consumption moments to the picture3 . Our work is
also related to Santos and Veronesi (2004). They set up two-sector-model, a labor-income
and a capital-income generating sector; assets are priced off a conditional CAPM in which
the labor income share is the conditioning variable. While the labor income share works
well as a conditioning variable in explaining the cross-section of returns, they find that
innovations to future labor income growth do not help much in pricing. We find that
future human capital risk is priced, and that growth firms provide a better hedge against
this risk.
       Lettau and Ludvigson (2001a) find that the single agent’s budget constraint provides
useful aggregate risk information. They use a linearized version of the household budget
constraint to show that the co-integration vector between consumption, financial wealth,
and labor income predicts stock returns. Lettau and Ludvigson (2001b) derive a scaled
version of the Consumption CAPM from this budget constraint and show it prices the
cross-section of size and value portfolios. We use the budget constraint and the Euler
equation to derive a consumption-consistent version of the CAPM. As a robustness check,
we estimate our system imposing co-integration between consumption, financial wealth,
and labor income. If anything, return on financial and human wealth must be even more
negatively correlated. We find that our consumption-wealth ratio still forecasts stock
returns, confirming Lettau and Ludvigson (2001a). Our market return process, derived
from actual US aggregate consumption innovations, actually does better in explaining the
cross-section of asset returns than the standard CAPM return on the stock market. Our
results may help to understand the findings of Lewellen and Nagel (2004), who argue the
CAPM betas do not vary enough in order for a conditional version of the CAPM to explain
the variation in returns; stock market risk is a poor measure of market risk. Interestingly,
Boyd, Hu, and Jagannathan (2005) show that on average good news about unemployment
implies lower stock returns, except in recessions. Similar results are obtained by Andersen,
Bollerslev, Diebold, and Vega (2005) for a wide range of macro-economic announcements.
We infer from aggregate consumption that bad news for stock returns is good news for the
rest of the economy.
   3
    We are less sanguine about large values of the EIS, for two reasons. First, if the EIS is larger
than one, the market return has to display multivariate mean aversion in order to match the aggregate
consumption volatility, and this has counterfactual asset pricing implications in the cross-section. Second,
financial returns display strong mean reversion and, according to the model, an individual investor holding
only financial wealth (e.g. a retiree) would have implausibly volatile consumption, if she is very willing to
substitute consumption over time.




                                                     6
Implications Beyond Asset Pricing There seems to be less of a dichotomy between
quantities and prices than suggested by some (e.g. Tallarini (2000) and Mulligan (2004)):
Prices and returns put very tight restrictions on quantities. Standard production functions
in business cycle models, such as the Cobb-Douglas, imply a nearly perfectly correlated
return on human and financial wealth (Baxter and Jermann (1997)). Our results suggest
that this is counter-factual and that we may need to think of different technologies. Models
with time-varying factor elasticities, such as the one of Young (2004), may allow for a better
description of the data.
    Our work also has clear portfolio implications. US household portfolios are biased
towards US securities. If financial and human wealth returns are negatively correlated, hu-
man wealth provides a good hedge against domestic asset return movements, rationalizing
a long position in home assets. Relying on co-integration analysis, Julliard (2003) reaches
the same conclusion as us, contradicting earlier results by Baxter and Jermann (1997),
who conclude that introducing labor income risk unambiguously worsens the international
diversification puzzle, because long-run labor income and financial income are positively
correlated. This makes human wealth look like stocks. Relying on the same positive corre-
lation between long-run labor income growth and stock returns, Benzoni, Collin-Dufresne,
and Goldstein (2004) manage to explain the hump-shaped life-cycle pattern of stock market
participation. Our model suggests that this mechanism may have counter-factual implica-
tions for the implied consumption of these investors. In all of these papers cited above, the
evidence on the correlation between cash-flow and discount rate risk of human and finan-
cial wealth returns relies mostly on co-integration analysis. Such co-integration tests are
known to have low power4 . We argue that the cross-equation restrictions on consumption
implied by the theory are perhaps more informative about the nature of long-run human
capital risk.
    We start by briefly reviewing the Campbell framework in section 2. In section 3, we
describe the data we use and how to operationalize the model. In section 4 we describe
the basic consumption correlation and volatility puzzle, and in 5 we explicitly introduce
human wealth returns. In section 6.1, we estimate the system subject to a co-integration
restriction on consumption, financial wealth, and labor income and find our results to be
robust. We derive the long-run restriction implied by the budget constraint in section
6.2, and show that our main findings are robust to imposing it. Next, section 7 tests the
   4
     For example, Hansen, Heaton, and Li (2005) show flat likelihood plots for the co-integration coefficient
between consumption and earnings.




                                                     7
asset pricing implications of our measure of market risk. Finally, in section 8, we entertain
potential alternative explanations of our findings. A separate appendix with additional
derivations and results is available on the authors’ web sites.


2     Environment

We adopt the environment of Campbell (1993) and consider a single agent decision problem.


2.1   Preferences

The agent ranks consumption streams {Ct } using the following utility index Ut , which is
defined recursively:
                           µ                   ³        ´1/θ ¶θ/(1−γ)
                                    (1−γ)/θ         1−γ
                       Ut = (1 − β)Ct       + β Et Ut+1               ,


where γ is the coefficient of relative risk aversion and σ is the intertemporal elasticity of
                                                     1−γ
substitution (IES). Finally, θ is defined as θ =   1−(1/σ) .   In the case of separable utility, the
elasticity of intertemporal substitution (henceforth EIS ) equals the inverse of the coefficient
of risk aversion and θ is one. Distinguishing between the coefficient of risk aversion and the
inverse of the EIS will prove important later on. Our results on the correlation structure
between financial asset returns and human wealth returns only depend on the EIS, not
on the coefficient of risk aversion. Epstein and Zin (1989) preferences impute a concern for
long run risk to the agent. This plays potentially an important role in understanding risk
premia (Bansal and Yaron (2004)).


2.2   Trading Assets

All wealth, including human wealth, is tradable. We adopt Campbell’s notation: Wt
                                                                               m is the
denotes the representative agent’s total wealth at the start of period t, and Rt+1
gross return on wealth invested from t to t+1. This representative agent’s budget constraint
is:
                                           m
                                   Wt+1 = Rt+1 (Wt − Ct ) .                                     (1)

Our single agent takes the returns on the market {Rtm } as given, and decides how much to
consume. Instead of imposing market clearing and forcing the agent to consume aggregate
dividends and labor income, we simply let her choose the optimal aggregate consumption
process, taking the market return process {Rtm } as given.

                                               8
2.3      The Joint Distribution of Consumption and Asset Returns

Campbell (1993) linearizes the budget constraint and uses the Euler equation to obtain an
expression for consumption innovations as a function of innovations to current and future
expected returns. First, Campbell linearizes the budget constraint around the mean log
consumption/wealth ratio c − w. Lowercase letters denote logs. If the consumption-wealth
ratio is stationary, in the sense that limj→∞ ρj (ct+j −wt+j ) = 0, this approximation implies
that:                                           ∞                                ∞
                                                X                                X
             ct+1 − Et ct+1 = (Et+1 − Et )            ρj rt+1+j
                                                          m
                                                                − (Et+1 − Et )         ρj ∆ct+1+j ,      (2)
                                                j=0                              j=1

where rm = log(1 + Rm ) and ρ is defined as 1 − exp(c − w).5 In the long run, only cash
flows matter -not the discount rates- and the returns on the market portfolio are completely
driven by aggregate consumption growth. We return to this long-run restriction in section
6.2.
      Second, Campbell assumes consumption and returns are conditionally homoscedastic
and jointly log normal, and he substitutes the consumption Euler equation:

                                                           m
                                      Et ∆ct+1 = µm + σEt rt+1 ,                                         (3)


where µm is a constant that includes the variance and covariance terms for consumption
and market return innovations, back into the consumption innovation equation in (2), to
obtain an expression with only returns on the right hand side:

                                                                                ∞
                                                                                X
                                    m             m
                ct+1 − Et ct+1 =   rt+1   −   Et rt+1   + (1 − σ)(Et+1 − Et )         ρj rt+1+j
                                                                                          m
                                                                                                ,        (4)
                                                                                j=1


Campbell shows this agent incurs relatively small welfare losses from using this linear
consumption rule. We will use this linear version of the model as our actual model.
      Innovations to the representative agent’s consumption are determined by (1) the un-
expected part of this period’s market return and (2) the innovation to expected future
market returns. There is a one-for-one relation between current return and consumption
innovations, regardless of the EIS, but the relation between consumption innovations and
innovations to expected future returns depends on the EIS. If the agent has log utility
over deterministic consumption streams and σ is one, the consumption innovations exactly
equal the unanticipated return in this period. If σ is larger than one, the agent lowers
  5
      Campbell (1993) shows that this approximation is accurate for values of the EIS between 0 and 4.



                                                         9
her consumption to take advantage of higher expected future returns, while, if σ is smaller
than one, she chooses to increase her consumption because the income effect dominates the
substitution effect. As σ approaches zero, the current consumption innovations equal the
long-run market return innovations, as is apparent from comparing the linearized budget
constraint in (2) and the consumption equation in (4).
    This consumption function in (4) puts tight restrictions on the joint distribution of
aggregate consumption innovations and total wealth return innovations. Our aim is to
study the properties of aggregate consumption implied by this restriction. More specifi-
cally, we are interested in two moments of the consumption innovations: (1) the variance of
consumption innovations and (2) the correlation of consumption innovations with financial
return innovations. Matching these moments of the data is a major hurdle for the model
with only financial wealth, because in the data financial returns and consumption innova-
tions have a low correlation and because consumption innovations are much less volatile
than financial return innovations.


3     Data and Model Implementation

This section discusses the measurement of financial asset returns, the computation of all
the innovations that feed into consumption innovations, and finally, the relevant moments
of the data.


3.1   Measuring Financial Asset Returns

We use two measures of financial asset returns. The first measure is the return on the
                                             a           Pt+1 +Dt+1
value-weighted CRSP stock market portfolio: Rt+1 =           Pt     ,   where Dt is the quarterly
dividend in period t and Pt is the ex-dividend price. To remove the seasonal component in
dividends, we define the log dividend price ratio as
                                µ                                          ¶
                                    .25Dt + .25Dt−1 + .25Dt−2 + .25Dt−3
                   dpat = log                                                  .
                                                     Pt

The full line in figure 1 shows the dividend-price ratio, exp(dpat ). We follow the literature
on repurchases (Fama and French (2001) and Grullon and Michaely (2002)), and adjust
the dividend yield for repurchases of equity, to ensure its stationarity. The repurchase data
are from Boudoukh, Michaely, Richardson, and Roberts (2004). This is the dotted line
in figure 1. The dividend-price ratio adjusted for repurchases is similar to the unadjusted
series until 1980, and consistently higher afterwards.

                                                10
   Our second measure of financial asset returns takes a broader perspective by including
corporate debt and private companies: we value a claim to US non-financial, non-farm
corporations and compute the total pay-outs to the owners of this claim. The value of US
(non-financial, non-farm) corporations is the market value of all financial liabilities plus
the market value of equity less the market value of financial assets. The payout measure
includes all corporate pay-outs to securities holders, both stock holders and bond holders.
See appendix A.1 for details. The dashed line in figure 1 shows the ratio of pay-outs to
securities holders to the market value of firms. Over the last two decades, the dividend
yield for the firm-value measure has been much higher than the dividend yield on stocks.
This is consistent with the findings of Hall (2001). The firm value dividend yield departs
from the CRSP-based repurchase adjusted series after the stock market crash of 2001. This
broader measure of financial wealth is our benchmark, but we also report the results using
stock market wealth, simply because the latter is more commonly used.

                                   [Figure 1 about here.]


3.2   Computing Innovations
                                                                                     a ),
We follow Campbell (1996) and estimate a VAR with log real financial asset returns (rt+1
real per capita labor income growth (∆yt+1 ), and three return predictors: the log dividend
yield on financial assets (dpat+1 ), the relative T-bill return (rtbt+1 ), and the yield spread
(yspt+1 ). To be consistent with our exercises in the next section, we add the labor income
share st+1 and real per capita consumption growth on non-durables and services to the
system ∆ct+1 . All varriables are demeaned. We stack the N = 7 state variables into a
vector z. The VAR describes a linear law of motion for the state:


                                     zt+1 = Azt + εt+1 ,


with innovation covariance matrix E[εε0 ] = Σ. The dimensions of Σ and A are N × N , the
dimensions of ε and z are N × T . Finally, we also define ek as the k th column of an identity
matrix of the same dimension as A. Table 15 in appendix A.9 reports the VAR-estimates.
The top panel uses firm value returns as the measure of financial asset returns, the bottom
panel uses the value-weighted stock market return instead.
   Once the VAR has been estimated, we can extract the news components that drive the
consumption growth innovations: we define innovations in current financial asset returns
{(a)t }, innovations in current labor income growth {(f y )t }, news about current and future

                                              11
labor income growth {(dy )t }, and news about future financial asset returns {(ha )t } and
human capital returns {(hy )t }:

                            a          a
                  (a)t+1 = rt+1 − Et [rt+1 ] = e01 εt+1

                 (f y )t+1 = ∆yt+1 − Et [∆yt+1 ] = e02 εt+1
                                         ∞
                                         X
                    y
                 (d )t+1 = (Et+1 − Et )     ρj ∆yt+1+j = e02 (I − ρA)−1 εt+1
                                              j=0
                                              ∞
                                              X
                 (ha )t+1 = (Et+1 − Et )            ρj rt+1+j
                                                        a
                                                              = e01 ρA(I − ρA)−1 εt+1
                                              j=1
                                              X∞
                                                        y
                 (hy )t+1 = (Et+1 − Et )            ρj rt+1+j .
                                              j=1


News about current and future financial income growth is backed out from news about
asset returns:
                                    (da )t+1 = (ha )t+1 + (a)t+1 .                                  (5)

Finally, innovations to consumption are found as:


                     (c)t+1 = ct+1 − Et [ct+1 ] = ∆ct+1 − Et [∆ct+1 ] = e07 εt+1 .                  (6)


The moments of these innovations will be denoted using Vi,j and Corri,j notation for
variances and correlations respectively.


3.3    Stylized Facts

Table 1 summarizes the moments from the data at quarterly frequencies for the full post-
war sample (1947.II-2004.III). The left panel uses the firm value returns as the measure
of financial asset returns; the right panel uses stock market returns. Our benchmark case,
a VAR with 1 lag, is reported in column 1. As a robustness check, we also report results
obtained using a 2-lag VAR in column 2 and an annual VAR(1) in column 3.6 All variances
are multiplied by 10,000. Four key stylized facts deserve mention. We focus on column 1
in the discussion.

   • Firm value return innovations are about 13 times as volatile as consumption innova-
      tions.7 The standard deviation of news about financial returns is 14% for firm value
   6
     The signs and relative magnitudes correspond to the ones reported in Campbell (1996) for monthly
and annual data.
   7
     Our measure of consumption is real per capita non-durables and services consumption. All results go


                                                    12
      returns and 16% per annum for stock returns; the same number for consumption is
      1.15% per annum (Va versus Vc ). News about future financial returns is also volatile.
      In annualized terms, the standard deviation is 11% for firm value and 20% for stock
      returns (Vha ).

    • Consumption innovations and return innovations are only weakly correlated: Corrc,a =
      0.17 for firm value returns and 0.185 for stock returns.

    • Current return innovations are negatively correlated with news about future expected
      returns: there is (multivariate) mean reversion in returns on firm value (Corra,ha =
      −.48). Stock returns display even more mean reversion Corra,ha is -.92.

    • For firm value returns, news about future dividend growth and news about future
      labor income growth are negatively correlated (Corrdy ,da < 0) as is news about
      current labor income growth and current dividend growth (Corrf y ,f d < 0).

    The first three facts are well-documented, at least for stock returns; the last one is not.
The firm value data indicate that good cash flow news for securities holders (stock and
bond holders) may not necessarily be good cash flow news for workers. For stock returns
these correlations are positive, but surprisingly small. This cash flow channel plays a key
role in our results. It might be even stronger in other countries: Bottazzi, Pesenti, and
VanWincoop (1996) document strong negative contemporaneous correlation between wage
and profit rates in a large cross-section of developed countries.
    All of these stylized facts are robust to inclusion of additional forecasting variables
in the VAR. They are also robust to different measures of labor income. Our benchmark
measure for labor income is real, per capita compensation of all employees from the Bureau
of Economic Analysis (Table 2.1 line 2). This measure excludes proprietor’s income, but
includes wages and salaries to government employees. Table 11 in section A.3 of the
separate appendix uses two alternative measures. Most moments are virtually unchanged
relative to table 1.

                                        [Table 1 about here.]


4    Model 1: Financial Wealth Only

We start by abstracting from non-financial wealth, and we compare the model-implied
consumption innovation behavior to aggregate US data. We call the model with only
through using total personal consumption. For total consumption Vc is .7 and Corrc,a is 0.1.


                                                   13
financial wealth Model 1. This is a natural starting point, because (1) standard business
cycle models imply that the returns on human and other assets are highly or even perfectly
correlated (e.g. Baxter and Jermann (1997))8 , and (2) in finance, it is standard practice
to use the stock market return rta as a measure of the market return rtm (Black (1987) and
Stambaugh (1982)).
    We analyze the moments of the model-implied consumption innovations in (4) with
rm = ra , simply by feeding the actual innovations to financial asset returns and news
about future returns into the linearized policy function of our single agent. The procedure
delivers a time series for the model-implied consumption innovations. We focus on two
moments in particular: the variance of consumption innovations given by:


                              Vc = Va + (1 − σ)2 Vha + 2(1 − σ)Va,ha ,                               (7)


and their correlation with innovations to current financial asset returns:


                                      Vc,a = Va + (1 − σ)Va,ha .                                     (8)


4.1    Fails to Match The Variance and Correlation Moments

In the data, the standard deviation of consumption innovations is only 0.58% per quarter,
compared to 6.95% per quarter for firm return innovations, and the correlation with return
innovations is .17 (see Table 1). Model 1 fails miserably to match either moment for
all values of EIS. Figure 2 plots the standard deviation of the model-implied consumption
innovations in the top panel and their correlation with current firm value return innovations
in the bottom panel. In both panels, the EIS ranges between 0 and 1.5.
    In the log case (σ = 1), consumption responds one-for-one to current return innovations.
The standard deviation of consumption innovations equals the standard deviation of news
about current financial returns, which is 6.95% per quarter (see equation 7). The correlation
of consumption innovations with financial asset return innovations is 1 (see equation 8).
    As the EIS decreases below 1, consumption also absorbs part of the volatility of shocks
to future asset returns Vha . The effect on the variance of consumption innovations can be
mitigated by the mean-reversion in returns (Vha ,a < 0). If σ < 1, a negative covariance
of current and future return innovations also lowers the covariance of consumption with
   8
     The capital and labor dividend streams are perfectly correlated in a Cobb-Douglas production economy
in which the entire, random, capital stock process is fixed exogenously (i.e. no investment choice and no
depreciation). Even with investment and depreciation, standard business cycle models imply a very high
correlation between human wealth and physical capital returns.


                                                   14
current return innovations: The agent adjusts her consumption by less in response to
a positive surprise if the same news lowers her expectation about future asset returns.
Indeed, figure 2 illustrates that the mean reversion in returns helps to lower the implied
volatility and correlation of consumption innovations somewhat, but not nearly enough. In
the bottom panel we see that the correlation goes down as the EIS declines below 1, but
it never reaches the observed correlation of 0.17. Even if σ is zero - this value of the EIS
maximizes the effect of the mean reversion on the volatility of consumption innovations
and on their correlation with return innovations- the standard deviation of consumption
innovations is off by a factor of 10 and the correlation by a factor of almost 4.
       Mean reversion in returns actually increases the volatility of consumption if the EIS
exceeds one: In response to good news, the agent increases his consumption, and this
effect is reinforced because the agent anticipates lower returns in the future and decides to
save less as a result! The variance of consumption indeed increases in the top panel. The
correlation between consumption and stock market return innovations never drops below
0.9.9

                                         [Figure 2 about here.]

       If we use stock returns instead of firm value returns, Model 1 can match the correlation
moment for σ = 0.2, because of the large mean-reversion in stock returns (-0.92, see
table 1). However, the volatility of consumption innovations is off by the same order of
magnitude. Also, the mean reversion of stock returns is lower in the VAR(2) model and
at annual frequencies. In annual data, the implied correlation between consumption and
financial asset return innovations never falls below 0.4, even for σ = 0, twice the value in
the data (see figure 8 in section A.9 of the separate appendix.).
       We refer to these first two facts, respectively, as the consumption volatility and the
consumption correlation puzzle. These are both tied to the lack of a large financial wealth
effect on aggregate consumption. Of course, these model-implied innovations are also
the consumption innovations of an investor with only financial wealth, e.g. a retiree.
High values of the EIS look extremely implausible, judged by the implied consumption
volatility and correlations for such investor. This failure of the model reflects a market
   9
    There is little evidence for an EIS in excess of one. Browning, Hansen, and Heckman (2000) conduct
an extensive survey of the consumption literature that estimates the EIS off household data; they conclude
the consensus estimate is less than one, around .5 for food consumption. The estimates from macro data are
much lower. Hall (1988) concludes the EIS is close to zero. Vissing-Jorgenson (2002) finds EIS estimates of
around .3-.4 for stockholders and .8-.9 for bondholders; these are larger than the IES estimates for non-asset
holders. One exception is Vissing-Jorgensen and Attanasio (2003), where the EIS is estimated to be above
one, based on an estimation of an equation similar to (4), they find σ = 1.17 with standard error 0.47.


                                                     15
return measurement problem. The next section adds human wealth to the single agent’s
portfolio.


5    Adding Human Wealth

The market portfolio now includes a claim to the entire aggregate labor income stream.
The total market return can be decomposed into the return on financial assets Ra and
returns on human capital Ry . For log returns, we have:

                                     m               a         y
                                    rt+1 = (1 − νt )rt+1 + νt rt+1 ,                                   (9)


where νt is the ratio of human wealth to total wealth.
    The innovation to the return on human capital equals the innovation to the expected
present discounted value of labor income less the innovation to the present discounted value
of future returns. The Campbell (1991) decomposition gives:

                                                ∞
                                                X                                 ∞
                                                                                  X
              y          y                                                                  y
             rt+1 − Et [rt+1 ] = (Et+1 − Et )         ρj ∆yt+1+j − (Et+1 − Et )         ρj rt+1+j .   (10)
                                                j=0                               j=1


A windfall in human wealth returns is driven by higher expected labor income (cash flow)
growth or by lower expected risk premia (discount rates) on human wealth. In the notation
of the previous section: (y)t+1 = (dy )t+1 − (hy )t+1 . To the econometrician, the human
wealth discount rate news {(hy )} is unobserved, and therefore so are the current innovations
to human wealth returns {(y)}. In section 5.1, we introduce three benchmark models
                                                                          y
(Models 2, 3, and 4 ) that impose assumptions on the expected return Et [rt+1 ] and hence
{(hy )} to render the human wealth return news {(y)} observable. Each of these models
               y
specifies Et [rt+1 ] as a particular linear function of the state. We will show that all three
imply consumption moments that are at odds with the data, and these do not solve the
two puzzles illustrated for Model 1 above. Our strategy is to stay within the class of linear
                                                   y
models for the discount rate on human wealth, Et [rt+1 ], and to find, within this class, the
{(hy )} process that implies consumption moments consistent with the data.
    Section 5.1 introduces the three benchmark models. Before presenting our results,
we generalize the analysis to time-varying wealth shares (section 5.2). The results for
constant wealth shares are presented as a special case in section 5.3, and we present the
general results in section 5.4.



                                                       16
5.1   Models 2, 3, and 4: Benchmark Models of Expected Human Wealth
      Returns

Each of the three benchmark models differ only in the N × 1 vector C which measures how
the innovations to the expected human wealth returns relate to the state vector z:

                                            y
                                       Et [rt+1 ] = C 0 zt .


In Model 2, the model of Campbell (1996), expected future human wealth returns are
                                                     y            a ], ∀t. Because asset
assumed to equal expected future asset returns: Et [rt+1 ] = Et [rt+1
returns are the first element of the VAR, we have C 0 = e01 A. The second term in equation
(10) is −(ha )t+1 . In Model 3, the model of Shiller (1995), the discount rate on human capital
                 y
is constant Et [rt+1 ] = 0, ∀t, and therefore C 0 = 0. The second term in equation (10), news
about future discount rates, is zero. Finally, in Model 4, the model of Jagannathan and
Wang (1996), the innovation to human wealth return equals the innovation to the labor
income growth rate. The underlying assumptions are that (i) the discount rate on human
capital is constant, implying that the second term in equation (10) is zero, and (ii) labor
income growth is unpredictable, so that the first term in equation (10) is ∆yt+1 − Et ∆yt+1 .
The corresponding vector is C 0 = e02 A.
   Having specified three different models for the expected returns on human wealth, or
equivalently a C vector, we immediately obtain a process for {(hy )t }, the innovations to
expected future returns on human wealth:


                                  (hy )t = C 0 ρ(I − ρA)−1 εt ,                           (11)


and a process for {(y)t }, the current innovation to the return on human wealth:


                       (y)t = (dy )t − (hy )t ,

                              = e02 (I − ρA)−1 εt − C 0 ρ(I − ρA)−1 εt .                  (12)


For example, in the JW model, equation (12) implies that C 0 needs to equal e02 A for (y)t+1
to equal ∆yt+1 − Et ∆yt+1 = e02 εt+1 . We can now back out the moments of the implied
aggregate consumption innovations. In the next section, we do this in the context of a
model with time-varying wealth shares.




                                               17
5.2     Incorporating Time-Varying Wealth Shares

Campbell (1996) keeps the human wealth share constant at the labor income share: νt =
ν̄ = s̄. We extend his approach to deal with time-variation in the portfolio shares, a
necessary extension because we allow the expected returns on both assets to differ. We
first derive a linear expression for the human wealth share νt (zt ), and then we show how
to compute consumption innovations.


5.2.1    Computing the Human Wealth Share

When the expected return on human wealth is a linear function of the state (with loading
vector C), the log dividend-price ratio on human wealth dpy is also linear in the state. In
particular, the demeaned log dividend-price ratio on human wealth is a linear function of
the state z with a N × 1 loading vector B:

                                            ∞
                                            X
                     dpyt − E[dpyt ] = Et              y
                                                  ρj (rt+j − ∆yt+j )
                                            j=1

                                     = ρ(C − e02 A)(I − ρA)−1 zt ≡ B 0 zt .
                                             0
                                                                                             (13)


The demeaned log dividend-price ratio on financial assets is also a linear function of the
state, because it is simply the third element in the VAR: dpat −E[dpat ] = e03 zt , and the price-
dividend ratio for the market is the wealth-consumption ratio; it is a weighted average of
the price-dividend ratio for human wealth and for financial wealth:

                                      W    Py     Pa
                                        C=    Y +    D.
                                      C    Y      D

Finally, the human wealth to total wealth ratio is given by:

                              Py                    y
                              Y Y           e−dpt st             1
                       νt =   W
                                    = −dpy         a        =         ,                      (14)
                              CC
                                               −dp
                                     e t st + e t (1 − st )   1 + ext
                                                          ³          ´                   ¡ y¢
which is a logistic function of xt = dpyt − dpat + log        1−st
                                                               st     , where dpy = − log PY . We
recall that s denotes the labor income share st = Yt /Ct with mean s̄. When dpat = dpyt , the
human wealth share equals the labor income share νt = st . In general, νt moves around
not only when the labor income share changes, but also when the difference between the
log dividend price ratios on human and financial wealth changes. It is increasing in the
former, and decreasing in the latter.
   In section A.2.2 of the appendix, we derive a linear approximation to the logistic func-

                                               18
tion in (14). The demeaned human wealth share ν̃t ≡ νt − ν̄ = D0 zt is a linear function of
the state, with loading vector D given by:


                                D ≡ e6 − s̄(1 − s̄)B + s̄(1 − s̄)e3 .                      (15)


5.2.2    Computing Consumption Innovations

When wealth shares are time-varying the agent considers the effect of (future) changes
in the portfolio share of each asset when she adjusts consumption to news about returns.
Combining equations (4), (9), and (10), the expression for consumption innovations be-
comes:


                      (c)t+1 = (1 − νt )(a)t+1 + νt (dy )t+1 − νt (hy )t+1
                                                ∞
                                                X
                          +(1 − σ)(Et+1 − Et )       ρj (1 − νt+j )rt+1+j
                                                                    a

                                                   j=1
                                                         ∞
                                                         X               y
                                +(1 − σ)(Et+1 − Et )            ρj νt+j rt+1+j .           (16)
                                                         j=1


Future returns are now weighted by future -random- portfolio shares. To deal with this
complication, we define the news about weighted future financial asset returns and human
wealth returns as follows:
                                                         ∞
                                                         X
                             1
                            Wt+1 = (Et+1 − Et )                ρj ν̃t+j rt+1+j
                                                                         a

                                                         j=1
                                                         ∞
                                                         X
                             2                                           y
                            Wt+1 = (Et+1 − Et )                ρj ν̃t+j rt+1+j .
                                                         j=1


This helps because these two objects have a recursive structure. Using these definitions,
the expression for consumption innovations reduces to:


             (c)t+1 = (1 − ν̄ − ν̃t )(a)t+1 + (ν̃t + ν̄)(dy )t+1 − (ν̃t + σν̄)(hy )t+1

                             +(1 − σ)(1 − ν̄)(ha )t+1 − (1 − σ)(Wt+1
                                                                 1      2
                                                                     − Wt+1 ).             (17)


When the human wealth share is constant (νt = ν̄ or ν̃ = 0), we obtain the simpler
expression


          (c)t+1 = (1 − ν̄)(a)t+1 + ν̄(dy )t+1 − σν̄(hy )t+1 + (1 − σ)(1 − ν̄)(ha )t+1 .   (18)



                                                  19
Consumption responds one-for-one to news about current asset returns, weighted with
the capital income share, and to news about discounted current and future labor income
growth, weighted with the labor income share, regardless of the EIS. As in Model 1, the
response to news about future asset returns is governed by 1 − σ. The response to news
about future human wealth returns is governed by −σ. This reflects the direct effect of
future human wealth risk premia on consumption and the indirect effect on the current
human wealth returns (see equation 10). In the log case (σ = 1), variation in future returns
or in future human wealth shares has no bearing on consumption innovations today. In
any other case, our single agent responds to news about future returns weighted by the
portfolio shares.
   We compute the function Wt+1    1  and Wt+12   using value function iteration. Define the
news about weighted future asset returns as W   f 1 = Et+1 P∞ ρj ν̃t+j ra             f2
                                                  t+1           j=1        t+1+j and Wt+1 =
     P∞ j         y
Et+1 j=1 ρ ν̃t+j rt+1+j . In section A.2.3 of the appendix we exploit the recursive structure
   f 1 and the linearity of the human wealth share to show that W
of W                                                                 f 1 can be stated as a
quadratic function of the state:

                               ft+1
                               W 1             0
                                    (zt+1 ) = zt+1 P zt+1 + d,


where P solves the matrix Sylvester equation


                                    Pj+1 = R + ρA0 Pj A.                                  (19)


We solve this equation by iteration, starting from P0 = 0, and R = ρDe01 A. The constant d
                                    ρ
in the value function equals d =   1−ρ tr(P Σ).   This also implies that the news about future
returns is a quadratic function of the VAR innovations and the matrix P :

                                                                   N X
                                                                   X N
                                       f 1 (zt+1 ) = ε0 P εt+1 −
             W 1 (zt+1 ) = (Et+1 − Et )W                                      Σij Pij .
                                        t+1           t+1
                                                                    i=1 j=1


which turns out to be a simple quadratic function of the VAR shocks, their covariance
                                                             f 2 and W 2 , replacing R
matrix Σ, and the matrix P . In the same manner we calculate W
in equation (19) by ρDC 0 .


5.3   Results With Constant Wealth Shares

To gain intuition, we first shut down the time-variation in the human wealth share and
estimate equation (18) for the three benchmark models. As in the case of Model 1, Mod-

                                              20
els 2, 3, & 4 cannot match the low volatility of consumption innovations and their low
correlation with financial asset return innovations. To understand this failure, we must
study these models’ implications for human wealth returns. One particularly useful way is
to reverse the logic and to impute the part of actual consumption innovations that is not
due to news about financial returns or labor income growth, to news about future human
wealth returns: We fix a value of the EIS parameter σ and we back out the innovations
to future human capital returns that are implied by the observed aggregate consumption
innovations. The moments of consumption are matched by construction. We can now
trace back the failure of the benchmark models to the difference in the moments of human
wealth returns they imply and the moments that are consistent with consumption data.
The consumption data clearly tell us that good news for current financial wealth returns
is bad news for current human wealth returns. The benchmark models imply a positive
correlation instead.


Failure of the Benchmark Models Table 2 summarizes the moments of consumption
and human capital return innovations for quarterly data, and for a calibration with constant
human wealth share ν̄ = s̄ = .70, and EIS of σ = .28, a compromise between the macro-
estimates of Hall (1988) -close to zero- and the consensus estimate of .5 for micro data
(see Browning, Hansen, and Heckman (2000)). The left panel reports the results using
firm value returns; the right panel is for stock returns. Columns 1-3 in each panel report
the properties of human wealth returns and consumption for Model 2 (Campbell (1996)),
Model 3 (Shiller (1995)), and Model 4 (Jagannathan and Wang (1996)).

                                    [Table 2 about here.]

   Because it equates expected future human wealth and financial wealth returns, Model
2 sets: Vhy = Vha , Corra,hy = Corra,ha , Corrdy ,hy = Corrdy ,ha , Corrha ,hy = 1. To un-
derstand the implications of these assumptions, Table 3 lists the sign of the effect of each
variable’s variance and all covariances on the variance of model-implied consumption Vc and
its covariance with financial return innovations Vc,a . For example, a positive (4, 4) entry in
the top panel means that a higher Vhy implies a higher Vc . Indeed, for Model 2, the news
about future expected returns on human capital is very volatile; as volatile as the news
about financial returns. This volatility is one contributing factor to the high variance of
consumption. The negative (1, 4) entries in the top and bottom panels show that Corra,hy
has a negative effect on Vc and Corrc,a . But since Model 2 sets it equal to Corra,ha , the


                                              21
mean reversion in the financial return data acts to increase the variance of consumption in-
novations and the correlation of financial return innovations and consumption innovations.
Intuitively, when good news in the stock market also leads to lower future risk premia on
human wealth, positive consumption responses are magnified. Likewise, Corrdy ,hy nega-
tively affects Vc and Corrc,a , but because ha and dy are negatively correlated in the data,
the assumption Corrdy ,hy = Corrdy ,ha again increases Vc and Corrc,a . The only assump-
tion that helps to reduce the variance of consumption and the correlation with financial
asset returns is Corrha ,hy = 1 (when σ < 1). The net result is that aggregate consumption
innovations in Model 2 are much too volatile (by a factor of 4.3 in panel A and 4.8 in panel
B) and much too highly correlated with return innovations (by a factor of 5.6 in panel A
and 5.2 in panel B).

                                       [Table 3 about here.]

       We expect Model 3 to do better by assuming a constant discount rate for human capital,
because this implies that Vhy = Corra,hy = Corrdy ,hy = Corra,hy = 0, all of which help
to lower the variance and correlation moment compared to Model 2. Indeed, the variance
of consumption is 4.30 per quarter and the correlation moment is .865, lower than the
6.05 and .946 of Model 2. However, they are still far away from the observed magnitudes.
When we use stock returns instead of the returns on firm value (panel B), the predicted
correlation of innovations in consumption decreases to 0.518, because stock market returns
display more mean reversion. The variance of consumption news is still off by an order of
magnitude, and the correlation by a factor of 2.8.
       Model 4 further improves the results. News in future human wealth returns equals news
in future labor income growth. This means Vhy ≈ Vdy .10 In the data, news in future labor
income growth is not very volatile, especially compared to news in future financial asset
returns. Also Corrhy ,a ≈ Corrdy ,a > 0, a good assumption, because we know from table 3
that Corrhy ,a > 0 helps to lower the volatility and correlation of consumption innovations
when the IES is smaller than one. Yet, quantitatively, these correlations are too small in
absolute magnitude to improve on Model 3.
       The variance of innovations to current human wealth returns (Vy ) and their correlation
with financial asset returns (Corry,a ) are good summary statistics of our findings. Model
2 does worse than the other two because the high volatility of human capital returns and
their high correlation with innovations in financial asset returns impute too much volatility
                                         P                                         P∞ j
  10
    More precisely: Vhy = V [(Et+1 − Et ) ∞      j
                                           j=1 ρ ∆yt+1+j ]. Note that (Et+1 − Et )  j=1 ρ ∆yt+1+j 6= d
                                                                                                       y

because of the summation index that starts at 1 instead of 0.


                                                  22
to consumption and too much correlation with financial wealth returns. The difference in
the correlation moment is especially stark using stock returns (panel B): Corry,a = .93 for
Model 2, 0.49 for Model 3, and 0.07 for Model 4.


       Lower Frequencies The same exercise using annual data produces similar results;
the discrepancy between the model and the data increases at annual frequencies because the
mean reversion in stock returns decreases. The lowest standard deviation for consumption
news is 3.74% for Model 4, compared to .80 % in the data. The results are in Table 16
in section A.9 of the separate appendix. We also studied bi-annual data and we obtained
similar results11 . The results for model-implied human wealth shares and consumption
display exactly the same features as in Table 16. We conclude that sampling consumption
at lower frequencies does not alleviate the puzzles nor changes the solution.


       Parameter Robustness These results are robust to plausible changes in parameter
values. Figure 3 plots the model-implied standard deviation of consumption innovations
and the correlation of consumption innovations with innovations in financial market returns
for different values of σ (the labor share ν̄ is .70). None of the models comes close to
matching the variance and correlation, even for very low σ. Figure 4 shows that a labor
income share of close to 1 is needed to match both consumption moments. For example, an
increase in the average labor income share from 0.70 to .85 brings the standard deviation
of consumption in Model 4 down to 2.3 times its value in the data; the correlation is still
much too high (0.78).

                                        [Figure 3 about here.]

                                        [Figure 4 about here.]


Consumption-Consistent Human Wealth Returns Sofar we have been unable to
bring the model’s moments closer to matching those in the data. We now treat the ex-
pected returns component of human wealth return innovations as a residual and we reverse-
engineer a human wealth return process that can match the consumption data. The in-
novations in this period’s consumption growth can be recovered from the VAR residuals
(see equation (6)). Plugging these consumption innovations back in the household’s linear
  11
    While the correlation between bi-annual consumption growth and bi-annual stock returns increases to
0.26, the correlation with bi-annual firm value returns is 0.00. Details are available from the authors upon
request.



                                                    23
policy rule (18), we can back out the implied news in future human capital returns:

                       1
         (hy )t+1 ≡       [(1 − ν̄)(a)t+1 + ν̄(dy )t+1 + (1 − σ)(1 − ν̄)(ha )t+1 − (c)t+1 ] .   (20)
                      σν̄

From this (hy ) and the data on labor income growth, we form innovations in current human
wealth returns (y)t+1 = (dy )t+1 − (hy )t+1 .
   The fourth column of each panel of Table 2 reports the properties of human wealth
returns implied by consumption data and the baseline parameter calibration ν̄ = .70 and
σ = .28 (label Reverse). What are the properties of human wealth returns that enable
us to match the two consumption moments? The main feature is the negative correlation
between innovations to human and financial wealth returns: Corry,a < 0. It is helpful to
break up the human wealth return (y) into news about cash flows on human wealth (dy )
and news about discount rates (hy ).


            Cov[y, a] = Cov[dy , a] − Cov[hy , a] < 0
                        | {z } | {z }
                                   ⊕                    ⊕
                          = Cov[d , d ] − Cov[dy , ha ] − Cov[hy , da ] + Cov[hy , ha ]
                                       y    a
                            | {z } | {z              } |      {z } |          {z     }
                                ª             ª               ⊕               ª
                            |           {z           } |                {z           }
                                           cash flows                discount rates


In the data, periods with good news about current financial asset returns tend to also be
periods with good news about current and future labor income growth (Corrdy ,a > 0, see
Table 1). To prevent our single agent from going on a consumption binge, good news for
current financial asset returns needs to coincide with higher future risk premia on human
wealth. That is exactly what our algorithm accomplishes (Corrhy ,a = .84 > 0). If we dig
a bit deeper, we can further decompose each term into two underlying components.
   Decomposing the first (cash flows) term, we uncover two opposing effects: good news
about future cash flows for human wealth coincides with bad news about future cash flows
for financial assets -this is the cash flow channel we mentioned earlier- but also with lower
future risk premia on financial assets (Corrdy ,da < 0 and Corrdy ,ha < 0). Both are features
of the data. The former helps to keep the volatility of consumption in check, but the latter
hurts.
   This brings us to the decomposition of the second (discount rate) term. The algorithm
fights this last effect by choosing future discount rates on human wealth (hy ) that are high
when expected future dividend growth is high (Corrhy ,da > 0) and future risk premia on
financial assets are low (Corrhy ,ha < 0). This is the discount rate channel. So, good news


                                                        24
on Wall Street is Bad news on Main street, both for cash-flows (first term) and for discount
rates (second term).
   Of our three benchmark models, only Model 4 delivers the same correlation pattern for
hy as in column Reverse: Corra,hy and Corrhy ,dy are positive and Corrha ,hy is negative,
but none of them imply Corra,y < 0.


   Volatility of Human Wealth returns For the benchmark parameters and firm
value returns, innovations to current and future human wealth returns Vy and Vhy are highly
volatile, 1.4 and 1.8 times as volatile as the innovations to current and future financial asset
returns respectively. On the other hand, if we use stock returns instead, human wealth
returns are less volatile because stock returns are more strongly mean reverting. The
volatility proportionality factors are .85 and .75. As we show in the next section, the
volatility of human wealth returns also declines with the EIS and the labor income share.


The Return on the Market Portfolio In the model with constant wealth shares,
innovations in the current market return are (m)t+1 = (1 − ν̄)(a)t+1 + ν̄(y)t+1 and news in
future market returns are given by (hm )t+1 = (1 − ν̄)(ha )t+1 + ν̄(hy )t+1 (see equation 9).
The bottom four rows of table 2 display the moments of the market return.
   In the three benchmark models, innovations in the market return are positively corre-
lated with innovations in financial asset returns and human wealth returns. In contrast, in
column Reverse, good news in financial markets is bad news for the current market return
Corrm,a < 0, simply because Corry,a < 0 and human wealth represents 70% of the market
portfolio. In panel B, where we use stock returns instead, Corrm,a is slightly positive, but
we show in extensions below that this is not a robust finding. In both cases, the market
return is strongly mean reverting Corrm,hm < −.99. When σ < 1, returns must display
strong (multivariate) mean-reversion to lower consumption volatility and its correlation
with the market return. Since there is not enough mean-reversion in financial returns,
our reverse-engineered discount rates for human wealth create more mean-reversion in the
market return, in order to match the consumption moments. We found the same results
for annual data (Table 16 in section A.9 of the separate appendix). The only difference is
that Corrm,a is now also negative for stock returns.




                                              25
5.4      Results with Time-Varying Wealth Shares

In this section, we show that the previous results are preserved when the human wealth
share vary over time (as described in section 5.2). We briefly revisit each of the three
benchmark models, and show that accounting for time-varying wealth shares does not help
much. Then, we estimate the vector C, which determines expected returns on human
wealth, that most closely matches the moments of consumption. As before, the resulting
human wealth returns are negatively correlated with financial asset returns.
       Figure 5 plots the human wealth share over time for the three benchmark models,
alongside the labor income share. Models 3 & 4 imply quite some variation in the human
wealth share, because the risk premia on human wealth and financial wealth are not or
weakly correlated; e.g. in the 90’s, the human wealth share is very low, while it is much
higher in the 80’s. In Model 2, the human wealth share follows the exact opposite pattern.

                                       [Figure 5 about here.]

       Columns 1-3 of Table 4 report the model-implied moments of consumption, human
wealth returns and the market return for the three benchmark models. The table has
the same structure as Table 2, but now with time-varying wealth shares. As is clear from
equations (11) and (12), the processes for news in future and current human wealth returns
only depend on the vector C, and not the human wealth share (vector D). Since C is fixed
for the benchmark models, the first seven rows of Table 4 are identical to the first seven
rows of Table 2,12 but the model-implied consumption innovations, specified in equation
(17), do depend on the wealth shares. Rows 8 and 9 show that allowing for time-varying
human wealth shares does not help to bring the benchmark models’ consumption moments
closer to the data. In panel A (firm value returns), Vc and Corrc,a are slightly lower, but,
in panel B, Vc is slightly higher. As before, the reason is that all three models imply a
high correlation between financial asset returns and the market return (row 11). Because
financial asset returns are so volatile, consumption ends up being too volatile and too
highly correlated with financial asset returns.

                                        [Table 4 about here.]
  12
    In Model 2, the conditional moments of future asset returns and human wealth returns are identical.
As a result, (hy )t = (ha )t , which implies Wt1 − Wt2 = 0 for all t. The latter can be shown by applying
    law of iterated expectations. In Model 3, hy = 0 and Wt2 = 0. In Model 4 model, W2 = (Et+1 −
the P
Et ) ∞     j
      j=1 ρ ν̃t+j ∆yt+1+j .




                                                   26
Model 5: Consumption Growth Accounting As in section 5.3, we now ask what
properties human wealth returns must have to imply consumption moments consistent
with the data. When human wealth shares vary over time, the procedure of backing
out those properties directly from consumption data (equation 20) is no longer available.
Instead, we choose the vector C, which relates the expected return on human wealth to
                       y
the state vector, Et [rt+1 ] = C 0 zt , to minimize the distance between the model-implied
consumption volatility and correlation moments and the same moments in the data. This
vector then delivers human wealth return processes {hyt } and {yt } from equations (11) and
(12). Once we pinned down the vector C, we can also solve for the human wealth share
from equations (13) and (15). For a given value of the EIS, equation (17) delivers the
consumption innovations, which we use to compute the consumption moments.13 We label
the model with the C that minimizes the distance between consumption in the model and
in the data Model 5 ; its moments are reported in the fourth column of Table 4 for σ = .28.
       Whereas time-varying wealth shares did not change the results for Models 2, 3, & 4
much, the results for Model 5 are somewhat different from the ones in column Reverse of
Table 2. Time-variation in the human wealth share allows the model to match the moments
of consumption (rows 8 and 9) for human wealth returns that are twenty percent less
volatile in panels A and B. As a result, the market return processes are much less volatile
as well. When the dividend yield on human wealth increases relative to the dividend yield
on financial wealth, future returns on human wealth are predicted to be higher than future
returns on financial wealth, but, this is counteracted by the lower human wealth share (νt
decreases in dpyt − dpat ). Time variation in the human wealth share reduces the volatility
of the market return, and hence consumption. Figure 6 plots the model-implied human
wealth share at the optimal parameter values, alongside the observed labor income share.
The human wealth share is more than twice as volatile as the labor income share.

                                       [Figure 6 about here.]

       The main findings are strengthened: The human wealth return process is consistently
negatively correlated with financial asset returns (Corrhy ,ha < 0 and especially Corry,a <
0). These correlations are more negative than with constant wealth shares.


Varying the EIS         We also investigated the sensitivity of the results to the choice of the
EIS parameter σ. The results are reported in table 5. Reading across the columns, for
  13
    We use a non-linear least squares algorithm to find the vector C that minimizes the distance between
the two model-implied and the two observed consumption moments. Because the moments are highly
non-linear in the N × 1 vector C, we cannot rule out that the C vector is not uniquely identified.


                                                  27
each of the calibrations, we get strong negative correlations between news about current
and future financial and human wealth returns, as well as high and positive correlations
Corra,hy and Corry,ha . Good news about current financial asset returns raises risk premia
on future human wealth returns and good news about current human wealth returns in-
creases future risk premia on financial assets. These features enable Model 5 to match the
smooth consumption series and its low correlation with financial asset returns (rows 8 and
9). The volatility of human wealth returns decreases in σ; Vhy and Vy are much lower than
in Table for σ = .28.

                                     [Table 5 about here.]

   What also changes across the columns are the properties of the market return. The
correlation between innovations in the market return and innovations in the human wealth
returns is 0.9 in the case of σ = .5 (column 1, row 12), whereas the correlation with
innovations in financial asset returns is -.7 (row 11). The implied market returns are
strongly mean-reverting, as shown by the correlation between m and hm of -.95 (row 13).
In column 2, σ = 1 and the consumption innovation equation (16) specializes to:


    (c)t+1 = (1 − νt )(a)t+1 + νt (dy )t+1 − νt (hy )t+1 = (1 − νt )(a)t+1 + νt (y)t+1 = (m)t .


Indeed, we find that Vc = Va and Vc,a = Vm,a . When the agent is myopic, her consumption
responds one-for-one to innovations in the market return. In the more-than-log case (σ =
1.5 in column 3), the market return must display mean aversion to match the consumption
moments (Corrm,hm > 0), and this is accomplished by choosing a human wealth return
process that implies large enough positive correlations Corra,hy and Corry,ha to overcome
the mean reversion in financial asset returns and human wealth returns (Corra,ha < 0 and
Corry,hy < 0). As σ increases, the negative correlation between future expected financial
and human wealth returns needs to be larger in absolute value, implying in turn a more
positive correlation between y and ha . Intuitively, as the agent becomes more willing to
substitute over time and σ > 1, only an increase in human wealth risk premia can prevent
him from consuming more when risk premia on financial returns go down.


Robustness: Different Income Measures Our results are robust to including pro-
prietor’s income in the income measure and to excluding government and non-financial
employees’ wages (see section A.3 in separate appendix). Importantly, when we a use a



                                                28
broader measure of labor income, the implied volatility decreases by roughly fifty percent,
as a result of the increase in the average share of human wealth in the market.


6     Long-Run Implications

Sofar, we focused on matching the high-frequency moments of consumption and returns,
but the model also has important implications for the joint distribution of consumption
and market returns over longer horizons. That is the focus of this section. We start by
checking whether imposing co-integration between consumption, financial wealth and labor
income changes our results, and we find it does not. In a second step, we focus on the
relation between consumption growth and market returns in the long run.


6.1   Imposing Cointegration

Lettau and Ludvigson (2001a) find evidence for a long-run relation between consumption,
household net worth, and labor income, and call the deviation from this co-integration
relationship cay. In this section, we investigate whether the results change when cay is
added to the state vector z. When consumption, financial wealth and human wealth are
co-integrated, this imposes restrictions on the state transition matrix A and on the errors
ε that must be imposed. We focus on the case with a constant human wealth share ν̄ and
find that all our results are qualitatively unchanged.


Constructing cay      Our measure of financial wealth at is either the CRSP stock market
capitalization (corresponding to our measure of stock returns) or the total market value
of non-farm non-financial business (corresponding to firm value returns). Appendix A.2.5
shows that in our model, the consumption-wealth ratio can be written as


                                cayt = ct − (1 − ν̄)at − ν̄yt .                       (21)


Consistent with the previous analysis, we set ν̄ equal to the sample average of 0.7317 and
use our quarterly data on (c, a, y) to compute cay.
    The correct specification of the state vector is now a Vector Error Correction Model
(VECM):
                                zt+1 = Azt + Γcay t + εt+1 ,                          (22)

with innovation covariance matrix E[εε0 ] = Σ. The dimensions of Γ and cay are N × 1 and


                                              29
1 × T . Following Cochrane (1994), we can rewrite this VECM in VAR form:
                                    
                                                       
                             z        A Γ      z      ²
                            t+1  =        t  +  t+1                              (23)
                            cay t+1   Ã Γ̃ cay t     ²̃t+1

where


                                Ã = A7. − (1 − ν̄)A1. − ν̄A2. ,

                               Γ̃ = 1 + Γ7 − (1 − ν̄)Γ1 − ν̄Γ2 ,

                            ε̃ = (Σ7. − (1 − ν̄)Σ1. − ν̄Σ2. ) ε,


and A7. denotes the 7th row of the matrix A.
   The co-integration relationship imposes restrictions on the last equation of the cd
                                                                                     ay-
augmented VAR. We estimate A, Γ, and Σ from the VECM in (22) and construct the
augmented VAR according to equation (23). The rest of the analysis goes through as
before, but with the augmented VAR. Appendix A.2.5 fills in the details.


Results Table 6 displays the moments of consumption and human wealth returns implied
by the models with human wealth. The benchmark Models 2, 3 & 4 have slightly worse
implications for the two consumption moments. Clearly adding cay and imposing co-
integration does not help to fix these models. Our model in the last column matches the
consumption moments by construction: We obtain a stronger negative correlation between
both current human and financial wealth innovations and news about future innovations
than in Table 2. Financial asset return and market return innovations are now also strongly
negatively correlated in panel B, which uses stock returns. These results strengthen our
conclusion that good news on Wall Street must be Bad news on Main Street.

                                      [Table 6 about here.]


Predictability We checked that our cay measure also forecasts future financial asset
returns, both firm value returns and stock returns. In a univariate forecasting regression,
the R2 goes from 3.5% at 1-quarter horizon to 30.2% at 5-year horizons in the firm value
return equation. The predictability coefficients are statistically significant at the 1% level
at all horizons. For stock returns, the R2 even goes up to 49.7% at the 5-year horizon.
This confirms the findings of Lettau and Ludvigson (2001a). We also computed the actual



                                                30
consumption-wealth ratio from the model, and we found that it predicts stock returns with
the right sign14 .


6.2       Long-Run Consumption and Market Return Risk

Finally, the model imposes an additional restriction on the low-frequency properties of
consumption and the market return that we have ignored sofar, and this restriction does
not depend on the household’s preferences.


6.2.1      Violates Long-Run Restriction

The household budget constraint (2) and the stationarity of the consumption-wealth ratio
imply the following restriction on the long-run effect of news about market returns and
consumption growth:

                                     ∞
                                     X                                  ∞
                                                                        X
                      (Et+1 − Et )         ρj rt+1+j
                                               m
                                                       = (Et+1 − Et )         ρj ∆ct+1+j ,               (24)
                                     j=0                                j=0


In the long run, only cash flows determine the returns on the market -not discount rates.
The force of this restriction is that it does not depend on preferences, only on the budget
constraint. However, as pointed out by Hansen, Roberds, and Sargent (1991) in a different
model, this restriction cannot be exactly satisfied for all possible shocks in the model
with constant wealth shares, if the VAR includes labor income growth and consumption
growth15 , but we can test the restriction in the case of time-varying wealth shares. In
what follows, only news about future cash flows, labor income growth and dividend growth,
matters.
       For Model 5, the correlation between (m)t + (hm )t and (dc )t is .11 for firm value returns
and .12 for stock returns in quarterly data, but the market response is about twice as
volatile. This correlation increases to .39 at annual frequencies for firm value returns and
.36 for stock returns over the 1947-2004 sample and even .69 for stock returns over the
1930-2004 sample. On the other hand, the correlation is negative in the model without
human wealth. Increasing the labor income share (s̄ = ν̄) lines up the long-run responses of
consumption and the market return even better. This is because, in the data, the long-run
  14
    Detailed Results available.
  15
    It is ruled out by the VAR identification. Appendix A.2.6 explains the details of this argument. So, for
the models with constant wealth shares, we cannot test the long-run restriction, because of the linearity,
but we can test it in the case of time-varying wealth shares. The reason is that both (m)t + (hm )t and (dc )t
are quadratic, not linear, functions of the innovations εt (see appendix A.2.6).




                                                       31
responses of labor income and consumption growth are more similar. Putting more weight
(higher ν̄) on the cash-flow news of human wealth brings the left-hand side of the long-run
restriction closer to the right-hand side, cash-flow news in consumption.
   So, bringing in human wealth delivers a much better measure of long run risk. Still
we do not completely eliminate the excess volatility of market returns in the long run. A
resolution of this long-run volatility puzzle and formal testing of the restriction is left for
future work.


6.2.2   Backing out Human Wealth Returns

Instead of using labor income growth data in the VAR, one way around the violation of
the long-run restriction is to back out news about current and future labor income growth
(dy ) from the long-run restriction itself, using consumption and financial returns data:

                                           1 c          1 − ν̄ a
                              (dy )t+1 =      (d )t+1 −       (d )t+1 .                   (25)
                                           ν̄             ν̄

   This way the long-run restriction is satisfied by construction. Simply imposing this
restriction turns out to reduce the distance between the Shiller (Model 3 ) and JW (Model
4 ) benchmark models with human wealth and our reverse-engineered model (Model 5 ).
Section A.4 in the separate appendix takes a closer look at this new measure of human
wealth cash flow news, dy .
   The first three columns of each panel of Table 7 display the results for the three bench-
mark models of human wealth; panel A reports the results using firm value returns, panel
B reports the results for stock returns. Remarkably, for Models 3 &4, the model-implied
variance of consumption dropped to only 1.5 and 1.3, compared to 0.3 in the data, while
the correlation with financial asset return innovations falls by half relative to Table 2 for
all three models. The reason for this dramatic improvement is that the increased mean-
reversion in market returns, especially in Models 3 & 4 (last row). Financial and human
wealth returns are negatively correlated for these two models, whereas before, using the dy
extracted from labor income growth data, they were not. This feature is a critical ingre-
dient to generating consumption innovations that are smooth and not too correlated with
financial return innovations. Indeed, in the last column, our reverse engineered human
wealth return is negatively correlated with financial wealth returns. Comparing column
Reverse to column Model 4, we see that they are much more similar than in our previ-
ous exercise in Table 2. In short, because Corrdy ,a < 0 for firm value returns, we need



                                                 32
less of a counter-acting effect from human wealth discount rates; Corrhy ,a is moderately
positive. Model 4 implies such correlation. The reduced reliance on the discount rate
channel is reassuring, because the discount rates channel is to some extent a measure of
our ignorance.
    The results using stock returns, reported in panel B, are quite different (see section A.4
in the separate appendix for a complete discussion). In this case, Models 3 & 4 actually
do worse than before, and the importance of the discount rate channel in the matching
exercise increases. Clearly, especially for long-run risk, the precise measurement of financial
returns is critically important. This deserves further study.

                                    [Table 7 about here.]

    To conclude, in this section we used the long-run restriction to back out (permanent)
cash-flow effects of human wealth (dy ), and we used the short-run variance and correlation
moments to back out the (temporary) discount rate effects (hy ). We found even stronger
evidence that the returns on human and financial wealth must be negatively correlated than
in section 5, but at least for the broad measure of financial returns, imposing this long-run
restriction helps to close the gap between the benchmark models and the reverse-engineered
model.


7     The Consumption-Consistent CAPM

This section examines the time-series and cross-sectional asset pricing implications of us-
ing model-implied market return and consumption instead of actual consumption: For
each model, we impose additional discipline by insisting on using the consumption innova-
tions implied by the model. Only in our reverse-engineered model does the model-implied
consumption series coincide exactly with actual consumption in the data.


7.1   Time-Series Properties of the SDF

A logical first question is whether the models we considered can price a broad stock mar-
ket return and a risk-free rate. Each of these models implies a different time series for
consumption innovations and the market return, and hence a different stochastic discount
factor M :                       µ                              ¶
                                           θ                m
                       Mt+1 = exp θ log β − ∆ct+1 + (θ − 1)rt+1
                                           σ



                                              33
We compute the stochastic discount factor for each model and study the moments of the
Euler equation errors for asset i

                                       i
                                                     ¡ i ¢
                                  errort+1 = Mt+1 exp rt+1 − 1,


where ri is either the real log gross return on the value-weighted CRSP stock market
portfolio (rs ) or the real log gross return on a 3-month T-bill (rf ). Table 8 compares Euler
equation errors across the different models presented in the previous section. The first
column is Model 1, the model with financial wealth only νt = 0. The market return is
simply the financial asset return. The second and third columns are Model 2 without and
with time-varying human wealth share. Columns four and five report Model 3 without and
with time-varying human wealth share. Likewise, columns six and seven are for Model 4
model, and the last two columns are for our model. Column 8 is our model with constant
human wealth shares (labeled Reverse): here we use actual consumption data to back out
a process for hy .16 For our model with time-varying wealth shares (last column), we choose
the optimal vector C to match the variance of consumption innovations, the correlation of
consumption innovations with financial asset return innovations, as well as the correlation
between consumption innovations in the model and in the data.17
       In all models, we used the broader financial return measure, the firm value return,
to compute the market return, and we consider two values for the EIS : σ = .28 (our
benchmark) and σ = 1.12 (the value proposed by Vissing-Jorgensen and Attanasio (2003)).
For each of these models, we find the value for γ that minimizes the root mean squared
pricing error on the stock return and the risk-free rate. This value is reported in the first
row of table 8. Clearly, consumption growth is most volatile in Model 1 without human
wealth and least volatile in model Reverse. Not surprisingly, the value for γ is highest in our
two models (last two columns) than in Model 1. In the reverse-engineered model (Reverse),
consumption growth is identical to observed consumption growth, and the market return
process, is the one implied by actual consumption. For that model, we find γ = 23.09.
The return on stocks is predicted to be 28 basis points too high; i.e. 2.54% per quarter
  16
     In this procedure, we back out hy from consumption data (equation 20). We form innovations in
current human wealth returns from y = dy − hy . To form realized market returns rm = (1 − ν)ra + νr y ,
we need realized human wealth returns ry . Realized human wealth returns are the sum of innovations in
current human wealth returns y and expected human wealth returns. Since this procedure does not identify
expected human wealth returns, we assume that they are the same as in Model 4, the model the closest to
ours. This choice does not affect the RMSE in column 7.
  17
     The matching exercise is successful in that it yields a model-implied consumption growth process that
has a correlation of 0.87 with consumption growth in the data (see last but one row). The downside is that
consumption is now 3 times too volatile.


                                                   34
instead of the observed 2.26% per quarter. The risk-free rate is predicted to be 21 basis
points too low; i.e. 0.00% per quarter instead of 0.21% per quarter. While our model
certainly makes progress on the equity premium and the risk-free rate puzzle, it does not
completely resolve it. For comparison, the pricing errors in Campbell’s model (Model 2 in
first column) are less than half the size, but this superior performance comes from the fact
that consumption growth in that model is 5 times too volatile and only weakly correlated
with consumption growth in the data.
   In the case of a high EIS, the pricing errors are mostly much larger, except for Model
5, the model with time-varying wealth shares and human wealth discount rates chosen to
match the actual consumption data as close as possible. It predicts an expected stock
return that is 67 basis points too low and a risk-free rate that is 66 basis points too high.
So it comes reasonably close to matching the risk-free rate and the equity premium for γ of
only 4. But, as will become apparent in the next section, this model with its mean-averting
market return for σ > 1, will fail in pricing a broader cross-section of assets.

                                    [Table 8 about here.]


7.2   Cross-Section of Size and Value Portfolios

We start from the linearized Euler equation for asset i:

                                          Vii     θ
                            i
                        Et rt+1 − rtf +         =   Vic + (1 − θ)Vim                    (26)
                                           2      σ
                                                = γVim + (γ − 1)Vihm                    (27)


In an Epstein-Zin asset pricing model, the expected excess return (corrected for one-half
its variance) is determined by two risk factors: the covariance of return i with aggregate
consumption growth Vic and the covariance of return i with the market return Vim (equation
27). Campbell (1993) substitutes out consumption, replacing Vic by Vim + (1 − σ)Vihm ,
which leads to asset pricing equation (27). We have argued that the consumption processes
in the three canonical models are very different from the observed consumption process.
This will lead to a market return process, different from the one in our consumption-
consistent model. Therefore, we stay with equation (26), and evaluate the performance of
the three canonical models and our model in pricing the cross-section of stock returns.
   Taking unconditional expectations of (26) delivers an unconditional asset pricing equa-
                                                                     i
tion. Following Campbell, we define the excess returns on I assets ert+1    i
                                                                         = rt+1 − rtf
with unconditional means µi . Both vectors have dimension I × 1. We define demeaned

                                                35
         i
returns ηt+1     i
             ≡ ert+1 − µi . We estimate the market prices of risk, λk off the ex-post version
of equation (26). The factor risk prices λc and λm depend on the coefficient of relative
risk aversion γ and the intertemporal elasticity of substitution σ. We implement a Fama-
MacBeth procedure (Fama and MacBeth (1973)): in the first stage we estimate the factor
loadings βic and βim for each of the 25 size and value portfolios from a time-series regres-
sion of the log excess returns on model-implied consumption growth and market return.
In the second stage, we estimate the market prices of risk from a cross-sectional regression
of variance-adjusted mean log excess returns on the factor betas from the first stage.

                                   [Table 9 about here.]

   The first two columns of Table 9 show the expected return and the expected return
with a variance correction for the 25 size and book-to-market decile portfolios (quarterly
data for 1947.II-2004.III from Kenneth French). Low book-to-market (growth) firms have
lower average returns than high book-to-market (value) firms and small firms have higher
average returns than large firms. The next two columns report our model’s predicted
adjusted return and the pricing error; the part of the return that is not explained by
sample covariances with the factors and the sample estimates of the risk prices. The last
three columns report the risk contribution to the expected excess return of each asset; the
first one of which is the market price of risk on a constant (λ0 , λc × βic and λm × βim ).
We use the consumption measure and the market return measure of our model with time-
varying human wealth share and the optimal vector C, i.e. the one that is consistent with
aggregate consumption moments, for σ equal to .28. In all models, the financial asset
return is the firm value return.
   Our model does a reasonable job accounting for the value spread. In each size quintile,
growth firms (B1) are predicted to give a lower average return than value firms (B5), and
just as in the data, the value effect is stronger for small firms. To measure the pure value
effect, we use book-to-market decile returns instead. Our model predicts a value spread of
1.1% per quarter, whereas in the data the spread is 1.4%.
   There is an interesting cross-sectional pattern in the betas of the book-to-market decile
returns with βim and βih . The top panel of figure 7 shows that growth firms are more
exposed to consumption risk than value firms (the second number in the horizontal axis
index denotes the book-to-market quintile, 11 is small growth, 15 is small value). The
bottom panel shows that growth firms form a better hedge against future market risk than
value firms. This is confirmed in the last two columns of Table 9, which show that the risk


                                             36
contribution of the market factor is much lower for growth firms than for value firms.

                                      [Figure 7 about here.]

       For the low EIS case, Panel A in table 10 compares the estimates for the market prices
of risk and their standard errors, the root mean-squared pricing error and the cross-section
R2 from the second stage of the Fama-MacBeth procedure across models. Each of the nine
columns denotes a different model, each with a different implied consumption growth and
market return process. These are the same models as in Table 8.

                                      [Table 10 about here.]

       The market price of risk on the market return is positive and significant in our model,
but it is negative in the model without human wealth and the three benchmark models
with human wealth: 12 in Model 5 versus -2.2, -3.1, -.7, and -.7 in columns Model 1, Model
2, Model 3, and Model 4 respectively. Our models (last two columns) are the only one that
deliver positive market prices of risk on both risk factors18 . All other models imply that
growth firms are exposed to more market risk than value firms, whereas the opposite is
true when the market return is consistent with consumption data. Among the models with
constant wealth shares, our model (column 8) has the lowest root mean-squared pricing
error (RMSE is 0.7% per quarter) and the highest cross-sectional R2 (65%). Among the
models with time-varying wealth shares, our model also delivers the lowest RMSE. Model
4, whose market return process shares many of the features of our market return process,
also prices the 25 Fama-French portfolios reasonably well (R2 = 45%). One failure of all
models, is that the intercept λ0 remains statistically different from zero.
       The second panel in table 10 shows the asset pricing results for σ = 1.12, the value
of the EIS estimated by Vissing-Jorgensen and Attanasio (2003) for stockholders. The
market price of risk is no longer significant for Model 5 (last two columns) and the R2 is
much lower. While this model almost matched the risk-free rate and the equity premium,
it cannot explain any of the cross-sectional variation in asset returns.
       We conclude that the omission of human wealth returns in the calculation of the market
return is significant for the CAPM’s ability to explain the cross-section of stock returns.
When human wealth returns are made consistent with observed consumption, an interesting
pattern arises in firm’s exposures to market returns: growth firms have lower risk premia
because they provide a better hedge against market risk, and human capital risk is priced.
  18
    The market price of consumption risk should be positive according to the theory if γ > 1, because
1/σ > 1.


                                                 37
8         Other Explanations

The previous analysis attributed to human wealth returns the part of consumption inno-
vations that could not be explained by financial wealth return innovations. In this section,
we consider four potential explanations for the lack of correlation and the volatility puzzle.
All four are richer versions of Model 1 with financial wealth only. We find that the usual
fixes tend to make the puzzles worse, rather than better.
         First, we consider heteroscedastic returns on financial assets and heteroscedastic con-
sumption growth, and we develop a way of testing whether this effect drives our results.
We find it does not. Second, we consider the effect of habit-style preferences. Standard
habits can be ruled out because they cannot lower the correlation between consumption
innovations and returns. Third, we consider heterogeneity across households, and we argue
reasonable specifications of heterogeneity only make the puzzle worse. Fourth, we briefly
consider consumption adjustment costs as a potential explanation.
         Finally, we address a potential criticism of a different nature; that the human wealth
return residual proxies for housing wealth. When we add housing wealth to the model, we
find our residual has much the same properties as in the model without housing wealth.


8.1        Heteroscedastic Market Returns

Sofar we have abstracted from time-variation in the joint distribution of consumption
growth and returns. Recently, Duffee (2005) reported finding some evidence of time-
variation in the covariance between stock returns and consumption growth. We denote
the conditional variance term by µm
                                  t . This adds a third source of consumption innovations

( see equation (38) in Campbell (1993)), which reflects the influence of changing risk on
the household’s saving decisions:

                                                                            ∞
                                                                            X
                                  m         m
                ct+1 − Et ct+1 = rt+1 − Et rt+1 + (1 − σ)(Et+1 − Et )             ρj rt+1+j
                                                                                      m

                                                                            j=1
                                                                           ∞
                                                                           X
                                                          −(Et+1 − Et )          ρj µm
                                                                                     t+1+j ,
                                                                           j=1

                            ¡θ¢
where µm
       t = σ log β+.5        σ
                                                  m ]. This last term drops out if either γ or σ are
                                  V art [∆ct+1 −σrt+1
one. We refer to this last term as news about future variances, hµ19 . If this time-variation
    19
    Assume we are in the plausible parameter range: γ > 1 and σ < 1. In this case, the last term can only
resolve the correlation puzzle if Vm,hµ is strongly positive -good news in the stock market today persistently
increases the conditional volatility of future financial returns or consumption innovations or decreases their



                                                     38
plays a role, our consumption growth accounting residual should predict the future variance
of stock market returns, and/or the future variance of consumption and/or the conditional
covariance between the two. So, we check whether the residual (hy )t that comes out of our
                                                                      m ]. We find that
model with time-varying human wealth shares predicts V art [∆ct+1 − σrt+1
it does not.
    More precisely, from the VAR innovations, we construct the implied conditional mo-
ments of financial asset returns and consumption growth:


                                   Vta ≡ Vt [rt+1
                                              a
                                                  ] = e01 Azt zt0 A0 e1 + e01 Σe1 ,

                                 Vtc ≡ Vt [∆ct+1 ] = e07 Azt zt0 A0 e7 + e07 Σe7 ,

                      Vta,c ≡ Covt [∆ct+1 , rt+1
                                             a
                                                 ] = e01 Azt zt0 A0 e7 + e01 Σe7 .

                                  m ] =
                                                  PH       h   c             a − 2σV c,a ) on (hy ) . We
Next, we regress V art [∆ct+1 − σrt+1                 j=1 ρ (Vt+j    + σ 2 Vt+j     t+j            t

vary j from 1 to 24 quarters. Using firm value returns, the regression coefficient is never
statistically significant (we use Newey-West standard errors), and the R2 of the regression
never exceeds 1%. We only find statistical significance at the 10% level for σ = .28
when financial asset returns are stock returns and only for horizons beyond 12 quarters.
However, the R2 never exceeds 3%, and the marginal significance disappears for higher σ.
We conclude that there is very weak evidence that our residual proxies for heteroscedasticity
in returns and consumption growth.


8.2    Habits

Second, we consider the possibility that habit formation in the household’s preferences is
responsible for the discrepancy between consumption innovation moments in the model
and the data. If the log surplus consumption ratio follows an AR(1) with coefficient
0 < φ < 1 and a constant sensitivity parameter λ > 0 that multiplies the consumption
growth innovations20 , then news about consumption is given by:
                                                                                                       
                         ·                        ¸                                                    
                                   1 − φρ                (rm,t+1 − Et rm,t+1 ) +
      ct+1 − Et ct+1 =                                                P
                             1 − φρ + λρ(φ − 1)  (1 − σ) (Et+1 − Et ) j=1 ρj rm,t+j+1 

See section A.5 of the separate appendix for the derivation. Clearly, the habit cannot fix
the volatility and correlation puzzles because, when φ < 1, the term in brackets is larger
conditional correlation.
  20
     We fix the sensitivity parameter, because we just checked for heteroscedasticity in section 7.1.



                                                     39
than 1. Rather, the puzzle in a model with habits is even larger.


8.3    Heterogeneity

Finally, allowing for heterogeneity across agents might even make these puzzles worse.
When households have the same EIS, aggregation reproduces exactly equation (4) for
aggregate consumption innovations under fairly mild conditions, described in section A.6
of the separate appendix, and all of the previous results go through trivially. However,
if household wealth and the EIS are positively correlated, then the aggregate EIS that
shows up in the aggregate consumption innovation expression exceeds the average EIS
across households. In fact, Vissing-Jorgenson (2002) reports evidence of a higher EIS
for wealthier stock- and bond-holders. A higher aggregate IES worsens the consumption
volatility and correlation puzzles.


Two Agents To illustrate this with a simple example, consider an economy with two
agents. Both face the same aggregate state variables. The first agent holds all human
wealth, and the second agent holds all financial wealth. We compute the model-implied
consumption innovations for each. Aggregate consumption innovations are the weighted
sum of the two individual innovations, weighted by the wealth shares. For comparison with
table 2, we hold the human wealth share fixed at .70. If both agents have a σ = .28, the
aggregate consumption moments for the benchmark models are exactly as reported in rows
8 and 9 of table 2. If instead the financial wealth holder has a higher EIS, his consumption
innovations are more volatile and more highly correlated with financial asset returns, and
so are the aggregates. For σ = 1.1, the value estimated by Vissing-Jorgenson (2002) for
stock holders, the volatility of aggregate consumption innovations is 41%, 29% and 28%
higher in Models 2, 3, & 4 than in the case where both agents have σ = .28.21 The
correlation between aggregate consumption innovations and financial asset returns are .87,
.93 and .94; the latter two are again higher than in the homogeneity case. This argument
readily extends to more households and to households with both financial and human
wealth. If the EIS and ratio of financial wealth to total wealth are positively correlated,
the consumption puzzles will be worse than in the economy with a stand-in agent with the
average EIS.
  21
    In the data, financial wealth holders’ consumption is more volatile than average consumption, but not
nearly as high as in the model. Vissing-Jorgenson (2002) finds a 6% consumption growth volatility for
stock holders, compared to a 3.4% volatility for all households. However, the model-implied volatility of
consumption growth for the agent with only financial wealth and σ = 1.1 is 15% per year!



                                                   40
Borrowing Constraints What about borrowing constraints? Binding constraints add
a third component to aggregate consumption innovations, news about future average mul-
tipliers on these constraints:

                                                        ∞
                                                        X                              ∞
                                                                                       X
                  m         m
ct+1 − Et ct+1 = rt+1 − Et rt+1 + (1 − σ)(Et+1 − Et )         ρj rt+1+j
                                                                  m
                                                                        −(Et+1 −Et )         ρj λt+1+j ,
                                                        j=1                            j=1


where λt+j denotes the cross-sectional weighted-average multiplier at t + j (see section
A.7 of the separate appendix for a derivation). Clearly, it does not help to have very
binding constraints all the time. For model-implied consumption innovations to be smooth
and only mildly correlated with financial asset returns, a positive innovation in financial
returns must be associated with more binding constraints in the future. The collateral
constraints of Lustig and VanNieuwerburgh (2004) have this feature.


Consumer Inattentiveness Finally, Gabaix and Laibson (2002) and Reis (2004), among
others, have argued that rational consumers may only periodically re-optimize, if it costly
to process the information required to do so. In that case, equation (4) only applies to
those consumers who are currently adjusting. To address this concern, we have re-done the
entire exercise on annual and bi-annual data, only to find identical results (detailed results
available upon request). It seems very likely that the effects of information processing
costs would be gone after a couple of quarters, especially because households face a lot of
large, idiosyncratic shocks that would cause them to adjust, even if the aggregate shocks
themselves are small (e.g. Golosov and Lucas (2003) for a similar argument applied to
costly price adjustment for firms).


8.4   Housing Wealth

As a last robustness check, we include a third source of wealth besides financial wealth and
human wealth: housing wealth. Consumption c is now non-durable and services consump-
tion excluding housing services. The stand-in consumer has non-separable preferences over
c and housing consumption; we fix the intra-temporal elasticity of substitution at .5, taken
from Yogo (2005), but our results are quite robust. We solve the model with constant
and time-varying human wealth shares. Section A.8 in the separate appendix describes
the derivation and data in more detail. We find that the human wealth ‘residual’ does
not proxy for housing wealth. Rather, the properties of consumption-consistent human
wealth returns look very similar in the models with and without housing wealth. Our main


                                             41
conclusions go through.


9     Discussion

From the perspective of a standard, neoclassical growth model, the volatility of consump-
tion innovations relative to that of return innovations and their correlation with return
innovations are much too small, even if the representative agent is very reluctant to sub-
stitute consumption over time. We propose that the resolution of these puzzles lies in the
measurement of human wealth returns. The returns on human wealth need to be negatively
correlated with returns on financial assets in order to generate a consumption process that
is consistent with the data. This reflects negative correlation in news about the future
discount rates and the cash flows for these two assets.
     A key question remains: what drives this negative correlation? The two tree models of
Santos and Veronesi (2004) and Cochrane, Longstaff, and Santa-Clara (2004) generate a
negative correlation between the two discount rates, but an open question is which model
can account for the negative correlation between the cash-flows on the two trees. There
is some evidence that the current labor market conditions have persistent effects on how
workers and owners split the pie (Lustig, VanNieuwerburgh, and Syverson (2005)). This is
an important avenue for future research.


References
Andersen, T., T. Bollerslev, F. Diebold, and C. Vega, 2005, “Real-Time Price Discovery in Stocks,
    Bonds and Foreign Exchange Markets,” Working paper Northwestern University.

Bansal, R., and A. Yaron, 2004, “Risks for the Long Run: A Potential Resolution of Asset Prizing
    Puzzles,” The Journal of Finance, 59, 1481–1509.

Baxter, M., and U. Jermann, 1997, “The International Diversificantion Puzzle is Worse Than You
    Think,” American Economic Review, 87(1), 170–180.

Benzoni, L., P. Collin-Dufresne, and R. Goldstein, 2004, “Portfolio Choice over the Life Cycle in
    the Presence of ‘Trickle Down’ Labor Income,” University of Minnesota.

Black, F., 1987, Business Cycles and Equilibrium, Blackwell, Cambridge, MA.

Bottazzi, L., P. A. Pesenti, and E. VanWincoop, 1996, “Wages, Profits and the International
    Portfolio Puzzle,” European Economic Review, 40, 219–254.

Boudoukh, J., R. Michaely, M. Richardson, and M. Roberts, 2004, “On the Importance of Measuring
    Payout Yield: Implications for Empirical Asset Pricing,” NBER Working Paper, 10651.

                                               42
Boyd, J. H., J. Hu, and R. Jagannathan, 2005, “The Stock Market’s Reaction to Unemployment
  News: ’Why Bad News is Usually Good for Stocks,” Journal of Finance, 60(2), 649 – 672.

Breeden, D. T., 1979, “An Intertemporal Asset Pricing Model with Stochastic Consumption and
  Investment Opportunities,” Journal of Financial Economics, 7, 265–296.

Browning, M., L. P. Hansen, and J. J. Heckman, 2000, “Micro Data and General Equilibrium Mod-
  els,” in John Taylor, and Mark Woodford (ed.), Handbook of Macroeconomics, North Holland,
  Amsterdam.

Campbell, J. Y., 1991, “A Variance Decomposition for Stock Returns,” Economic Journal, 101,
  157–179.

Campbell, J. Y., 1993, “Intertemporal Asset Pricing Without Consumption Data,” American Eco-
  nomic Review, 83(3), 487–511.

Campbell, J. Y., 1996, “Understanding Risk and Return,” The Journal of Political Economy, 104,
  298–345.

Campbell, J. Y., and J. H. Cochrane, 1999, “By Force of Habit: A Consumption-Based Explanation
  of Aggregate Stock Market Behavior.,” Journal of Political Economy, 107, 205–251.

Cochrane, J. H., 1994, “Permanent and Transitory Components of GNP and Stock Prices,” The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 109, 241–265.

Cochrane, J. H., F. Longstaff, and P. Santa-Clara, 2004, “Two Trees,” Working Paper UCLA
  Anderson School of Management.

Duffee, G. R., 2005, “Time-Variation in the Covariation Between Consumption Growth and Stock
  Returns,” Journal of Finance.

Epstein, L. G., and S. Zin, 1989, “Substitution, Risk Aversion and the Temporal Behavior of
  Consumption and Asset Returns: A Theoretical Framework,” Econometrica, 57, 937–969.

Fama, E., and K. French, 2001, “Disappearing Dividends: Changing Firm Characteristics or Lower
  Propsensity to Pay?,” Journal of Financial Economics, 60,, 3–43.

Fama, E. F., and J. D. MacBeth, 1973, “Risk, Return, and Equilibrium: Empirical Tests,” The
  Journal of Political Economy, 81, 607–636.

Gabaix, X., and D. Laibson, 2002, “The 6D Bias and the Equity Premium Puzzle,” NBER Macro-
  economics Annual, pp. 257–312.

Golosov, M., and R. E. Lucas, 2003, “Menu Costs and Phillips Curves,” NBER Working Paper,
  10187.

Grossman, S., and R. Shiller, 1981, “The Determinants of the Variability of Stock Market Prices,”
  American Economic Review, 71, 222–227.



                                               43
Grullon, G., and R. Michaely, 2002, “Dividends, Share Repurschases and the Susbstitution Hy-
  pothesis,” Journal of Finance, 62, 1649–84.

Guvenen, F., 2003, “A Parsimonious Macroeconomic Model for Asset Pricing: Habit Formation or
  Cross-Sectional Heterogeneity,” Working Paper University of Rochester.

Hall, R. E., 1988, “Intertemporal Substitution in Consumption,” Journal of Political Economy, 96,
  339–357.

Hall, R. E., 2001, “The Stock Market and Capital Accumulation,” American Economic Review, 91,
  1185–1202.

Hansen, L. P., J. C. Heaton, and N. Li, 2005, “Consumption Strikes Back,” Working Paper Uni-
  versity of Chicago.

Hansen, L. P., W. Roberds, and T. J. Sargent, 1991, “Time-Series Implications of Present Value
  Budget Balance and Martingale Models of Consumption and Taxes,” in Lars P. Hansen, and
  Thomas J. Sargent (ed.), Rational Expectations Econometrics, Westview Press.

Hansen, L. P., and K. Singleton, 1983, “Stochastic Consumption, Risk Aversion, and the Temporal
  Behavior of Asset Returns,” Journal of Political Economy, 91, 249–265.

Heaton, J., and D. Lucas, 1996, “Evaluating the Effects of Incomplete Markets on Risk Sharing
  and Asset Pricing,” Journal of Political Economy, 104, 668–712.

Jagannathan, R., and Z. Wang, 1996, “The Conditional CAPM and the Cross-Section of Expected
  Returns,” The Journal of Finance, 51, 3–53.

Julliard, C., 2003, “The Internal Diversification Puzzle is Not Worse Than You Think,” Interna-
  tional Finance, 0301004.

Kandel, S., and R. F. Stambaugh, 1990, “Expectations and Volatility of Consumption and Asset
  Returns,” Review of Financial Studies, 3, 207–232.

LeRoy, S. F., and R. D. Porter, 1981, “The Present-Value Relation: Tests Based on Implied Variance
  Bounds,” Econometrica, 49, 555–574.

Lettau, M., and S. Ludvigson, 2001a, “Consumption, Aggregate Wealth and Expected Stock Re-
  turns,” The Journal of Finance, 56, 815–849.

Lettau, M., and S. Ludvigson, 2001b, “Resurrecting the (C)CAPM: A Cross-Sectional Test When
  Risk Premia Are Time-Varying,” The Journal of Political Economy, 109, 1238–1287.

Lewellen, J., and S. Nagel, 2004, “The Conditional CAPM Does Not Explain Asset Pricing Anom-
  alies,” Working Paper MIT Sloan.

Lucas, R., 1978, “Asset Prices in an Exchange Economy,” Econometrica, 46, 1429–54.

Lustig, H., and S. VanNieuwerburgh, 2004, “A Theory of Housing Collateral, Consumption Insur-
  ance and Risk Premia,” Working Paper NYU Stern and University of Chicago.

                                                 44
Lustig, H., S. VanNieuwerburgh, and C. Syverson, 2005, “Equilibrium Search in the Labor Market
  and the Value of the Capital Stock,” Working Paper.

Mehra, and E. Prescott, 1985, “The Equity Premium: A Puzzle.,” Journal of Monetary Economics,
  15, 145–161.

Mulligan, C., 2004, “Robust Implications of Aggregate Stochastic Discount Factor Volatility,”
  Working Paper University of Chicago.

Palacios-Huerta, I., 2001, “The Human Capital of Stockholders and the International Diversification
  Puzzle,” Journal of International Economics, 54, 309–331.

Palacios-Huerta, I., 2003a, “An Empirical Analysis of the Risk Properties of Human Capital Re-
  turns,” American Economic Review, 93, 948–964.

Palacios-Huerta, I., 2003b, “The Robustness of the Conditional CAPM with Human Capital,”
  Journal of Financial Econometrics, 1, 272–289.

Reis, R., 2004, “Inattentive Consumers,” Working Paper Princeton University.

Roll, R., 1977, “A Critique of the Asset Pricing Theory’s Tests,” Journal of Financial Economics,
  4, 129–176.

Santos, T., and P. Veronesi, 2004, “Labor Income and Predictable Stock Returns,” Review of
  Financial Studies, forthcoming.

Shiller, R. J., 1981, “The Use of Volatility Measures in Assessing Market Efficiency,” Journal of
  Finance, 36, 291–304.

Shiller, R. J., 1995, “Aggregate Income Risks and Hedging Mechanisms,” Quarterly Review of
  Economics and Finance.

Stambaugh, R. F., 1982, “On The Exclusion of Assets From the Two Parameter Model: A Sensi-
  tivity Analysis,” Journal of Financial Economics, 10, 237–268.

Tallarini, T., 2000, “Risk-Sensitive Real Business Cycles,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 45(3),
  507–532.

Vissing-Jorgensen, A., and O. P. Attanasio, 2003, “Stock-Market Participation, Intertemporal Sub-
  stitution and Risk Aversion,” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 93, 383–391.

Vissing-Jorgenson, A., 2002, “Limited Asset market Participation and Elasticity of Intertemporal
  Substitution,” The Journal of Political Economy, 110, 825–853.

Yogo, M., 2005, “A Consumption-Based Explanation of the Cross-Section of Expected Stock Re-
  turns,” forthcoming Journal of Finance.

Young, A. T., 2004, “Labor’s Share Fluctuations, Biased Technical Change, and the Business
  Cycle,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 7, 916–931.


                                                45
A     Appendix
A.1     Data Appendix: Returns on Firm Value
This computation is based on Hall (2001). The data to construct our measure of returns on
firm value were obtained from the Federal Flow of Funds (Federal Reserve Board of Governors,
downloadable at www.federalreserve.gov/ releases/z1/current/data.htm). The data are for non-
farm, non-financial business. We extracted the stock data from ltabs.zip. The Coded Tables provide
more information about the codes used in the Flow of Funds accounts. A complete description is
available in the Guide to the Flow of Funds Accounts. We calculated the value of all securities as the
sum of financial liabilities (144190005), the market value of equity (1031640030) less financial assets
(144090005), adjusted for the difference between market and book for bonds. The subcategories
unidentified miscellaneous assets (113193005) and liabilities (103193005) were omitted from all
of the calculations. These are residual values that do not correspond to any financial assets or
liabilities. We correct for changes in the market value of outstanding bonds by applying the index
of corporate bonds to the level of outstanding corporate bonds at the end of the previous year. The
Dow Jones Corporate Bond Index is available from Global Financial Data. We measured the flow
of pay-outs as the flow of dividends (10612005) plus the interest paid on debt (net interest series
from NIPA, see Gross Product of non-financial,corporate business.) less the increase in the volume
of financial liabilities (10419005), which includes issues of equity (103164003).

A.2     Notation and Model Details


                                a          a
                    Va    = V [rt+1 − Et [rt+1 ]]
                                             ∞
                                             X
                   Vd y   = V [(Et+1 − Et )       ρj ∆yt+1+j ]
                                              j=0
                                              ∞
                                              X
                   Vha    = V [(Et+1 − Et )         ρj rt+1+j
                                                        a
                                                              ]
                                              j=1
                                                                       ∞
                                                                       X
                                  a          a
             Corra,ha     = Corr[rt+1 − Et [rt+1 ], (Et+1 − Et )             ρj rt+1+j
                                                                                 a
                                                                                       ]
                                                                       j=1
                                                                       ∞
                                                                       X
                                  a          a
             Corra,dy     = Corr[rt+1 − Et [rt+1 ], (Et+1 − Et )             ρj ∆yt+1+j ]
                                                                       j=0
                                                    ∞
                                                    X                                 ∞
                                                                                      X
            Corrha ,dy    = Corr[(Et+1 − Et )             ρj ∆yt+1+j , (Et+1 − Et )         ρj rt+1+j
                                                                                                a
                                                                                                      ]
                                                    j=0                               j=1

    News to future expected returns on human wealth, (hy )t , is an unobservable to the econome-




                                                     46
trician. The following moments of (hy )t will play a crucial role in the exercise:
                                                         ∞
                                                         X         y
                     Vh y     =        V [(Et+1 − Et )         ρj rt+1+j ]
                                                         j=1
                                                                                  ∞
                                                                                  X
                                             a          a                                   y
                Corra,hy      =        Corr[rt+1 − Et [rt+1 ], (Et+1 − Et )             ρj rt+1+j ]
                                                                                  j=1
                                                               ∞
                                                               X                                 ∞
                                                                                                 X        y
               Corrdy ,hy     =        Corr[(Et+1 − Et )             ρj ∆yt+1+j , (Et+1 − Et )        ρj rt+1+j
                                                               j=0                                j=1
                                                               X∞                               X∞
                                                                                                        y
            Corrha ,hy        =        Corr[(Et+1 − Et )             ρj rt+1+j
                                                                         a
                                                                               , (Et+1 −   Et )     ρj rt+1+j ]
                                                               j=1                              j=1


A.2.1    Moments of Consumption Innovations with Constant Wealth Shares
We denote the innovations to current consumption growth using (c)t . Using the symbols defined
in the text, we get:

                      (c)t = (1 − ν̄)(a)t + ν̄(dy )t + (1 − σ)(1 − ν̄)(ha )t − σν̄(hy )t .                        (28)

    The variance of consumption innovations is readily found as:

                                                           Vc = (1 − ν̄)2 Va + ν̄ 2 Vdy
                                                               +(1 − σ)2 (1 − ν̄)2 Vha
                                                                          p p
                                       +σ 2 ν̄ 2 Vhy + 2(1 − ν̄)ν̄Corra,dy Va Vdy
                                                                          p p
                                           +2(1 − σ)(1 − ν̄)2 Corra,ha Va Vha
                               p p                                       p p
          −2σ(1 − ν̄)ν̄Corra,hy Va Vhy + 2(1 − σ)(1 − ν̄)ν̄Corrha ,dy Vdy Vha
                            p p                                       p      p
          −2σν̄ 2 Corrhy ,dy Vdy Vhy − 2σ(1 − σ)(1 − ν̄)ν̄Corrha ,hy Vha (Vhy ).                                  (29)

    Similarly, we derive an expression for Vc,a , the covariance of consumption with asset return
innovations:
                                                                   p p
                                     Vc,a = (1 − ν̄)Va + ν̄Corra,dy Va Vdy
                                          p p                       p √
                 +(1 − σ)(1 − ν̄)Corra,ha Va Vha − σν̄Corra,hy Va hy .                       (30)

    Note that Corra,hy > 0, Corrdy ,hy > 0, and Corrha ,hy > 0 keep the variance of consumption
innovations and the covariance of consumption innovations with financial asset return innovations
low. Likewise, a low variance of news in future human capital returns (Vhy ) keeps consumption
volatility low.

Log Utility The variance of consumption innovations reduces to:

                                                Vc = (1 − ν̄)2 Va + ν̄ 2 Vdy + ν̄ 2 Vhy + 2(1 − ν̄)ν̄
           ³              p        p                 p p         ´                     p p
               Corra,dy       Va    Vd y   − Corra,hy Va Vhy − 2ν̄ 2 Corrhy ,dy Vdy Vhy ,                         (31)

while the covariance is given by:
                                       ³        p p               p √ ´
                 Vc,a = (1 − ν̄)Va + ν̄ Corra,dy Va Vdy − Corra,hy Va hy .                                        (32)

More moments Another moment of interest is the correlation between the innovations in
human wealth returns (y) and either innovations in financial asset returns (a) or news in future


                                                                47
financial asset returns (ha ). Now go back to equation (10) and take the covariance with current
financial asset return innovations:
                                         p p                  p p
                          Va,y = Corra,dy Va Vdy − Corra,hy Va Vhy

Likewise, take the covariance with news to future stock market returns:
                                         p p                    p    p
                      Vha ,y = Corrdy ,ha Vdy Vha − Corrha ,hy Vha Vhy

Finally, note that the variance of human capital return innovations is

                                       Vy = Vdy + Vhy − 2Vdy ,hy

A.2.2     Time-Varying Wealth Share
Because dpyt is a function of the entire state space, so is νt . νt+1 is not a linear, but a logistic
function of the state. We use a linear specification:

                                                 ν̃t ≡ νt − ν̄ = D0 zt

and we pin down D (N × 1) using a first order Taylor approximation. Let st be the labor income
share with mean s̄ and wt = dpyt − dpt with mean zero. (The mean of wt must be zero to be able
to use the same linearization constant ρ for human wealth and financial wealth.) We can linearize
the logistic function for the human wealth share νt from equation (14) using a first order Taylor
approximation around (st = s̄, wt = 0). We obtain:

                                              ∂νt                           ∂νt
                νt (st , wt ) ≈   νt (s̄, 0) +    |st =s̄,wt =0 (st − s̄) +     |s =s̄,wt =0 (wt ),
                                              ∂st                           ∂wt t
                            ≈     s̄ + (st − s̄) − (s̄(1 − s̄))wt ,
                            ≈     st − s̄(1 − s̄)dpyt + s̄(1 − s̄)dpt                                 (33)

The average human wealth share is the average labor income share: ν̄ = s̄. If dpt is the third
element of the VAR, dpt = e03 zt , and st − s̄ the sixth, and if dpyt = B 0 zt , then we can solve for D
from equation (33) and ν̃t = D0 zt :

                                      D = e6 − s̄(1 − s̄)B + s̄(1 − s̄)e3 .                           (34)

A.2.3     Sylvester Equations
With the portfolio weights νt we can construct consumption innovations according to equation (17).
The difficulty is to calculate the terms W1 and W2 . We use value function iteration to pin down
W1 and W2 . Let
                                              ∞
                                              X
                   f1 (zt+1 ) =
                   W                   Et+1         ρj ν̃t+j rt+1+j
                                                              a

                                              j=1
                                                                      ∞
                                                                      X
                   f1 (zt+1 ) =
                   W                                a
                                       ν̃t+1 Et+1 ρrt+2 + Et+1              ν̃t+j ρj Et+j rt+1+j
                                                                                           a

                                                                      j=2
                                                                      X∞
                   f1 (zt+1 ) =
                   W                     0
                                       ν̃t+1 ρe01 Azt+1 + ρEt+1             ν̃t+j ρj−1 Et+j rt+1+j
                                                                                             a

                                                                      j=2

                                  =     0
                                       zt+1 Dρe01 Azt+1             f1 (zt+2 )
                                                            + ρEt+1 W                                 (35)

    We can compute a solution to this recursive equation by iterating on it. We posit a quadratic



                                                          48
objective function:
                                       f1 (zt+1 ) = zt+1
                                       W             0
                                                         P zt+1 + d
where P solves a matrix Sylvester equation, whose fixed point is found by iterating on:

                                          Pj+1 = R + ρA0 Pj A,                                       (36)

starting from P0 = 0, and R = ρDe01 A. The constant d in the value function equals
                                                    ρ
                                            d=         tr(P Σ)
                                                   1−ρ
   We are interested in:
                                         f1 (zt+1 ) = (Et+1 − Et )[z 0 P zt+1 + d]
                W1 (zt+1 ) = (Et+1 − Et )W                           t+1
                                                    = ε0t+1 P εt+1 − Et [ε0t+1 P εt+1 ]
                                                                                 N X
                                                                                 X N
                                                            =   ε0t+1 P εt+1 −             Σij Pij
                                                                                 i=1 j=1

which turns out to be a simple quadratic function of the VAR shocks and the matrix P .
    In the same manner we calculate W2 , replacing R in equation (36) by ρDC 0 . C takes on different
values for the three canonical models.

A.2.4    Market Return
We can now compute innovations to the total market return (m):
                              m           m
               (m)t+1     ≡ rt+1  − Et [rt+1 ]
                                        y           y                       a          a
                          = (ν̃t + ν̄)(rt+1 − Et [rt+1 ]) + (1 − ν̃t − ν̄)(rt+1 − Et [rt+1 ])
                          = (ν̃t + ν̄)ICY Rt+1 + (1 − ν̃t − ν̄)ICARt+1
                            £                                                     ¤
                          = (ν̃t + ν̄)(e02 − ρC 0 )(I − ρA)−1 + (1 − ν̃t − ν̄)e01 εt+1

   and also news in future market returns (hm ):
                                         ∞
                                         X
           (hm )t+1     ≡ (Et+1 − Et )          ρj rt+1+j
                                                    m

                                         j=1
                                         X∞
                                                  £             y                              ¤
                        = (Et+1 − Et )          ρj (ν̃t+j + ν̄)rt+1+j                    a
                                                                      + (1 − ν̃t+j − ν̄)rt+1+j
                                          j=1
                        = ν̄N F Y Rt+1 + W2,t+1 + (1 − ν̄)N F ARt+1 − W1,t+1
                        = ρ [ν̄C 0 + (1 − ν̄)e01 A] (I − ρA)−1 εt+1 − (ε0t+1 (P − Q)εt+1 ) − q
                      PN PN
where the constant q = i=1 j=1 Σij (Pij − Qij ).
   From the innovations, we back out realized human wealth returns and market returns:
                          y
                         rt+1   =   (y)t+1 + C 0 zt
                          m
                         rt+1   =   (m)t+1 + (ν̃t + ν̄)C 0 zt + (1 − ν̃t − ν̄)e01 Azt

A.2.5    Imposing co-integration
This appendix explains how to impose co-integration between consumption, financial wealth and
labor income in our exercise. Much of it follows Campbell (1993) and Lettau and Ludvigson (2001a).
We focus on the case of constant wealth shares.



                                                      49
Deriving the Cointegration Relationship Define total wealth (in levels) to be Mt =
At + Ht ; it consists of financial wealth A and human wealth H. Denote log variables by lower
case letters. Log wealth can be written as mt = (1 − ν̄)at + ν̄ht , where ν̄ is the human wealth
share. Likewise, returns on the market portfolio are a linear combination of returns on financial
                                         y
and human wealth: rtm = (1 − ν̄)rta + ν̄rt+1 .
    We start by linearizing the budget constraint around the mean log consumption-wealth ratio22 :
                                                   µ      ¶
                                          m             1
                              ∆mt+1 = rt+1    +k+ 1−        (ct − mt )                      (37)
                                                        ρ
                    ³      ´
where k = log(ρ) − 1 − ρ1 c − m and ρ = 1 − exp(c − m). The same equation holds for the growth
rate of financial wealth ∆at+1 :
                                                   µ      ¶
                                         a              1
                               ∆at+1 = rt+1 + k + 1 −       (dt − at )                      (38)
                                                        ρ

where dt denotes financial income, and for human wealth changes ∆ht+1 :
                                                 µ      ¶
                                        y             1
                              ∆ht+1 = rt+1 + k + 1 −      (yt − ht )                                           (39)
                                                      ρ

We have assumed that the linearization constants k and ρ are the same for the three sources of
wealth.23
    The next step is to iterate forward each of these three equations. For example, we substitute the
identity ∆mt+1 = ∆ct+1 +(ct −mt )−(ct+1 −mt+1 ) into equation (37) and impose limj→∞ ρj (ct+j −
mt+j ) = 0 to get an expression for the consumption-wealth ratio, the dividend price ratio on total
wealth:
                                         X∞
                                                                    ρk
                               ct − mt =     ρj (rt+j
                                                  m
                                                      − ∆ct+j ) +      .
                                         j=1
                                                                  1 −ρ

Likewise, we obtain the dividend-price ratio on financial wealth:
                                                 ∞
                                                 X                             ρk
                                  dt − at =            ρj (rt+j
                                                            a
                                                                − ∆dt+j ) +       ,
                                                 j=1
                                                                              1−ρ

and on human wealth:
                                                 ∞
                                                 X          y                  ρk
                                  yt − ht =            ρj (rt+j − ∆yt+j ) +       .                            (40)
                                                 j=1
                                                                              1−ρ

       The last step is to substitute the expressions for m and rm into the expression for ct − mt
                                               ∞
                                               X                            y                  ρk
                  ct − (1 − ν̄)at − ν̄ht =            ρj ((1 − ν̄)rt+j
                                                                   a
                                                                       + ν̄rt+j − ∆ct+j ) +       ,
                                                j=1
                                                                                              1−ρ

to solve (40) for ht and to substitute this expression into the above equation:
                                         ∞
                                         X                                                         ρk
              ct − (1 − ν̄)at − ν̄yt =         ρj ((1 − ν̄)rt+j
                                                            a
                                                                + ν̄∆yt+j − ∆ct+j ) + (1 − ν̄)        .
                                         j=1
                                                                                                  1−ρ
                                                                                P∞
This expression hold ex-post but also ex-ante. Imposing that Et                   j=1   ρj ((1 − ν̄)rt+j
                                                                                                     a
                                                                                                         + ν̄∆yt+j −
  22
    This is an approximation which we take to be the true model.
  23
    It follows from the expressions for ∆mt+1 , ∆at+1 , and ∆ht+1 , and from ∆mt+1 = (1−ν̄)∆at+1 +ν̄∆ht+1
that ct − mt = (1 − ν̄)(dt − at ) + ν̄(yt − ht ), i.e. the log dividend price ratios on the wealth components are
linearly related.


                                                            50
∆ct+j ) is stationary, the left-hand side must also be stationary. This is the co-integration relation-
ship between consumption, financial wealth and labor income, or cay, from Lettau and Ludvigson
(2001a).

Empirical Proxy for Consumption-Wealth Ratio Lettau and Ludvigson (2001a) argue
that non-durable consumption and services is only a fraction of total consumption and postulate
λct = ctotal
       t     . They then estimate the co-integration coefficients by dynamic least squares:
                                                  k
                                                  X                     k
                                                                        X
                       ct = α + βa at + βy yt +          ba,j ∆at+j +          by,j ∆yt+j .
                                                  j=−k                  j=−k

                 ρk
where α = 1−ν̄               1−ν̄           ν̄
             λ 1−ρ , βa = λ , and βy = λ . In our data, we find little support for λ > 1 (λ = 1.017),
and set it equal to 1 for simplicity. We use the model-implied co-integration weights (1−ν̄, ν̄) instead
of estimating them. In the model with constant wealth shares, ν̄ = s̄, the labor income share which
is 0.73172 in our data. So, our measure of cay is:

                                   cay t = ct − 0.26728at − 0.73172yt .

    The state vector z contains the same elements as before, except that the first element, the
return on financial assets ra , must be replaced by real per capita financial wealth growth ∆at+1 .
                                                                                   a
We construct this measure from equation (38) using data on the financial return rt+1  and the lagged
dividend-price ratio d³t − at .´The linearization constants are found using the sample mean of d − a
to form k = log(ρ) − 1 − ρ1 d − a and ρ = 1 − exp(d − a). In other words, we construct ∆at+1 so
that equation (38) holds exactly, not approximately.
    We then estimate the VECM (equation 22 in the main text) and form the cay-augmented VAR
(equation 23 in the main text). We then redefine the companion matrix A to be the 8×8 companion
matrix of the augmented VAR system and ε to be the augmented 8 × T innovation vector. We
note that its covariance matrix is singular, because the 8th element is a linear combination of three
elements of the original 7 × 1 innovation vector.
    The last step is to extract the news components that drive the consumption growth innovations.
We only write out the expressions that have changed:
                        a          a
         (a)t+1    =   rt+1 − Et [rt+1 ] = ∆at+1 − Et [∆at+1 ] = e01 εt+1
       (f d )t+1   = ∆dt+1 − Et [∆dt+1 ] = (e01 + e03 )εt+1
                                  ∞
                                  X
       (ha )t+1    = (Et+1 − Et )   ρj rt+1+j
                                        a

                                    j=1
                                    ∞
                                    X               µ      ¶              X∞
                                                         1
                   = (Et+1 − Et )       ρj ∆at+1+j − 1 −     (Et+1 − Et )     ρj (dt+j − at+j )
                                    j=1
                                                         ρ                j=1

                   = [e01 ρA + e03 (1 − ρ)](I − ρA)−1 εt+1 ,

with the understanding that news about current and future dividend growth is formed as before:

                                       (da )t+1 = (ha )t+1 + (a)t+1 .

The last change is that the conditional expectation of demeaned financial returns is a function of the
conditional expectation of demeaned financial wealth growth and the lagged dividend-price ratio:
                                         µ      ¶
                    a                         1               1
               Et [rt+1 ] = Et [∆at+1 ] − 1 −     (dt − at ) = [e01 ρA + e03 (1 − ρ)] zt .
                                              ρ               ρ

The rest of the analysis proceeds as before, but with the augmented VAR.



                                                    51
A.2.6        Long-Run Restriction
The household budget constraint imposes a restriction on the long-run effect of news about market
returns and consumption growth:
                                         ∞
                                         X                                   ∞
                                                                             X
                          (Et+1 − Et )         ρj rt+1+j
                                                   m
                                                         = (Et+1 − Et )            ρj ∆ct+1+j .
                                         j=0                                 j=0

In our notation: (m)t + (hm )t = (dc )t .

Long-Run Restriction on Consumption Growth in Data As pointed out in Hansen,
Roberds, and Sargent (1991) this restriction cannot be satisfied for the models with constant wealth
shares. To see why, we can rewrite it as24

                                         (1 − ν̄)(da )t + ν̄(dy )t = (dc )t                          (41)

Since consumption growth is taken from the data (it is the seventh element in the VAR), the
long-run response of consumption growth can be computed as:
                                                    ∞
                                                    X
                        (dc )t+1 = (Et+1 − Et )           ρj ∆ct+1+j = e07 (I − ρA)−1 εt+1 .
                                                    j=0

Likewise,
                                                    ∞
                                                    X
                        (dy )t+1 = (Et+1 − Et )           ρj ∆yt+1+j = e02 (I − ρA)−1 εt+1 .
                                                    j=0

Finally, news about current and future financial income growth is

                         (da )t+1 = (a)t+1 + (ha )t+1 = [e01 + e01 ρA(I − ρA)−1 ]εt+1 .

    The equality between news about long run returns and consumption growth should hold for all
εt+1 . Thus, the constraint imposes that

                     (1 − ν̄)[e01 + e01 ρA(I − ρA)−1 ] + ν̄e02 (I − ρA)−1 = e07 (I − ρA)−1 ,

or post-multiplying by (I − ρA) shows this implies:

                                               (1 − ν̄)e01 + ν̄e02 = e07 ,

which cannot be satisfied because the vector on the right hand side has zeros in all entries but
the seventh, while the left-hand side has non-zero elements in the first and second entries. So,
the linearity of the VAR implies that the budget constraint cannot be satisfied exactly for all
innovations.

Long-Run Restriction on Consumption Growth in Model The same restriction is
also violated for model-implied consumption innovations. Recall the optimal consumption rule
  24
       In the constant wealth share case, we obtain:

                    (m)t + (hm )t   =    (1 − ν̄)(a)t+1 + (1 − ν̄)(ha )t+1 + ν̄(y)t+1 + ν̄(hy )t+1
                                    =    (1 − ν̄)[(a)t+1 + (ha )t+1 ] + ν̄ (dy )t+1 ,
                                    =    (1 − ν̄)(da )t+1 + ν̄(dy )t+1 ,

where we have used that (y)t+1 = (dy )t+1 − (hy )t+1 and (da )t+1 = (a)t+1 + (ha )t+1 .




                                                           52
which follows from the Euler equation:

(c)t+1   = (1 − ν̄)(a)t+1 + ν̄(dy )t+1 − σν̄(hy )t+1 + (1 − σ)(1 − ν̄)(ha )t+1 ,
           £                                                                                    ¤
         = (1 − ν̄)e01 + ν̄e02 (I − ρA)−1 − σν̄C 0 ρ(I − ρA)−1 + (1 − σ)(1 − ν̄)e01 ρA(I − ρA)−1 εt+1

where we have used hy = C 0 ρ(I − ρA)−1 εt+1 . For the discounted infinite sum of consumption
innovations, we get (dc )t+1 = (I − ρA)−1 (c)t+1 . This needs to equal
                               £                                                  ¤
              (m)t + (hm )t = (1 − ν̄)[e01 + e01 ρA(I − ρA)−1 ] + ν̄e02 (I − ρA)−1 εt+1 .

This implies that the following equality must hold for all εt+1 :


(1 − ν̄)e01 + ν̄e02 (I − ρA)−1 − σν̄C 0 ρ(I − ρA)−1 + (1 − σ)(1 − ν̄)e01 ρA(I − ρA)−1 = (1 − ν̄)e01 + ν̄e02

which would require singularity of A. To conclude, in the models with constant wealth shares, we
cannot test the long-run restriction.

Long-Run restriction in Model with Time-Varying Wealth Shares Importantly,
for the models with time-varying wealth shares νt , the above argument does not go through. Recall
the definition of the human wealth share in terms of its mean and its deviations from the mean:
νt = ν̄ + ν̃t . We obtain:
                                                                       ∞
                                                                       X
          (m)t + (hm )t    =    (1 − ν̄ − ν̃t )(a)t+1 + (Et+1 − Et )         ρj (1 − ν̄ − ν̃t+j )rt+1+j
                                                                                                  a

                                                                       j=1
                                                                    ∞
                                                                    X                      y
                                +(ν̄ + ν̃t )(y)t+1 + (Et+1 − Et )         ρj (ν̄ + ν̃t+j )rt+1+j
                                                                    j=1


                                                                                1
Using the definitions for news about weighted future financial asset returns (Wt+1 ) and human
                   2
wealth returns (Wt+1 ) from appendices A.2.2 and (A.2.3), the expression for model-implied cash-
flow news in consumption reduces to:

                (m)t + (hm )t    = (1 − ν̄ − ν̃t )(a)t+1 + (ν̃t + ν̄)(dy )t+1 − ν̃t (hy )t+1
                                   +(1 − ν̄)(ha )t+1 − (Wt+1 1
                                                                 − Wt+12
                                                                           )


    Now, W 1 and W 2 are quadratic, not linear. The problem that arose before, is gone because
of the nonlinearity. The condition that this expression equals the long-run consumption growth
response (dc ) does not simplify as before, because of the quadratic terms. In addition, model-
implied consumption is nonlinear as well (see equation 17).




                                                    53
Figure 1: Dividend Yield on CRSP Value-Weighted Stock Market Index and Payout-Yield
on Total Firm Value

                                                              0.02
                                                                                 dp CRSP adj
                                                             0.018               dp CRSP adj rep.
                                                                                 dp FV adj
                                                             0.016
                                     Dividend−Price Ratio

                                                             0.014

                                                             0.012

                                                              0.01

                                                             0.008

                                                             0.006

                                                             0.004

                                                             0.002
                                                                       1950   1960         1970              1980   1990   2000




                         Figure 2: Matching Moments of Consumption Innovations
The first panel plots the quarterly model-implied standard deviation of consumption innovations against the EIS σ,
while the second panel plots the model-implied correlation of consumption innovations . We use the returns on total
firm value. The sample is 1947-II-2004.III.

                                                            0.09
                   Standard Deviation Stdc




                                               0.085

                                                            0.08

                                               0.075

                                                            0.07

                                               0.065

                                                            0.06

                                               0.055
                                                                   0                 0.5                            1             1.5
                                                                                                       IES


                                                              1

                                                            0.95
                    Correlation Corrc,a




                                                             0.9

                                                            0.85

                                                             0.8

                                                            0.75

                                                             0.7

                                                            0.65
                                                                   0                 0.5                            1             1.5
                                                                                                       IES




                                                                                                  54
Figure 3: The EIS and Consumption Innovation Variance and Correlation: 3 Benchmark
Models
Using Returns on Firm Value, Quarterly Data 1947-2003. The labor share s̄ = ν̄ is .70.

                                            80
                                                                                                                             Campbell
                                                                                                                             JW
                                            60                                                                               Shiller
                              Variance Vc




                                            40


                                            20


                                                0
                                                    0.2      0.4           0.6              0.8            1          1.2      1.4
                                                                                            EIS


                                                1

                                         0.95
                   Correlation Corrc,a




                                            0.9

                                         0.85

                                            0.8

                                         0.75

                                            0.7

                                         0.65
                                                    0.2      0.4           0.6              0.8            1          1.2      1.4
                                                                                            EIS




Figure 4: The Labor Share and Consumption Innovation Variance and Correlation: 3
Benchmark Models
Using Returns on Firm Value, Quarterly Data 1947-2003. The EIS σ is .28.

                                         12
                                                                                                                            Campbell
                                         10                                                                                 JW
                                                                                                                            Shiller
                                            8
                      Variance Vc




                                            6

                                            4

                                            2

                                            0
                                            0.5     0.55   0.6     0.65          0.7       0.75      0.8       0.85   0.9   0.95        1
                                                                                       labor share

                                                             Correlation of Consumption with Return Innovations Corrc,a
                                            1
                   Correlation Corrc,a




                                         0.8


                                         0.6


                                         0.4


                                         0.2
                                           0.5      0.55   0.6     0.65          0.7       0.75      0.8       0.85   0.9   0.95        1
                                                                                       labor share




                                                                                       55
      Figure 5: Labor Income Share and Human Wealth Share for Models 2, 3, and 4
The return on financial assets is return on Firm Value.



                               Labor Income Share
                               Model 2
               0.85
                               Model 3
                               Model 4

                0.8



               0.75



                0.7



               0.65



                0.6
                      1950          1960          1970         1980   1990       2000




                              Figure 6: Human Wealth Share in Model 5.
The return on financial assets is the return on firm value.



                                                                      Labor Income Share
                                                                      Model 5
               0.85



                0.8



               0.75



                0.7



               0.65



                0.6
                      1950          1960          1970         1980   1990       2000




                                                          56
                                    Figure 7: Value Portfolios: Risk Contributions of c and m


                              2.5
           Consumption Beta




                               2

                              1.5

                               1

                              0.5

                               0
                                    11 12 13 14 15 21 22 23 24 25 31 32 33 34 35 41 42 43 44 45 51 52 53 54 55


                               0
Market Return Beta




                         −0.1

                         −0.2

                         −0.3

                         −0.4
                                    11 12 13 14 15 21 22 23 24 25 31 32 33 34 35 41 42 43 44 45 51 52 53 54 55




                                                                     57
                       Table 1: Moments from Data: Returns on Firm Value
The table reports variances (V ) and correlations Corr in the data. The sample covers 1947.II-2004.III. In the left
panel, the asset return is the return on firm value (own computation). In the right panel, it is the return on the
value-weighted CRSP stock index. The first column reports results for a 1-lag VAR with quarterly data. The second
column reports results for a 2-lag VAR with quarterly data. The third column reports the results for annual data
over the same period 1947-2004. The subscript a denotes innovations in current financial asset returns; dy denotes
news in current and future labor income growth; ha denotes news in future financial market returns,; da denotes news
in current and future financial dividend growth; and c denotes innovations to non-durable and services consumption.

                                       Firm   Value Returns            Stock Return Returns
                     Moments        1 Lag     2 Lags Annual         1 Lag     2 Lags Annual
                     Va             48.31      47.74   185.12       63.54      62.74   242.96
                     Vdy             1.61       1.90     6.67        1.65       1.92     6.95
                     Vha            32.67      32.97    47.44       103.07     98.37   231.85
                     Corra,ha       -.477      -.625   -0.487        -.918     -.805   -0.760
                     Corra,dy        .337       .377    0.599        .491       .473    0.329
                     Corrdy ,ha     -.525      -.656   -0.818        -.336     -.208   -0.196
                     Vc              .333       .325    0.681        .328       .321    0.642
                     Corrc,a         .168       .168    0.163        .185       .175    0.208
                     Corrdy ,da     -.101      -.209    0.166        .118       .286    0.200
                     Corrf y ,f d   -.092      -.081   -0.259        .173       .114    0.139




Table 2: Moments for Consumption Growth and Human Capital Returns - Constant
Wealth Shares.
The left panel uses firm value returns, the right panel uses stock returns. All results are for the full sample 1947.II-
2004.III. In each panel, the first column is Model 2, with human capital returns implied by C 0 = e01 A. The second
column represents the constant discounter Model 2 (C 0 = 0), and the third column represents Model 4 (C 0 = e02 A).
The last column gives the moments of human wealth returns that are consistent with consumption data (equations
6 and 20). Computations are done for ν̄ = .70 and σ = .28. In the data, Vc = .33 and Corrc,a = 0.168 in panel A
and Vc = .33 and Corrc,a = 0.185 in panel B.

  Moments        Model 2 Model 3 Model 4 Reverse                      Model 2   Model 3 Model 4 Reverse
                       Panel A: Firm Value Returns                            Panel B: Stock Returns
  Vhy             32.67         0        .54     107.38                103.07       0          .79   58.37
  Corra,hy        -.477         0       .485       .839                 -.918       0        .644     .476
  Corrdy ,hy      -.525         0       .752       .324                 -.336       0        .735     .704
  Corrha ,hy      1.000         0      -.306      -.037                 1.000       0        -.453   -.137
  Vy              41.91       1.61       .75     100.46                113.48    1.65          .76   46.22
  Corry,a          .487       .337      .081      -.825                 .934      .491       .065    -.443
  Corry,ha        -.986      -.525     -.511      -.029                 -.994    -.336       -.032    .091
  Vc               6.05       4.30      3.95       0.33                  7.61    2.49         2.10     .33
  Corrc,a          .946       .865      .868       .168                  .955    .518         .486   .185
  Vm              34.52       5.51      4.07      29.45                 96.47    7.43        5.16    18.29
  Corrm,a          .710       .928      .950      -.682                 .959      .954       .960     .066
  Corrm,y          .961       .664      .389       .976                  .997    .730         .342   .865
  Corrm,hm        -.946      -.587     -.436      -.994                 -.988    -.836       -.790   -.991




                                                          58
                      Table 3: Matching Consumption Moments when σ < 1
In the first panel, the entries show the sign of the effect of the variance/covariance of (i, j) on the variance of
consumption Vc . In the second panel, the entries show the sign of the effect of the variance/covariance of (i, j) on
the covariance of consumption Vc,a .

                                                    a   dy         ha   hy
                                                              Vc
                                               a   +     +         +    −
                                              dy         +         +    −
                                              ha                   +    −
                                              hy                        +
                                                             Vc,a
                                              a    +     +       +      −




Table 4: Moments for Consumption Growth and Human Capital Returns - Time-Varying
Wealth Shares
This table has the same structure as Table 2,but here computations are done for a time-varying human wealth share
νt and σ = .28.

 Moments        Model 2 Model 3 Model 4 Model 5                         Model 2  Model 3 Model 4 Model 5
                      Panel A: Firm Value Returns                               Panel B: Stock Returns
 Vhy             32.67         0        .54      69.05                   103.07       0         .79    36.38
 Corra,hy        -.477        0        .485       .897                    -.918       0        .644     .504
 Corrdy ,hy      -.525        0        .752       .452                    -.336       0        .735     .874
 Corrha ,hy      1.000         0      -.306      -.152                   1.000        0       -.453    -.209
 Vy              41.91       1.61       .75      61.13                   113.48     1.65        .76    24.50
 Corry,a         .487       .337       .081      -.880                     .934     .491       .065    -.487
 Corry,ha        -.986      -.525     -.511       .076                    -.994    -.336      -.032     .168
 Vc              5.65       3.84       3.46        .52                     8.00     2.77       2.41      .47
 Corrc,a         .922       .848       .853       .168                     .955     .511       .473     .185
 Vm              34.62       5.69      4.21      18.92                   96.09      7.75       5.46    10.10
 Corrm,a         .707       .917       .937      -.759                     .961     .939       .937     .067
 Corrm,y         .961       .667       .392       .971                     .996     .736       .353     .825
 Corrm,hm        -.948      -.584     -.430      -.987                    -.987    -.810      -.748    -.980




                                                         59
Table 5: Moments for Consumption Growth and Human Capital Returns - Model 5 -
Sensitivity to EIS.
The table reports the same moments as Table 2. All results are for Model 5 with time-varying human wealth share.
The first column is for σ = .5, the second column is for σ = 1, and the last column is for σ = 1.5. The sample is
1947.II-2004.III. Financial asset returns are firm value returns in panel A and stock returns in panel B.

                  Moments       σ = .5 σ = 1      σ = 1.5                σ = .5 σ = 1 σ = 1.5
                                Panel A: Firm Value Returns               Panel B: Stock Returns
                  Vhy           24.36     8.59      5.91                 18.10    12.58    11.81
                  Corra,hy       .941    .967       .914                  .791     .956     .978
                  Corrdy ,hy     .466    .561       .604                  .751     .704     .643
                  Corrha .hy     -.280   -.588     -.757                  -.512   -.809    -.905
                  Vy            20.14     6.02      3.79                 11.55     7.82     7.79
                  Corry,a        -.940   -.980     -.922                  -.805   -.987    -.978
                  Corry,ha       .159    .430       .603                  .515     .872     .960
                  Vc              .33      .33       .33                    .33     .33      .41
                  Corrc,a        .168    .168       .168                  .185     .185     .185
                  Vm             3.12      .33       .82                   2.21     .33      .66
                  Corrm,a        -.719    .168      .614                  .032     .185     .188
                  Corrm,y        .895    -.036     -.318                   .546   -.116    -.056
                  Corrm,hm       -.947    .199      .779                  -.925   -.052     .625




Table 6: Moments for Consumption Growth and Human Capital Returns - Imposing Co-
integration.
The left panel uses firm value returns, the right panel uses stock returns. All results are for the full sample 1947.II-
2004.III. In each panel, the first column is Model 2, with human capital returns implied by C 0 = e01 A. The second
column represents the constant discounter Model 2 (C 0 = 0), and the third column represents Model 4 (C 0 = e02 A).
The last column gives the moments of human wealth returns that are consistent with consumption data (equations
6 and 20). Computations are done for ν̄ = 0.7317 and σ = .28. In the data, Vc = .31 and Corrc,a = 0.196 in panel
A and Vc = .31 and Corrc,a = 0.183 in panel B.

  Moments        Model 2 Model 3 Model 4 Reverse                      Model 2     Model 3 Model 4 Reverse
                       Panel A: Firm Value Returns                              Panel B: Stock Returns
  Vhy             11.56         0        .54     106.71                 11.28         0          .81   95.81
  Corra,hy        -.566         0       .503       .921                 -.911         0        -.007    .870
  Corrdy ,hy      -.580         0       .756       .440                 -.002         0         .733    .378
  Corrha ,hy      1.000         0      -.436      -.376                 1.000         0         .008   -.674
  Vy              18.17       1.61       .74      96.78                 12.92       1.63         .75   88.00
  Corry,a          .553       .340      .074      -.923                  .865       .037        .063   -.903
  Corry,ha        -.970      -.579     -.482       .320                 -.935      -.002       -.011    .703
  Vc               6.14       4.43      4.05        .31                  6.39       4.04        3.85     .31
  Corrc,a          .945       .935      .942       .196                  .935       .878        .901    .183
  Vm              19.59       5.49      4.02      25.34                 21.21       5.59        5.14   20.48
  Corrm,a          .809       .928      .950      -.849                  .958       .919        .960   -.783
  Corrm,y          .937       .666      .382       .987                  .972       .428        .339    .974
  Corrm,hm        -.921      -.678     -.385      -.994                 -.957      -.825       -.689   -.992




                                                          60
Table 7: Moments for Consumption Growth and Human Capital Returns - Constant
Wealth Shares - Using Labor Income Growth Implied by the Long-Run Restriction.
Same as Table 2, except that (dy ) is computed from equation (25) using consumption and financial income data
instead of labor income data. Computations are done for ν̄ = .70 and σ = .28. In the data, Vc = .33 and
Corrc,a = 0.168 in panel A and Vc = .33 and Corrc,a = 0.185 in panel B.

  Moments        Model 2 Model 3 Model 4 Reverse                    Model 2   Model 3 Model 4 Reverse
                       Panel A: Firm Value Returns                          Panel B: Stock Returns
  Vhy             32.67         0        .54      25.60              103.07       0          .79   69.64
  Corra,hy        -.477         0       .485       .423               -.918       0         .644    .929
  Corrdy ,hy      -.547         0       .023       .560               -.871       0         .364    .823
  Corrha ,hy      1.000         0      -.306      -.875               1.000       0        -.453   -.945
  Vy              63.99      10.79     11.22      17.77              157.77     7.21        6.27   39.95
  Corry,a          .166      -.426     -.525      -.840                .883     .661        .480   -.945
  Corry,ha        -.939      -.547     -.469       .624               -.994    -.871       -.773    .877
  Vc               5.02       1.51      1.33       0.33               13.61     3.19        2.79     .33
  Corrc,a          .467       .419      .386       .168                .932     .906        .901   .185
  Vm              39.58       5.55      4.72       2.72              120.17    15.20      12.81     5.30
  Corrm,a          .479       .469      .393      -.238                .927     .932        .903   -.777
  Corrm,y          .945       .599      .576       .727                .995     .888        .810   .940
  Corrm,hm        -.994      -.956     -.933      -.937               -.998    -.983       -.973   -.969




                                     Table 8: Euler Equation Errors
The table shows the coefficient of risk aversion γ (first row) that minimizes the root mean squared pricing error
on the CRSP value-weighted stock returns and a T-bill return (RMSE in row four). It also shows the average
Euler equation errors on the stock return (errorst ) and the T-bill return (errorrf ). For each model, rows five and
six report the correlation between model-implied consumption growth and actual consumption growth (Corrm,d =
Corr(∆cm , ∆cd )), and the standard deviation of model-implied consumption growth (Stdm = Std(∆cm )). The time
discount factor is held constant throughout the table at β = .99. The value for γ is held fixed at the value reported
in the first row. In panel A, we fix σ = 0.28. In panel B, we set σ = 1.12. The estimation uses the firm value return
for ra . The Euler equation errors are multiplied by 100; they report a percentage error per quarter.


               Model 1   Model 2    Model 2 T V    Model 3   Model 3 T V      Model 4    Model 4 T V    Reverse    Model 5
                                                     Panel A: EIS .28
 γ              3.71      15.93        18.44        17.02       19.90          17.49        20.74        23.09          11.37
 errorst        0.34      −0.07        −0.09        −0.17       −0.23          −0.20        −0.29        −0.28          0.66
 errorrf        −0.24      0.05         0.07         0.12        0.17           0.14         0.21         0.21          −0.60
 RM SE          0.30       0.06         0.08         0.15        0.20           0.17         0.25         0.25           0.63
 Corrm,d        0.03       0.33         0.35         0.26        0.29           0.24         0.28         1.00           0.87
 Stdm           6.17       2.48         2.40         2.09        1.99           2.01         1.89         0.65           1.84
                                                    Panel B: EIS 1.12
 γ              5.46       6.27         6.27         1/σ         1/σ            1/σ          1/σ          1/σ           3.97
 errorst        −0.53      0.23         0.02         0.92        0.92           0.93         0.93        0.99            0.67
 errorrf        0.48      −0.22        −0.02        −0.95       −0.97          −0.96        −0.98        −1.03          −0.66
 RM SE          0.50       0.23         0.02         0.94        0.95           0.94         0.95        1.01            0.66
 Corrm,d        0.18       0.30         0.30         0.33        0.35           0.28         0.30        1.00            0.93
 Stdm           7.30       6.48         6.54         2.67        2.52           2.33         2.15        0.65            1.36




                                                        61
          Table 9: Risk Contributions From c and m - 25 Size and Value Portfolios
The first column gives the average log excess return per quarter, in excess of a 3-month T-bill return (erdata ). The
second column adjusts for the Jensen effect by adding 1/2 times the variance of the log excess return (eradj    data ).
                                                                pred
Columns 3-4 give the model’s predicted adjusted return ((eradj       )) and the pricing error (error). The last three
columns give the risk contribution (price of risk times quantity of risk) to the expected excess return of each asset;
the first one of which is the market price of risk on a constant (p0 ). The assets are the 25 size and book-to-market
decile portfolios from Kenneth French. The return measure ra in the VAR is the firm value return. All numbers are
multiplied by 100. Our model is computed for σ = .28 and time-varying human wealth share.
                                                        pred
                    Portfolio    erdata       data
                                           eradj     eradj     error      λo     λc βic   λm βim
                    S1B1          0.073     1.296     1.547    −0.251    3.775   1.138    −3.366
                    S1B2          1.841     2.704     1.900     0.805    3.775   1.158    −3.034
                    S1B3          2.154     2.800     2.160     0.640    3.775   0.797    −2.412
                    S1B4          2.792     3.381     2.661     0.720    3.775   0.810    −1.924
                    S1B5          3.137     3.826     2.566     1.261    3.775   0.845    −2.054
                    S2B1          0.642     1.602     0.651     0.951    3.775   1.123    −4.247
                    S2B2          1.813     2.470     1.315     1.156    3.775   0.894    −3.355
                    S2B3          2.432     2.947     1.854     1.093    3.775   0.773    −2.694
                    S2B4          2.605     3.103     2.272     0.832    3.775   0.747    −2.250
                    S2B5          2.975     3.572     2.316     1.256    3.775   0.826    −2.285
                    S3B1          1.123     1.903     0.995     0.908    3.775   0.947    −3.727
                    S3B2          1.998     2.505     1.774     0.731    3.775   0.720    −2.721
                    S3B3          2.105     2.545     2.127     0.418    3.775   0.686    −2.334
                    S3B4          2.519     2.953     2.465     0.488    3.775   0.638    −1.948
                    S3B5          2.724     3.261     2.031     1.230    3.775   0.824    −2.568
                    S4B1          1.425     2.049     1.243     0.806    3.775   0.843    −3.375
                    S4B2          1.580     2.035     1.581     0.453    3.775   0.662    −2.856
                    S4B3          2.366     2.758     2.262     0.496    3.775   0.565    −2.078
                    S4B4          2.331     2.721     2.251     0.470    3.775   0.621    −2.144
                    S4B5          2.524     3.062     2.178     0.884    3.775   0.808    −2.405
                    S5B1          1.415     1.824     2.105    −0.280    3.775   0.665    −2.335
                    S5B2          1.538     1.861     2.088    −0.227    3.775   0.560    −2.246
                    S5B3          1.925     2.195     2.326    −0.131    3.775   0.556    −2.005
                    S5B4          1.854     2.149     2.429    −0.280    3.775   0.546    −1.892
                    S5B5          1.911     2.323     2.490    −0.167    3.775   0.797    −2.082




                                                          62
                                        Table 10: Model Comparison
The table shows the market prices of risk obtained from the cross-sectional regression eri = λ0 + λc βic + λm βim + ²i .
The risk exposures (βic , βim ) are obtained from a first step time series regression. Standard errors are Shanken-
corrected. The last two lines report the root mean squared pricing error across all portfolios, and the adjusted R2
from the second step regression. The test asset returns are the log real excess returns on the 25 Fama-French size
and value portfolios. The estimation uses the firm value return for ra and σ = .28 in the upper panel, σ = 1.12 in
the lower panel. All numbers are multiplied by 100.


 MPR       Model 1     Model 2     Model 2 T V     Model 3    Model 3 T V     Model 4     Model 4 T V    Reverse    Model 5
                                                      Panel A: EIS .28
 λ0           4.73       3.73          3.36          3.39         3.22          3.21          3.20        4.26         3.78
 σλ0          0.83       0.68          0.75          0.82         0.90          1.03          1.10        1.17         0.92
 λc          −3.24       −0.60        −0.51          0.09         0.32          0.47          0.58        0.58         0.53
 σλc          1.51       0.37          0.40          0.55         0.68          0.67          0.78        0.31         0.88
 λm          −2.25       −2.11        −3.11         −0.70       −0.66          −0.74         −0.73        6.37        11.99
 σλm          1.03       1.47          1.73          0.38         0.42          0.39          0.43        2.41         4.75
 RMSE         0.82       0.84          0.84          0.83         0.83          0.81          0.80        0.72         0.76
 R2          36.91       30.44        31.13         32.87        35.06         42.67         45.87        63.77       47.33
                                                      Panel B: EIS 1.12
 λ0           4.29       3.83          3.96          4.25         4.46          4.08          4.69        3.55         2.47
 σλ0          0.84       0.73          0.81          1.00         1.09          0.82          0.99        0.92         0.65
 λc          −1.33       −1.44        −0.72         −0.18       −0.00          −0.69         −0.59        0.55         0.22
 σλc          1.25       1.27          1.54          0.59         0.65          0.34          0.34        0.30         0.56
 λm          −2.05       −2.00        −1.71         −0.72       −0.65          −0.60         −0.71        0.89        −0.92
 σλm          1.03       1.06          1.13          0.43         0.47          0.30          0.31        0.32         0.96
 RMSE         0.83       0.84          0.83          0.81         0.78          0.83          0.83        0.72         0.85
 R2          35.96       30.94        32.02         37.42        45.54         34.70         36.93        64.44       −4.24




                                                          63
