NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE ECONOMICS OF PRICE SCISSORS

Raah Kumar Sah
Joseph E. Stiglitz

Working Paper No. 1156

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge MA 02138

June 1983

We would like to thank Jere Behrman and Michael Lipton for their
conmients
this paper. Stiglitz!s research
was supported by the National Science Foundation. The research
reported here is part of the NBER's research program in Taxation.
Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

on an earlier draft of

NEER Working Paper# 1156
June 1983

THE ECONOMICS OF PRICE SCISSORS

ABSTRACT

We analyze consequences of changing the terms of trade between
agriculture and industry on capital accumulation and on welfare of

workers in different sectors. The issue was central to Soviet industrialization debate and it remains important in today's developing

world. Through a simple general equilibrium model, we show that a
price squeeze on peasants increases accumulation (as Preobrazhensky
argued), but it makes both urban and rural workers worse—off (con-

trary to Preobrazhensky's contention). The desirable changes in terms
of trade are shown to depend on intertemporal valuations, but, within

a range, not on rural—urban welfare trade—off. Our characterization

the optimal terms of trade is remarkably simple, in which the role
of welfare weights and of relevant empirical parameters are easily
of

ascertained.

We then extend our analysis to economies with labor mo-

bility and unemployment and, using a simple model with rigid industrial
wage, show that the optimal terms of trade entail a tax on urban sector,
a subsidy to rural sector, and a level of urban employment such that the
urban wage exceeds the marginal product of urban worker.

Raaj K. Sah
Department of Economics
University of Pennsylvania

Philadelphia, PA 19104

Joseph E. Stiglitz
Department of Economics
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544

THE ECONOMICS OF PRICE SCISSORS

by

Raaj Kumar Sah and Joseph E.Stiglitz

An important policy issue facing many developing countries is that of the

appropriate terms of trade between the industrial and the agricultural

sectors. Traditionally, this problem has been known as the 'scissors
problem', and it has been typically discussed in the context of a socialist
society striving f or capital accumulation in the early phase of economic

development.1 Changing the terms of trade has distributional consequences as

well. We examine here both the accumulation and the distribution aspects
simultaneously.

Our

analysis

is based upon a simple general equilibrium model of a dual

economy, in which the role of incentives in the rural sector is emphasized.

Using this model, we describe the effects of altering the terms of trade on
the members of the rural and the urban sectors, and on the state's surplus.

We then extend our analysis to obtain normative results, such as: under what
conditions will a change in the terms of trade unequivocally benefit a
society; and what is the nature of the optimal terms of trade?
The issues being examined in the present paper are of considerable

historical as well as contemporary significance. One of the central concerns
of the classical economists was the relative roles of the town and the country

in the early phases of economic growth. Probably the best known landmark of
this interest was the lively controversy between Thomas Maithus and David

Ricardo on the corn laws. These concerns were also recognized, but side—

—1—

stepped, by Karl Marx2.

The town—versus—country questions emerged as pivotal, however, on the eve
of the October Revolution; so much so that every important Soviet leader had

to grapple with it.3 Furthermore, the economic events of the early 1920's
were so severe [see Dobb (1966, chapter 7)] that the state's policy on the
terms of trade became

a

raging controversy in the ensuing debate on Soviet

industrialization. A seminal
Preobrazhensky (1965) who

participant

proposed

in this debate was Evgeny

that the state can, and should, increase

its surplus by turning the terms of trade against peasants.4 This policy of
'primitive accumulation' was challenged on a number of different grounds by

many members of the Soviet leadership (see Erlich (1960)]. What interests us
here about the Soviet debate is that some of our results clarify and correct

certain

crucial elements of this debate.

Even though the discussions within the USSR itself had subsided with the

institution

of Joseph Stalin's collectivization policy, the town—versus—

country problems have remained important in recent decades in many socialist
countries, for example in Eastern Europe and in the People's Republic of

China. Specfcally, the past

attempts of several socialist economies to

achieve a direct control of the agricultural sector have not been particularly
successful, and these experiences in turn have added a greater relevance to
the

examination of indirect control mechanisms, as for example, through price
-

incentives.
Similar

considerations are relevant in developing economies. In fact, in

a typièal developing economy, not only does the government have fewer
instruments

of

control, but also the agricultural sector plays a re

important role in determining national output and employment.
surprising therefore that the issue of

It

is not

intersectoral pricing is a central

—2—

aspect of policy making in many developing economies.5 The research on these
issues, however, has been surprisingly inadequate.6 In particular, an
analytical examination of the scissors problem has been hitherto lacking, and
the present paper is intended to fill this lacuna.

The plan of the paper is as follows. The basic model of the economy is
presented in Section I. Descriptive analysis is conducted in Sections II and

III. The analysis of normative questions is then taken up. Results on the
desirable reforms in the terms of trade are presented in Section IV, and the

optimal tax and the optimal terms of trade are discussed in Section V. The
model is then extended in Section VI to incorporate labor mobility and

unemployment. Section VII contains some comments on the Soviet
industrialization debate. Certain extensions of the present analysis are
discussed in Section VIII, and conclusions are presented at the end of the
paper.

I.

THE MODEL
The rural sector's population Is N', and A is the-total agricultural land

area which is owned within the rural sector. Intra—sectoral distribution is

ignored, and a A/N' is the land area per worker. Li denotes the hours
worked by each worker. The production technology exhibits constant returns to
scale.

X X(A/N, L1)

X(a, L) is the output per worker. A rural

worker's consumption of the rural and the urban good Is denoted by (x1, y).
The surplus of the rural good per worker, Q, is given by

(1)

Q"X—x'

The relative price of the rural good in terms of the urban good is denoted by

—3—

p. A rural worker's budget constraint becomes

pQ"y1

(2)

A rural worker's utility is represented by U'

U(x', y', L1). The

indirect utility is obtained from

111

1

1

(3)

1

1

1

1

1

maxU(x,y,L)+'[pX(A/N,L)px —yl

V(p,N)

x ,y ,L

From the envelope theorem

X1Q > 0,

(4)

where Xa —

-, and

and --

— AIpXaa/Nl < 0

is the (positive) marginal utility of income in sector

i. It is evident that the rural surplus is a function of the relative price
and the rural

population, i.e., Q

Q(p, N1). It is also worth keeping in

mind that, in our notation, an increase in the size of price scissors, i.e.,
an increase in the relative price of the urban good, corresponds to a decrease

inp.
The urban population is N2, and an urban worker supplies

hours of work

which are fixed by the government, based on technological considerations. The
urban worker's consumption of the rural and the urban good is denoted by (x2,

y2), and w is the wage per hour, in terms of the industrial good. The budget
constraint of an urban worker is given by

(5)

px +y -wL

—4—

Denoting the urban individual's utility function by U2

U(x2, y2, L2), the

indirect utility is obtained from7

222 22

2

2

2

maxU(x ,y ,L)+ A[wL px —yl

V(p, w)

(6)

x ,y
The envelope theorem yields

<0

>O,and

(7)

Naturally, the urban consumption is a function of the relative price and the
urban wage, i.e., x2.
normal.

x2(p, w). The consumption goods are assumed to be

The output of an

urban worker is denoted by Y Y(k, L2), where k —

K/N2 is capital stock per urban worker, and K

is the total

urban capital

stock.

The economy under consideration is a closed economy.8 The sectoral
populations are fixed. The total population is N, and

(8)

N—N'+N2

The rural quantities can not be controlled directly, but they
influenced indirectly through the terms

of

can

be

trade, p. The urban sector is

somewhat ure controllable, in that the urban wage can be changed by the
government.9
The two basic constraints in the economy are the quantity balances of the

urban and the rural goods respectively. Defining I as the state's surplus of

the urban good, i have

—5—

22 11
2
INY—Ny
—Ny ,

(9)

That is,

and

I—K

the urban output is used either for consumption or for investment.

Similarly, the balance between the supply and demand of the rural good
requires

22

1
NQ(p,N)Nx(p,w)
1

(10)

Finally, note that the above model can be easily expanded to include the

possibility of investing the urban capital good in the rural sector. We
ignore this aspect because the focus of the present paper is on the analysis

of the terms of trade. This analysis in any case remains essentially
unchanged, as we will see later, if the investment allocation decision is
incorporated.

With the features of the economy described above, we can now begin the

analysis of the terms of trade. The next two sections trace the impact of
altering the terms of trade on the basic economic variables. Interestingly
enough, six decades ago, Preobrazhensky had presented certain important

propositions on these matters. Our

descriptive

analysis ascertains the

conditions under which Preobrazhensky's propositions are valid.

II. PREOBRAZHENSKY'S FIRST PROPOSITION
Preobrazhensky's most important claim was that the state can

increase

accumulation by moving the terms of trade against peasants, i.e., by

increasing the size of scissors. For ease of reference, we call this

Preobrazhensky's first proposition. Naturally, this proposition is quite
basic, because it asserts the feasibility of using the terms of trade as an

—6—

instrument for society's accumulation.

Recall that moving the terms of trade against peasnts means a decrease

< 0. To examine the conditions

in p. The above proposition thus says:

under which this proposition holds, we obtain an alternative expression for

the state's surplus. Substitution of (2), (5), and (10) in (9) yields

(11)

I — N2(Y —

vL2)

The state's surplus is therefore the difference between the urban output and
the wage payment to the urban workers, and the surplus does not directly
depend on the terms of trade, p.
A change in p, however, requires a change in the urban wage, w, if the
demand and supply balance of the rural

good,

(10), is to be preserved. To

obtain the relation between p and w, we first define some notations. m wL2
is the income of an urban worker, and

1

(12)

are

CQp

aQ
ônp

2

' xp

—

—

and

32nx2

xm

d£nt

respectively, the price elasticity of the rural surplus, the price

elasticity of the urban consumption of the rural good, and the income

elasticity of the urban consumption of the rural good. Finally define
as the percent change in the urban wage which must accompany a percent

increase in p. That is

(13)

C

wp

Next, differentiation of (10), and the use of the above definitions

—7—

yields

(C'

(14)

C

+C2)

—

wp

xm
The change in the state's surplus due to a change in the terms of trade is
then obtained from (11) and

(15)

(1..) as

2 2 (E +
_NwL
Qp
p

C2

xp

)

dp

xm
In the above expression, the sign of the rural surplus response,

is

not predictable theoretically because this response is a composite of the

production response, the consumption response and the labor supply response.
Fortunately, however, several sources of empirical evidence already exist on

this subject. Among them are: (i) analysis of rural surplus in the

Soviet

Union during the 1920's (Dobb (1966, Chapter 7)], (ii) econometric studies of
economy—wide supply response of different crops in many countries, following
an early work by Behrman (1968), arid (iii) inicroeconometric studies of farm—

household behavior [Lau, Lin and

(1978), and Barnum

Yotopoulos

and Squire

(1979)]. All of these studies indicate a positive surplus response to
price. Based on this evidence, we maintain throughout the paper that

(16)

and

Now, looking at the right side of (15),

are positive

because consumption goods are normal. Using (16), therefore,
fact, the same result will hold even if

C'

Further, note from (15) that a higher C,

—8—

is

< 0. [In

negative within some range]

corresponds

to a higher magnitude

dl
—.
dp

of

is valid,
We therefore conclude that: Preobrazensky's first proposition
i.

e. , turning the terms of trade against peasants leads to an increased

accumulation. Also that: turning the

terms of trade against peasants leads

to a larger increase in accumulation if the price response of the rural
surplus is larger.

The above results need to be contrasted with the assertion made by
several authors that increasing the squeeze on farmers through the price
scissors may not lead to accumulation if the rural surplus is highly price
responsive [for example, Lipton (1977, p. 129—130) and Mitra (1977, p. 54)1.

As shown above, not only is this not correct, but quite the opposite is true!
The
the

main point missed by earlier researchers is the distinction between

rural surplus and

state's

the

state's surplus, and

the

distinction between the

surplus and the consumption of industrial workers. Surely, a decrease

in the relative price of the rural good will lead to a lower rural surplus, if
the price response of the rural surplus is higher.

This in turn will require

a higher decrease in the urban demand of the rural good, and the only way in

which it can be accomplished is if a higher

decrease in the urban real wage is

enforced by the government. This higher decrease in the urban wage will then
naturally lead to a higher state's surplus.

III. PREOBRAZHENSKY'S SECOND PROPOSITION
The economic content of another important claim of PreobrazhenskY can be

expressed as follows: by turning the terms of trade against peasants, itis
possible to accumulate in a manner that the economic position of industrial

workers will not deteriorate.'0
This proposition can be expressed in our notation as:

—9—

dV2

(

0. From the

earlier analysis, it is clear that there are two effects on an urban worker of
changing the terms of trade: a direct price effect, and an indirect effect due
to the induced change in the urban wage.

LIJ

—

dp

The total effect is expressed as

W
+
.
1—
p dW ep

SubstitutiOn of (7) in the above yields

wL2
—— x [—x2 +c
dV2
dp

,

18)

2

wp

p

the urban budget share of the rural good,
We define c— 23. as

2u — — P

X

as

and

the price elasticity of the compensated demand for the

rural good in the urban sector. Using these definitions, the Slutsky
expression can be written as

22
c2xp —c2u
+ae
xp x

(19)

Substitution

-

of (14), and (19), in (18) gives

2

22 (c1 +c2

(20)

2

x
In the above expression,

0 from the standard Slutsky property of

Also note
compensated demand. it follows from (16) and (20) that dV2> 0 •
dp
dV2
1
that a higher c, corresponds to a higher —.
must decline if the state
Therefore the welfare of industrial workers
accumulates by turning the terms of trade against peasants. Preobrazhensky'S

second

proposition is therefore invalid. Also: turning the terms of trade
—10—

against peasants leads to a larger decline in the welfare of industrial

workers if the price response of the rural surplus is larg.
The crucial point missed by Preobrazhensky and subsequent researchers is
the constraint generated by the demand and supply balance of the rural

good.1' This constraint, (10), dictates the feasible combinations of the
terms of trade and the urban wage and, hence, it determines the feasible (as

well as the necessary) change in the urban wage corresponding to any change in
the terms of trade. 12 This in turn

determines

the effect of a change in the

terms of trade on the state's surplus as well as on the welfare of urban
workers.

To recapitulate, we have shown that turning the terms of trade against
the rural

sector

leads to an increase in the state's surplus according to

(15), and that it leads to a decrease in the welfare of urban workers

according to (20). Finally, the effect of the terms of trade on the rural
sector's welfare is given directly by (4). As one would expect, the peasants
experience a decrease in welfare if the price ratio is turned against them.
These three effects are now put together for normative analysis, which is
conducted in the next two sections.

IV. REFORM IN TUE TERMS OF TRADE

The aim of
ment

a policy reform analysis is

to identify rules for an improve-

in society's overall welfare. Naturally any

less information is required to apply

it.

such

rule is

more

useful if

The results in this section are

particularly significant from this point of view because, as we shall see,

their application requires quite minimal

information.

The first step in the analysis of reform is to def Inc the aggregate

social welfare. For this, we use an additive Bergson—Samuelson social welfare

—1k—

function,

1, to aggregate over individual utilities.

(21)

— N1W(V1) + N2W(V2)

where W is concave and increasing in V. If 6 iE the
marginal

social value of the

investment, then the current value of the aggregate social welfare,

II, is given by

R '1'+ 6i

(22)

Substituting (11) in (22)
(23)

N1W(V'(p, N1)) + N2W(V2(p, v)) +

H—

The

—

wL2

above expression is now perturbed with respect to p, while ensuring a

corresponding

perturbation in the urban wage to preserve the

Using

(7),

(24)

(4) and

we obtain

dH H aHdW
2

—

where

identity (10).

N'8'Q

-—

+ N282( x2 +!
c
p wp

—

Q

2
C

p

is the social value of a marginal increase

in the income of

worker in sector i. The three terms on the right band side of (24)
represent, respectively, the welfare gain to the rural sector, the welfare
a

gain

to the urban sector, and the loss of investment due to an increase in the

relative price of the rural

good.

Naturally, these gains and losses are

—12—

weighed by their respective social weights.

Using (10), and the definition of the budget share, (X,

(24) can be

expressed as

—

(25)

N2x(1

—

+ N2x2(2 — 5)

J2

Note that the above expression clearly separates the two distinct effects of a

change in the relative price. The first term is the direct effect of an
increase in the relative price of the rural good, which benefits the peasants

but hurts the urban workers. The second term is the net effect of the induced
increase in the urban wage, which benefits the urban workers but reduces the
investment fund.

The expression (25) can now be used to obtain the rules for reform in the
terms of trade, i.e., the sufficient conditions which will guarantee that a
specific change in the relative price will increase the social welfare.

Rewriting (25), we obtain

dR N2x2[(1 — 6) + (2 — 5)

(26)

Next note from (19) that
> 0,

(27)

/cL2C2 >
xp
x—

C2

1)1

1, because C211 > 0. Further, as

xp-

it follows from (14) that

C
wp

x

Substitution of the above in (26) yields the following two rules for ;:.forms

(28)

< 0, if

'

and

2

(with at least one strict inequality),

—13—

and

(29)

6 and 82

> 0, if 81

From (28) and (29)

,

6 (with at least one strict inequality)

we find that: moving the terms of trade
against (in

favor of) peasants is desirable if the social weight on investment is greater
(smaller) than the social weights on rural and urban income, Note that this
rule holds no matter which one of the two social weights on income is

larger. The reason for this is quite simple. If the social valuation of a
dollar of investment exceeds the social valuation of a dollar of consumption
(in both sectors), then the gains from moving the prices against peasants
exceed the losses .due to decreased consumption, regardless of which one of the

two sets of workers is worse—off.

What is important about these rules is that their use does not require
the knowledge of the behavioral parameters (such as the rural surplus

response, and the urban consumption response). Our rules can be used solely
on the basis of the social weights 'in the existing regime, i.e., the social

weIghts associated with a dollar of rural and urban income versus a dollar of

investment. The simplicity of these rules is quite unlike the results which
one typically finds in the public finance literature [see Atkinson and
Stiglitz (1980, p. 382—386) for a recent review of this material].

The procedure for moving the terms

of

trade in the desirable direction

can now be examined. Suppose we are in an initial regime in which the social

weight on investment exceeds the two social weights on income. Then, from
(28) the relative price of the rural good, p, should be decreased. A decrease
in p, from (4) and (20), will decrease the individual utilities, V and

but, on the other hand, it will increase the investment I, due to (15). The

—14—

social weights on income,

and

will

in turn increase

since individuals

now have lower levels of utility.'3 In contrast, it is natural to expect that
the

decrease

in p will lead to a decrease in the social weight on investment,

6, because the investment has become larger.

Thus, after every small decrease in the relative price, we need to

compare 8',

2

,

and 6 •

The price decrease should be continued until that

point when the larger of the two social weights on incomes becomes equal to

the social weight on investment. Once this equality arises, any finite

decrease in p will violate (28). Thus, we can no longer use the rules of
reform, and additional information is needed to facilitate further policy

making. Essentially the same line of reasoning applies for an increase in the
relative price if we are in an initial regime in which the social weight on

investment is smaller than both

of

the social weights on income, i.e., when

(29) holds.

A final point needs to be emphasized here. The above analysis clearly
shows that, over a range of social weights, the decision to widen or to narrow
the price scissors is independent of the comparison between rural and urban

welf are, Instead, this decision depends on the intertemporal comparison
between consumption and investment.

V. OPTIMT}1 TERMS OF TRADE

We are already in a position to recognize some features of the optimal

price structure. Assuming that a unique interior maximum exists for our
maximization problem, we

conditions

should

have

0 at the optimum.

The necessary

for this characteristic of the optimum can be extracted from (28)

and (29). We find that the optimal. price structure must satisfy14

—15-

1>6>2,or2>6>1.

(30)

In other words, if the social weight on investment does not lie between
the social weights on the rural and the urban income then the regime is not

optimal, and it can be improved through price policy. This result needs to
contrasted with a view often held in the literature on project evaluation that
the social weight on investment should be higher than the (undifferentiated)
social weight on consumption [Yotopoulos and Nugent (1976, p. 385), f or

example 1.

This

view is incorrect if the terms of trade can be used as an

of policy.
Before analyzing the optimal term of trade, we take up the question of

instrument

taxation in the present policy problem. The
theory suggests that nre

prices

insights can

often

recent literature on optimal tax

be obtained by comparing market

with shadow prices, rather than by comparing producer and consumer

prices [Stiglitz and Dasgupta (1971)]. This is specially relevant here since
producer and consumer prices are identical. In fact, a rural worker is
simultaneously a producer and a consumer.

We therefore define "tax" ("subsidy") as the difference between the
consumer (producer) price and the social opportunity cost of producing the

sa good. If

fl

is

the shadow price of the rural good, then the shadow price

of the rural good in terms of the urban good is

therefore is defined as s — (p —

n/6)/p.

ft 6•

The subsidy rate

An interesting feature of the

present problem is that the same price regime will mean a subsidy to one

sector and a tax on another sector. Take an example. If s > 0 then the urban
sector is paying a tax, while the rural sector is receiving a subsidy.
To obtain the optimal tax formula, the following Lagrangian is defined by
explicitly incorporating the rural .good constraint, (10), into the maximand

—16--

Z

(31)

where '

is

'1' + ó[N2Y —

N2y2 —

N'y']

+ nEN1Q — N2x2]

given by (21), and p and w are the control variables.15 The first

order conditions with respect to p and w, after some manipulation'6, can be
written as

(32)

s—,1
' 2

__________

(C'
+c2)
Qp
xp
—p

x

Equations (33) and (34) are alternative expressions for the optimal

subsidy rate, and these can be easily interpreted. Note from (32) that s is
positive or negative depending on whether

is greater than or smaller than

A higher , on the other hand, corresponds to a lower level of utility
[see footnote 13]. The expression (32), therefore, clearly demarcates the
location of the optima]. tax (or subsidy) between the two sectors: the workers

who are better—off should be taxed, while the workers who are worse—off should
be- subsidized. This result is independent of the behavioral responses in the
economy, of the social valuation of investment, and of whether the peasants or

the industrial worker3 are better—off. Note, however, that the magnitude of
subsidy does depend on the social weight on investment.
The influence of the rural surplus response on subsidy can be partly

understood in the following manner. For a moment, assume that the social

weights are constants. Then, a higher

means

that

an increase in the

price p leads to a higher loss (gain) to the government if p exceeds (is less
than)

ui/6, The government, therefore, would want to keep a-lower absolute

—17—

value of the rate of subsidy, as (32) indicates. This explanation, however,
is

only partial because our formulae for an optimum do not provide a. closed

form solution for the rate of subsidy.
The formula for the optimal price is easily obtained by equating the

right hand sides of (32) and

(33),

and using (14).

2
2
2 1 —)—wL(
2 6 —8)c
px("

(34)

The above expression equates the net social gain from a price increase to the
net

social 1088 due to the price—induced wage increase. Rearranging the terms

in (34), we obtain a remarkably simple rule to characterize the optimum.

(6_

2)

(
Alternative

)2 Wp

—

X

budget share

Characterizations: In the above analysis we have employed

the terms of trade as the instrument of control. This we have done to keep
the analysis within the context of the tecissors problem'. There are several
alternative ways, however, in which the present problem can be characterized.
First, consider the control of the nominal price of the urban good or the

nominal urbanwage, because it is

trade

through these variables that a terms of

policy can actually be implemented. It can be verified that an increase

in the nominal price of the urban good corresponds to a movement in the terms

of trade against

the rural

sector, and that an increase in the

nominal urban

wage corresponds to a movement in the terms of trade in favor of the rural
sector. Either one of these two nominal variables can therefore be used as
the instrument of control, without affecting the results.
Second, the economic content of the analysis remains unchanged if either

—18—

the level of investment, 1, or the rural surplus, Q, is used as the

independent policy instrument. In these cases the analysis will correspond to
what is sometimes called the 'investment problem', and the 'marketed surplus'
problem.

Third, our conclusions regarding the terms of trade remain essentially
unaltered if the "modern" capital good produced in the urban sector can be
productively employed in the rural sector, and if the government exercises the

choice over the intersectoral allocation of investment. As a simple example,
consider the case in which there is positive investment in both sectors and
the rent

on the

verified

that

optimum.

change

rural capital accrues to the rural

pricing

sector.

Then it can be

rules, (32) to (35) continue to characterize the

Similarly, our qualitative results on the terms of

trade will not

if a time dependent process of technical progress in production is

incorporated in the model.

Finally, we can reinterpret our analysis in a decentralized economic

setting. To see this, first imagine that the government instructs its public
sector managers to maximize profits based on the nominal prices they face, but

introduces either a commodity tax on the urban good or a wage tax. Naturally,

then,

the government can control the terms of trade at any level that it

desires.

In particular, the optimum which we have analyzed earlier, is

implementable in this manner. Next, assume that the industrial production is
privately owned, but that the government imposes a 100Z

profit

tax, and

that

it also imposes one of the two taxes mentioned above. It follows that the
desired public policy can be implemented through a private market
equilibrium.

17

—19--

VI. UNtPLO'!MENT MD LABOR MOBILITY IN DEVELOPING ECON4IES

Many developing economies are characterised by significant unemployment
as well as by endogenous mobility of labor between rural and urban

It

is then necessary that the design of pricing

should

In

take into account its influence

on

policy in such economies

labor mobility and unemployment.18

this section, therefore, we extend our basic

additional

sectors.

model to include these

aspects.

The population is now divided into three groups, consisting of employed

rural workers, employed urban workers, and unemployed workers. Their

utilities are represented by V'(p, N'), V2(p, w), and V

,

and their

populations are denoted by N', N2, and Nu respectively. For simplicity, the
present analysis abstracts from transfer arrangements from the employed to the
unemployed workers, and assumes that the unemployed workers have zero income.
We posit that the mobility of labor across different groups of workers

can be described through a reduced form equation

(36)

N'

N'(p, w, N2)

which gives the rural. population

as

a function of the relative price, the

urban wage and urban employment. It follows then that the level of unemployment can be obtained as a function of same variables, since

(37)

N=Nl+N2+NU

Note that our representation of labor mobility is quite general. Specific
hypotheses concerning migration which have been proposed in the literature,
e.g., the Rarris—Todaro hypothesis [Harris and Todaro (1970)1, can be treated

—20—

as special cases

of

the above.

Next, one needs to specify the determination of the urban wage. A number
of alternative theories have been proposed in the literature [see Stiglitz
(1982a, 1982b)J, and it is possible to examine the correct pricing policy for
each of these theories of urban wage determination [see Sah and Stiglitz

(1983a) for such an approach]. For brevity, however, we follow here a simple
hypothesis, according to which the urban wage is fixed, and the urban

employment is controlled by the government. This representation of what the
government can control in a developing economy conforms to the understanding
that the urban wage is institutionally determined and also that much of the
urban employment is in the public sector, over which the government exercises
some control.

Note, however, that the two policy variables, p and N2, can not be

controlled independently in the present problem. This is because a given
combination of (p, N2) determines a level of N' through (36), and the
resulting set of variables can not in general be expected to satisfy the
quantity balance of the rural good, (10).

For later use, we define the following elasticities. Based on (36),

(38)

N = tnN ,andMe
p
3Lnp

LnN'

are the elasticities of the rural population with respect to the relative

price and the urban employment respectively. a —

is

the elasticity of

rural surplus per rural worker with respect to land per rural worker.
Finally,

—

3LQ)

is elasticity of total rural surplus with respect to

its price. It is easy to verify that

—21—

—

(39)

+ (1 —

£a)Mp

The relevant Lagrangian is defined by (31) in which

N1W(V1) + N2w(v2) + (N —

(40)

N1— N2)W(Vt1)

The first order conditions with respect to p and N2 can be obtained easily.

For brevity, we present and interpret only the first order condition with
respect to p, which after making subsitutions which are similar to those

encountered earlier, can be written as

(61 - 62)

—

(41)

(1 —

(42)

—

W(V)

—

w(v')

+!_E

l4 + c]
2

—

B'pXa

Note immediately that (41) reduces to (32) if

we

would expect. If the

pricing with

where

marginal,

— 0.

This

is precisely what

migration is zero then the rule for optimal

endogenous migration is the same as the one in which populations

are fixed.

The additional effects introduced by labor mobility can be understood

intuitively by comparing (41) with (32). First note that the rural surplus
response in the denominator of (41) is now redefined, according to (39), to

include the effect of price on the size of rural population. Second, from

(42), •

is

the gain in the social welfare if one unemployed worker becomes

employed in the rural sector. This includes the direct gain, W(V1) —

and the indirect loss, 8'pXaa, due to the increased congestion on the rural
land. The term containing

in (41), therefore, represents the welfare gain

—22—

from the price induced labor bility.
In the rest of this section, we provide a specific illustration of the
above approach in which the migration is described by the Harris—Todaro

hypothesis. According to this hypothesis, the unemployed workers are in the
urban sector, and the probability that a migrant worker from the rural sector
finds employment in the urban sector is N2/(N — N1).

The sectoral populations

are determined by the equalization o& the rural utility to the expected urban

utility. That is, the expression (36)is specialized to

(43)

(N —

N1)V' —

N2V2

+

(N — N1 — N2)VU

To ensure that NU remains positive, it is explicitly assumed that

v2 > V1 > V". This naturally restricts the range of price

within which the

above hypothesis is meaningful. In addition, we make the following
simplifying assumptions: (i) the rural land is not too scarce, i. e., Xa and
are negligible in magnitude, and (ii) the social welfare function is

utilitarian, i.e., W(V) — V, and B A. Because of the second assumption,
our results do not depend on whether the social welfare function is defined
over the ex ante or the ex post utilities of workers.

By perturbaing (43) with

(44)

respect

to p and N2, we find -that

> 0, and N < 0

A result follows immediately. An increase (decrease) in the price of
agricultural output will be accompanied by an increase (decrease) in

industrial employment. This can be seen as follows. An increase in p
increases the total rural surplus because

—23—

> 0, from (39) and (44). Also,

an increase

in

p decreases

the urban demand for the rural good. As a result,

will be an oversupply of the rural good. An increase in the urban

there

employment will therefore be necessary to achIeve a
and

balance between the demand

supply of the rural good.

From the first order conditions of optimality with respect to p and

N2,

we obtain

1

11

,and

2

N2L2(w —

(46)

NpQ(1 —

where

Me)

''rAj -

aLL
There are two results to be noted. First, s > 0 from (45). Therefore,
the optimal terms of trade will entail a subsidy to peasants and a tax on
industrial workers.

Second, the optimal terms of trade will entail a level of industrial
employment such that the industrial wage will exceed the marginal product of

an industrial worker. This follows from (44), (46), and s > 0. The idea
behind this result is quite intuitive. The society in the present case is
concerned only with the rural utility because this utility is the same as the
expected utility of other workers.

An. increase in the rural price therefore

raises the social welfare associated with consumption. From an earlier
result, on the other hand, a higher rural price will be accompanied by an

increase in the urban employment. The contribution of an additional urban
worker to investment is

—

w)L2, which declines as urban employment

increases because of the declining marginal product. The optimal terms of

—24—

trade will thus involve a trade—off between a gain in consumption and a loss

in investment. The latter obviously implies that

< w.

VII. CfMENTS ON THE SOVIET DEBATE
A significant shortcoming of the Soviet debate was the lack of attention

given to the behavioral responses of peasants. This is especially surprising
since the economic events faced by the early Soviet state (Dobb (1966, Chapter
7)], as veil as Vladimir Lenin's warnings'9, had already pointed out the

importance of incentives. Be that as it may, we have clearly demonstrated
that the behavioral responses of peasants are central to any analysis of the
scissors problem.

On the specific effects of turning the prices against peasants, we find
that the government can indeed increase the rate of accumulation by imposing a

price squeeze on peasants. This effect was originally claimed by
Preobrazhensky, and his claim is valid, despite the doubts raised by

subsequent researchers. But, the other important proposition made by
Preobrazhensky, that the price squeeze can be operated without hurting the

industrial proletariat, is invalid. A price squeeze on peasants will hurt the
industrial proletariat, just as it will hurt the peasants,
It is of some interest to note here that much of the criticism faced by

Preobrazhensky
accused

in

the Soviet debate was that he was anti—peasant. "They

him of ,favoring

the 'exploitation' of the peasants, of advocating a

kind of internal colonialism" [Nove (1965, p. xi)]. In fact, Preobrazhensky
himself devoted much of his energies to trying to prove that he was not as
anti—peasant as his book might have suggested at first [see his reply to
Nikolai Bukharin and other opponents, in Preobrazhensky (1965, Appendix)].
Some of this criticism might have been avoided, we suspect, had he not claimed

—25--

(incorrectly, as demonstrated by our analysis) that the industrial proletariat
would not have to pay any price for the state's ac.umulation.

Our analysis has also shown that the determination of the correct "tax
level or the correct size of the scissors depends on the social valuation of
the welfare of the peasants and the industrial proletariat, as compared to the

social valuation of investment [see equations (32) to (35)]. On this score,
it has often been believed that the peasants' welfare was irrelevant to the

early Soviet state. Probably a better interpretation of the pre—
collectivization debates might be that Preobrazhensky represented the lower

end of the concern for the peasants, in contrast to Lenin who represented the
middle position,2° and to Bukharin who represented the higher end of the

concern for the peasants.2' On the other hand, it appears that the early
Soviet leadership was fairly unanimous in placing a higher social weight on
investment as compared to consumption, and in placing a higher social weight
on the consumption of the industrial proletariat as compared to the
consumption of the peasants.

22

For this interpretation of the initial Soviet situation, our analysis
shows that a movement in the terms of trade against peasants emerges as
desirable, at least to that point where investment and the consumption of

industrial protetariat have the sams social weight [see (28)1. The direction
of change in the terms of trade, therefore, remains the same even though the

relative concern for peasants might differ! The level of tax to be imposed on
peasants, on the other hand, will differ according to the social concern for

them: a higher concern will correspond to a lower tax [see (32)].

—26—

VIII. EXTENSIONS

There

are two

important

aspects of a model of policy analysis such as the

present one: the structure of the economy under consideration, and the
instruments

worked

of policy which the government

with a simple dual

presentation

economy

can (or

cannot) employ. We have

model, while ensuring an adequate re-

of individuals' incentives. The terms of trade is the instrument

of control on which we have focussed, although we have discussed a number of

alternative ways in which the same control problem can be characterized. It
is always possible to include additional, instruments in an analysis, but one
needs to exercise some care in doing so.

Take the example of the policy debates in the Soviet Union in the 1920's.
A number of instruments of policy, other than the terms of trade, were brought
up in these debates; among them were quantity controls, credit policy, foreign

trade and borrowing, railway tariff, and printing money. It was widely
acknowledged, however, that the opportunities provided by these additional
instruments were at best quite limited, given the institutional, limitations of

the economy at that time. Further, it was also acknowledged that the inadequacies of the bureaucracy and the possibility of an underground economy
were quite serious, and that these features should be considered in using any
instrument which required a direct control of quantities.23
The institutional constraints faced by many developing countries today
are no less restrictive, probably much more so, than those faced by the early

Soviet state. For such countries, therefore, it is desirable to focus on the
instruments like the terms of trade, which are less difficult to implement.
In developing economies with relatively greater institutional
capabilities, however, many instruments of policy have been used which are

relevant to the town—versus—country considerations. Among the instruments

—27—

which need to be examined are: agricultural marketing boards and internal tax
borders which

exercise

some regional control over prices and

can tax the

marketed surplus, and non—price methods for the distribution of food in urban
areas24'25

IX, CONCLUSION
The problem of price scissors has remained a controversial issue ever

since the Soviet leadership debated it in the 1920's. Also, it is a topic of
substantial importance in imich of today's developing world. Our analysis of
the problem shows that some of the received wisdom on this issue is correct,

while some of it is not correct. We conclude that the rate of accumulation in
a socialist economy can indeed be increased by imposing a price squeeze on the

rural sector. But, a price squeeze on the peasants leads to a decrease in the
welfare of industrial workers, just as it leads to a decrease in the welfare

of the peasants. We have also identified the critical parameters which
influence the impact of the terms of trade on the state's surplus, and on the

welfare of industrial workers. These parameters are the price response of the
rural surplus, and the price and the income response of the urban consumption
of.

the rural good.
Our analysis of desirable reforms in the terms of trade yields rules

which are particularly simple to use, requiring only the knowledge of the
social weights on the incomes of workers in the two sectors and of the social

weight on investment. In many cases, the desirability of a shift in the terms
of trade can be assessed simply by looking at the intertemporal trade—off s
(rather

than by looking at the rural—urban trade—off a).

Finally, we have

analyzed the optimal terms of trade. This analysis leads to a remarkably
simple rule to determine which of the two sectors should be taxed and which

—28—

should be subsidized.

We have then extended our analysis to incorporate unemployment and labor
mobility, which are critical, features of many of today's developing

economies. Using a simple model with rigid industrial wage, we show that the
optimal terms of trade will entail a subsidy to the rural

sector

and a tax on

the urban sector. Further, the corresponding level of urban employment will
be such that the urban wage will exceed the marginal product of an urban
worker.

We also discuss a number of other ways in which the present approach can
be. expanded to suit the varying economic structures and institutional

capabilities of different economies. These extensions will naturally modify
the precise form of the results obtained here. We believe, however, that the
central economic effects which we have brought out in our analysis, focussing

on the consequences of pricing policy (term. of trade) on incentives in the
rural and the urban sectors, and the general equilibrium effects of a price
change on the welfare of individuals and on accumulation, will remain valid.

—29—

FOOTNOTES

1.

The term 'price scissors' was used extensively in the Soviet

industrialization debate. The term denotes the relative price of the
industrial (urban) good in terms of the agricultural (rural) good. It is
interesting to note here that the diagram of the relative movements of the
retail prices of agricultural and industrial goods in the USSR, between
April 1922 and March 1924, indeed resembles a pair of scissors [Dobb
(1966, p. 164)].
2.

"The foundation of every division of labour ...

is

the separation of town

from country. One might well say that the whole economic history of
society is summed up in the movement of this antithesis. However, for the

moment we shall not go into this" [Marx (1967, p. 472)]. Marx does not
elaborate on this issue in his later writing either.

3. For example, Bukharin (1971), Lenin (1975a, l975b), Preobrazhensky (1965),
Stalin (1954), and Trotsky (1971).

4. Preobrazhensky's verbal model consisted of a peasant sector existing side
by side with a state controlled industrial sector. This model, as Dixit
(1973, p. 325) correctly points out, can be considered a precursor of the
modern models of dual developing economies.

5. This may also explain why there has been an increasing sense of
dissatisfaction with the quantity based approach of the traditional

thoeries of economic planning. These approaches, originating in the model

of Feldman,typically ignore the rural sector entirely, which implicitly
means that the government can force the rural sector to deliver the

desired amount of food needed for the urban workers, regardless of the
amount of urban goods the rural sector receives in return.

6. A significant recent work in this area is by Lipton (1977), in which a
history of the town—versus—country ideologies is traced. Also, see Dixit
(1969), and 'Hornby (1968).

7. Individual's preferences are assumed identical in the two sectors, but

the

more general case can be easily worked out.

8. As we discuss later, this is the correct assumption to make for examining
the scissors problem. For an analysis of pricing in an open economy, see
Sah and Stiglitz (1983b).

9. We discuss other possible instruments

of

policy, as well as other

structures of the economy, in Section VIII.
10. "The objection that taxation on the basis of a definite price policy will
affect the wages of workers...is completely futile...Here is a numerical
example: if as a result of an appropriate price policy the working class
along with the rest of the population pays to the state industry say 50

million, the state can easily return this sum to the workers by an
increase in wages,..." [Preobrazhensky (1965, p. 112)1.

11. It is in fact possible that some governments are also ignorant of such a

constraint. If this is the case, then a government may decide to lower
the relative price of food without changing the urban wage. A natural
response to the resulting shortage of food in cities would be to introduce

an urban rationing system. In turn then, one could argue that the
recurring occurances of rationing in many economies is consistent with the

kind of ignorance suggested above. In any event, a rationing system,
whether it is introduced by design or because the government is unaware of
the constraints in the economy, entails a different set of instruments

than the one on which we focus in this paper. See Sah and Stiglitz
(1983b) for further analysis.

12. Contrast this to footnote 10, which appears to suggest that the urban wage
can be arbitrarily changed along with any given change in the terms of
trade.

13. This is because

( 0. To ensure this, we are assuming that either (1)

the social welfare function is strictly concave and the marginal utility
of income is non—increasing in income, or (ii) the social welfare function
is concave
14.

and the marginal utility of income is decreasing in income.

To keep our exposition uncluttered,

we are ruling out

a rather rare regime

inwhich 81_82_6
15. Note that the focus in this paper is on determining the properties of the

optimal regime at any given point in time. An instructive and useful
extension will be to find out how the optimum policy variables as well as

the resulting welfare levels of individuals change over time. Such an
analysis of the optimal time path is beyond the scope of the present
paper.

16. We

use (4)

from

and (7), and also the expressions for

,

, and

(2) and (5).

17. The relationship between the optimal production and pricing in public
enterprises and optimal taxation of private enterprises has been discussed

in the standard tax literature. See, for instance, Stiglitz and Dasgupta
(1971).

18. Bythe same token, the valuation of labor, i.e., the shadow wage of labor,

will be influenced not only by the dependence of the two sectors through
trade and resource transfers, but also by the pricing policies of the

government. The existing literature on the shadow wage has not paid
sufficient attention to these relationships. See Sah and Stiglitz (1983a)

for a re complete analysis.

9• ...

it is impossible to increase the production and collection of grain
except by improving the condition of the peasantry..." [Lenin (1975b,

p. 536)1.

20. See Lenin (1975a).
21. Bukharln, in fact, exhorted the peasants to enrich themselves.

22. Stated differently, it appears that there was unanimity on
6 > 62 )

3'.

But there were differences on the relative size of

61 compared to 2.

It is obvious that, in the present context, the

welfare evaluations are not based on an anonymous social welfare function.

23. "Exchange is freedom to trade; it is capitalism. It is useful to us in as
much as it will help us overcome the dispersal of the small producer, and
to a certain degree combat the evils of bureaucracy" [Lenin (1975b, p.
555)1.

24. Another issue which arises repeatedly in policy discussions is the role
and the nature of correct pricing and taxation policies in those open
developing economies which not only have the special features associated
with dualism, but which in addition face restrictions on the external

trade of some of the

goods they produce, as well as on the external

borrowing which is available to them. For an analysis of many of these
issues, see Sah and Stiglitz (1983b).

25. See Sah

(1982)

for a comparison of the performance of several different

non—price instruments to allocate a good within a singl sector with many
consumers.

REFERENCES

Atkinson, Anthony B. and Stiglita, Joseph E., Lectures on Public Ec-noniics,
New York: McGraw—Hill, 1980.

Barnum, Howard N. and

Squire,

Lyn, A Model of an Agricultural Household,

Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press, 1979.

Behrman, Jere B., Supply Response in Underdeveloped Agriculture: A Case Study
of Four Major Annual Crops in Thailand, 1937—1963, Amsterdam: North
Holland, 1968.

Bukharin, Nikolai I., Economics of the Transformation Period, New York:
Bergman Publishers, 1971.

Dixit, Avinash K., "Marketable Surplus and Dual Development," Journal of
Economic Theory, August 1969, 1, 203—219.

___________, "Models of Dual Economies," in James A. Mirrlees and Nicholas H.
Stern, eds., Models of Economic Growth, New York: John Wiley, 1973, 325—
352.

Dobb, Maurice, Soviet Economic Development since 1917, London: Routledge and
Kegan Paul, 1966.

Erlich, Alexander, The Soviet Industrialization Debate, Cambridge: Harvard
University Press, 1960.

Harris, John and Todaro, Michael, "Migration, Unemployment, and Development,"
American Economic Review, March 1970, 60, 126—142.

Hornby, J.M., "Investment and

Trade

Policy in the Dual Economy," Economic

Journal, March 1968, 78, 96—107.

Lau, Lawrence 3., Lin, Wuu—Long and

Yotopoulos,

Pan A., "The Linear

Logarithmic Expenditure System: An Application to Consumption—Leisure
Choice," Econometrica, July 1978, 46, 843—868.

Lenin, Vladimir (1975a), "Economics and Politics in the Era of the
Dictatorship of the Proletariat," in Selected Works, Vol. 3, Moscow:
Progress Publishers, 1975, 230—238.

Lenin, Vladimir (1975b), "The Tax in Kind," in Selected Works, Vol. 3,

Moscow: Progress Publishers, 1975, 526—556.

Lipton, Michael, Why

Poor

People Stay Poor: Urban Bias in World Development,

Cambridge, Harvard University Press, 1977.

Marx,

Karl,

Capital, Vol. 1, New York: Vintage Books, 1967.

Mitra, Ashok, Terms of Trade and Class Relations, London: Prank Cass, 1977.

Nove, Alec, "Introduction," in Evgeny Preobrazhensky, The New Economics,

Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1965.

Peterson, Willis L., "International Farm Prices and the Social Cost of Cheap.
Food Policies," American Journal of Agricultural Economics, February 1979,
61, 12—21.

Preobrazhertsky, Evgeny, The New Economics, Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1965.

Sah, Raaj Kumar, "Performance of Coupons, Queues, and Rations in Managing

Scarcities," CADE Discussion Paper 82—48. Department of Economics,
Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania, 1982.

_________ and Stiglitz, Joseph E.

(1983a), "Social Cost of Labor and Project

Evaluation: A General Approach," mimeo, Department of Economics,
Princeton: Princeton University, 1983.

_________ and _________ (1983b), "The Town, the Country, and the Rest of
World: Economics of Public Marketing Boards in Open. Developing
Economies," mimeo , Department of Economics, Princeton: Princeton
University, 1983.

Schultz, Theodore W., ed., Distortions of Agricultural Incentives,

Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1978.

Stalin, Joseph, Problems of Leninism, Moscow: Progress Publishers, 1954.

Stiglitz, Joseph E.. (1982a), "The Structure of Labor Markets and Shadow
Prices in LDCs," in Richard H. Sabot, ed., Migration and the Labor Market

in Developing Countries, Boulder: Westview Press, 1982.

_____________ (1982b), "Alternative Theories of Wage Determination and
Unemployment: the Efficiency Wage Model," in Mark Gersovitz et. al., eds.,
The Theory and Experience of Economic Development, London: George Allen
and Unwin, 1982.

___________ and Dasgupta, Partha S., "Differential Taxation, Public Goods, and
Economic Efficiency," Review of Economic Studies, April 1971, 38, 151—174.

Trotsky, Leon, 1905, New York: Random House, 1971.

Yotopoulos, Pan A. and Nugent, Jeffrey B., Economics of Development, New

York: Harper and Row, 1976.

