NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

IS ACADEMIC SCIENCE DRIVING A SURGE
IN INDUSTRIAL INNOVATION? EVIDENCE
FROM PATENT CITATIONS
Lee Branstetter
Yoshiaki Ogura
Working Paper 11561
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11561
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2005
We thank seminar participants at the NBER Summer Institute, Columbia Business School, the UCLA
Anderson Graduate School of Management, Hitotsubashi University, the University of Tokyo, and the
NBER-CREST-CRIW Zvi Griliches Memorial Conference for useful comments and suggestions. We are
grateful to Jim Adams, Reiko Aoki, Pierre Azoulay, Rebecca Henderson, Adam Jaffe, Joshua Lerner, and
Frank Lichtenberg for detailed comments on an earlier draft. We also wish to thank a number of academic
scientists and industrial R&D managers for providing me with their insights into the process by which
knowledge flows from academia to industry. By prior agreement, they will remain anonymous. We are
indebted to Masami Imai, Hiau-Looi Kee, Changxiu Li, and Kaoru Nabeshima for excellent research
assistance. We would like to thank Tony Breitzman, Francis Narin, Adam Jaffe, and Marie and Jerry Thursby
for their help in obtaining the data used in this study. The Institute of Economic Research at Hitotsubashi
University provided a hospitable environment in which part of this paper was written – Lee Branstetter
thanks the faculty and staff for their support. This project was funded by grants from the University of
California Industry-University Cooperative Research Program, the NBER Project on Industrial Technology
and Productivity, the Japan Foundation Center for Global Partnership, and the National Science Foundation
(grant no. 0097941). Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this paper
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation or any
other funding agency.The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by Lee Branstetter and Yoshiaki Ogura. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Is Academic Science Driving a Surge in Industrial Innovation? Evidence from Patent Citations
Lee Branstetter and Yoshiaki Ogura
NBER Working Paper No. 11561
August 2005
JEL No. O31, O38
ABSTRACT

What is driving the remarkable increase over the last decade in the propensity of patents to cite
academic science? Does this trend indicate that stronger knowledge spillovers from academia have
helped power the surge in innovative activity in the U.S. in the 1990s? This paper seeks to shed light
on these questions by using a common empirical framework to assess the relative importance of
various alternative hypotheses in explaining the growth in patent citations to science. Our analysis
supports the notion that the nature of U.S. inventive activity has changed over the sample period,
with an increased emphasis on the use of the knowledge generated by university-based scientists in
later years. However, the concentration of patent-to-paper citation activity within what we call the
"bio nexus" suggests that much of the contribution of knowledge spillovers from academia may be
largely confined to bioscience-related inventions.

Lee Branstetter
Columbia Business School
815 Uris Hall
3022 Broadway
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
lgb2001@columbia.edu

Yoshiaki Ogura
Kyoto University Institute of Economic
Research
Center for Advanced Policy Studies
Yoshida Honmachi, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto-shi
606-8501 JAPAN
ogura@kier.kyoto-u.ac.jp

I.

Introduction

Recent research points to an apparent surge in innovative activity in the United States
over the past fifteen years. This is suggested by, among other things, a sharp rise in patent
applications and patent grants that has substantially outpaced increases in public and private R&D
spending. While a large fraction of U.S. patent grants are awarded to foreign inventors, the
fraction obtained by domestic inventors has risen – and this fraction has risen particularly rapidly
in fields where patenting has grown most sharply. The recent patent surge could potentially be
explained by an increase in the propensity of Americans to patent inventions, rather than an
increase in the productivity of American research and development, but the recent research of
Kortum and Lerner [1998, 2000, 2003] strongly supports the latter interpretation. If this
conclusion is correct, then it could help explain the widely observed increase in U.S. TFP growth
in recent years.1
But if American R&D productivity has increased, then that raises the question of what
factors are driving the increase.2 This paper attempts to assess the importance of one possible
contributing factor – increased knowledge spillovers from U.S.-based academic science. In
essence, this paper is an attempt to explain the phenomenon graphed out in Figure I. This figure
shows that citations made by patents granted in the United States to articles in the scientific
literature increased very rapidly from the mid 1980s through the late 1990s.3 Over this period,
the number of patents granted by the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office to U.S. residents more
than doubled, real R&D expenditures in the United States rose by almost 40%, and global output
of scientific articles increased by about 13%, but patent citations to science increased more than
1

See Gordon [2002].
The work of Kortum and Lerner [2000] has stressed the potential role of venture capital-linked firms in
improving U.S. R&D output.
3
This graph does not break down growth in citations by the nationality of the inventor, but data from the
2002 National Science and Engineering Indicators shows that the majority of these citations are made by
domestic patent applicants, and U.S.-based academic science is disproportionately likely to be cited. The
fraction of citations to science made to U.S. authors has increased over this period. See also Narin et. al.
[1997] and Hicks et. al. [2001].
2

3

13 times.4 Many at the National Science Foundation and other U.S. science policy agencies find
this graph extremely interesting, because it seems to suggest – at least in some broad sense – that
academic science and industrial technology are “closer” than they used to be. This could mean
that publicly funded science is generating more spillovers to industrial innovation than in the
past.5 This, in turn, may have contributed in important ways to the apparent surge of innovative
activity in the United States in the 1990s.
This positive interpretation of recent trends in the data is influenced by the theoretical
contributions of Evenson and Kislev [1976] and the more recent analysis their work inspired,
such as Adams [1990] and Kortum [1997]. In this general class of models, applied research is a
search process that eventually exhausts the technological opportunities within a particular field.
However, basic science can open up new “search distributions” for applied researchers, raising
the productivity and the level of applied research effort – at least temporarily. Viewed through
this theoretical lens, the concurrence of rapid growth in U.S. private R&D expenditures, even
more rapid growth in patenting, mounting evidence of an acceleration in TFP growth, and still
more rapid growth in the intensity with which U.S. patents cite academic science would all seem
to suggest a response to new technological opportunities created by academic research. Not
surprisingly, other advanced industrial nations are deliberately trying to foster closer connections
between university-based scientific research and industrial R&D in conscious imitation of the
“U.S. model.”
However, increasingly strong knowledge spillovers from academic science to industrial
R&D are only one of several factors that could be driving the changes illustrated in Figure I.
Furthermore, even if such knowledge spillovers are growing in strength, this could be happening
in a number of different ways, which have different implications for public policy.
4

These data come from the 2002 edition of the National Science and Engineering Indicators. The data on
scientific article output may understate the growth in articles, but even a substantial correction of the
official statistics would leave the basic message of Figure 1 essentially unchanged.
5
This interpretation has been stressed in recent editions of the National Science and Engineering
Indicators and in the recent work of Narin et. al. [1997].

4

In order to better understand these implications, we seek to accomplish two related goals
in this paper. First, we conduct a systematic analysis of the growth in U.S. patent citations to the
scientific articles generated by a particular subset of American research universities across space,
time, cited fields of academic science, and citing fields of technology. We consider several
possible sources of growth, including:
(1) Changes in the nature of academic science, such that more recent science has
become more relevant to inventors
(2) Changes in the nature of industrial invention, such that inventors have become more
likely to rely on academic research in their corporate R&D programs
(3) Changes in the industrial composition of patent activity, such that there is more
patenting in fields of technology that have historically been closely linked to science
(4) Changes in citation activity that are driven by legal considerations, but have no
connection to real “knowledge spillovers” from academic science to industrial
innovation
As we will show below, we find that patent citations to science are overwhelmingly concentrated
in a nexus of academic disciplines and technological fields that we dub the “bio nexus”; much of
the growth in patent citations to science can be explained by the growth of patenting in this nexus,
in which a close connection between science and invention has existed for decades. At first
glance, it seems that changes in the industrial composition of patenting are the primary driving
factor of increased patent citations to science.
Having established this fact, we then examine patent citation activity within the bio nexus
more carefully, in order to explore the possibility that the expansion of patenting in the bio nexus
is itself partly driven by increasingly powerful knowledge spillovers from academic science. We
find suggestive evidence that this is the case. We also provide an abbreviated examination of
patent-to-paper citation activity outside the bio nexus and show that this activity is concentrated
in a secondary “information technology” nexus. In the concluding section, we outline some
policy implications of our results and directions for future research. The main message of this
paper is that increased knowledge flows from academia may have contributed significantly to the

5

innovation surge reflected in the U.S. patent statistics, but most of that impact appears to be
confined to a narrow locus of technologies and scientific fields.6
II.

The Link Between Academic Science and Industrial Innovation

Historical Perspective
In the late 19th and 20th centuries, the search for commercial applications of the preceding
decades’ scientific discoveries led to the early creation within American universities of new
engineering disciplines, including chemical engineering, electrical engineering, and aeronautical
engineering, as documented by Rosenberg and Nelson [1994]. However, progress at the
scientific frontier was still dominated by European institutions through the 1930s. World War II
and its aftermath prompted a substantial migration of European scientists to the U.S., where they
received an unprecedented level of financial support from the federal government. The large U.S.
postwar investment in basic research was predicated on the notion that investment in basic
science would eventually lead to useful technological invention for use in both industry and in
national defense. However, early attempts to assess the strength of this connection in the postwar
era, including De Solla Price [1965], Lieberman [1978], and the Defense Department’s ambitious
“Project Hindsight,” suggested that relationship between frontier academic science and industrial
invention, while obviously important, was neither close nor direct.
Lessons from the Recent Literature
Drawing upon a wide range of data sources and methodological approaches, the recent
economics literature suggests that the linkage between frontier science and industrial technology
is stronger and more direct than in the past.7 Case studies, manager interviews, and surveys have
been used to assess the magnitude of this impact, the channels through which it flows, and

6

Our reliance on patent statistics means that we will miss the impact of academic research on certain
domains of invention – such as “open source” software – that do not utilize patents at all.
7
For a comprehensive literature review that covers relevant research beyond the economics journals, see
Agrawal [2001].

6

changes in these factors over time.8 These studies suggest that firms perceive academic research
to be an important input into their own research process, though this importance differs widely
across firms and industries.9 A second stream of recent research has undertaken quantitative
studies of knowledge spillovers from academic research. Jaffe [1989] and Adams [1990] were
early contributors to this literature. More recently, Jaffe et al. [1993, 1996, 1998], Barnes et al.
[1998], Mowery et al. [1998], and Kim et al. [2005] have used data on university patents and
citations to these patents to quantify knowledge spillovers from academic science. While
patenting by universities has increased substantially in the United States over the last twenty
years, there is evidence that as the number of university patents has grown, the marginal quality
of those patents has declined.10
A related stream of research has undertaken quantitative analysis of university-industry
research collaboration. Contributors include Zucker et. al. [1998] and Cockburn and Henderson
[1998, 2000]. A number of papers in this literature have studied “start-up” activity related to
academic science or academic scientists, such as Zucker et. al. [1998] and Audretsch and Stephan
[1996]. Finally, several recent studies have examined university licensing of university generated
inventions, such as Barnes et al. [1998], Mowery et. al. [1998], Thursby and Thursby [2002],
Shane [2000, 2001], and Lach and Schankerman [2003]. While the counts of licensed inventions
have grown over time, there is also evidence that, like patents, the marginal value of licenses has
declined as their number has increased [Thursby and Thursby, 2002]. Furthermore, this stream of
literature suggests that inventions generated by universities are typically quite “embryonic” –
bringing such inventions to the market requires extensive additional investment by private firms.
Using Patent Citations to Academic Science as Measures of Knowledge Spillovers

8

Important recent studies relying primarily on case study techniques and surveys include Mansfield
[1995], Cohen et. al. [1994], Faulkner and Senker [1995], and Agrawal and Henderson [2002].
9
While the channels by which firms absorb the results of academic research vary across industries, the
Cohen et. al. [1994] study suggests that the formal scientific literature is, on average, an important channel.
10
See Jaffe, Trajtenberg, and Henderson [1998] and Hicks et al. [2001].

7

This paper will use patent citations to academic papers to measure knowledge spillovers
between academic science and industrial R&D.11 As indicators of knowledge spillovers from
academia to the private sector, these data have a number of advantages. The academic promotion
system creates strong incentives for academic scientists, regardless of discipline, to publish all
research results of scientific merit. As a consequence, the top-ranked research universities
generate thousands of academic papers each year. Similarly, inventors have an incentive to
patent their useful inventions, and a legal obligation under U.S. patent law to make appropriate
citations to the prior art – including academic science.
The recent research discussed in previous paragraphs indicates that, in response to the
Bayh-Dole Act and other public policy measures, universities have increased the extent to which
they patent the research of university-affiliated scientists and the extent to which they license
these patented technologies to private firms. Nevertheless, it is clear to observers that only a tiny
fraction of the typical research university’s commercially relevant research output is ever
patented, and only a fraction of this set of patents is ever licensed.12 To illustrate this, Figure II
shows the trends over the 1988-1997 period in several alternative indices of university research
output and knowledge spillovers for one of the university systems in my data set, the University
of California, which includes nine separately managed campuses and a number of affiliated
laboratories. The figure graphs university patents by issue year (patents), invention disclosures
by year of disclosure filing (invention disclosures), new licenses of university technology by date
of contract (licenses), the number of citations to previous university patents by issue year of the
11

In doing so, we are building on the work of Francis Narin and his collaborators, who have pioneered the
use of these data in large-sample “bibliometric” analysis. See Narin et al. [1997] and Hicks et al. [2001]
for recent examples of this work.
12
This result is also emphasized strongly in the interview-based evidence presented by Agrawal and
Henderson [2002]. Thursby and Thursby [2004], in their study of 3,342 faculty members in science and
engineering departments at Cornell, MIT, University of Pennsylvania, Purdue, Texas A&M, and the
University of Wisconsin-Madison find that only 7.1% of their (person-year) observations show invention
disclosures (the first step in the patenting process) by a faculty member. The overwhelming majority of
professors never patent. Azoulay et al. [2004] show that this is true even in their study of 4,270 academic
life scientists. Fewer than 4% of their observations represent patenting by a faculty member, and most
patenting faculty produce only a handful of patents over the course of a career.

8

citing patent (citations to UC patents), and the number of citations to UC-generated academic
papers by issue year of the citing patent (citations to UC papers). Clearly, citations to papers are
far more numerous than any other indicator. This figure suggests that patent citations to academic
papers may provide a much broader window through which to observe knowledge spillovers from
academic science to inventive activity than any available alternative.13
Citations to scientific articles can reflect learning on the part of industrial inventors
through multiple channels. For instance, a firm may learn about a useful scientific discovery
through an informal consulting relationship with an academic scientist or through the hiring of
graduate students trained by that scientist rather than through a systematic and regular reading of
the professional scientific literature. Even in these cases, the confluence of academic scientists’
interest in rapid publication of significant discoveries combined with firms’ legal obligation to
cite relevant prior art means that citations to scientific articles will often show up in patent
documents, providing a “paper trail” of knowledge diffusion, even when the particular means of
knowledge diffusion was something other than the publication itself.
It has long been recognized that patent citations are inserted into patent documents by
both the patent applicants and patent examiners. Exploiting a change in patent data in 2001 that
identifies the origin of citations, Sampat [2005] has examined the distribution of examiner and
applicant-generated citations across patent classes and types of applicants. He finds that patent
examiners collectively account for a surprisingly large fraction of total citations to previous
patents (62%), calling into question the earlier interpretation of these citations as indicators of
knowledge spillovers to the inventor. On the other hand, he finds that examiners account for a
low fraction, and applicants a high fraction (90%), of citations to non-patent prior art.
III. Examining Patent Citations to Science: A Citations Function Approach
Explaining the Growth in Patent Citations to Science: Four Alternative Views
13

Other recent studies using data on patent citations to scientific papers include work by Fleming and
Sorenson [2000, 2001] and Lim [2001]. None of these studies focuses on the large change in citations to
academic science over the course of the 1990s, which is the focus here.

9

In the introduction, we noted that one of the goals of this paper is to identify the factors
that best explain the growth in patent citations to science over time, and we listed four possible
sources of variation that will receive particular scrutiny. Each of these can be associated with a
particular hypothesis of what is driving the increase in patent citations to science. Before
describing our data and empirical approach, we think it is useful to outline these hypotheses in
greater detail.
The first is the “increasing scientific fertility” hypothesis, which posits that more recent
cohorts of scientific papers contain more discoveries that are directly applicable to industrial
research and development, and that this trend holds across many fields of science. A less positive
view of the same phenomenon would be that academic scientists are doing less “fundamental
science” and are deliberately pursuing more work with (potential) commercial applications, partly
in response to financial incentives. Under this hypothesis, knowledge spillovers from academia
to industry are increasing primarily because of a qualitative change in the nature of the science
being conducted at universities.14 If this is the primary driving factor, then a significant
component of the growth in patent citations to science will be explained by an increasing
propensity for more recent cohorts of scientific papers to be cited by patents.
The second is the “changing methods of invention” hypothesis, which posits that
industrial inventors have changed the way they create new technology. The new approach to
R&D draws more heavily on academic science than in the past, though it does not necessarily
draw exclusively on the most recently published articles. The point being stressed is that it is the
inventors themselves who are generating the increased citations as they alter the direction and
nature of their R&D programs to probe the new opportunities for industrial research created by

14

We note that here and elsewhere, we are being a bit loose in our use of the term “knowledge spillover.”
The knowledge flows from academia to industry are only pure spillovers to the extent that industrial
inventors receive them for free. In fact, conversations with industry-based R&D managers suggest that
investments on the part of the firm (of various kinds) are necessary in order to effectively learn from these
knowledge flows – so that they are not pure spillovers. See Cohen and Levinthal [1988], Zucker et. al.
[1998], and Cockburn, Henderson, and Stern [1999].

10

basic science. Like the first hypothesis, this implies that knowledge spillovers from academic
science are increasing over time, but the mechanism driving this increase is different. This would
be reflected in an increasing propensity for more recent cohorts of patents across a wide range of
technical fields to cite science.
The third is the “changing composition of invention” hypothesis, which posits that
invention in certain areas of technology has been closely linked to science for some time, and,
likewise, some fields of science have always been frequently cited by industrial patents. Under
this hypothesis, there has been disproportionate growth in patenting in frequently citing patent
classes. Similarly, growth in academic publications has been biased towards those fields of
science which have historically been more closely linked to industrial R&D. In other words, at
the level of individual technology classes and scientific fields, there has been little change in the
relationship between science and technology per se – rather there has been a change in the
distribution of patents and papers that generates the observed increase in citations.
The fourth hypothesis is the “attorney-driven” hypothesis, which posits that the change
in patent citations is entirely driven by changes in citations practices. For various strategic
reasons connected to the desire to impress patent examiners, the fear of subsequent litigation, or
both, patent lawyers have instructed their clients to increase the number of citations made to the
scientific literature. The increasing availability of data on the scientific prior art in electronic
form has lowered the costs of such citations, further contributing to their growth. This
hypothesis, in its extreme version, suggests that little can be learned about the changing
relationship between science and technology from patent citation data.
These hypotheses are not mutually exclusive, but they have quite different implications
for the appropriate interpretation of the growth in patent citations to papers. In order to
understand what Figure I really means, how it relates (or not) to the recent American innovation
surge, and what the appropriate policy response is, it is necessary to sort out the relative
importance of these hypotheses in explaining the trend illustrated in that graph.

11

Tracking Patent Citations to California-based Academic Science
If we are to do this, then it is essential that we examine changes in patent citations to
papers while controlling for growth and changes in the distribution across fields of the population
of potentially cited papers, growth and changes in the distribution across fields of the population
of potentially citing patents, and differences in the historical propensity for different categories of
patents to cite science. While it would be impractical to do this for the universe of academic
publications and U.S. patents, it has been possible for us to obtain and link the requisite data for
the campuses and affiliated research units of the University of California, Stanford University, the
California Institute of Technology (Caltech), and the University of Southern California. These
are the principal sources of academic research in the state of California. Our inference will be
based on U.S. patent citations made to scientific articles generated by these institutions. The
location of the inventor of the citing patent can be anywhere within the territory of the United
States. Because the focus in this paper is on the impact of knowledge flows from academic
science on U.S. invention, we restrict ourselves to the subset of U.S.-granted patents with U.S.based inventors. However, we note that extending the sample to all patents granted by the U.S.
PTO, regardless of location of the inventor, does not qualitatively alter any of our key empirical
results.
Related research strongly suggests that the patterns in the citation data used in this study
closely mirror national trends. Branstetter [2004] analyzes the complete set of nonpatent citations
made by a random sample of 30,000 U.S. patents granted over the 1987-1997 period. While he
uses a completely different statistical approach to these data than the one employed here and
cannot control for changes in the volume and distribution of potentially citing papers, he finds the
growth rate of patent citations to science and their distribution across fields of science and
technology in that random sample to be similar to that indicated in the current paper.
Nevertheless, one must be sensitive to the potential difficulties involved in generalizing from our

12

results to the entire American research university system. Wherever such difficulties arise, they
are noted in the discussion of empirical results in sections IV, V, and VI.
From the University Science Indicators database generated by the Institute for Scientific
Information, we have obtained comprehensive data on the publication of scientific articles by our
sample of California research universities, by institution, year, and scientific field, from 19811997. These data are matched to data on patent citations made to these publications over the
1983-1999 (grant year) period, which were provided by CHI Research. CHI Research, which has
since been acquired by the consulting firm ipIQ, developed a comprehensive data base of “nonpatent references” made in U.S. patent documents. The focus in this paper is on the subset of
references made to articles appearing in peer-reviewed scientific journals. In the CHI Research
database, these references are put into a standardized format that can then be matched to data on
papers published in the more than 4,000 journals covered by the Science Citation Index (SCI).
To these data we match data on the universe of potentially citing U.S. utility patents granted over
that same period, which is available from the NBER Patent Citation Database documented in Hall
et. al. [2001].15
Trends in scientific publications generated by California research universities for a subset
of scientific disciplines are plotted in Figure III. Particularly strong growth can be observed in
biomedical research, “physics” (an aggregate which includes materials sciences fields connected
to semiconductors), and “engineering and technology.”16 Trends in U.S. patenting across
different categories of technologies are similarly plotted in Figure IV. While patenting in all
fields has increased over the sample period, particularly sharp increases can be seen in “drugs and
medicine” and “computers and communications.”17
A Citation Function Approach to the Data
15

Further details on data construction are provided in the Data Appendix.
Comparison of these data with similar data for all major American research universities shows that
California academic publication closely mirrors national trends.
17
This graph does not break down patent trends by nationality of the inventor, but the fraction of patent
grants awarded to domestic inventors has risen sharply in these two rapidly growing fields.
16

13

The empirical framework we use for analyzing these data borrows from the work of Jaffe
and Trajtenberg [1996, 2002]. In this framework, we model the probability that a particular
patent, p, applied for in year t, will cite a particular article, a, published in year T. This
probability is determined by the combination of an exponential process by which knowledge
diffuses and a second exponential process by which knowledge becomes superceded by
subsequent research.
This probability is referred to in the work of Jaffe and Trajtenberg [1996, 2002] as the
citation frequency. It is a function of the attributes of the citing patent (P), the attributes of the
cited article (a), and the time lag between them (t-T). It can be rendered in notation as
(1)

p (a, P) = α (a, P) exp[− β 1(t − T )][1 − exp(− β 2 (t − T ))]
Attributes of the citing patent that we incorporate into our analysis include the application

year, the technical field (based on the primary technology class assigned by the patent examiner),
the type of entity owning the patent (based on the identity of the assignee), and the geographic
location of the patent, based on the address of the inventor. Attributes of the cited article that we
consider include the publication year, the scientific field of the article, and the institution with
which the authors were affiliated at the time of publication.
Given these data, one could sort all potentially citing patents and all potentially cited
articles into cells corresponding to the attributes of articles and patents. The expected value of
the number of citations from a particular group of patents to a particular group of articles could be
represented as
(2)

E[ctcelTSL ] = (nTSL )(ntcel )α tcelTSL exp[−( β 1 )(t − T )][1 − exp(− β 2 (t − T ))]

where the dependent variable measures the number of citations made by patents in the appropriate
categories of grant year (t), technology class (c), institutional type (e), and location of the citing
patent’s inventor (l) to articles in the appropriate categories of publication year (T), scientific
field (S), and particular campus (L). The α ’s are multiplicative effects estimated relative to a

14

benchmark or “base” group of patents and articles. In this model, unlike the linear case, the null
hypothesis of no effect corresponds to parameter values of unity rather than zero. Equation (2)
can easily be rewritten as
(3)

E[ctcelTSL ]
= α tcelTSL exp[− β1 (t − T )][1 − exp(− β 2 (t − T ))]
(nTSL ) * (ntcel )

This is what Jaffe and Trajtenberg [1996] refer to as a citations function. If one adds an error
term, then this equation can be estimated using nonlinear least squares. The estimating equation
is thus
(4)

ptcelTSL = α t α cα eα l α T α S α L exp[− β 1 (t − T )][1 − exp(− β 2 (t − T ))] + ε tcelTSL

where the dependent variable now measures the likelihood that a particular patent in the
appropriate categories (grant year, technology class, institution type, and location) will cite an
article in the appropriate categories (science field, source campus, and publication year).
Patents are placed into one of the following categories: computers and communications,
chemicals, drugs and medicine, electronics, mechanical inventions, and a catch-all “other”
category. These are the same categories for which patent growth is depicted in Figure III.
Scientific articles are classified into the following fields: biology, biomedical research,
chemistry, clinical medicine, engineering and technology, physics, and “other science.” Patent
assignees are classified into the following institutional types: public science institutions
(predominantly universities, research hospitals, and government laboratories), firms, and other
institutions. The division of patents on the basis of location of the inventor and the assignment of
patents and papers into groups based on grant and publication year, respectively, are discussed
below.
We estimate various versions of (4) using the nonlinear least squares estimation routine
of the STATA software package. When doing so, we weight the observations by the square root
of the product of potentially cited articles and potentially citing patents corresponding to the cell,
that is

15

(5)

w = (ntcel ) * (nTSL )

This weighting scheme should take care of possible heteroskedasticity, since the observations
correspond to “grouped data,” that is, each observation is an average (in the corresponding cell),
computed by dividing the number of citations by (ntcel)*(nTSL).
IV.

Empirical Evidence from Citations Functions

Localization in Time and Geographic Space
Regression results from a version of (4) are given in Table I. Using the parameter values
from this regression, it is also possible to graph out the double exponential function implied by
our parameter estimates, giving us a sense of how the “citedness” of a particular group of articles
by a particular group of patents changes over time. This is graphed out for our “base case” in
Figure V. The base case in this regression corresponds to patents assigned to firms, where the
first inventor resides in the U.S. outside the state of California. The base patent grant period is
1983-1987, and the base publication period is 1981-1985. The base science category is biology,
the base patent category is chemistry, and the base institution is Stanford University.18
The shape of the curve graphically demonstrates the first key result of this section –
namely that citations to academic science are, to some extent, localized in time. Citations to
science appear almost immediately after article publication, and the citation function peaks at a
lag of about eight years after article publication. These lags are measured here with respect to the
grant date of the patent. An alternative specification measuring patents by application date finds
a modal lag between publication and application of five to six years, implying fairly rapid
spillovers of knowledge from science into industrial invention. While the estimated lag structure

18

As commonly understood, biology is an aggregate that contains components closely associated with the
bio nexus (molecular biology) and components that are arguably not closely connected (such as population
ecology). In this paper, however, we have classified the subdisciplines of biology closely connected to the
bio nexus as “biomedical research.” Subdisciplines that remain within the biology aggregate used in this
paper include such fields as ecology and “aquatic sciences.” They are not closely connected to the bio
nexus and, defined this way, “biology” would seem to be a reasonable base category. Note also that the
institutional boundary of campuses like Stanford is drawn to include affiliated medical schools.

16

demonstrates that papers continue to receive some citations even at relatively long lags, the
citation frequency declines steadily after the peak lag.
These results also provide evidence of concentration in geographic space. Citing patents
are assigned to two categories based on the recorded addresses of the inventor: California
inventors and U.S. inventors outside California. U.S. inventors outside California are the base
category, so the coefficients imply that California-based inventors in a given technology class are
nearly three times more likely to cite California academic science.
The intranational localization of knowledge spillovers implied by the California effect
seems large. However, the current specification arguably does not control well for regional
clustering of industrial R&D within the particular niches of the broad technology categories we
have employed. A finer disaggregation of patent classes would likely attenuate the measured
degree of localization. Furthermore, as can be seen in Figure VII, it is still the case that large
numbers of citations are made by inventors far from California. In fact, one sees a “bicoastal”
concentration of citations, reflecting the clustering of U.S. innovative activity in the Northeast
and the West Coast.19
Localization of Knowledge Flows in Technology Space and the “Changing Composition of
Invention” Hypothesis
We find striking differences in the incidence of citation across fields of technology.
Relative to the base category (chemicals), drug/medicine patents are 2.4 times more likely to cite
science, whereas all other categories are substantially less likely to cite science. The typical
patent in the least likely-to-cite category, mechanical patents, is only about 1% as likely to cite
science as the typical chemical patent. The estimated gap between technology categories in
citation propensity is quite substantial. Note that these estimated propensities control for the

19

The recent work of Thompson and Fox-Keane (2005) suggests that earlier evidence of intranational
geographic localization of knowledge spillovers may have exaggerated the real degree to which knowledge
spillovers are regionally localized. Our cautious interpretation of our own findings of a “California effect”
is based partially on this recent work.

17

number of patents in these categories over time, so that these coefficients are properly interpreted
as an estimate of the differential “per-patent” propensity to cite science.
Continuing in this theme, we can also allow different categories of science to display
different propensities to be cited by patented technologies. Note that the citation function
specification controls for the number of “citable papers” within these science categories over
time, as well as the number of potentially citing patents across fields of technology, so the
coefficients on science categories are akin to a “per-paper” measure of technological fertility.
The coefficients in Table I suggest that a paper in the “biomedical research” field is about 41
times more likely to be cited in a patent than a paper in the base category of biology. Papers in
“chemistry” and “clinical medicine” are about five times as likely to be cited as a biology paper,
while papers in the other science categories are substantially less likely to be cited than biology
papers.20 The gap between the most and the least intensely cited science categories is quite
substantial.
As one can see in Figure IV, “biomedical” patenting has risen sharply over our sample
period, both in absolute terms and relative to patenting in other technology categories. In fact,
patenting in this area has risen more than four-fold. Likewise, as Figure III indicates, there has
been substantial growth in publishing in bioscience areas by California research institutions.
Even controlling for this growth, biotech patents are much more likely to cite science throughout
the sample period, and bioscience papers are much more likely than other categories to be cited.
This suggests that the aggregate trends in patent citations to science are driven largely by
“biotech” patents citing “bioscience” papers. While there is growing citation activity outside this
“bio nexus,” patent citations to science have, to date, been highly concentrated within it.

20

In results available upon request, we estimated an “academic production function” for the university
systems studied in this section of the paper, in which the output measure was the count of publications
generated in a scientific field by a particular campus in a particular year. This was regressed on measures
of “inputs” to the research process. The results suggest that the higher “productivity” of the biomedical
sciences is not driven purely by the increase in R&D funding in that field.

18

In another take on the “composition hypothesis,” we have also looked at patenting by
different categories of assignees: firms, public science institutions (universities, research
institutes, and research hospitals), and a grab-bag category of “other institutions” in the non-profit
sector. Assignment of a patent to one of these categories is based on the typography of assignees
developed in the NBER patent citation database. Relative to the base category of firms, public
science institutions are nearly four times as likely to cite academic science, and “other
institutions” are almost twice as likely to cite academic science, according to Table I. This is
unsurprising, given the connection that is likely to exist between academic science and academic
patenting. Because these institutional categories accounted for a small fraction of total U.S.
patenting, even by the end of our sample period, it is still the case that the vast majority of patent
citations to California academic science are made by the patents of industrial firms, not
universities.21
Evidence on “Changes in Methods of Invention”
Having incorporated fixed effects associated with the citing field of technology, the cited
field of science, the cited institution, and characteristics of the citing inventor/assignee, we can
also make some inference about average changes in citation patterns over time across fields.
Perhaps the most interesting finding here is that the propensity to cite academic science is
evidently growing over time. This can be seen by examining the pattern of coefficients on the
citing patent grant year cohort terms. We group patents into categories corresponding to the years
in which they were granted: 1983-87, 1988-90, 1991-93, 1994-96, and 1997-99. For these
cohorts, we estimate an average propensity to cite science relative to the base category. These
estimated propensities increase substantially from the “base category” of 1983-87, more than

21

This statement requires some qualification. University patenting is highly concentrated in a small
number of fields. By the end of our sample period, university patenting accounted for roughly 15% of
health care-related patenting. That being said, the overall results in Table I are robust to the removal of
patents granted to “public science institutions” (primarily universities and research hospitals) from the
sample. In fact, in some ways, they become even stronger. See Table III and the discussion on page 23.

19

doubling by the end of the sample period.22 Note that we have explicitly controlled for the fact
that academic publications in the heavily cited branches of science have become more numerous
and that there has been an increase in patenting in fields that heavily cite academic science.
These results are consistent with the view that there has been a change in the nature of invention
such that inventors now draw more heavily on academic science.
Evidence on Attorney-Driven Changes in Patent Citations to Scientific Papers
These results could also be driven, at least in part, by an “attorney-driven” change in
citation practice, and, in fact, interpretation of the measured increase in the per-patent propensity
to cite academic papers is clouded by the issue of the so-called “spike patents.”23 In 1995, the
effective period of monopoly granted to U.S. patent holders changed from 17 years after the grant
date to 20 years from the filing date, in order to bring U.S. patent law more fully into compliance
with the provisions of the TRIPs Agreement. This change took effect for patents filed after June
8, 1995. Patents filed prior to this deadline benefited from a “grandfather” provision – they were
granted a monopoly of either 17 years from date of grant or 20 years from date of application,
whichever was longer. Rejected patents re-filed after this deadline would also be subject to new
evaluation criteria.
Applications submitted to the U.S. PTO more than doubled in May and June of 1995, and
these applications, referred to as the “spike patents,” carried an unusually large number of
citations to science. This surge in patenting seems to have been driven in part by a rush to file in
order to benefit from the “grandfather” timing provision. The increase in citations to science
seems to have been driven in part by a desire to avoid having to refile rejected patents under the
new rules. Applicants thus erred on the side of caution by making far more than the usual
number of citations to scientific material. Patents applied for in this period were issued gradually

22

This pattern is quite robust to alternative aggregations of grant years into categories. Regression results
demonstrating this are available from the author upon request.
23
This issue is also discussed in the 2002 issue of Science and Engineering Indicators and in Hicks et. al.
[2001].

20

over the next few years – dramatically increasing the average citations to science per patent in the
overall data. Once the last of these applications was processed, average science citations per
patent actually fell, as is illustrated in Figure VI. This kind of simple data tabulation might
suggest that the connection between science and technology is weakening, after nearly a decade
of rapid growth. That conclusion would be unwarranted, but it is likely that some of the
movement in the aggregate data in the mid-to-late 1990s was “attorney-driven.”
Within the context of our empirical approach, one potential remedy for this problem is to
remove the spike patents from my data set and re-run the citations function. The results are
shown in Table II, and it can be seen here (and in all subsequent tables, where the spike patents
have been removed), that the basic qualitative features of the previous empirical results remain.
In particular, the finding of an increase in per-patent propensity to cite scientific papers is robust
to the removal of these patents.
While the spike patents are the “attorney-driven” change that is easiest to identify in the
data and to associate with a particular change in legislation, removal of the spike patents does not
necessarily purge our data of changes in citations that reflect factors other than changes in
knowledge spillovers. Over the course of our sample period, on-line databases have emerged that
have made it steadily easier for inventors and their attorneys to identify the relevant non-patent
prior art, including related scientific papers. One might be concerned that the measured increase
in propensity to cite papers reflects declining search costs more than an increasing tendency to
utilize academic science in commercial innovation.
There are two responses to this concern. First, the emergence of on-line databases has
taken place across all scientific disciplines. However, the actual incidence of patent citations to
science has remained remarkably concentrated in precisely those disciplines where qualitative
evidence and practitioner accounts suggest that the actual knowledge spillovers have been the
strongest and grown the most over time. Second, we provide some evidence in section V of a
link between the propensity to cite science and inventive productivity at the firm level, measured

21

in various ways. If citations are purely defensive, and if the increase in citations purely reflects
the decline in the cost of a citation, there is no reason to expect that firms which increase their
citations will improve their research productivity. On the other hand, the interpretation that the
increase in citations reflects an increase in spillovers would predict such an association.
A final note on “attorney-driven” changes in patent citations to science relates to the
interesting recent work by Murray [2002] and Murray and Stern [2005] on so-called “patentpaper pairs.” The authors suggest that some academic scientists are publishing their work in the
academic literature while simultaneously applying for patent protection for essentially the same
material. To the extent that an increasingly large fraction of scientific output is destined to
become patent-protected inventions, inventors may feel increasingly constrained to cite papers
defensively, even if there are no direct knowledge spillovers.
But it is unclear how important the patent-paper pair phenomenon has been over the
course of our sample period. First, open publication of a paper prior to the issue of the patent
could undermine the ability of the author-inventor to secure intellectual property rights.24 This
creates a strategic incentive for inventors to defer publication until their patent rights are securely
granted, in which case subsequent inventors could simply cite the relevant patent. Second, other
studies show the fraction of publishing scientists who also patent is small, and that the patent
counts of the patenting scientists are small relative to their publication counts (Thursby and
Thursby, 2004; Azoulay et al., 2005). While interesting objects of study, patent-paper pairs may
not be numerous enough to affect our results.
Evidence on Changes in Scientific Fertility

24

U.S. patent law allows for a window of time during which inventors can seek protection for an
invention whose essence has already been disclosed in, among other things, an academic publication.
Nevertheless, this sort of prior disclosure increases the risks associated with patenting, particularly if there
are disagreements with the Patent and Trademark Office about particular claims or patent scope. These
concerns could be even more relevant for inventors seeking to obtain patent protection outside the United
States – something that would be sought as a matter of course for potentially important inventions. It is
worth pointing out that the patent-paper pair profiled in Murray [2002] was one in which the paper was
published after the patent had been granted.

22

Another explanation of the increase in patent citations to papers would suggest that
“academic” research has become steadily more practical, that is, relevant to inventors. In its
simplest form, this change in the nature of academic science could show up as a tendency for
more recent cohorts of academic papers to be more highly cited by patents than older cohorts of
papers, when controlling for changes in the volume and distribution across fields of potentially
cited papers and potentially citing patents. Our data allow us to test for precisely that tendency,
by estimating a set of coefficients that correspond to “cohort effects” for the potentially cited
papers. As we did with the patents, we group papers into categories corresponding to the year of
publication: 1981-1984 (the base category), 1985-1988, 1989-1992, and 1993-1997. Our data
source on papers ends in 1997, but there are very few patents granted by 1999 that cite papers
with publication dates after 1997, so little is lost due to this data restriction. Recall that, because
we control for the number of papers in a given cohort, the regression coefficient on the cohort
effect measures average per-paper “citedness.”
The exact pattern revealed by the regression coefficients on these cohort effects varies a
bit depending on the data used. In the full sample, measures of per-paper “citedness” increase,
relative to the base period, in the late 1980s and early 1990s, peaking in the 1989-92 period.
They then seem to decline somewhat in the most recent period, but estimated per-paper citedness
remains higher than in the base period. This finding would seem to provide reasonably strong
evidence for the “changes in scientific fertility” hypothesis. However, this finding is not robust to
the exclusion of university patents from the sample. The latter point is illustrated in Table III,
which presents results based on a sample that excludes both spike patents and patents assigned to
universities and to other “public science institutions,” a category including research hospitals that
often have links to universities. As can be seen, the apparent increase in per-paper citedness
evaporates with this sample restriction. Instead, we see an apparently steady decline in per-paper
citedness. If we narrowly define the scientific fertility hypothesis to mean an increase in the

23

average citedness of scientific papers over time, then there does not appear to be robust evidence
for this in our data. If anything, citedness may be trending downward.
However, we need to emphasize that rejection of this narrow version of the hypothesis
does not rule out the possibility that there has been a stream of scientific discoveries over time, at
least in some academic disciplines, that inventors in industry have been able to build upon in their
R&D activities. We will argue that there is evidence this has happened within the bio nexus.
Instead, our results on scientific fertility suggest that the growth in patent citations over time has
not been driven primarily by a broad-based change in the nature of academic science, per se, over
time, but by a change over time in the degree to which private inventors use this science and a
shift in the composition of invention across technology classes.
What Happens if We Exclude University and Research Hospital Patents?
Given the plausibly strong connection between university-based science and universitygenerated patents, it is obviously of interest to examine the robustness of our other empirical
results to the exclusion of patents granted to “public science institutions” (a category which
includes primarily universities and research hospitals) from the sample. Table III shows that,
with the exception of results pertaining to scientific fertility, all of our main findings are robust to
this sample restriction. In particular, the measured localization of spillovers within the bio nexus
remains after dropping university patents. In fact, it becomes even more pronounced, as does the
measured increase over time in per-patent propensity to cite science.
Summarizing the Lessons from the Full Sample
Once we exclude spike patents, it seems that trends in the data are best explained by a
combination of the “changing composition” story and the “changing methods of invention”
story.25 At first glance, it would appear that the changing composition story is the more important

25

The evidence in Tables I-III comes from a version of the citation function in which we constrain the
obsolescence parameter to be the same across categories of technology. Following Jaffe and Trajtenberg
[2002], we can allow this parameter to differ across patent technology categories. Results from such a

24

of that two. To see this, it is useful to examine Table IV, which presents results from a series of
hypothesis tests. The data strongly reject the imposition of the constraint that methods of
invention have not changed – or, more precisely, that per-patent propensities to cite science have
not changed broadly across fields of technology. But the degradation in model fit generated by
this constraint is fairly small.26 On the other hand, imposing the constraint that the relative
propensity of different patent classes to cite science is the same causes the adjusted R-squared to
fall by about 67%, and imposing this constraint and the constraint that the relative citedness of
different categories of science is the same causes the adjusted R-squared to fall by about 85%,
relative to the unrestricted model. In other words, changes in the distribution of patenting across
technologies and changes in the distribution of publications across fields would appear to explain
much more of the total variance in patent citations to science than does average changes across
fields in per-patent citation behavior over time.
But it is likely that a significant part of the substantial expansion in biotech patenting has
been driven by increasing knowledge spillovers from university-based science. This is certainly
the impression we have received from conversations with both scientists and corporate R&D
managers in this field. According to these practitioners, methods of invention have changed
dramatically within the bio nexus, and these changes have contributed to the relative expansion of
patenting in this field. If this is the case, then the variance decomposition exercise presented in
Table IV misses an important part of the story, because the bio nexus “field effect” is presumed to
be time invariant. The developments described by practitioners suggest a change in the

regression are omitted for reasons of space. Allowing this parameter to vary does not change the
qualitative patterns in the other results.
26
The value of the Wald test parameter associated with this parameter restriction (see the second column,
third row) easily exceeds the critical value of the Chi-Square distribution at the appropriate degrees of
freedom. But the degradation in model fit generated by this constraint is relatively small. Relative to the
unrestricted model, the adjusted R-squared of the restricted model declines by only about one percent. This
can be inferred by comparing values in the third column – the adjusted R-squareds associated with the
restricted models – with the adjusted R-squared of the restricted model given on the next to last row.

25

composition of invention that is itself driven, in part, by field-specific changes in methods of
invention.
To explore this more complicated alternative hypothesis, we will look at changes in the
patterns of patent citations to science within the bio nexus itself. We will find three pieces of
evidence consistent with the practitioners’ accounts. First, we will find evidence of a substantial
increase over time in the propensity of bio nexus patents to cite bio nexus papers, even
accounting for the strong growth in potentially cited patents and potentially citing papers.
Second, we will note that total patenting in the bio nexus has grown much more rapidly than NSF
estimates of total R&D investment – public and private – suggesting an increase in the
productivity of research in the nexus as a whole. Finally, we will relate some preliminary
findings from related research that suggests a positive association between patent citations to
science and research productivity at the firm level.
V. Are Knowledge Spillovers from Science Driving Patent Growth in the Bio Nexus?
We first address this question by presenting evidence from a citations function using only
data from the bio nexus.27 The results are given in Table V. This table maintains the same
aggregation scheme across patent classes as Tables I-III, but uses only data from the bio nexus in
estimating the citations function. The “biomedical research” cluster of scientific fields is broken
up into the “core fields” of biochemistry, biophysics, and molecular biology on the one hand and
the remaining fields of biomedical research on the other. This sample excludes spike patents, but
includes patents assigned to universities, research institutes, and research hospitals.
The qualitative results are similar to those estimated in the full sample. In particular, one
finds, even within the bio nexus, statistically significant evidence of an increase in the per-patent
propensity to cite science over time. In other words, even within this nexus, where citation

27

We have also investigated what patent citations to science look like when we exclude the bio nexus
from consideration. The data identify a secondary nexus clustered around the information technology
disciplines. The results of this investigation are discussed in section VI.

26

activity has always been strongest and where the number of patents has been growing rapidly, the
connection between industrial research and academic science seems to have grown substantially
over time. The estimates on the grant year coefficients suggest that per-patent citation
propensities had increased by more than 70% (relative to the base period) by 1997-99. In this
particular sample of the data, the measured increase in per-paper citedness – our measure of
changes in scientific fertility – remains roughly what it was in the overall sample including public
science patents.

That is, it suggests an increase, albeit non-monotonic, in scientific fertility over

time. While this result does not survive the exclusion of public science patents, the result of an
increase in per-patent citation propensity does.28 Looking carefully within the bio nexus itself,
one finds strong evidence of a change in the method of invention over our sample period.
The finding of an increase over time in the per-patent intensity to cite science is
supported by a number of studies of the pharmaceutical and biotech industries. From its
inception, the biotechnology industry has been closely linked to university-based science.29 But
over the course of the 1980s and 1990s, established pharmaceutical companies have increasingly
drawn on recent scientific developments in their efforts to improve the efficiency of their drug
discovery programs.30 While the received literature has not yet tried to quantify the changes in
this intensity of industrial borrowing from academic science over time, the basic trends in our
data are reasonably consistent with the qualitative descriptions of changes over time in the
existing literature.
Have these spillovers from academic science actually raised inventive productivity in the
bio nexus? A casual examination of the aggregate evidence would suggest an affirmative answer.
According to NSF data, total real R&D outlays from both public and private sources associated
with the life sciences nearly doubled between 1985 and 1995. However, U.S. patenting in the bio
28

Results from this robustness check are available from the authors upon request.
See Kaplan and Murray [2003], Kenney [1986], Lichtenberg [forthcominga], and Gambardella [1995].
30
See, among others, Cockburn, Henderson, and Stern [1999], who provide a useful qualitative
description of these changes, then go on to document their implications for relative firm performance over
time within the pharmaceutical industry.
29

27

nexus more than tripled over this period, which would seem to imply a considerable increase in
R&D productivity for the nexus as a whole.31
Related research by Aoki and Branstetter [2004] has begun to explore more carefully the
statistical association between the intensity of patent citations to science and research productivity
at the firm level, using a formal theoretical model of the interaction between academic science
and industrial research to guide empirical analysis. Results from this research suggest a positive,
statistically significant correlation between increases in the intensity with which a particular firm
cites science in its patents and measures of productivity and new product introductions.
We repeat two pieces of this evidence here. First, we can estimate a simple CobbDouglas production function in which the “science citation intensity” of firm patenting enters as
an argument. The estimated equation is
(6) Qit = β 0 + β1lkapit + β 2 lempit + β 3 lrnd it + β 4 lciting it −l + β 5 lpit −l + α i + δ t + ε it
Where Q is output as measured by deflated sales of firm i in year t, lkap is the log of the deflated
capital stock, as measured by firm accounts, lemp is the log of the number of workers, and lrnd is
the level of real expenditure on R&D.32 The intensity of the firm’s use of academic science is
measured by the log of the number of citations to academic science made by the cohort of patents
applied for in year t, lciting; we also experiment with various lags of this measure. This measure
includes patent citations made to all scientific papers, not just those generated by Californiabased research universities. Since there is a clear relationship between the number of citations
and the number of patents generated by the firm in a year, we include the log of the number of
patent applications (or various lags thereof) lp, as an additional control. We also allow for firm
( α i ) and year ( δ t ) fixed effects. Following a long tradition in the productivity literature, we

31

On the other hand, studies by others have suggested that the patent to real R&D ratio has fallen
substantially for large U.S.-based pharmaceutical companies – an important component of the nexus – over
much of our sample period. See, among others, Henderson and Cockburn [1996].
32
Alternative specifications estimated with an R&D stock produced results qualitatively similar to those
reported in the paper. Our results are also robust to the inclusion of multiple lagged patent terms.

28

interpret the coefficients on the R&D and science intensity terms as measuring the marginal
contribution of these measures to total factor productivity – output, adjusted for changes in
standard tangible inputs.33
Columns (1) through (4) of Table VI illustrate the results we get from various lags of our
science citation intensity measure. Given the inevitable lag between the generation of a patent
and the implementation of patented technology into new products or processes on a sufficient
scale to affect overall sales, it is important to demonstrate that the results are not purely
contemporaneous.34 The sample of firm-level data on which specification (6) is estimated,
described in detail in Aoki and Branstetter [2004], includes firms across a full range of
manufacturing industries, not just those linked to the bio nexus. The statistically significant
coefficients imply that a 100% increase in science citations generates a 2%-3% increase in
productivity. This would appear to be a modest effect, but the reader should recall that, in the
aggregate economy, such citations have increased 13-fold over our sample period. Given the
various issues of measurement and causal inference, we would not want to overemphasize the
power of this evidence, but it is clearly consistent with a positive relationship between
productivity and science citations – and this relationship is not purely limited to firms in the bio
nexus.35
The second piece of evidence for this relationship we take from Aoki and Branstetter
[2004] uses a measure of inventive output that is only available for the “bio nexus”: data on new
product introductions. The IMS LifeCycle Patent Focus Database connects FDA-approved drugs
to the specific patents protecting the innovations incorporated into these drugs. By matching

33

A more detailed description of these data sources is provided in the Appendix, included with this paper.
While the coefficients of lagged values of the science intensity term are consistently positive and
significant, this is not true for leading values of the science intensity term, providing an epsilon of
reassurance on the issue of reverse causality. These results, omitted for reasons of space, are available
upon request.
35
Implausibly low estimates for the output elasticity of capital – which likely reflect measurement error in
firm-level capital stocks – are only one of the problems that arise in this setting, hence our caution. See
Griliches and Mairesse (1998).
34

29

information in this data base with our sample of patenting entities, we are able to identify the
number of approved drugs that can be associated with the patents generated by a particular firm in
a given year. Do increases in the science citation intensity of a firms’ patents result in an increase
in the number of approved drugs?36
The answer provided in column (6) of Table VI appears to be affirmative. In this column
we present results based on the following specification:
(7)

Approvit = β 0 + β 1lrnd it + β 2 lciting it + β 3lp it + α i + δ t + ε it

where the right hand side variables have the same definition as in specification (6) and the
dependent variable counts the number of approved new products that can be linked to the patents
generated by firm i in year t. Controlling for the size of the patent portfolio and the level of
contemporaneous R&D investment, the coefficient on lciting measures the relationship between
the “science citation intensity” of a patent cohort and its ability to yield successful products.
Because the dependent variable is a count variable, we employ the fixed effects negative binomial
estimator pioneered by Hausman, Hall, and Griliches [1984]. The estimated coefficient is
roughly .7, implying that a 100% increase in science citations yields 70% more approved
products. As is the case with the other results in Table VI, issues of measurement and causal
inference necessitate caution in interpreting these results. Nevertheless, they are clearly
consistent with a fairly strong positive link between science citations and the generation of
inventions that can survive the formidable screening procedure erected by the U.S. FDA. We
recently learned of related research by Markiewicz [2004], who has independently found a
positive connection between citations to academic science and various measures of economic
performance of drug and biotechnology companies, underscoring the point made here.
VI. Evidence from the IT Nexus

36

Lichtenberg [forthcomingb, 2003a, 2003b] has established a statistical association between the
introduction of new drugs and measures of longevity, mortality reduction, and economic growth.

30

For every year of our sample period, roughly 70-90% of the total citations made by
patents to scientific articles are made within the bio nexus. For this reason, we have concentrated
much of our analysis on the patent-to-paper citation activity within this nexus. Before concluding
the paper, however, we provide results of a citation function that deliberately excludes the bio
nexus, in order to provide readers with a sense of how patent-to-paper citation activity is
distributed across time and technological fields outside the bio nexus.37 The pattern of knowledge
diffusion from science to invention may be quite different outside the bio nexus; partitioning the
data in this way allows us to quantify those differences.38
Evidence from the IT Nexus
Indeed, we find that the non-biotech subsample generates a significantly different pattern
of results. The aggregate patent classes used are computers and communications (IT), chemistry,
general electronics, mechanical inventions, and a catch-all “other” category. Science aggregates
are engineering and technology, chemistry, physics, and a catch-all “other science” category. The
other categories remain as before. Note that we are estimating roughly the same number of
parameters for our non-biotech subsample as in the full sample, even though we have only a
small fraction of the number of observations of patent-article citations. The relative thinness of
the data here means that our parameter estimates need to be regarded with an extra measure of
caution, even when they are statistically significant according to the conventional thresholds.
Results are given in Table VII.
Patent-article citation activity outside the bio nexus is clearly concentrated in a secondary
“IT” nexus. The IT patent classes cite science most frequently, displaying a propensity to cite

37

The discipline of chemistry is somewhat unique in that it includes subdisciplines that are closely
connected to the bio nexus and other subdisciplines that are completely unrelated. Given this dual nature,
we include chemical patents and chemistry papers in both subsamples.
38
A potential downside to this partition is that we lose “cross-nexus” citations, such as citations made by
biotech patents to papers in mathematics and computer science. It is true that we observe an increase in
such cross-nexus citations over time, probably reflecting the increasing importance of such fields as
“bioinformatics,” but the aggregate numbers of these cross-nexus citations remain small, even in the most
recent periods.

31

that is nearly 18 times as high as the base category of chemistry. General electronics patents are
more than 7 times as likely to cite science, while mechanical patents are three times as likely.
Articles in the physics fields are more than 44 times more likely to be cited than base category
(chemistry) articles. The physics aggregate includes fields that relate to semiconductors and
advanced materials. The engineering/technology aggregate (which includes computer science) is
the next most highly cited, with a citedness per paper that is about 8 times greater than the base
category. The rest of the sciences are significantly less likely to be cited. Incidentally, these
results suggest that much of the citation activity involving chemical patents and chemistry papers
comes from the bio nexus. Once chemistry is separated from those technologies and disciplines,
it ceases to stand out in terms of patent-article citation activity.
In a striking contrast with earlier results, geographic localization seems to be much higher
in this subsample. California-based inventors display a much higher likelihood of citing
California science than the base (non-California U.S.) category of inventors. This pattern of
results could very well reflect the increasing geographic concentration of the U.S. information
technology industry in California. Another contrast with earlier results is a much higher
propensity (relative to industrial firms) for patents generated by public science institutions to cite
science. Public science institutions are nearly 39 times as likely to cite science as are firm
patents, controlling for patent category. Patents held by “other institutions,” are less likely than
firms to cite science in these fields, corresponding to the less significant role played by this
category of assignee in non-biotech patenting.39 The pattern of campus coefficients also
highlights the unique role played by Stanford University within the sample. While, within the
full sample and the bio nexus, a number of other institution’s “campus effects” were nearly as
high, or even higher, than Stanford’s, in the non-bio subsample no other institution comes

39

However, dropping “public science institution” patents from the sample does not qualitatively change
the nature of the other results.

32

remotely close to Stanford’s implied relative level of academic fertility. As with the estimates of
geographic localization, it seems these data reflect the “Silicon Valley” phenomenon.
The patterns suggested by the coefficients on patent grant year cohorts and paper
publication year cohorts also differ from those in previous regressions. Controlling for changes
in the volume and distribution of publications and patents, all periods display a substantially
greater per-patent propensity to cite science than the base period. Rather than the steadier
increase one saw in the full sample, the pattern here looks more like a step function, with a sharp
increase in the late 1980s. Although the increase relative to the base period is higher than in the
bio nexus, one has to keep in mind that the absolute numbers of citations in this category remains
much smaller than in the bio nexus. The increase in per patent propensity to cite science,
combined with a sharp increase in patenting in the IT-related classes, explains most of the
aggregate increase in citations to science outside the bio nexus.
While much of the recent qualitative literature on university-industry interaction has
focused on the extensive borrowing from science taking place in the bio nexus, this activity is less
well documented outside that nexus.40 Nevertheless, the timing of the increase in per-patent
propensity to cite science noted above is roughly coincident with two major changes in patenting
– a substantial increase in patenting by semiconductor firms, especially the so-called “fabless” IC
design firms, and a sharp increase in software patenting. The semiconductor industry has always
had strong links to science [Hicks et al., 2001, Lim, 2003], but, as Hall and Ziedonis [2001] have
showed, firms in this industry began sharply increasing their patenting in the 1980s and 1990s.
Furthermore, new entrants (the so-called “fabless” design firms) emerged that were often closely
linked to university engineering departments.
The increase in software patenting followed changes in U.S. patenting law and practice
which expanded the ability of software inventors to patent, rather than copyright, their inventions
40

Arora and Gambardella [1994] present many examples of what might be called a more “scientific”
approach to industrial research outside the bio nexus, and stress the centrality of information technology in
driving this shift.

33

[Bessen and Hunt, 2003]. There was little patent “prior art” to cite, so patents in this area have
tended to cite more nonpatent prior art, including the relevant academic work in computer science
and related fields. Software patents can be difficult to track, and the exacting timing of the
measured increase depends on ones definition of a software patent. Nevertheless, some observers
suggest that there was a sharp increase in software patenting at the end of the 1980s.41
The final result to note from our exploration of citation activity outside the bio nexus is
that recent cohorts of papers are not more likely to be cited. In fact, the per-paper citedness
measures have sharply plummeted, even when one includes public science patents in the sample.
One can also see that the estimated obsolescence coefficient is substantially higher than the
overall sample, while the diffusion parameter is lower. These results need to be viewed together.
On average, the gap between paper publication and patent citation is much shorter than it is in the
bio nexus, such that very recent science is much more likely to get cited. Controlling for this
short gap, however, there is no evidence that the most recent cohorts of papers generate more
knowledge spillovers. In fact, the estimated decline in per-paper citedness is so sharp that the
substantial increase in publications in these disciplines fails to make a positive contribution to
total citations. In general, it seems that citations to science in these categories arrive more
quickly, decay more rapidly, and peak at a lower level.
Framing these results in light of the alternative hypotheses stated in the introduction, it
seems clear that the increase in citations outside the bio nexus has been driven almost entirely by
composition effects – both in terms of fields of technology, fields of science, and institutions -and “changing methods of invention.” In that sense, results here are broadly consistent with those
discussed earlier. However, it must be stressed that citation activity in the secondary IT nexus
identified in these data is substantially lower than that within the bio nexus – so much so that the
IT nexus does not even show up in the full sample. The explosion of IT patenting in recent years
41

See Bessen and Hunt [2003] who discuss the problems involved in measuring software patenting and
provide alternative counts of software patents over time. Some of these series increase quite sharply in the
late 1980s.

34

has been even more dramatic than that of bio nexus patenting, but the relative paucity of citations
to science among these patents suggests that knowledge spillovers from academia have almost
certainly not played the primary role in generating this patent explosion.
VII.

Conclusions and Extensions

What is driving the remarkable increase over the last decade in the propensity of patents
to cite academic science? Does this trend indicate that stronger knowledge spillovers from
academia have helped drive the surge in innovative activity in the U.S. in the 1990s? This paper
has sought to shed light on these questions by using a common empirical framework to assess the
relative importance of various alternative hypotheses in explaining the growth in patent citations
to science. Our analysis supports the notion that the nature of U.S. inventive activity has changed
over the sample period, with an increased emphasis on the use of the knowledge generated by
university-based scientists in later years. That being said, knowledge flows from academia to
industry, as they are measured in this paper, appear to have been overwhelmingly concentrated in
the bio nexus throughout the sample period. While scientific breakthroughs generated by
academic researchers, particularly in the life sciences, have generated new “technological
opportunities,” these new opportunities are evidently limited in scope.
In our introduction, we laid out four alternative hypotheses that could possibly explain
the sharp increase over time in the number of patent citations to science: the “increasing
scientific fertility hypothesis,” the “attorney-driven” hypothesis, the “changing method of
invention hypothesis,” and the “changing composition of invention” hypothesis. It is clear from
Section IV that increased patenting in the bio nexus is, in a mechanical sense, the single most
important driver of the growth in patent citations over time. This would seem to lead one to the
conclusion that changing composition of invention is the hypothesis validated by the data.
But this begs the question of what has driven the expansion of patenting in the bio nexus.
Conversations with practitioners suggest that part of the increase in bio nexus patenting has itself
been generated by an increase in knowledge spillovers from academic science. Three pieces of

35

evidence support this view. First, within the bio nexus, there has been a pronounced increase
over time in the propensity of patents to cite scientific articles, even controlling for the enormous
increase in potentially citing patents and potentially cited articles. Second, the aggregate statistics
on R&D spending and patenting suggest a rise in inventive productivity for the nexus as a whole.
Third, we cite evidence at the firm level suggesting a positive association between inventive
productivity and patent citations to science – one that is particularly strong in the bio nexus. This
latter evidence is interesting in its own right, and is the subject of ongoing research.

36

Bibliography
Adams, James, 1990, “Fundamental Stocks of Knowledge and Productivity Growth,”
Journal of Political Economy 98: 673-702.
Adams, James and Zvi Griliches, 1996, “Research Productivity in a System of Universities,”
NBER working paper no. 5833.
Agrawal, Ajay, 2001, “Research on University-to-Industry Knowledge Transfer: Framework of
Existing Literature and Future Questions,” International Journal of Management
Reviews.
Agrawal, Ajay and Rebecca Henderson, 2002, “Putting Patents in Context: Exploring
Knowledge Transfer from MIT,” Management Science, Vol. 48, No. 1.
Aoki, Reiko, and Lee Branstetter, 2004, “Is Academic Science Raising Innovative Productivity?
Theory and Evidence from Firm-Level Data,” working paper, Columbia Business School.
Arora, Ashish and Alfonso Gambardella, 1990, “Complementarity and External Linkages: the
Strategies of the Large Firms in Biotechnology,” Journal of Industrial Economics, Vol.
38, pp. 361-379.
Arora, Ashish and Alfonso Gambardella, 1994, “The Changing Technology of Technological
Change: General and Abstract Knowledge and the Division of Innovative Labor,”
Research Policy, Vol. 23, pp. 523-532.
Audretsch, David and Paula Stephan, 1996, “Company-Scientist Locational Links: The
Case of Biotechnology,” American Economic Review, Vol. 86, No. 3.
Azoulay, Pierre, Waverly Ding, and Toby Stuart, 2004, “The Impact of Academic Patenting on
Public Research Output,” working paper.
Barnes, Michael, David Mowery, Arvids Ziedonis, 1998, “The Geographic Reach of Market and
Nonmarket Channels of Technology Transfer: Comparing Citations and Licenses of
University Patents,” working paper.
Bessen, James and Robert Hunt, 2003, “An Empirical Look at Software Patents,” unpublished
working paper.
Branstetter, Lee, 2004, “Exploring the Link Between Academic Science and Industrial
Innovation,” unpublished working paper.
Cockburn, Iain and Rebecca Henderson, 2000, “Publicly Funded Science and the Productivity of
the Pharmaceutical Industry,” paper prepared for the NBER Conference on Science and
Public Policy.
Cockburn, Iain, Rebecca Henderson, and Scott Stern, 1999, “The Diffusion of Science Driven
Drug Discovery: Organizational Change in Pharmaceutical Research,” NBER Working
Paper No. 7359.
Cockburn, Iain and Rebecca Henderson, 1998, “The Organization of Research in Drug

37

Discovery,”Journal of Industrial Economics, Vol XLVI, No. 2.
Cohen, Wesley, Richard Florida, Louis Randazzese, and John Walsh, 1998, “Industry and the
Academy: Uneasy Partners in the Cause of Technological Advance,” in R. Noll, ed.,
Challenges to the Research University. Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution
Cohen, Wesley and Daniel Levinthal, 1989, “Innovation and Learning: The Two Faces of R&D,”
Economic Journal, no. 99, pp. 569-596.
Evenson, Robert and Yoav Kislev, 1976, “A Stochastic Model of Applied Research,” Journal of
Political Economy, Vol. 84, pp. 265-282.
Faulkner, Wendy and Jennifer Senker, 1995, Knowledge Frontiers: Public Sector Research and
Industrial Innovation in Biotechnology, Engineering Ceramics, and Parallel Computing,
Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Fleming, Lee and Olav Sorenson, 2001, “Science as a Map in Technological Search,”
working paper.
Gordon, Robert J., 2002, “Technology and Economic Performance in the American Economy,”
NBER Working Paper no. 8771.
Griliches, Zvi and Jacques Mairesse, 1998, “Production Functions : The Search for
Indentification,” in Practicing Economics: Essays in Method and Application,
Cheltenham, Edward Elgar, London.
Hausman, Jerry, Bronwyn Hall, and Zvi Griliches, 1984, “Econometric Models for Count Data
with an Application to the Patents-R&D Relationship,” Econometrica 52, pp. 909-938.
Henderson, Rebecca and Iain Cockburn, 1996, “Scale, Scope, and Spillovers: the Determinants
of Research Productivity in Drug Discovery,” Rand Journal of Economics 27, pp. 32-59.
Henderson, Rebecca, Adam B. Jaffe, and Manuel Trajtenberg, 1998, “Universities as a Source of
Commercial Technology: A Detailed Analysis of University Patenting, 1965-1988,”
Review of Economics and Statistics, 119-127.
Hicks, Diana, Tony Breitzman, Dominic Olivastro, and Kim Hamilton, 2001, “The Changing
Composition of Innovative Activity in the US – A Portrait Based on Patent Analysis,”
Research Policy 30, pp. 681-703.
Jaffe, Adam, 1989, “The Real Effects of Academic Research,” American Economic Review,
79 [5], pp. 957-70
Jaffe, Adam, Manuel Trajtenberg, and Rebecca Henderson, 1993, “Geographic Localization of
Knowledge Spillovers as Evidenced by Patent Citations,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, Vol. CVIII, No. 3.
Jaffe, Adam and Manuel Trajtenberg, 2002, Patents, Citations, and Innovations: A Window on
the Knowledge Economy, MIT Press.
Jaffe, Adam and Manuel Trajtenberg, 1996, “Flows of Knowledge from Universities and Federal

38

Labs: Modeling the Flow of Patent Citations over Time and across Institutional and
Geographic Boundaries,” NBER working paper no. 5712.
Jaffe, Adam, Michael Fogarty, and Bruce Banks, 1998, “Evidence from Patents and Patent
Citations on the Impact of NASA and Other Federal Labs on Commercial Innovation,”
Journal of Industrial Economics, Vol. XLVI, No. 2.
Jensen, Richard and Marie Thursby, 1999, “Proofs and Prototypes for Sale: The Licensing of
University Inventions,” American Economic Review, 91, pp. 240-259.
Kenney, Martin, 1986, Biotechnology: The University-Industrial Complex, New Haven: Yale
University Press.
Kim, Jinyoung, Sangjoon John Lee, and Gerald Marschke, 2005, “The Influence of University
Research on Industrial Innovation,” NBER working paper no. 11447.
Kortum, Samuel, 1997, “Research, Patenting, and Technological Change,” Econometrica, Vol.
65, pp. 1389-1419.
Kortum, Samuel and Joshua Lerner, 1998, “Stronger Protection or Technological Revolution:
Which is Behind the Recent Surge in Patenting?” Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series
on Public Policy, 48, pp. 247-304.
Kortum, Samuel and Joshua Lerner, 2000, “Assessing the Contribution of Venture Capital to
Innovation,” Rand Journal of Economics, 31, pp. 674-692.
Kortum, Samuel and Joshua Lerner, 2003, “Unraveling the Patent Paradox,” unpublished
working paper.
Lach, Saul and Mark Schankerman, 2003, “Incentives and Invention in Universities,”
unpublished working paper.
Lichtenberg, Frank, forthcominga, “Public Policy and Innovation in the U.S. Pharmaceutical
Industry,” in Public Policy and Entrepreneurship, by Douglas Holtz-Eakin, ed., MIT
Press.
Lichtenberg, Frank, forthcomingb, “Pharmaceutical Knowledge-Capital Accumulation and
Longevity,” in Measuring Capital in the New Economy, by Carol Corrado, John
Haltiwanger, and Dan Sichel, eds., University of Chicago Press.
Lichtenberg, Frank, 2003a, “The Effect of New Drugs on HIV Mortality in the U.S., 1987-1998,”
Economics and Human Biology 1 (2003), pp. 259-266.
Lichtenberg, Frank, 2003b, “Pharmaceutical Innovation, Mortality Reduction, and Economic
Growth,” in Measuring the Gains from Medical Research: An Economic Approach, ed.,
by Kevin Murphy and Robert Topel, University of Chicago Press.
Lieberman, Marvin, 1978, “A Literature Citation Study of Science-Technology Coupling in
Electronics,” Proceedings of the IEEE, 36 [1], pp. 5-13.
Lim, Kwanghui, 2001, “The Relationship between Research and Innovation in the

39

Semiconductor and Pharmaceutical Industries,” working paper.
Markiewicz, Kira, 2004, “Absorptive Capacity and Innovation: Evidence from Pharmaceutical
and Biotechnology Firms,” working paper, UC-Berkeley.
Mansfield, Edwin, 1995, “Academic Research Underlying Industrial Innovations: Sources,
Characteristics, and Financing,” The Review of Economics and Statistics 77: 55-65.
Mowery, David, Richard Nelson, Bhavin Sampat, and Arivds Ziedonis, 1998, “The Effects of the
Bayh-Dole Act on U.S. University Research and Technology Transfer: An Analysis of
Data from Columbia University, the University of California, and Stanford University,”
working paper
Murray, Fiona, 2002, “Innovation as Co-evolution of Scientific and Technological Networks:
Exploring Tissue Engineering,” Research Policy 31: 1289-1403.
Murray, Fiona and Sarah Kaplan, 2001, “The Role of Social Evidence in Shaping a
Technological Discontinuity: The Evolution of Biotechnology,” unpublished working
paper.
Murray, Fiona, and Scott Stern, 2005, “Do Formal Intellectual Property Rights Hinder the Free
Flow of Scientific Knowledge? An Empirical Test of the Anti-Commons Hypothesis,”
NBER Working Paper no. 11465.
Narin, Francis, Kimberly Hamilton, and Dominic Olivastro, 1997, “The Increasing Linkage
Between U.S. Technology and Public Science,” Research Policy 197: 101-121.
National Science Foundation, 2002, National Science and Engineering Indicators.
Office of Technology Transfer, University of California, 1997, Annual Report:
University of California Technology Transfer Program. Oakland, CA: University of
California.
Price, Derek, 1965, “Is Technology Historically Independent of Science? A Study in
Statistical Historiography,” Technology and Culture, 6, pp. 553-568.
Rosenberg, Nathan and Richard Nelson, 1994, “American Universities and Technical Advance in
Industry,” Research Policy, 23, pp. 323-348.
Sampat, Bhaven, 2005, “Determinants of Patent Quality: An Empirical Analysis,” working
paper.
Shane, Scott, 2000, “Prior Knowledge and the Discovery of Entrepreneurial Opportunities,”
Organization Science, 11, pp. 448-469.
Shane, Scott, 2001, “Technological Opportunities and New Firm Creation,” Management
Science, 47, pp. 205-220.
Sorenson, Olav and Lee Fleming, 2001, “Science and the Diffusion of Knowledge,” working
paper.

40

Stephan, Paula, 1996, “The Economics of Science,” Journal of Economic Literature 34:
1199-1235.
Stern, Scott, 1999, “Do Scientists Pay to Be Scientists?” NBER Working Paper No. 7410.
Thompson, Peter and Melanie Fox-Kean, 2005. “Patent Citations and the Geography of
Knowledge Spillovers: A Reassessment,” American Economic Review 95 (1), pp. 450460.
Thursby, Jerry and Marie Thursby, 2002, “Who is Selling the Ivory Tower? Sources of Growth
in University Licensing,” Management Science, 48, pp. 90-104.
Thursby, Jerry and Marie Thursby, 2004, “Patterns of Research and Licensing Activity of Science
and Engineering Faculty,” working paper.
Zucker, Lynne, Michael Darby, and Michael Brewer, 1998, “Intellectual Capital and the Birth of
U.S. Biotechnology Enterprises,” American Economic Review, 88: 290-306.

41

Figure I Patent Citations to Academic Science
Series are scaled so that 1986 values are equal to 1
16

14

12

Patent citations to science
10

8

6

4

Patent grants by U.S. PTO

U.S. real
R&D spending

2

Worldwide output of scientific articles
0
1986

1987

1988

1989

1990

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

1997

1998

Source: National Science and Engineering Indicators, 2002
Figure II

Citations to UC papers vs other indicators

9000

8000

7000

6000
Citations to UC papers
5000

4000

3000

2000

Citations to UC patents
Invention Disclosures

Licenses
Patents

1000

0
88

89

90

91

92

93

94

95

96

97

Source: Authors’ calculations based on data from the University of California Technology
Transfer Office annual report, AUTMN, the NBER Patent Citation Data Base, and CHI Research.

42

Figure III
Growth in California Academic Publishing, Excluding Clinical Medicine
4500
4000
3500
Earth & Space Science
3000

Engineering & Technology
Biology

2500

Biomedical Research
Chemistry

2000

Mathematics
Physics

1500

Psychology
1000
500

19
99

19
97

19
95

19
93

19
91

19
89

19
87

19
85

19
83

19
81

0

Source: University Science Indicators, 1999
Figure IV Patent Grants by Technology Category, 1981-1999
35,000
Computers and Communications
30,000

25,000
Mechanical
20,000
Chemicals

Other

15,000

10,000

Drugs and Medicine
Electronics

5,000

19
81
19
82
19
83
19
84
19
85
19
86
19
87
19
88
19
89
19
90
19
91
19
92
19
93
19
94
19
95
19
96
19
97
19
98
19
99

0

Source: NBER Patent Citation Database

43

Table I Citation Function Results, Full Sample
Variable
Computers and Communications
Drugs/medicine
Electronics
Mechanical
Other
Biomedical research
Chemistry
Clinical Medicine
Eng/Technology
Other Science
Physics
Caltech
Berkeley
Davis
Irvine
Los Angeles
Riverside
Santa Barbara
Santa Cruz
San Diego
Santa Francisco
USC
US-CA
Other Institutions
Public Science
Grant year 88-90
Grant year 91-93
Grant year 94-96
Grant year 97-99
Paper pub year 85-88
Paper pub year 89-92
Paper pub year 93-97
β 1 (obsolescence)
β 2 (diffusion)
Adjusted R-squared
Number of observations

Coefficient

T-statistic for H0: Parameter=1

0.04
2.39
0.05
0.01
0.05
40.87
4.83
5.36
0.25
0.37
0.50
1.20

-126.82
75.67
-132.54
-110.78
-100.33
8.37
6.68
6.92
-6.55
-5.76
-4.32
20.61

0.57
0.42
0.44
0.39
0.26
0.28
0.26
1.02
0.85
0.54
2.67
1.75
3.68
1.04
1.03
1.36
2.10
1.29
1.39
1.10
0.12
1.07E-08

-67.43
-93.97
-78.03
-106.46
-91.93
-74.35
-71.51
2.89
-21.82
-61.09
105.69
38.09
99.18
1.13
0.96
8.55
15.56
21.7
17.4
4.08
62.66
8.33
0.224
556416

Base categories: Patent technology category=chemicals, scientific field=biology, academic
institute=Stanford, patent assignee location=U.S./non-California, patent assignee type=firm, patent grant
year=[1983, 1987], paper publication year=[1981, 1984].

44

Figure V Fitted Citation Frequency (Base Category)

Predicted Citation Frequency (x1Mill)

0.04
0.035
0.03
0.025
0.02
0.015
0.01
0.005
0
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30
Lag in Years

Source: Authors’ calculations.
Figure VI Average Science Citations Per Patent
2.50

2.00

1.50

1.00

0.50

0.00
1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000

Source: National Science and Engineering Indicators, 2002, National Science
Foundation
45

Figure VII Citations to UC Berkeley Papers, US

Source: Authors’ calculations based on NBER Patent Citation Database

46

Table II Citation Function Results, Excluding “Spike Patents”
Coefficien T-statistic for H0: Parameter=1
Variable
Computers and Communications
Drugs/medicine
Electronics
Mechanical
Other
Biomedical research
Chemistry
Clinical Medicine
Eng/Technology
Other Science
Physics
Caltech
Berkeley
Davis
Irvine
Los Angeles
Riverside
Santa Barbara
Santa Cruz
San Diego
San Francisco
USC
US-CA
Other Institutions
Public Science
Grant year 88-90
Grant year 91-93
Grant year 94-96
Grant year 97-99
Paper pub year 85-88
Paper pub year 89-92
Paper pub year 93-97

β 1 (obsolescence)
β 2 (diffusion)
Adjusted R-squared
Number of observations

0.04
2.24
0.06
0.01
0.05
40.44
5.69
5.23
0.29
0.38
0.62
1.16
0.59
0.35
0.47
0.39
0.28
0.29
0.22
1.04
0.85
0.53
2.68
1.76
4.30
1.04
1.07
1.43
1.98
1.30
1.37
1.17
0.12
1.01E-08

-126
70.87
-133.03
-110.84
-100.01
7.82
6.52
6.43
-5.78
-5.26
-2.88
16.03
-59.86
-98.53
-68.19
-98.7
-82
-68.85
-70.14
5.17
-20.88
-57.49
98.85
31.67
87.8
1.43
2.15
9.59
14.38
20.51
15.55
5.77
61.21
7.81
0.199
556416

Base categories: Patent technology category=chemicals, scientific field=biology, academic
institute=Stanford, patent assignee location=U.S./non-California, patent assignee type=firm, patent grant
year=[1983, 1987], paper publication year=[1981, 1984].

47

Table III Citation Function Results, Excluding “Spike Patents” and University Patents
Coefficient T-statistic for H0: Parameter=1
V
i
bl
Computers and Communications
0.039
-52.65
Drugs/medicine
4.331
36.21
Electronics
0.072
-48.02
Mechanical
0.025
-44.74
Other
0.015
-47.16
Biomedical research
87.037
2.23
Chemistry
2.576
1.31
Clinical Medicine
9.232
2.01
Engineering and Technology
0.414
-1.38
Other Science
0.531
-1.11
Physics
0.709
-0.62
Caltech
1.211
15.03
Berkeley
0.394
-69.92
Davis
0.191
-95.16
Irvine
0.236
-73.62
Los Angeles
0.328
-81.43
Santa Barbara
0.159
-72.75
Riverside
0.640
-24.43
Santa Cruz
0.178
-54.48
San Diego
0.528
-51.70
San Francisco
0.505
-59.54
USC
0.589
-36.50
US-CA
2.721
55.94
Other Institutions
2.278
62.61
Grant year 88-90
1.210
5.28
Grant year 91-93
1.018
0.47
Grant year 94-96
1.232
4.59
Grant year 97-99
2.158
11.34
Paper pub year 85-88
0.717
-23.82
Paper pub year 89-92
0.520
-32.13
Paper pub year 93-97
0.407
-34.20
β 1 (obsolescence)
0.123
2.25
β 2 (diffusion)
5.26E-09
-52.65
Adjusted R-squared
0.119
Number of observations
370944
Base categories: Patent technology category=chemicals, scientific field=biology, academic institute=Stanford, patent assignee
location=U.S./non-California, patent assignee type=firm, patent grant year=[1983, 1987], paper publication year=[1981, 1984]

48

Table IV Wald Tests of Restrictions

Hypotheses:
(1) H0: All coefficients of patent technology categories are the same.
(2) H0: All coefficients of paper fields are the same.
(3) H0: All coefficients of patent grant years are the same.
(4) H0: All coefficients of paper publication years are the same.
Test results
Hypothesis

Adj. R2 (rest.)

Chi-Sq.
(p-value)

(1)

63273.3
(0.000)

0.083

(2)

448.7
(0.000)
63721.9
(0.000)

0.052

(3)

2923.8
(0.000)

0.196

(4)

29429.4
(0.000)

0.197

(1) and (2)

0.029

Adj. R2 (unrest).

0.199

# of obs.

556416

49

Variable
Drugs & Medical
Chemistry
Clinical Medicine
Other Biotech
Caltech
Berkeley
Davis
Irvine
Los Angeles
Riverside
Santa Barbara
Santa Cruz
San Diego
San Francisco
USC
US-CA
Other Institutions
Public Science
Grant year 88-90
Grant year 91-93
Grant year 94-96
Grant year 97-99
Paper pub year 85-88
Paper pub year 89-92
Paper pub year 93-97
β 1 (obsolescence)
β 2 (diffusion)
Adjusted R-squared
Number of observations

Table V Bio Nexus Results
Coefficient
T-statistic for H0: Parameter=1
2.326
0.196
0.184
2.321
0.911
0.478
0.297
0.367
0.364
0.221
0.260
0.243
0.985
0.782
0.498
2.548
1.614
4.174
1.040
1.043
1.377
1.729
1.296
1.307
1.105
0.115
3.28E-07

30.16
-56.39
-80.2
34.8
-4.69
-37.35
-51.5
-38.88
-47.29
-42.09
-33.1
-30.29
-0.82
-14.3
-28.45
41.57
11.49
37.72
0.58
0.62
3.88
5.38
8.81
5.76
1.63
24.2
15.03
0.189
105984

Base categories: Patent technology category=chemicals, scientific field=biochemistry, biophysics, and molecular biology, academic
institute=Stanford, patent assignee location=U.S./non-California, patent assignee type=firm, patent grant year=[1983, 1987], paper
publication year=[1981, 1984]

50

Table VI
The Link Between Science Citations and Inventive Productivity
Variable
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Outcome Measure
Real
Real
Real
Real
New product
Sales
Sales
Sales
Sales
introductions
Science Citations

.0302
(.0045)

Science Citations t-1

.6961
(.0240)
.0264
(.0048)

Science Citations t-2

.0238
(.0051)

Science Citations t-3

.0276
(.0056)

R&D

.1657
(.0085)

.1730
(.0089)

.1846
(.0095)

.1977
(.0101)

.0865
(.0183)

Patenting

-.0049
(.0062)

-.0002
(.0065)

.0043
(.0068)

.0058
(.0072)

.4080
(.0328)

Capital

.0716
(.0060)

.0734
(.0062)

.0768
(.0065)

.0806
(.0068)

Labor

.8387
(.0127)

.8257
(.0134)

.8049
(.0142)

.7872
(.0151)

Observations
R-squared
Log Likelihood

14,495
.9743

13,799
.9747

13,086
.9753

12,352
.9758

2,483
-4788

Standard errors are listed in parentheses. Columns (1)-(4) provide results of regression specification (6)
run on a firm-level panel data set of 1,279 publicly traded companies based in the United States, Western
Europe, and Japan. The science citation coefficient effectively provides the elasticity of TFP with respect
to changes in the level of citations to academic science, controlling for the size of the cohort of patent
applications. The data set measures all citations made by the patents of these companies to all scientific
papers appearing in the peer-reviewed journals indexed by the Science Citation Index, not just those
generated by California-based research universities. Patents are dated accorded to the year of application
rather than the year of grant. Column (5) provides the results of regression specification (7) run on a firmlevel panel data set of 273 publicly traded companies in the drug and biotechnology industries and related
sectors. The sample includes most major manufacturers based in Western Europe and Japan.

51

Variable

Table VII Results from the “IT Nexus”
Coefficient
T-statistic for H0: Parameter=1

Computers & Communications
Electronics
Mechanical
Other
Eng/Technology
Other Science
Physics
Caltech
Berkeley
Davis
Irvine
Los Angeles
Riverside
Santa Barbara
Santa Cruz
San Diego
San Francisco
USC
US-CA
Other Institutions
Public Science
Grant year 88-90
Grant year 91-93
Grant year 94-96
Grant year 97-99
Paper pub year 85-88
Paper pub year 89-92
Paper pub year 93-97

β 1 (obsolescence)
β 2 (diffusion)
Adjusted R-squared
Number of observations

17.757
7.175
4.568
0.205
9.467
0.527
45.498
0.140
0.087
0.457
0.011
0.044
0.013
0.038
0.005
0.024
0.002
0.065
21.964
0.436
38.980
16.606
7.166
16.022
16.255
0.207
0.079
0.022

7.16
6.49
5.75
-4.56
2.5
-1.22
2.75
-111.24
-116.36
-44.23
-88.11
-109.79
-71.51
-111.09
-67.68
-101.04
-116.04
-94.57
8.08
-1.56
6.94
17.27
11.97
11.07
7.16
-153.46
-173.74
-320.19

0.544

88.66

5.41E-11

2.36
0.074
264960

Base categories: Patent technology category=chemicals, scientific field=chemistry, academic institute=Stanford, patent
assignee location=U.S./non-California, patent assignee type=firm, patent grant year=[1983, 1987], paper publication
year=[1981, 1984]

52

Data Appendix
This appendix provides additional details on the construction of the data sets used in the
paper.
Construction of the Data Set Used in Tables I-IV
From the University Science Indicators database generated by the Institute for Scientific
Information and purchased by the authors, we have obtained comprehensive data on the
publication of scientific articles by our sample of California research universities, by institution,
year (of publication), and scientific field, from 1981-1997. The raw data are counts of
publications, and they are assigned to a large number of narrowly defined scientific fields.
These data are matched to data on patent citations made to these publications over the
1983-1999 (grant year) period, which were provided by CHI Research. CHI Research, which has
since been acquired by the consulting firm ipIQ, developed a comprehensive data base of “nonpatent references” made in U.S. patent documents. These references include citations to scientific
journals, industrial standards, technical disclosures, engineering manuals, etc. The focus on this
paper is on the subset of references made to articles appearing in peer-reviewed scientific
journals. In the CHI Research database, references to scientific journals are put into a
standardized format, and these data can then be matched to data on papers published in the more
than 4,000 journals covered by the Science Citation Index (SCI).42 Through this matching
process, we obtain data on patent citations to peer-reviewed scientific articles generated by
California research universities.
The raw data thus obtained consisted of a patent-paper match – an observation that linked
a specific U.S. patent grant with a specific paper for which at least one of the authors was
affiliated with a California-based research university at the time of publication. The papers were

42

For a more detailed description of the database developed by CHI Research, see Narin et. al. [1997].
Further details are also available from the authors upon request.

53

assigned to a set of scientific field categories developed by CHI Research based on the journal in
which they appeared. The citing patents were also assigned to a set of technology categories, also
developed by CHI Research, based on the primary patent class assigned by the U.S. patent
examiner. For the purposes of our analysis, we only considered U.S. patent grants awarded to
inventors with a U.S. address. However, inclusion of the full set of U.S. patent grants, including
those made to foreigners, did not qualitatively change our results.
Finally, we obtained data on the universe of potentially citing U.S. utility patents granted
over that same period, which is available from the NBER Patent Citation Database documented in
Hall et. al. [2001]. These data use information on inventor address to identify “domestic” versus
“foreign” patents. These data also provide information on the nature of the patent owner, so that
we can distinguish between patents owned by universities, public research institutes, government
agencies, and private firms. The geographic and institutional categories used in this data set are
incorporated into our own analysis.
Given the nature of our analysis, we aggregated our raw paper, patent, and patent-topaper citation data into cells, based on the scientific field, generating institution, and publication
date of the cited paper, and the technological field, grant date, inventor location, and institutional
category of the citing patent. This required us to construct a concordance between the
disaggregated fields used by the University Science Indicators database and the more aggregated
fields used by the CHI Research data. Papers with authors from more than one California
institution are “credited” to each institution. The large number of categories implies a large
number of cells and, hence, a large number of observations.
Construction of the Data Set Used in Table VI
The data set used in Table VI is at the firm-level. The NBER Patent Citation Database
was used to identify the patent assignee codes assigned by the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office
to the most significant “patent-generating” industrial firms and not-for-profit organizations. This
set of mostly large enterprises was supplemented with a set of patent assignee codes assigned to

54

smaller firms in technology-intensive industries, including biotechnology, semiconductors, and
information technology. While the majority of these assignee codes were associated with U.S.based organizations, the codes associated with roughly 300 Japanese and 200 West European
firms were also included.
Using these assignee codes, information was downloaded from the NBER Patent
Citations Database on all patents granted to these firms and organizations from 1982-1999. With
the help of CHI Research, information on all of the citations made by these patents to scientific
papers published in journals tracked by the Science Citation Index was obtained. For more than
70% of the papers cited, the institutional affiliation of the author at the time of publication can be
identified, although these data are not incorporated in the empirical analysis shown in the paper.
Instead, counts of the number of citations to science references that appear in each year’s cohort
of patents were constructed, where patents are dated by the year of application rather than the
year of grant. By looking at the number of science citations while controlling for the size of the
patent cohort, one can obtain a firm-specific, time-varying measure of the science citation
intensity of the firm’s patented inventions.
The IMS LifeCycle Patent Focus Database maintains a record of approved drugs and the
U.S. patents associated with them. This database was employed to create a count of (eventually)
approved drugs that can be associated with the cohort of a firm’s patent applications in a given
year. This provides a way of linking the science citation intensity of a patent cohort with the
number of drugs that patent cohort eventually produces. This measure of product innovations is
only available for pharmaceutical and biotechnology firms, but it provides a direct connection
between patents and products.
Most of the largest firms generating patent applications are publicly traded corporations,
allowing for the linkage of patent data with data on R&D investment, labor and capital inputs,
and sales. This kind of linked data was obtained for nearly 1,300 firms. Data on accounts for
U.S. firms were taken from Compustat. Data on Western European firms were taken from

55

Compustat Global, Datastream, and Osiris. Data on Japanese firms were taken from the
Development Bank of Japan Corporate Finance Database, with supplementary R&D data taken
from firm-level R&D surveys published in the Japan Company Handbook series distributed by
Toyou Keizai. Corporate output was deflated by producer price indices associated with the firm’s
primary industry. This is obviously problematic in the case of highly diversified manufactures.
Measures of the capital stock were deflated “book value” measures taken directly from firm
accounts. Measures of R&D stocks were obtained by applying the perpetual inventory method to
our R&D expenditure series. Regressions run with these R&D stock measures yielded results
qualitatively similar to those using R&D flow measures. However, these stocks are subject to
considerable measurement error due to the absence of “pre-sample” data on R&D expenditure
with which to calculate an initial stock. Obtaining better measures of capital and R&D stock is
the focus of ongoing research efforts.

56

