                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                 EXPERIMENTAL ANALYSIS OF
                                  NEIGHBORHOOD EFFECTS

                                            Jeffrey R. Kling
                                          Jeffrey B. Liebman
                                           Lawrence F. Katz

                                         Working Paper 11577
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w11577


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 2005



This paper integrates material previously circulated in Kling and Liebman (2004), Kling et al. (2004), and
Liebman et al. (2004). Support for this research was provided by grants from the U.S. Department of Housing
and Urban Development, the National Institute of Child Health and Development (NICHD) and the National
Institute of Mental Health (R01-HD40404 and R01-HD40444), the National Science Foundation (9876337
and 0091854), the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation, the Russell Sage Foundation, the Smith Richardson
Foundation, the MacArthur Foundation, the W.T. Grant Foundation, and the Spencer Foundation. Additional
support was provided by grants to Princeton University from the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation and from
NICHD (5P30-HD32030 for the Office of Population Research), by the Princeton Industrial Relations
Section, the Bendheim-Thomas Center for Research on Child Wellbeing, the Princeton Center for Health and
Wellbeing, and the National Bureau of Economic Research. We are grateful to Todd Richardson and Mark
Shroder of HUD; to Eric Beecroft, Judie Feins, Barbara Goodson, Robin Jacob, Stephen Kennedy, Larry Orr,
and Rhiannon Patterson of Abt Associates; to our collaborators Jeanne Brooks-Gunn, Alessandra Del Conte
Dickovick, Greg Duncan, Tama Leventhal, Jens Ludwig, Bruce Psaty, Lisa Sanbonmatsu, and Robert
Whitaker; to our research assistants Ken Fortson, Jane Garrison, Erin Metcalf, and Josh Meltzer; and to
numerous colleagues and three anonymous referees for valuable suggestions. Any findings or conclusions
expressed are those of the authors. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by Jeffrey R. Kling, Jeffrey B. Liebman and Lawrence F. Katz. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Experimental Analysis of Neighborhood Effects
Jeffrey R. Kling, Jeffrey B. Liebman and Lawrence F. Katz
NBER Working Paper No. 11577
August 2005
JEL No. H43, I18, I38, J38

                                           ABSTRACT




Families, primarily female-headed minority households with children, living in high-poverty public
housing projects in five U.S. cities were offered housing vouchers by lottery in the Moving to
Opportunity program. Four to seven years after random assignment, families offered vouchers lived
in safer neighborhoods that had lower poverty rates than those of the control group not offered
vouchers. We find no significant overall effects of this intervention on adult economic self-
sufficiency or physical health. Mental health benefits of the voucher offers for adults and for female
youth were substantial. Beneficial effects for female youth on education, risky behavior, and physical
health were offset by adverse effects for male youth. For outcomes exhibiting significant treatment
effects, we find, using variation in treatment intensity across voucher types and cities, that the
relationship between neighborhood poverty rate and outcomes is approximately linear.



Jeffrey R. Kling                                      Lawrence F. Katz
Firestone A-16-J                                      Department of Economics
Princeton University                                  Harvard University
Princeton, NJ 08544-2098                              Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER                                              and NBER
kling@princeton.edu                                   lkatz@harvard.edu

Jeffrey B. Liebman
Kennedy School of Government
Harvard University
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
jeffrey_liebman@harvard.edu
    The residents of disadvantaged neighborhoods fare substantially worse on a wide range of

socioeconomic and health outcomes than do those with more affluent neighbors. Economic

models of residential sorting --partially motivated by these observed associations between

neighborhood characteristics and individual outcomes -- suggest that inefficient equilibria can

arise when individual outcomes are influenced by neighbors and individuals do not take their

external effects on neighbors into account in their location decisions (e.g., Benabou, 1993).

    It is hard to judge from theory alone whether the externalities from having neighbors of

higher socioeconomic status are predominantly beneficial (from social connections, positive role

models, reduced exposure to violence, and more community resources), inconsequential (only

family influences, genetic endowments, and individual human capital investments matter), or

adverse (from competition with advantaged peers and discrimination).1 Empirical assessment of

the importance of such externalities has also proven difficult using non-experimental data

because individuals sort across neighborhoods for reasons that are likely to be correlated with the

underlying determinants of their outcomes.

    In this paper, we avoid the problem of endogenous neighborhood selection by using data

from a randomized experiment in which some families living in high-poverty housing projects

were offered housing vouchers to enable them to move to lower-poverty neighborhoods while

others were not offered vouchers.2 Thus our analysis provides direct evidence on the existence,

direction, and magnitude of neighborhood effects for important socioeconomic and health

outcomes in both adult and youth populations. The findings also bear on key housing policy

decisions such as whether it is better for the government to provide housing subsidies tied to

public housing projects or housing vouchers that can be used in the private-sector rental market.
1
 Jencks and Mayer (1990), Becker and Murphy (2000), Brock and Durlauf (2001)), Kawachi and Berkman (2003).
2
 Tenants in U.S. public housing and those using federal Section 8 housing vouchers both pay approximately 30
percent of their income in rent (Olsen 2003). The value of a voucher is the difference between 30 percent of income
and the city’s Fair Market Rent, set at the 40th percentile of area rents.


                                                         1
    The research design used in this paper is based on comparisons of three groups to which

households were randomly assigned in the Moving To Opportunity (MTO) social experiment,

operated in five cities -- Baltimore, Boston, Chicago, Los Angeles, and New York -- by the U.S.

Department of Housing and Urban Development. A control group received no new assistance,

but continued to be eligible for public housing. A Section 8 group received a traditional Section

8 voucher, without geographic restriction. An experimental group received a Section 8 voucher,

restricted for one year to a census tract with a poverty rate of less than 10 percent, and mobility

counseling. Our sample consists of 4248 households assigned from 1994-97 at the five sites.

    In 2002, extensive data were collected on outcomes from five key domains: economic self-

sufficiency, mental health, physical health, risky behavior, and education. This paper provides

the main results from MTO for adults and for youth ages 15-20 at all five sites an average of five

years after random assignment, providing the most comprehensive experimental analysis to date

of neighborhoods effects.3


1. Data and descriptive statistics.

    The data for this study come from a baseline survey, from administrative data, and from an

impact evaluation survey conducted in 2002 of one adult and up to two randomly selected

children in each MTO household. The baseline survey was administered to household heads

prior to random assignment. Administrative data on earnings and welfare benefits were obtained

from state and county agencies in California, Illinois, Maryland, Massachusetts, and New York.4


3
  Additional results are available from Sanbonmatsu et al. (2004) who analyze reading and math test scores for
children ages 6-20 and from Kling, Ludwig, and Katz (2005) who analyze arrest records for youth ages 15-25. The
earlier single-site pilot studies of MTO are collected in Goering and Feins (2003).
4
  Four of the states provided individual-level earnings information on each MTO sample member who matched to
the UI records. Massachusetts could provide the data only aggregated across groups consisting of at least 10 MTO
individuals. Data was linked by Social Security Number (SSN). SSNs from each state of random assignment were
linked to agency data only for that state. Earnings and welfare amounts were inflation adjusted to 2001 dollars using
the Consumer Price Index for all urban consumers.


                                                          2
The 2002 survey had an effective response rate of 90 percent for adults and female youth and 86

percent for male youth.5 All statistical estimates in this paper use weights.6 The baseline

covariates included in the regressions and supplemental details regarding outcome variables are

given in the Appendix.

    The Boston, Los Angeles, and New York families in our sample are mainly black or

Hispanic; those in Baltimore and Chicago are nearly all black. Overall, 85 percent of the

households are female-headed and either African-American or Hispanic. 98 percent of the

sample adults were female, and 93 percent were ages 25-54 as of December 31, 2001. At the

time of random assignment, one quarter of sample adults were employed, three quarters were

receiving AFDC, more than half had never married, fewer than half had graduated from high

school, and a quarter had been teenage parents. In a baseline survey, a majority said they wanted

to move out of public housing “to get away from drugs and gangs.”

    Participants volunteered for this study, presumably because they were interested in moving

out of their original high-poverty neighborhoods. Although this may be the most relevant

population when considering incremental expansion of the use of housing vouchers to replace

public housing, care should be taken in applying these results to populations with different

characteristics. The experiment did not result in large clusters of moves to the same new
5
  An initial phase from January - June 2002 resulted in an 80% response rate for adults. At that point, we drew a 3-
in-10 subsample of remaining cases and located 48% of them. The purpose of the subsampling was to concentrate
our remaining resources on finding hard-to-locate families in a way that would minimize the potential for non-
response bias. We calculate the effective response rate for adults as 80 + (1 - .8)*48 = 89.6. The effective response
rate for youths is calculated in an analogous manner.
6
  The weights have three components (Orr et al., 2003). First, subsample members receive greater weight since, in
addition to themselves, they represent individuals whom we did not attempt to contact during the subsampling
phase. Second, youth from large families receive greater weight since we randomly sampled two children per
household implying that youth from large families are representative of a larger fraction of the study population; this
component does not apply to adults. Third, all individuals are weighted by the inverse of their probability of
assignment to their experimental group to account for changes in the random assignment ratios over time. The ratio
of individuals randomly assigned to treatment groups was changed during the course of the demonstration to
minimize the minimum detectable effects after take-up of the vouchers turned out to be different than had been
projected. This third component of the weights prevents time or cohort effects from confounding the results. Our
weights imply that each random assignment period is weighted in proportion to the number of people randomly
assigned in that period. Analyses of administrative data use only the third component of the weights.


                                                          3
neighborhoods; therefore it is unlikely to have had large effects on receiving neighborhoods or

via “social multiplier” or “general equilibrium” effects (Manski 1993, Heckman 2001).

    Families in the treatment groups had four to six months to find qualified housing and move

using an MTO voucher. The fraction of treatment group families who used an MTO voucher to

move -- which we refer to as the compliance rate -- was 47 percent for the experimental group

and 60 percent for the Section 8 group. Compared to non-compliers (those in the treatment

groups who do not use an MTO voucher), compliers (those who move using an MTO voucher)

are younger and more likely to have had no teenage children at baseline, to have reported that

their neighborhood was very unsafe at night, to have said that they were very dissatisfied with

their apartment, to have been enrolled in school, and to have forecast that they would be “very

likely” to find a new apartment if offered a voucher. Compliance rates differed substantially by

site from a low of 32 percent in the Chicago experimental group to a high of 77 percent in the

Los Angeles Section 8 group.7

    To characterize the neighborhoods in which families lived and the differences in residential

location for those who used an MTO voucher versus those who did not, Figure 1 shows several

densities of neighborhood (census tract) poverty rates. The poverty rates are duration-weighted

averages over locations lived at since random assignment, and use linear interpolation for

poverty rates between the Census years of 1990 and 2000. Figure 1 indicates that experimental

compliers lived in neighborhoods with significantly lower poverty rates than did controls, with

nearly 60 percent living in neighborhoods below 20 percent poverty; Section 8 compliers also

lived in lower-poverty neighborhoods, but their density is shifted by a more modest magnitude.

The densities for experimental non-compliers, Section 8 non-compliers, and controls are quite


7
  The intensity of housing search assistance provided to the experimental group by the non-profits responsible for
the counseling varied considerably across sites, as did the tightness of local housing markets.


                                                          4
similar to each other.8

    Additional descriptive statistics of the residential locations are shown in Table 1. The

experimental and Section 8 groups are both substantially less likely to live in very poor areas

with visible drug activity, and somewhat more likely to live in areas with greater adult

employment and a lower share of minority residents. Members of the treatment groups feel safer

and are less likely to report a household member having been victimized by crime in the previous

six months. The .82 average share minority for the experimental group tracts is indicative of the

fact that, while families moved to lower poverty census tracts, these families did not move to

distant white suburban areas. In the experimental group, only 16 percent moved 10 miles or

more, and only 12 percent had an average tract share minority less than half.


2. Analysis.

    We focus on fifteen primary outcomes for adults and fifteen primary outcomes for youth.

Prior to examining the data, we decided to examine youth results pooled by gender and

separately for females and males -- both because the prevalences for some outcomes differ

greatly by gender and result in different statistical power to detect effects and because there had

been some evidence of more beneficial effects for boys in earlier MTO research (Katz, Kling,

and Liebman 2001; Ludwig, Duncan, and Hirshfield 2001) and in welfare reform research (Bos

et al 1999). With fifteen outcomes, four population groups (adults, all youth, female youth, male

youth) and two treatment groups, there are a total of 120 treatment effect estimates in this set.

    To draw general conclusions about the experiment’s results, we first present findings for

summary indices that aggregate information over multiple treatment effect estimates (later we


8
 This implies that there was little selection of the type typically hypothesized, where compliers would have been
more likely to have moved to lower-poverty neighborhoods even if they had not been offered a voucher (and the
poverty distribution for controls would therefore exhibit greater density at lower neighborhood-poverty rates than
would the density for noncompliers).


                                                         5
present estimates for specific outcomes). For example, we create an index of economic self-

sufficiency that averages together five measures of employment, earnings, and public assistance

receipt. The aggregation improves statistical power to detect effects that go in the same direction

within a domain.9 The index Y is an equally weighted average of z-scores of the components of

the index, with signs of measures oriented as defined in the notes to Table 2 so that more

beneficial outcomes have higher index scores. The z-scores are calculated by subtracting the

control group mean and dividing by the control group standard deviation, so the value of the

index has mean zero and standard deviation one by construction for the control group.10

    We begin by estimating intent-to-treat (ITT) effects -- differences between treatment and

control group means. Estimation of the ITT effect π1 is from equation (1). Let Z be an indicator

for treatment group assignment, and X be a matrix of baseline covariates.

    (1) Y = Zπ 1 + Xβ 1 + ε 1

X is included to improve estimation precision and to account for chance differences between

groups in the distribution of pre-random assignment characteristics. Table 2 shows ITT results by

domain and population group for indices -- with details on the measures included in each index

provided in the notes to Table 2. The absolute magnitudes of the indices are in units akin to

standardized test scores; the ITT estimate shows where the mean of the treatment group is in the

distribution of the control group in terms of standard deviation units.
9
  O’Brien (1984) constructs a global test statistic for multiple endpoints with maximum power against the alternative
that all effects have the same sign and effect size. An adaptation of the O’Brien approach is discussed in the
Appendix and implemented in Kling and Liebman (2004) which uses seemingly unrelated regression effects for
specific outcomes to estimate the covariance of the effects and calculates the mean effect size for groups of
estimates in a second step. The average z-score index used in this paper is much simpler to work with, particularly
for our results relating neighborhood poverty rates to outcomes. The two approaches yield identical treatment effects
when there is no item nonresponse and no regression adjustment.
10
   If an individual has a valid response to at least one component measure of an index, then any missing values for
other component measures are imputed at the random assignment group mean. This results in differences between
treatment and control means of an index being the same as the average of treatment and control means of the
components of that index (when the components are divided by their control group standard deviation and have no
missing value imputation), so that the index can be interpreted as the average of results for separate measures scaled
to standard deviation units.


                                                          6
     For adults, the direction of effects is positive for both the experimental and Section 8 groups

relative to the control group for all three domains: economic self-sufficiency, physical health,

and mental health. The effect on mental health for the experimental group is much larger in

magnitude than the others and is the only adult estimate that is statistically significant at the 5

percent level. For results pooling all youth, the direction of effects is positive for mental health

and education, and negative for physical health and risky behavior. Again, the effects on mental

health (for both the experimental group and Section 8 groups) are much larger and have p-values

below .06. For the overall index averaging together all fifteen outcomes, the results in columns

(i)-(iv) for adults and for all youth are positive in sign, but the magnitude is not large enough to

reject a null hypothesis of no effect with 95 percent confidence. Thus, for adults and for all

youth, the strongest evidence of effects from relocation to lower poverty neighborhoods is for the

domain of mental health.

     The overall results for youth average together estimates that substantially differ for female

and male youth. Columns (v)-(viii) of Table 2 show large positive effects on mental health and

risky behavior for female youth, and large negative effects on physical health and risky behavior

for male youth.11 This gender pattern in results was the opposite of what we expected.12 Yet, as

shown in columns (ix)-(x), the medium-term effects for females are more beneficial than for

males for all four domains and in both treatment groups relative to the control group.

     As a complement to the summary indices, we also examined results for each specific

outcome that was a component of an index. Because the magnitudes of these separate outcomes


11
   These results are based on estimation of Y = (1 − G )( Xβ 10 + Zπ 10 ) + G ( Xβ 11 + Zπ 11 ) + υ , where G is an indicator
for gender, X includes household and individual-specific characteristics.
12
   All of the non-experimental papers that we are aware of showing gender differences in neighborhood effects find
larger beneficial effects for boys from living in advantaged neighborhoods than for girls (examples include Entwisle,
Alexander, and Olson , 1994; Ramirez-Valles, Zimmerman, and Juarez, 2002; and Crane, 1991). The predominant
mechanism proposed in these studies is that boys spend more time hanging out in the neighborhood (rather than in
the home), and therefore are influenced more heavily by the neighborhood.


                                                             7
are often easier to interpret than those of the summary indices, we show in Table 3 all outcomes

with ITT effects significant at the five percent level. In addition to ITT effects, we also report the

effect of treatment-on-treated (TOT) for these measures. We estimate this effect using the offer

of an MTO voucher as an instrumental variable for MTO voucher use, so Z is the excluded

instrument for an indicator D of compliance in two stage least squares estimation of (2).13

     (2) Y = Dγ 2 + Xβ 2 + ε 2

The TOT parameter γ2 is equal to the ITT parameter divided by the regression-adjusted

compliance rate. This TOT approach relies on the assumption that there was no average effect of

being offered an MTO voucher on those who did not use an MTO voucher, which we believe is a

reasonable approximation, but not strictly true.14 Under this assumption, we can assess the

average magnitude of the effect of the voucher offer for those who complied and used an MTO

voucher to move to a lower-poverty neighborhood.

     As an example, results for the specific outcome of adult obesity, using a standard body mass

index cutpoint (BMI ≥ 30 kg/m2), are shown in the first row of Table 3. The results in column (i)

compare the experimental and control groups (E-C), and the ITT effect on obesity is a five

percentage point reduction in obesity for the experimental group relative to the control group.



13
   We interpret the 2SLS results as treatment-on-treated estimates rather than local average treatment effect (LATE)
estimates (Imbens and Angrist 1994) because the endogenous variable is use of a voucher offered by the MTO
program, and MTO vouchers are never offered to the control group; there are no always-takers in the terminology of
Angrist, Imbens, and Rubin (1996). Over time, some control group members do receive housing vouchers from
other sources, but they tend to receive them significantly later than treatment group members do. Therefore, in our
TOT estimates, we do not define control group voucher recipients as having been treated. We do interpret both our
ITT and TOT estimates as averages of heterogeneous treatment effects across individuals.
14
   For the experimental group, this assumption implies that the later outcomes of households who met with a housing
mobility counselor were not affected by the counselor if that household did not make a subsidized move through the
MTO program. For both treatment groups, this assumption implies that the experience of housing search induced by
assignment to a treatment group did not affect later outcomes if that household did not make a subsidized program
move. For noncompliers, we believe that the effects of mobility counselors (who mainly provided housing advice
and not general social services) on self-sufficiency and health outcomes are likely to be orders of magnitude smaller
than the effects of moving to a new residential location. The TOT approach also requires that the control group was
not affected by the experience of losing the voucher lottery, something we view as a reasonable approximation.


                                                         8
Assuming no effect on those who did not use an MTO voucher to move, the TOT effect was ten

percentage points.

     Since outcomes are directly observed for treatment group compliers and we have a TOT

estimate, we can estimate the mean level of each outcome for those in the control group who

would have complied if they had been offered a voucher -- which we refer to as the control

complier mean or CCM (Katz, Kling, and Liebman 2001) -- based on relation that CCM = E[Y |

Z=1, D=1] - γ.15 For the fraction obese, the CCM in column (iv) is estimated to be .502.16 Thus

a ten percentage point change would be a decline in relative risk among compliers of 21 percent

and a relative odds ratio of .66 for obesity for experimental relative to control compliers.17

     These effects on adult obesity are of substantial magnitude, yet they are the smallest in

relative risk and relative odds among the 13 binary outcomes in Table 3. The two continuous

outcomes in Table 3 (the z-scores from the K6 distress index) have TOT effect sizes of .2 and .5

standard deviations. Thus, each of the TOT effects in Table 3 appears to be of a substantively

important magnitude.

     Another metric in which the magnitude of the results can be assessed is in terms of the

association between a change in the neighborhood poverty rate (W) and the change in an

outcome.18 Thus in equation (3) the key parameter is γ3, the OLS coefficient on poverty rate.19



15
   For binary outcomes, sampling variation can produce negative estimates of the CCM. Our analytic method
assumes that the there would have been the same fraction of noncompliers in the control group as were observed in
the treatment group, and that these noncompliers had exactly the same outcome prevalence as treatment
noncompliers. In any one sample this method may produce a negative estimate of a CCM if a particular realization
of the treatment noncomplier mean is higher than the realization of the control noncomplier mean, even though the
method is unbiased in repeated sampling. In our results, we report a CCM of zero when the CCM estimate for a
binary outcome is negative.
16
   BMI = 30 for a woman five feet four inches and 175 pounds. Nationally for ages 18-44, 33 percent of black
women and 22 percent of Hispanic women have BMI ≥ 30 (Lucas, Schiller, and Benson 2004).
17
   The odds of obesity for control compliers are .502/(1-.502) = 1.01. The odds for experimental compliers are
.399/(1-.399) = .664. The relative odds are .664 / 1.01 = .659.
18
   This approach permits direct comparison with the large nonexperimental literature. In addition, sociological
threshold models (Granovetter, 1978) and economic models of sorting across neighborhoods, schools, and


                                                        9
    (3) Y = Wγ 3 + Xβ 3 + ε 3

OLS estimation of this regression may be biased by endogenous residential location as

previously discussed, but treatment group assignment can be used to form instrumental variables.

Consider a regression using all sample members, regardless of MTO group. With a set of

excluded instruments containing site-by-treatment interactions and when X contains only site

indicators, then the 2SLS estimate of γ3 is the line fit through a scatterplot of 15 outcome and

poverty rate means for the three random assignment groups in each of five sites, normalized so

that each site has mean zero. This is depicted graphically in Figure 2, with four panels for four

summary indices (adult mental health, female youth mental health, female youth overall, and

male youth overall). The figures show that there is a consistent pattern across the sites and

groups that larger differences in poverty rates (relative to the site mean) are associated with

differences of larger magnitude in outcomes. The relationship between poverty rate and

outcomes appears fairly linear, and in each case, a test of the overidentifying restrictions

(Davidson and MacKinnon, 1993) has a p-value of less than .30 indicating that the data are

consistent with a linear model.20

    Estimates based on equation (3) are given in Table 4 for selected outcomes. The first column

shows OLS estimates using data for the control group only – results illustrative of the approach

taken in the non-experimental literature on neighborhood effects (e.g., Brooks-Gunn et. al.,

1997) that could have been applied in analysis of this population without the random assignment


classrooms (Arnott and Rowse, 1987, de Bartolome, 1990; Fernandez and Rogerson, 1996; Benabou, 1993) hinge
on the exact form of the relationship between neighborhood or peer groups characteristics and individual outcomes.
19
   We interpret the coefficient on neighborhood poverty rate as the effect of moving a neighborhood with a lower
poverty rate and other associated differences in neighborhood characteristics, and not as the effect of changing the
poverty rate while holding other characteristics of the neighborhood constant.
20
   We have also used another diagnostic technique for examining the form of the relationship between the outcomes
and poverty rates in each group-site – examining augmented partial residual plots, recommended by Mallows (1986)
to detect nonlinearity in the relationship of W and Y. This analysis did not suggest any evidence of nonlinearities in
our estimated relationships.


                                                         10
of vouchers. The second column shows 2SLS estimates of γ3 for the entire sample with site-

group interactions as excluded instruments for the neighborhood poverty rate W, and a full set of

covariates in X. The 2SLS estimates bear little relation to the OLS estimates, implying that

endogeneity is a substantial issue for non-experimental approaches to these data. Differences in

neighborhood poverty rates of ten percentage points (roughly the treatment-control difference in

poverty rates in Table 1) are associated with outcome effect sizes similar in magnitude to those

for the ITT effects in Table 2.

    To test the hypotheses that differences in poverty rates had the primary effects on outcomes

as opposed to simply using an MTO voucher to move out of public housing, we also enriched W

in equation (3) to include both the poverty rate and an indicator for compliance (D), with results

reported in columns (iii) and (iv) of Table 4. Comparing columns (ii) and (iii), results without

and with controls for compliance are quite similar for female youth and are within sampling error

for adult mental health and for male youth (accounting for the covariance of the estimates). For

the more precisely estimated models (adult mental health, female youth overall, male youth

overall), the coefficients on poverty rates are large both in absolute magnitude and relative to

their standard errors, while the coefficients on compliance are wrong-signed and small relative to

their standard errors -- providing some evidence that the poverty rate effect was more important

than the “move per se” effect. We have also examined other models with two endogenous

variables, such as poverty and poverty-squared, intercept shifts in poverty rates, and kink points

in poverty rates; while there is no evidence of nonlinearities in these models, the research design

has little power to identify these effects.




                                                11
3. Discussion

     Adult economic self-sufficiency. The idea that residence in a distressed community can limit

an individual’s economic prospects has been powerfully advanced by Wilson (1987), and the

related hypothesis that proximity to employment is important has its roots in the spatial

mismatch hypothesis of Kain (1968). However, we found no significant evidence of treatment

effects on earnings, welfare participation, or amount of government assistance after an average

of five years since random assignment. As shown in Figure 3, the fraction of MTO adults with

positive quarterly UI earnings increased from less than 25 percent in early 1995 to more than 50

percent in 2001. The time-patterns are, however, similar for the three randomly-assigned

groups.21

     In analyses shown in the Appendix, we explore possible reasons for the lack of effects. There

do not appear to be important differences across the three MTO groups in job accessibility, to the

extent that aggregate employment growth in establishments at the zip code level reflects

available job vacancies.22 Also, the MTO intervention had only small impacts on job-related

social networks. While we found that the intervention modestly increased the fraction of sample

members who “had a friend who graduated from college or earned more than $30,000 a year,”

we also found that only about eight percent of the sample “found a job through someone living in
21
   The strength of the U.S. labor market, welfare reform, and the declining fraction of sample members with
preschool-age children at home are the most likely explanations for this upward trend. In analyses shown in the
Appendix we found similar results based on survey and administrative data, suggesting little bias in self-reports.
Given that the name of the demonstration is “Moving To Opportunity” and it was promoted by the government as a
pathway to better jobs, one might have expected employment and earnings to be the most likely outcomes to be
exaggerated by treatment group members if they were trying to “tell us what they thought we wanted to hear.”
22
   It is somewhat surprising that the MTO intervention – which assisted families in moving out of some of the most
concentrated pockets of poverty in the U.S. – had no discernable overall effects on employment, given that a recent
comprehensive survey (Ihlandfeldt and Sjoquist, 1998) concludes that the empirical evidence overwhelmingly
supports the spatial mismatch hypothesis that inner-city low-skilled minority workers have relatively weak access to
jobs because job opportunities are disproportionately in suburban areas and housing market discrimination plus
commuting costs create barriers that prevent minorities from reaching suburban jobs. It turns out, however, that the
MTO experiment provides only a weak test of this aspect of spatial mismatch since the effects on distance moved
and on local area job growth are small. If spatial mismatch is construed more broadly to encompass residence in
distressed, unsafe, crime-ridden communities inhibiting access to jobs outside these communities, the results do
indicate that moving to communities that are substantially safer does not have detectable effects on employment.


                                                        12
their neighborhood such as a friend, relative, or acquaintance” -- and that this proportion did not

vary across MTO groups.

     We also explored whether effects differed by baseline characteristics, and in general results

do not differ appreciably by these characteristics.23 In results shown in the Appendix, we find

some suggestive evidence using UI data of interesting dynamics in the treatment effects on

employment and earnings for younger adults, with initial negative treatment effects in the first

two years after random assignment fading away over time for the Section 8 group and turning

positive and substantial in the fourth and fifth years after random assignment for the

experimental group.24

     Adult physical health. Our early work at the Boston site (Katz, Kling, Liebman, 2001)

suggested that the MTO intervention may have had important health impacts and led us to

expand the outcomes studied beyond the economic and housing outcomes that were the original

focus of the MTO demonstration. In the much more extensive health data gathered in the current

study, there was not a broad pattern of physical health improvements for the treatment groups.

The intervention did not have statistically significant effects on self-reported overall health,

hypertension, asthma, or trouble carrying groceries or climbing stairs and there was not a

statistically significant effect on the physical health index in Table 2.25

     There was a large and statistically significant effect on obesity (see Table 3), possibly related

to the reduced psychological distress and increase in exercise and nutrition that we also observed

23
   Results are given in the Appendix by age. Results by education level, gender composition of the household, and
whether the household head was a prime-age minority single mother are available from the authors.
24
   Examining effects by age was an exploratory and not a confirmatory exercise, and we note that this type of
searching for significant effects in subgroups raises the chance of concluding that there are statistically significant
results even when the null hypothesis of no effects is true.
25
   Further exploration of the data by age showed a positive and significant impact of the MTO experimental
treatment on our summary measure of physical health outcomes for the younger adults and no significant overall
impact for older adults. These health impacts come from aggregating five consistently-signed estimates with small
magnitudes rather than from a large effect on any one measure. This result, along with the suggestive evidence of
employment gains among younger adults, leads us to speculate that the habits and behaviors of younger adults may
be more malleable and therefore more responsive to a change in residential environment.


                                                          13
for the treatment groups. The interpretation of the obesity results depends largely on one’s reason

for focusing on obesity. If a researcher was searching for social experiments about the effects of

neighborhoods on obesity (and this is the only one), focusing on the t-statistic of 2.2 and the

associated per-comparison p-value of .03 is highly suggestive of an important effect of

residential location on obesity. If a researcher is searching through the MTO results for

significant effects, however, we suggest some caution in interpreting the obesity results. When

using a method that focuses on particular results from among many outcomes of a family

because of their t-statistics, there is considerable likelihood that the obesity results could have

been observed by chance under a joint null hypothesis of no effects for all estimates in that

family.26

     Adult mental health. In contrast to the results for physical health, the adult mental health

results were quite consistent across specific measures (distress, depression, anxiety, calmness,

sleep) in finding beneficial effects for the experimental group relative to the control group. This

consistency led to the large mean (ITT) effect size estimate of .08 standard deviations for the

adult mental health summary measure in Table 2. The confidence level that the results are not

due to chance is quite high under a method where the focus on mental health is determined

exogenously (leading to per-comparison inference) or endogenously from the high t-statistic

(leading to familywise inference).27 The magnitude of the mental health results – for example a

45 percent reduction in relative risk among compliers of scoring above the K6 screening cutpoint



26
   The probability that the second largest t-statistic among 30 adult estimates is 2.2 or higher under the joint null
hypothesis of no effect is a familywise adjusted p-value of .80, which is indicative of the fact that there is little
power to reject the joint null hypothesis for specific outcomes. The adjusted p-values throughout this paper are
based on a bootstrap procedure accounting for covariance among estimates, using a method adapted from Westfall
and Young (1993) as described in the Appendix.
27
   We focus our familywise inference on the summary indices, which reduces the dimension of the inference
problem. For adults, we focus on 8 ITT estimates for summary indices in Table 2. The familywise adjusted p-value
for the mental health index t-statistic being 2.8 or higher (i.e., the largest t-statistic on estimates for 8 adult indices)
under the joint null hypothesis of no effect on any of the 8 adult indices in Table 2 is .06.


                                                             14
for serious mental illness (Kessler et al., 2003) -- is comparable to that found in some of the most

effective clinical and pharmacologic mental health interventions.28

     The overall pattern of adult results -- with the agreement of estimated effects based on self-

reports and administrative records of economic outcomes, with effects concentrated in the single

domain of mental health, and with mental health effect sizes systematically related to changes in

neighborhood poverty rates in Figure 2A and in Table 4 -- indicates that there are beneficial

impacts on mental health of moving to less distressed neighborhoods. In addition, this pattern is

contrary to a model in which the unrestricted choice of the Section 8 group should have led to

better outcomes than the restricted choice of the experimental group. Based in part on evidence

from the extensive qualitative interviews that have been done with MTO participants and the

strong associations shown in the MTO quantitative research, we believe that the leading

hypothesis for the mechanism producing the mental health improvements involves the reduction

in stress that occurred when families moved away from dangerous neighborhoods in which the

fear of random violence influenced all aspects of their lives (Kling, Liebman and Katz, 2005;

Popkin, Harris and Cunningham, 2002).

     Female youth outcomes. Teenage youth are often seen as the population most at risk from the

adverse effects of high-poverty neighborhoods. In this study, 15 specific outcomes were assessed

for youth within the four domains of physical health, mental health, risky behavior, and

education. A summary index of all 15 outcomes shows large benefits for female youth in the

28
   In a study often cited as an exemplar of an effective clinical intervention, Wells et al. (2000) analyzed outcomes
of depressive patients randomized to obtain usual care or improved quality care (better training of medical staff and
better follow-up with patients). 12 months later, the fraction with depressive symptoms in the quality improvement
group was .42, while the fraction was .51 in the usual care group – a reduction in relative risk of 18 percent. A meta-
analysis of clinical trials of medications for major depressive disorder found that on average 50 percent of patients
receiving an active medication showed improvement compared with 29 percent receiving a placebo -- a reduction in
relative risk of 30 percent (Walsh et al, 2002). The reduction in relative risk for major depressive episode among
MTO experimental compliers was also 30 percent (Appendix Table F5). Improved mental health for the treatment
groups relative to the control group was a mechanism that we had hypothesized might increase employment and
earnings. Although the effects on mental health reported here are large, Kling et al. (2004) calculate that these are
unlikely to translate into effects on earnings large enough to detect.


                                                          15
experimental and Section 8 groups relative to the control group. This pattern of beneficial effects

is quite consistent across outcomes, with 13 of 15 outcomes having the sign of a treatment effect

in a beneficial direction for both treatments. The magnitudes of the effects are largest for mental

health, still substantial for education and risky behavior, and small for physical health. For

example, the experimental compliers have a relative risk of serious generalized anxiety

symptoms 70 percent lower than the control complier mean.

   In terms of assessing statistical significance, we adopt a similar framework as with the adult

outcomes. If there is ex-ante interest by a researcher in a particular estimate, then the per-

comparison p-value for that estimate is appropriate. When considering the many estimates for

youth simultaneously, there is a high probability of observing a few large estimates due to

sampling variability even if there were no true effect. To account for these multiple comparisons

while restricting the set to a manageable size, we considered inference for three youth subgroups

(all, female, male), two treatments (experimental, Section 8), and five domains (physical health,

mental health, risky behavior, education, and overall) -- which correspond to the 30 estimates in

columns (iii)-(viii) of Table 2. We calculated familywise adjusted p-values, similar to Bonferroni

corrections, but adjusted for the ordering of the tests and the covariance of the estimates as

described in the Appendix. The estimate in this set with the largest t-statistic was the overall

summary index for the experimental group, and the probability of observing an effect this large

or larger as the maximum of the 30 estimates was less than .001 under the joint null hypothesis

of no effects for the 30 estimates. The familywise adjusted p-value was .003 for the experimental

group mental health index. Based on these calculations, we conclude that the overall pattern and

the mental health result for the experimental group were quite unlikely to have occurred by

chance even if one focused on these results because of their large t-statistics.




                                                 16
     Male youth outcomes. The results for the overall summary index of male youth outcomes are

of almost exactly the same magnitude as for female youth but with the opposite sign, implying

more adverse effects in the treatment groups than in the control group. Among specific

outcomes, the effects are largest for injuries and for substance use, as shown in Table 3, leading

to large effects for the male physical health and risky behavior summary indices in Table 2.

These summary index measures for males have highly significant per-comparison p-values,

although familywise adjusted p-values were greater than .05.

     There are a number of issues that complicate interpretation of the results for male youth.

First, males in the treatment groups exhibited more behavior and other problems at baseline than

did those in the control group (there were no such baseline differences among females).29 This

imbalance appears largely due to the random sampling that occurred when we subsampled

children for our interviews, rather than to survey attrition or imbalance in the original random

assignment.30 The key question for our analysis is whether our regression controls for baseline

covariates are sufficient to adjust for the imbalance. In many situations where imbalance is due

to attrition or some other systematic reason, it is intuitive that unobservable variables are also

imbalanced; therefore controlling for observable differences might not be sufficient. In our case,

however, the source of imbalance is largely randomness. Therefore there is less reason to be

29
   This result comes from a summary index of baseline covariates constructed in the same manner as the outcomes
indices (normalizing the control group for each gender to mean zero and standard deviation one). The index includes
variables (collected prior to random assignment) for age, gifted classes, school suspension, problems at school,
behavior problems, learning problems, physical activity problems, and other medical problems. To orient the index,
the signs are reversed for all items except gifted classes.
30
   For the following E-C and S-C refer to ITT differences in the baseline covariate index in standard deviation units
for male youth (with standard errors). For all 1604 male youth ages 15-20 in MTO households, the E-C difference
was -.022 (.031), and the S-C difference was -.019 (.034). For the 923 male youth we attempted to survey (drawing
two children per household and a 3-in-10 subsample of initial nonrespondents), the E-C difference was -.133 (.053),
and the S-C difference was -.108 (.055). For the 879 youth with whom we completed surveys, the E-C difference
was -.158 (.054), and the S-C difference was -.129 (.056). Since there was less than half a standard error difference,
respectively, between the estimates for all male youth for whom surveys were attempted and for those completed but
large imbalance between treatment groups in baseline covariates for those attempted, we conclude that the
imbalance was largely driven by random sampling. For comparison with the 928 female youth surveyed, the E-C
difference was -.021 (.044), and the S-C difference was -.047 (.055).


                                                         17
concerned about imbalance in unobservables, and we suspect that our regression adjustment is

sufficient to remove most of the potential bias.31 Moreover, in analysis of administrative arrest

data using the full set of MTO youth (with little imbalance in covariates and no survey attrition),

Kling, Ludwig, and Katz (2005) find adverse treatment effects for males and beneficial effects

for females, supporting out conclusion that gender differences in effects are substantial and not

simply an artifact of sampling issues.

     A second issue is that the rates of some adverse outcomes in the control group seem

implausibly low. For example, the proportion of non-sports injuries for male youth in the control

group is barely half as high as the injury rate for females, whereas our analysis of National

Health Interview Survey data found non-sports injury rates for male youth over 30 percent higher

than for female youth. Moreover, assuming that the injury rate among control noncompliers is

the same as for treatment noncompliers implies a control complier mean of less than zero. Both

of these facts are consistent with a low realization of injury rates for the particular sample and

time period for which we have data; we speculate that the injury rate for males would be at least

as high for males as for females if we were to run the experiment again. The rates of substance

use for males in the control group are also low relative to demographically similar individuals in

national data, whereas there are smaller differences between MTO controls and national data for

females.32 Our interpretation of the results is that issues such as random covariate imbalance,


31
   It turns out that the estimates for injuries are scarcely different with and without regression adjustment. In
contrast, risky behavior estimates are affected by regression adjustment. ITT estimates without regression
adjustment for the four risky behavior outcomes are 0.3 to 1.7 percentage points larger for the experimental group
and 1.8 to 4.9 percentage points larger for the Section 8 group than the regression-adjusted estimates.
32
   In the Appendix, we describe our method for producing results for the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth
1997 (NLSY97) that are adjusted to match the demographics of the MTO sample. The following results in
parentheses are for the MTO control group, the adjusted NLSY97, and the unadjusted NLSY97 respectively.
Marijuana (females: .13, .13, .16; males: .12, .21, .18). Cigarettes (females .20, .26, .33; males: .13, .29, .33).
Alcohol (females: .23, .28, .43; males: .13, .30, .45). The deviations of the MTO controls from the adjusted NLSY97
across these three outcomes (in parentheses, respectively) are substantially smaller for females (0, .06, .05) than for
males (.09, .16, .17), which is consistent with a random draw of unusually low substance use among males in the
control group.


                                                          18
survey attrition, and surprisingly low prevalence of adverse outcomes among controls may

exaggerate the magnitude of the adverse effects for males, but that these factors are not large

enough to account for the differences in effects between males and females.

     Understanding gender differences. We collected extensive data on mediating factors that

could potentially help in determining the mechanisms responsible for the observed results.33

Given the gender differences in our youth results, an important question is whether there were

gender differences in any mediating factors. In brief, we find that there were large effects of the

treatment on neighborhood characteristics and smaller effects on school characteristics, but no

significant differences by gender in the treatment effects on neighborhoods or schools (see the

Appendix for details). We conclude that female youth and male youth in the treatment groups

responded to similar new neighborhood environments in different ways.

     Several mechanisms could potentially explain the gender differences in outcomes. There has

been a broad trend over the past two decades of gains in education and employment for minority

women – gains that have not been shared by minority men (Altonji and Blank 1999). Moves

through MTO may remove barriers to benefiting from these gains for female youth, whereas the

male youth have poor prospects even in lower poverty neighborhoods. It is also likely that girls

suffer disproportionately from domestic violence and sexual abuse (Popkin, Harris, and

Cunningham, 2002), and the MTO intervention may have reduced their exposure to such events

– providing benefits from the moves for girls that were not nearly as relevant for boys. We do

find some statistically significant evidence that female youth are more likely to have three or

more adult role models to whom they are comfortable talking about their problems, and that the

mean effect size on a summary index of adult contact measures was significantly higher for
33
  Because the MTO intervention changed so many aspects of neighborhoods and housing environments
simultaneously, the research design was not ideal for determining the mechanisms that may have produced the
effects on outcomes that we observed. Interventions that change on feature of the environment at a time would more
directly evaluation particular mechanisms.


                                                       19
female youth than for male youth. While the probability is quite high of observing at least one

effect this large under a joint null hypothesis of no gender differences in the many mediating

mechanisms we examined, our interpretation is that differences in adult contact are the most

likely contributor to at least part of the gender difference in effects from among the mechanisms

about which we have data to examine.34

     For males, a two-audience signaling process (Austen-Smith and Fryer 2005) could encourage

them to avoid peer sanction through participation in deviant group activities rather than engage

in more pro-social behaviors that are ultimately valued by employers-- a process which could be

more important when there is more uncertainty about social group affiliation due to greater

racial, ethnic, or economic diversity among peers (as there would tend to be for youth in families

using MTO vouchers). Fryer and Torelli (2005) find a stronger negative association between

popularity and grades among high achievers for black males than for black females and that this

difference is larger in less segregated schools; although this gender difference was concentrated

among those with high grades and was not found in full population, their result is consistent with

greater peer sanction against the pro-social activities of black males than those for females for

some subgroups. For MTO, we have evidence on the prevalence of visits to baseline

neighborhoods (that may have been negative influences through signaling to a group or through

lack of parental supervision); the sign is consistent with males making more visits, but the male-

female difference is insignificant. Another possibility is that relative deprivation or being at a

lower point in the ability distribution in the new schools than in the pre-move schools has

particularly adverse effects for males.35


34
   We also found that the beneficial effects on adult mental health outcomes overall (such as distress and calmness)
were not evident for adults with male youth in their households, with the difference for male-female youth being
significant. This finding could be the effect of adverse male outcomes rather than the cause.
35
   Also, male youth may have less effective coping strategies in stressful situations (Zaslow and Hayes, 1986;
Coleman and Hendry, 1999; Kraemer 2000), and the disruption of moving itself may have been greater for male


                                                         20
    Reconciling OLS and 2SLS estimates. If low neighborhood poverty rates were beneficial and

the neighborhood selection process operated such that people with unobserved characteristics

associated with good outcomes tended to locate in lower-poverty neighborhoods, these

assumptions would predict that the OLS estimates of effects of higher poverty rates would be

more adverse than 2SLS estimates. In Table 4, however, we found OLS estimates (based on the

control group only) were smaller in absolute magnitude than 2SLS and often of opposite sign.

The implied selection process is that adults and families with female teenagers likely to have

adverse outcomes tended to move to low poverty neighborhoods, and families with male

teenagers likely to have beneficial outcomes tended to move to low-poverty neighborhoods.36

The complexity of these selection patterns implies that it will not in general be possible to

identify the direction of bias in non-experimental studies of neighborhood effects.37

    Younger Children. Sanbonmatsu et al. (2004) hypothesized finding greater effects of the

MTO treatment on children who are younger than the youth whose outcomes we study in this

youth. However, at least two strands of evidence run counter to this hypothesis. First, mobility rates were slightly
higher among households with female youth than those with male youth. Second, the adverse effects for males did
not manifest themselves right after the initial moves, as predicted by a simple mobility disruption model, but only
after several years. In studies of single MTO sites 1-3 years after random assignment, there were either no gender
differences in effects reported, or more beneficial effects for males than females (Katz, Kling, and Liebman, 2001;
Leventhal and Brooks-Gunn, 2003a, 2003b). In administrative arrest data, the adverse effects on male property
crime are not found in the first two years after random assignment, but in the third and fourth years (Kling, Ludwig,
and Katz, 2005). It is also possible that the destination neighborhoods lacked some of the institutional support for at-
risk boys that might have been present in the origin neighborhoods and that male youth lacked male role models of
their race or ethnicity in the new neighborhoods (given that nearly all MTO families are headed by single mothers, a
female MTO youth will generally have an adult same-sex role model). We find however that the MTO intervention
had no significant impacts on parenting practices, peer characteristics, school engagement, or access to health care
for either boys or girls.
36
   These implications about the pattern of residential sorting are borne out within the treatment groups as well. For
nearly all outcomes, the compliers are more similar to the noncompliers than to the control group. For female youth
and adults, this pattern can only be consistent with beneficial treatment effects if compliers were people who
otherwise would have had poor outcomes. And for male youth, this pattern can only be consistent with adverse
treatment effects if compliers were people who would otherwise have had good outcomes. We examined the
predictors of compliance and of average tract poverty rate separately for each group. Consistent predictors of greater
compliance include younger adult age, smaller household size, and dissatisfaction with original neighborhood. No
characteristics except site were consistent predictors of poverty rates across all three of the groups. Unfortunately,
none of these predictors shed much light on the selection pattern.
37
   The standard assumption of positive selection may be more applicable to populations where the frequency is
lower of recent moves and attendant transitory shocks or where there is greater scope for differences in unobserved
characteristics than in this MTO sample of largely female-headed minority households from public housing.


                                                          21
paper because the younger children (such as those ages 6-10) will have had less lifetime

exposure to the high poverty neighborhoods, but they found no statistically significant treatment

effects for younger children on reading test scores, math test scores, or behavior problems. It is

also the case, however, that the main outcomes for which we found large treatment effects for

teenage youth – mental health problems and risky behavior – have very low prevalence at

younger ages, and it is therefore too early to tell whether the outcomes of the younger children

will be different.


4. Conclusion

    Using a housing voucher lottery which caused otherwise similar groups of families to reside

in very different neighborhoods, we have investigated the effects of moving out of some of the

highest poverty neighborhoods in the United States on outcomes for adults and teenage youth.

Our findings – no effects on adult economic self-sufficiency, improvements in adult mental

health, beneficial outcomes for teenage girls, adverse outcomes for teenage boys – have three

important implications.

    First, housing mobility by itself does not appear to be an effective anti-poverty strategy – at

least over a five-year horizon. The MTO demonstration program was motivated by theories and

non-experimental empirical results suggesting that there would be large economic gains from

moving to lower-poverty neighborhoods. However, we found no evidence of treatment effects on

adult earnings or welfare participation. Whether economic gains begin to appear in the longer

run, particularly among MTO children, remains to be seen.

    Second, even in the absence of economic gains, policies that move families out of distressed

public housing projects using rental vouchers are likely to have benefits that significantly exceed

their costs. Because the MTO intervention produced large mental health improvements and



                                                 22
because other research suggests that it is cheaper to provide a unit of subsidized housing with

vouchers than in a public housing project (Olsen 2000), an offer of a housing voucher is likely to

pass the Kaldor-Hicks criterion --the gains to those who benefit would be large enough to

hypothetically compensate those who experience adverse effects and still be better off. We note,

however, that spillovers onto neighborhoods to which these families moved remain unknown. If

there were large negative spillovers this conclusion could be reversed. In addition, the largely

offsetting male and female youth results complicate the welfare analysis.

     Third, substantively important neighborhood effects do exist, but only for some outcomes.

Teenagers – the population often thought to be most affected by neighborhood conditions –

exhibited effects on the broadest range of outcomes. The evidence that effects of housing

vouchers appear to accrue from changes in neighborhood characteristics rather than from moves

per se suggests that interventions which substantially improve distressed neighborhoods could

have effects as least as large as those observed from moving to lower-poverty neighborhoods.38

Although numerous non-experimental studies document strong associations between

neighborhood characteristics and individual outcomes, these associations appear to be much

weaker in the studies with the most credible identification strategies.39 Because the current study

used randomization to solve the selection problem, because it studied families who made very

large moves as measured by changes in neighborhood poverty rates, and because it collected

extensive data on teenagers, it provides us with the clearest answer so far to the threshold

question of whether important neighborhood effects exist.


38
   Bloom, Riccio, and Verma (2005) found substantial positive earnings effects in a community-based intervention.
39
   Reviewing the early non-experimental literature, Mayer and Jencks (1989) conclude “the more we learn about a
given outcome, the smaller the effects of mean SES usually look.” More recently, Ellen and Turner (1997) report
that “some recent studies that have done the most careful job of controlling for unobserved family characteristics . . .
find no independent neighborhood effects, casting doubt on the robustness of results from other studies.” Finally,
recent quasi-experimental studies (Jacob, 2004; Oreopoulos, 2003) find little or no effect of living in high-poverty
housing projects on child outcomes.


                                                          23
                                             REFERENCES

Altonji, Joseph and Blank, Rebecca, 1999. “Race and Gender in the Labor Market.” In Handbook of Labor
     Economics, Vol. 3A, edited by Orley Ashenfeleter and David Card. Amsterdam: North Holland.
Angrist, Joshua A.; Imbens, Guido W., and Rubin, Donald B., 1996. "Identification of Causal Effects Using
     Instrumental Variables," Journal of the American Statistical Association, 91, 444-472.
Arnott, Richard and John Rowse. “Peer Group Effects and Educational Attainment.” Journal of Public
     Economics 32 (1987), 287-305.
Austen-Smith, David, and Fryer, Roland, 2005. “An Economic Analysis of Acting White.” Quarterly Journal of
     Economics 120:2, 551-583.
De Bartolome, Charles. “Equilibrium and Inefficiency in a Community Model with Peer Effects.” Journal of
     Political Economy 98 (February 1990), 100-113.
Becker, Gary and Kevin M. Murphy, 2000. Social Economics. Chicago: University of Chicago.
Benabou, Roland, 1993. “Workings of a City: Location, Education, and Production.” Quarterly Journal of
     Economics, 108:3, 619-652.
Bloom, Howard S.,James A. Riccio, and Nandita Verma, 2005. Promoting Work in Public Housing The
     Effectiveness of Jobs-Plus. New York: MDRC.
Bos, Johannes; Brock, Thomas; Duncan, Greg; Granger, Robert; Huston, Aletha and Lloyd, Vonnie, 1999. New
     Hope for People with Low Incomes: Two-Year Results of a Program to Reduce Poverty and Reform Welfare.
     New York: MDRC.
Brock, William A. and Durlauf, Steven N., 2001. “Interactions-based Models.” In James J. Heckman and Edward
     Leamer, eds., Handbook of Econometrics, Volume 5. Amsterdam: North-Holland, 3297-3380.
Brooks-Gunn, Jeanne, Greg J. Duncan, and Lawrence Aber, 1997. Neighborhood Poverty: Context and
     Consequences for Children, Vol. I. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.
Coleman, John and Leo B. Hendry, 1999. The Nature of Adolescence. London: Routledge.
Crane, Jonathan (1991). “The Epidemic Theory of Ghettos and Neighborhood Effects on Dropping Out and
     Teenage Childbearing.” American Journal of Sociology 96 (5): 1226-1259.
Davidson, Russell, and MacKinnon, James G., 1993. Estimation and Inference in Econometrics, New York,
     Oxford University Press.
Ellen, Ingrid G. and Turner, Margery A., 1997. “Does Neighborhood Matter? Assessing the Recent Evidence.”
     Housing Policy Debate, 8: 833-866.
Entwisle, Doris R.; Alexander, Karl L. and Olson, Linda S. (1994). “The Gender Gap in Math: Its Possible
     Origins in Neighborhood Effects.” Child Development 67: 2400-2416.
Fernandez, Raquel and Richard Rogerson. “Income Distribution, Communities and the Quality of Public
     Education.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 111, 135-164.
Fryer, Roland, and Torrelli, Paul, 2005. “An Empirical Analysis of Acting White.” Unpublished manuscript,
     Harvard University.
Goering, John and Judith D. Feins, eds. (2003). Choosing a Better Life: Evaluating the Moving to Opportunity
     Social Experiment. Washington, DC: Urban Institute Press, 2003.
Granovetter, Mark. 1978. “Threshold Models of Collective Behavior.” American Journal of Sociology 83, 1420-
     1443.
Heckman, James J., 2001. “Accounting for Heterogeneity, Diversity and General Equilibrium in Evaluating
     Social Programs.” Economic Journal, 111, 654-699.
Ihlanfeldt, Keith R. and Sjoquist, David J. 1998. “The Spatial Mismatch Hypothesis: A Review of Recent Studies
     and Their Implications for Welfare Reform.” Housing Policy Debate, 9: 849-892.
Imbens, Guido W. and Angrist, Joshua D., 1994. “Identification and Estimation of Local Average Treatment
     Effects.” Econometrica, 62(2), 467-475.
Jacob, Brian A., 2004. “Public Housing, Housing Vouchers, and Student Achievement: Evidence from Public
     Housing Demolitions in Chicago.” American Economic Review, 94(1), 233-258.




                                                     24
Jencks, Christopher, and Mayer, Susan E., 1990. “Residential Segregation and Black Job Opportunities.” In Inner
     City Poverty in the United States, ed. by Larry Lynn Jr. and Michael McGeary. Washington, D.C.: National
     Academy Press, 187-222.
Jencks, Christopher, and Mayer, Susan E., 1990. “The Social Consequences of Growing Up in a Poor
     Neighborhood,” In Inner City Poverty in the United States, ed. by Larry Lynn Jr. and Michael McGeary.
     Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press, 111-186.
Kain, John F. “Housing Segregation, Negro Employment and Metropolitan Decentralization.” Quarterly Journal
     of Economics, 1968, 82, pp. 175-197.
Katz, Lawrence F.; Kling, Jeffrey R. and Liebman, Jeffrey B., 2001. “Moving to Opportunity in Boston: Early
     Results of a Randomized Mobility Experiment.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116(2), 607-654.
Kawachi, Ichiro and Berkman, Lisa F., 2003. “Introduction,” in Ichiro Kawachi and Lisa F. Berkman, eds.,
     Neighborhoods and Health. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1-19.
Kessler, Ronald C.; Barker, Peggy R.; Colpe, Lisa J.; Epstein, Joan F.; Gfroerer, Joseph C.; Hiripi, Eva; Howes,
     Mary J.; Normand, Sharon-Lise T.; Mandersheid, Ronald W.; Walters, Ellen E. and Zaslavsky, Alan M.,
     2003. “Screening for Serious Mental Illness in the General Population.” Archives of General Psychiatry, 60,
     184-189.
Kling, Jeffrey R., and Liebman, Jeffrey B., 2004. “Experimental Analysis of Neighborhood Effects on Youth.”
     Princeton IRS Working Paper 483, March.
Kling, Jeffrey R.; Liebman, Jeffrey B. and Katz, Lawrence F., 2005. “Bullets Don't Got No Name: Consequences
     of Fear in the Ghetto,” in Thomas S. Weisner, ed. Discovering Successful Pathways in Children's
     Development: New Methods in the Study of Childhood and Family Life. Chicago: University of Chicago
     Press, 243-281.
Kling, Jeffrey R.; Liebman, Jeffrey B.; Katz, Lawrence F., and Sanbonmatsu, Lisa, 2004. “Moving to Opportunity
     and Tranquility: Neighborhood Effects on Adult Economic Self-Sufficiency and Health from a Randomized
     Housing Voucher Experiment.” Princeton IRS Working Paper 481, April.
Kling, Jeffrey R.; Ludwig, Jens and Katz, Lawrence F., 2005. “Neighborhood Effects on Crime for Female and
     Male Youth: Evidence from a Randomized Housing Voucher Experiment.” Quarterly Journal of
     Economics, 120:1, 87-130.
Kraemer, Sebastian, 2000. “The Fragile Male,” British Medical Journal, 321, 23-30.
Leventhal, Tama and Brooks-Gunn, Jeanne, 2003a. “Moving To Opportunity: an Experimental Study on
     Neighborhood Effects on Mental Health.” American Journal of Public Health, 93(9), 1576-1582.
Leventhal, Tama and Brooks-Gunn, Jeanne, 2003b. “New York City Site Findings: The Early Impacts of Moving
     To Opportunity on Children and Youth,” in John M. Goering and Judith D. Feins, eds., Choosing a Better
     Life: Evaluating the Moving to Opportunity Social Experiment. Washington, DC: The Urban Institute Press,
     213-244.
Liebman, Jeffrey B.; Katz, Lawrence F., and Kling, Jeffrey R.., 2004. “Beyond Treatment Effects: Estimating the
     Relationship Between Neighborhood Poverty and Individual Outcomes in the MTO Experimental.”
     Princeton IRS Working Paper 493, August.
Lucas, Jacqueline W.; Schiller, Jeannine S. and Benson, Veronica, 2004. Vital and Health Statistics, Series 10,
     Number 218. Washington, DC: National Center for Health Statistics.
Ludwig, Jens; Duncan Greg J. and Hirschfield, Paul, 2001. “Urban Poverty and Juvenile Crime: Evidence from a
     Randomized Housing-Mobility Experiment.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 116 (2): 655-679.
Mallows, C. L., 1986. “Augmented Partial Residual Plots.” Technometrics 28, 313-319.
Manski, Charles F., 1993. “Identification of Endogenous Social Effects: The Reflection Problem.” Review of
     Economic Studies, 60, 531-542.
O'Brien, Peter C., 1984. “Procedures for Comparing Samples with Multiple Endpoints.” Biometrics, 40, 1079-
     1087.
Olsen, Edgar O., 2000. “The Cost-Effectiveness of Alternative Methods of Delivering Housing Subsidies.”
     Manuscript, University of Virginia.
Olsen, Edgar O., 2003. “Housing Programs for Low-Income Households,” in Robert A. Moffitt, ed., Means-
     Tested Transfer Programs in the Untied States. Chicago: University of Chicago Press and NBER, 365-441.




                                                      25
Oreopoulos, Philip, 2003. “The Long-Run Consequences of Growing Up in a Poor Neighborhood,” Quarterly
     Journal of Economics, 118(4), 1533-1575.
Orr, Larry; Feins, Judith D.; Jacob, Robin; Beecroft, Eric; Sanbonmatsu, Lisa; Katz, Lawrence F.; Liebman,
     Jeffrey B. and Kling, Jeffrey R., 2003. Moving to Opportunity: Interim Impacts Evaluation. Washington
     D.C.: U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development.
Popkin, Susan J.; Harris, Laura E. and Cunningham, Mary K., 2002. Families in Transition: A Qualitative
     Analysis of the MTO Experience. Washington, DC: Urban Institute.
Ramirez_Valles, Jesus; Zimmerman, Marc A. and Juarez, Lucia (2002). “Gender Differences of Neighborhood
     and Social Control Process: A Study of the Timing of First Intercourse among Low-achieving, Urban,
     African American Youth.” Youth and Society 33(3):418-442.
Sanbonmatsu, Lisa; Kling, Jeffrey R.; Duncan, Greg J.; Brooks-Gunn, Jeanne. 2004. “Neighborhoods and
     Academic Achievement: Results from the MTO Experiment.” Princeton IRS Working Paper 492.
Walsh, B. et al. 2002. Placebo Response in Studies of Major Depression: Variable, Substantial, and Growing,”
     Journal of the American Medical Association, 287: 1840-1847.
Wells, Kenneth B.; Sherbourne, Cathy; Schoenbaum, Michael; Duan, Naihua; Meredith, Lisa; Unützer, Jürgen;
     Miranda, Jeanne; Carney, Maureen F. and Rubenstein, Lisa V. 2000. “Impact of Disseminating Quality
     Improvement Programs for Depression in Managed Primary Care: A Randomized Controlled Trial,” Journal
     of the American Medical Association, 283: 212-220.
Westfall, Peter H., and Young, S. Stanley, 1993. Resampling-Based Multiple Testing: Examples and Methods for
     P-value Adjustment. New York: Wiley.
Wilson, William J., 1987. The Truly Disadvantaged: The Inner City, the Underclass, and Public Policy. Chicago:
     University of Chicago Press.
Zaslow, Martha J., and Hayes, Cheryl D., 1986. “Sex Differences in Child’s Response to Psychosocial Stress:
     Toward a Cross-Context Analysis,” in M. Lamb, A. Brown, and B. Rogoff, eds., Advances in Developmental
     Psychology, Volume 4. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Earlbaum.



                    FIGURE 1. DENSITIES OF AVERAGE POVERTY RATE, BY GROUP
        .05
        .04
          .03
     Density
   .02  .01
        0




                0         20                 40                60                80                100
                                             Average Poverty Rate
                      Experimental Group Compliers             Experimental Group Non−Compliers
                      Section 8 Group Compliers                Section 8 Group Non−Compliers
                                                               Control Group


Notes. Average poverty rate is a duration-weighted average of tract locations from random assignment through
12/31/01. Poverty rate is based on linear interpolation of 1990 and 2000 Censuses. Density estimates using
Epanechnikov kernel with halfwidth of 2.



                                                       26
                                                                                               FIGURE 2. PARTIAL REGRESSION LEVERAGE PLOTS

                                                               A. Adult Mental Health                                                                                                                             B. Female Youth Mental Health


                      .18




                                                                                                                                                                       .18
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          S Bal

                                                                                                                                                                                                      E NY




                                                                                                                                                                                      .12
                                     .12
  Outcome relative to site overall mean




                                                                                                                                                   Outcome relative to site overall mean
                                                                                                                                                                                                   E LA          E Chi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         E Bos




                                                                                                                                                                             .06
                            .06



                                                            S Chi
                                                    E LA
                                                         E Bal    E Bos                                                                                                                                          S Chi          S LA
                                                    E NY
                                                                     E Chi
                                                                 S LA                                            C Bal




                                                                                                                                                                     0
                    0




                                                                                                                                                                                                              E Bal           S Bos
                                                                        S Bos          S NY          C Bos      C NY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        S NY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  C Bos




                                                                                                                                                          −.06
         −.06




                                                                             S Bal                                                C LA
                                                                                                                      C Chi




                                                                                                                                                   −.12
  −.12




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             C LA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              C NY




                                                                                                                                                                       −.18
                      −.18




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 C Bal
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      C Chi

                                           −.09       −.06       −.03          0           .03          .06            .09              .12                                                 −.09      −.06            −.03          0           .03          .06               .09                  .12
                                                                 Poverty rate relative to site overall mean                                                                                                           Poverty rate relative to site overall mean

                                                                      C. Female Youth Overall                                                                                                                             D. Male Youth Overall
                      .18




                                                                                                                                                                       .18
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 C NY
                                     .12




                                                                                                                                                                                      .12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               C Bal
  Outcome relative to site overall mean




                                                                                                                                                   Outcome relative to site overall mean
                                                                                                                                                                                                               S LA                                                                  C Chi
                                                             E Chi      S Bos
                            .06




                                                                                                                                                                             .06
                                                                     E Bal                                                                                                                                                                             C Bos
                                            E LA
                                                   E NY                               S Bal
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               S Bos
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       E Chi
                    0




                                                                                                                                                                     0
                                                             S Chi             S LA                                                                                                                                                                                    C LA
                                                                             E Bos                  C Bos                C NY
                                                                                        S NY                                     C LA                                                                                     E LA         E Bal
                                                                                                                                                                                                    E NY
         −.06




                                                                                                                                                          −.06
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      S Bal
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         S NY
                                                                                                                                                                                                      E Bos           S Chi
  −.12




                                                                                                                                                   −.12


                                                                                                                              C Chi

                                                                                                              C Bal
                      −.18




                                                                                                                                                                       −.18




                                           −.09       −.06       −.03          0           .03          .06            .09              .12                                                 −.09      −.06            −.03          0           .03          .06               .09                  .12
                                                                 Poverty rate relative to site overall mean                                                                                                           Poverty rate relative to site overall mean

Notes. The index on the horizontal axis is expressed in standard deviation units relative to the control group overall standard deviation for each variable. The
components of the overall and mental health indices are described in the notes to Table 2. The poverty rate is an average across tracts since random assignment,
weighted by residential duration, using linear interpolation between the 1990 and 2000 Censuses. The line passes through the origin with the slope from 2SLS
estimation of equation (3) of the outcome on poverty rate and site indicators, using group-by-site interactions as instrumental variables. The points are from a
partial regression leverage plot of the group outcome means on the group poverty rate means, conditional on site main effects, as described in the text. The size
of each point is proportional to the sample size of that group, and correspondingly to the weight each point receives in the 2SLS regression.

                                                                                                                                              27
           .55
           .5  .45
   Employment Rate
    .35   .4
           .3
           .25
                                                        FIGURE 3. EMPLOYMENT RATES OVER TIME




                            2   3    4          2   3   4          2   3  4
                     1995                1996               1997            1998 2 3 4 1999 2      3   4
                                                                                                           2000   2     3    4
                                                                                                                                 2001   2     3    4

                                                                       Calendar Year and Quarter
                                                                       Experimental            Section 8
                                                                       Control


              Notes. Employment is fraction with positive earnings per quarter from Unemployment Insurance records in
              California, Illinois, Maryland, Massachusetts and New York.




                                    TABLE 1. DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS OF NEIGHBORHOOD CHARACTERISTICS

                                                                                                             Experimental           Section 8          Control
                                                                                                                       (i)                  (ii)        (iii)
 Average census tract poverty rate                                                                                    .33                   .35         .45
 Average census tract poverty rate above 30%                                                                          .52                   .62          .87
 Respondent saw illicit drugs being sold or used in neighborhood during past 30 days                                  .33                   .34          .46
 Streets are safe or very safe at night                                                                               .70                   .65          .55
 Member of household victimized by crime during past 6 months                                                         .17                   .16          .21
 Average census tract share on public assistance                                                                      .16                   .17          .23
 Average census tract share of adults employed                                                                        .83                   .83          .78
 Average census tract share workers in professional and managerial occupations                                        .26                   .23          .21
 Average census tract share minority                                                                                  .82                   .87          .90

Notes. Census tract characteristics are the average for an individual’s addresses from randomization through 2001 weighted by
duration. Except for “managerial and professional occupations” (for which only 2000 Census data was used due to differences in
the occupation classification used for the 1990 Census and 2000 Census), values for inter-census years are interpolated. “Saw
illicit drugs,” “streets are safe,” and “victimized by crime” are based on adult report in 2002 survey. All Experimental - Control
and Section 8 - Control differences have p-values < .05.




                                                                                  28
                                       TABLE 2. MEAN EFFECT SIZES FOR SUMMARY MEASURES OF OUTCOMES

                                         All Adults               All Youth              Female Youth               Male Youth               M-F Youth

                                       E-C        S-C          E-C         S-C           E-C        S-C           E-C         S-C           E-C        S-C
                                        (i)       (ii)         (iii)       (iv)          (v)        (vi)          (vii)      (viii)         (ix)        (x)

         Economic                      .017       .037
            self-sufficiency          (.031)     (.033)

         Absence of physical           .012       .019        -.038       -.020          .025       .077         -.112*     -.114*         -.138      -.192*
           health problems            (.024)     (.026)       (.038)      (.040)        (.053)     (.055)        (.053)     (.061)         (.076)     (.084)

         Absence of mental            .079*       .029         .102       .138*         .267*      .192*         -.052        .054         -.319*     -.138
           health problems            (.030)     (.033)       (.053)      (.056)        (.062)     (.067)        (.080)      (.092)        (.101)     (.113)

         Absence of risky                                     -.023       -.039         .142*      .129*         -.181*     -.208*         -.323*     -.337*
           behavior                                           (.043)      (.050)        (.053)     (.059)        (.062)     (.071)         (.080)     (.092)

         Education                                             .050        .028         .138*       .056         -.053       -.001         -.191*     -.057
                                                              (.041)      (.047)        (.065)     (.068)        (.047)      (.060)        (.080)     (.090)

         Overall                       .036       .028         .018        .018         .136*      .109*         -.099*     -.078*         -.235*     -.187*
                                      (.020)     (.022)       (.025)      (.026)        (.034)     (.034)        (.031)     (.037)         (.047)     (.051)


Notes. E-C: Experimental - Control. S-C: Section 8 - Control. Estimates are the intent-to-treat mean effect sizes, from equation (1), fully interacted with gender in
columns (v)-(x) as described in the text. The estimated equations all include site indicators and the baseline covariates listed in Appendix C. M-F Youth is male -
female difference. Adult economic self-sufficiency: + adult not employed and not on TANF + employed + 2001 earnings - on TANF - 2001 government income.
Adult mental health: - distress index - depression symptoms - worrying + calmness + sleep. Adult physical health: - self-reported health fair/poor - asthma attack
past year - obesity - hypertension - trouble carrying/climbing. Adult overall includes 15 measures in self-sufficiency, physical health, and mental health. Youth
physical health: - self-reported health fair/poor - asthma attack past year - obesity - non-sports injury past year. Youth mental health: - distress index - depression
symptoms - anxiety symptoms. Youth risky behavior: - marijuana past 30 days - smoking past 30 days - alcohol past 30 days - ever pregnant or gotten someone
pregnant. Youth education: + graduated high school or still in school + in school or working + WJ-R broad reading score + WJ-R broad math score. Youth
overall includes 15 measures in physical health, mental health, risky behavior, and education. Sample sizes in the E, S, and C groups are 1453, 993, and 1080 for
adults and 749, 510, and 548 for youth ages 15-20 on 12/31/01. Robust standard errors adjusted for household clustering are in parentheses.




                                                                                   29
          TABLE 3. SPECIFIC OUTCOMES WITH EFFECTS SIGNIFICANT AT 5 PERCENT LEVEL

                                                     E/S           CM           ITT          TOT         CCM
                                                     (i)           (ii)         (iii)        (iv)         (v)
  A. Adult outcomes
    Obese, BMI≥30                                    E-C           .468         -.051        -.108        .505
                                                                               (.022)        (.048)
    Calm and peaceful                                E-C           .466         .061          .131        .443
                                                                               (.022)        (.047)
    Psychological distress, K6 z-score               E-C           .050         -.092        -.196        .150
                                                                               (.046)        (.099)
  B. Youth (female and male) outcomes
    Ever had generalized anxiety symptoms            E-C           .089         -.044        -.099        .164
                                                                               (.019)        (.042)
    Ever had generalized anxiety symptoms            S-C           .089         -.063        -.138        .147
                                                                               (.019)        (.055)
    Ever had depression symptoms                     S-C           .121         -.039        -.069        .134
                                                                               (.019)        (.035)
  C. Female youth outcomes
    Psychological distress -- K6 scale z-score       E-C           .268         -.289        -.586        .634
                                                                               (.094)        (.197)
    Ever had generalized anxiety symptoms            E-C           .121         -.069        -.138        .207
                                                                               (.027)        (.055)
    Ever had generalized anxiety symptoms            S-C           .121         -.071        -.125        .168
                                                                               (.026)        (.046)
    Used marijuana in the past 30 days               E-C           .131         -.065        -.130        .202
                                                                               (.029)        (.059)
    Used marijuana in the past 30 days               S-C           .131         -.072        -.124        .209
                                                                               (.032)        (.056)
    Used alcohol in past 30 days                     S-C           .206         -.091        -.155        .306
                                                                               (.038)        (.056)
  D. Male youth outcomes
    Serious non-sports accident or injury            E-C           .062         .087          .215         0
     in past year                                                              (.026)        (.064)
    Serious non-sports accident or injury            S-C           .062         .080          .157         0
     in past year                                                              (.028)        (.058)
    Ever had generalized anxiety symptoms            S-C           .055         -.049        -.098        .126
                                                                               (.024)        (.047)
    Smoked in past 30 days                           E-C           .125         .103          .257         0
                                                                               (.032)        (.084)
    Smoked in past 30 days                           S-C           .125         .151          .293        .014
                                                                               (.037)        (.073)

Notes. E/S: indicates whether row is experimental - control (E-C) or Section 8 - control (S-C). CM: Control Mean.
ITT: Intent-to-treat, from equation (1). TOT: Treatment-on-treated, from equation (2). CCM: Control complier
mean. Robust standard errors adjusted for household clustering are in parentheses. The estimated equations all
include site indicators and the baseline covariates listed in Appendix C. Rows shown in table to illustrate
magnitudes were selected based on ITT p-values < .05, and are 17 of 60 from the set of specific outcomes (15 for
adults and 15 for youth) and subgroups -- adults, youth (female and male), female youth, and male youth --
described in the notes to Table 2.
                                                        30
          TABLE 4. EFFECTS OF NEIGHBORHOOD POVERTY RATES ON SELECTED OUTCOMES

Models                                            OLS                 2SLS                         2SLS
                                                 Poverty            Poverty              Poverty      Compliance
RHS variables
                                                   (i)                (ii)                (iii)          (iv)

  Adult                                            .13                -.62*              -1.35*           -.17
   Mental Health                                  (.17)               (.24)               (.60)           (.13)
  Adult                                            .16                -.31*               -.53            -.05
   Overall                                        (.12)               (.16)               (.39)           (.08)
  Youth (female and male)                          .57                -.97*               -.18            -.20
   Mental Health                                  (.34)               (.41)               (.87)           (.21)
  Female Youth                                     .99               -1.84*               -1.88           -.01
   Mental Health                                  (.61)               (.50)              (1.09)           (.25)
  Female Youth                                    -.61                -.94*               -1.03           -.02
   Risky Behavior                                 (.42)               (.39)               (.85)           (.19)
  Female Youth                                    -.03                -.90*               -1.03           -.03
   Overall                                        (.28)               (.26)               (.56)           (.12)
  Male Youth                                      -.84*               1.07*               1.77             .18
   Physical Health                                (.35)               (.49)              (1.09)           (.26)
  Male Youth                                      -.06                1.46*                .94            -.13
   Risky Behavior                                 (.42)               (.54)              (1.29)           (.31)
  Male Youth                                      -.13                .80*                1.47*            .17
   Overall                                        (.23)               (.28)               (.68)           (.16)



Notes. Models: OLS is from equation (3) with no excluded instruments, using the control group only; 2SLS is from
equation (3) with 10 site-by-treatment interactions as excluded instruments, using the entire sample. Columns (i) and
(ii) are each based on separate estimation of equation (3), with W including poverty rate. Each row in columns (iii)
and (iv) contains coefficients from one estimate of equation (3) with W including poverty rate and an indicator for
treatment compliance as endogenous variables. Units of summary indices are standard deviations of control group
outcomes. The estimated equations all include site indicators and a full set of covariates combining baseline
variables about adults and those about youth (for youth outcomes only): age, gender, race, marital status,
employment, education, mobility history, attitudes about neighborhood, special classes for youth, behavioral or
emotional problems of youth. Poverty rate averaged over tracts since random assignment, weighted by duration,
using linear interpolation between 1990 and 2000 Censuses. Standard errors are in parentheses, adjusted for
correlation between same-sex siblings. * = p-value <.05. Rows shown in table to illustrate magnitudes were selected
based on 2SLS column (ii) p-value <.05, and are 9 of 19 from set of four adult, five youth (female and male), five
female youth, and five male youth summary indices shown in Table 2.




                                                           31
                                                 Appendix



This appendix contains the following sections:

       A. Summary indices and mean effect sizes

       B. Calculation of adjusted p-values

       C. Description of baseline covariates and outcomes

       D. Comparison of outcomes to the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth

       E. Additional discussion of internal validity

       F. Additional results for adults

       G. Additional results for youth




                                                 A1
A. Summary indices and mean effect sizes
         This paper reports results for outcomes that are summary indices, aggregating
information across related outcomes. This aggregation improves statistical power to detect
effects that are consistent across specific outcomes when these specific outcomes also have
idiosyncratic variation. Focusing our interpretation on the indices helps us to form conclusions
about the overall impact of the study and to reduce the number of statistical tests performed so as
to reduce the chance of false positives. Specific outcomes are normalized to in standardized
units to study mean effect sizes of the indices relative to the standard deviation of the control
group.
         To illustrate the creation of a summary index, the 15 specific outcomes for adults are
shown in Table A1. Column 1 (labeled “raw”) shows the mean of each outcome for the control
group. In this paper, we focus on normalized transformations of each outcome (labeled “norm”),
where we subtract the mean of the control group and divide by the standard deviation of the
control group. Let Yk be the kth of K outcomes, µk be the control group mean, and σk be the
control group standard deviation. The normalized outcome is Yk* = (Yk - µk )/σk. The summary
index is Y* = Σk Yk*/K. We use the control group standard deviation to compare the treatment
groups to their counterfactual, because this metric does not depend on which treatment
(experimental or Section 8) is being analyzed.
         In calculating the normed measure, we reverse the sign for adverse outcomes (welfare,
government income, distress, depression, anxiety, poor general health, physical limitations,
asthma, obesity, hypertension), so that a higher value of the normalized measure represents a
more “beneficial” outcome. For earnings in 2001, the control group mean was 8829 and the
experimental-control (E-C) difference was 246 -- a difference of .02 standard deviations, relative
to the control group standard deviation. For asthma attack in the past year, the fraction having an
attack was .21 in the control group, with an E-C difference of -.01. This is also a difference of
.02 standard deviations, relative to the control group. This illustrates how we use this
normalization in order to translate the magnitudes of different measures into standardized units.
         The bottom row of Table A1 shows our summary index, which is the equally weighted
average of the normalized transformations for each of the 15 outcomes. For twelve of the
fifteen, the experimental group shows more beneficial outcomes than the control group, and the
E-C difference for our summary index is .05 standard deviations. These results are based on
unadjusted mean differences for simplicity of illustration, and slightly larger in magnitude (with


                                                 A2
slightly smaller p-values) than our preferred regression-adjusted specification discussed in the
text. For Table A1 and for the analyses in Table 2, weights are calculated based assuming that if
an individuals was subsampled for any one outcome in the index then they were subsampled for
all outcomes in the index.40
         We interpret this summary index as aggregating information about related constructs, but
do not intend to suggest that the measures within a domain are merely proxies for a single latent
factor. For the fifteen key outcomes in our analysis of adults, there are three principal
components with eigenvalues greater than one. Promax rotated factors do correspond to the a
priori designation of the fifteen variables into the three domains pre-specified: economic self-
sufficiency, physical health, and mental health. There is considerable variation that is not
explained by the first principal component within each domain: 39% in economic self-
sufficiency, 54% in mental health, and 64% in physical health. Relatedly, instead of equal
weights of .2 on each variable, a principal components approach would have weights that ranged
from .17-.24 in economic self-sufficiency, .12-.25 in mental health, and .13-.26 in physical
health -- with lower weights on sleep, obesity, and hypertension. However, we do not believe
that hypertension is less important than, say, asthma simply because it has lower correlation with
self-reported overall health and with physical limitations (and consequently, with the first
principal component of physical health); therefore, we do not adopt the principal component
approach.
         An alternative approach to estimating ITT effects on these summary constructs is to first
estimate treatment effect for each outcome, standardized them, and then average them. This
approach is very similar to that used for global significance testing in biostatistics (O’Brien
1984) and for effect sizes in educational meta-analysis (Hedges and Olkin 1985). Let σ k2 equal
the variance of Yk for the control group. Equation (4) defines the mean effect size, τ, for a set of
K outcomes based on the treatment effect estimates and the control group standard deviations.
                        1   K
                                   π 2k
         (A1)     τ =
                        K
                            ∑σ
                            k =1     k




40
   As discussed by Orr et al. (2003), subsampling was not conducted at the household level, but separately for youth
surveys, testing, parental surveys, and blood pressure measurement depending upon what data had been collected at
the time of subsampling. The assumption used in creating weights for indices is that an individual subsampled for
any outcome (e.g., from the youth survey, testing, or parental report of high school completion) was subsampled for
all outcomes in the index. This simplification drops data for a few individuals with partially complete information,
but introduces no bias.

                                                        A3
To calculate the sample variance of τ, we need to account for the covariance of the estimates π2k.
We obtain this covariance matrix using the seemingly unrelated regression system shown in
equation (A2). Point estimates for each outcome are identical to those obtained using equation
(1) for a specific outcome. Let IK be a K by K identity matrix and let Z and X be defined as in
(1).
         (A2)   Y = ( I K ⊗ (Z   X ))θ + υ            Y = (Y1' , K, YK' )'
We calculate a point estimate, standard error, and p-value for τ based on the parameters, π2k,
jointly estimated as elements of θ in (A2). These estimates treat σk as known. Kling and
Liebman (2004) show that delta method and bootstrap approaches yield very similar inferences
using these statistical methods in a study of MTO youth.
         If there were no missing data on survey items and X contained only a constant, then the
mean effect size in equation (A1) would be identical to estimation using the summary index in
equation (1). Equation A2 is a more direct summary of the treatment effects on each specific
outcome and it incorporates regression adjustment for each outcome. The summary index
approach is simpler to compute and can be represented graphically which is why we use it in the
paper.
         A comparison of results from the two approaches is given in Table A2. As a practical
matter, our results are not very sensitive to the specification for regression adjustment or to item
nonresponse. Therefore, results from the two approaches are very similar.

Additional reference:
Hedges, Larry V. and Olkin, Ingram, 1985. Statistical Methods for Meta-Analysis. Orlando, FL:
   Academic Press.




                                                 A4
                         Table A1. Components of Summary Indices for Adults
                                             CM                  E-C                  S-C
                                      Raw     Norm        Raw          Norm   Raw       Norm
                                       1       2           3            4      5         6
   A. Economic Self-sufficiency
     Employed                         .52         0       .02          .05    .02           .04
     Earnings in 2001                 8829        0       262          .02     -5           -.00
     Employed & not on welfare        .45         0       .03          .06    .02           .04
     Receiving welfare                .30         0      -.04*         .08*   -.05*         .11*
     Government income in 2001        250         0        54          -.01   -158          .04

   B. Physical health
     Overall health fair or poor      .33         0       .01          -.03    .02          -.03
     Trouble carrying/climbing        .44         0       -.02         .04    -.02          .04
     Asthma attack in past year       .21         0       -.01         .02    -.01          .02
     Obese                            .47         0      -.05*         .10*   -.05*         .09*
     Hypertension                     .30         0       .02          -.05    .03          -.06

   C. Mental health
     Distress z-score                 .05         0      -.09*         .09*   -.04          .04
     Depression in past 12 months     .16         0      -.03*         .08*   -.02          .05
     Worrying                         .39         0       -.02         .05    -.01          .01
     Calm and peaceful                .46         0       .07*         .13*    .02          .04
     Sleep 7-8 hours nightly          .45         0       .04          .07    .02           .03

   D. Adult overall index                         0                    .05*                 .03


Notes. Raw = unadjusted value. Norm = (unadjusted value - control mean)/(control standard
deviation); sign reversed for risky behavior, mental health, and physical health. CM = Control
mean. E-C = Experimental - Control. S-C = Section 8 - Control. Differences based on
unadjusted means, with no covariates. Summary index is the mean of normalized values of
component items. Sample sizes are 859 and 3484 for male youth and all adults, respectively. *
= p-value <.05.




                                                  A5
                    Table A2. Summary Index and Mean Effect Size Results
                                        Summary Index         Mean Effect Size

                                         E-C          S-C       E-C       S-C
                                          (i)         (ii)      (iii)     (iv)

                Self-sufficiency         .017      .037         .016      .034
                   [5 measures]         (.031)    (.033)       (.031)    (.034)

                Mental health           .079*      .029        .084*      .030
                  [5 measures]          (.030)    (.033)       (.030)    (.034)

                Physical health          .012      .019         .016      .017
                  [5 measures]          (.024)    (.026)       (.024)    (.027)

                Overall                  .036      .028         .039      .027
                  [15 measures]         (.020)    (.022)       (.020)    (.022)


Notes. E-C: Experimental - Control. S-C: Section 8 - Control. Estimates are the mean of the
standardized intent-to-treat effects, from equation (4). Standard errors are derived from equation
(5), adjusted for correlation within individuals.




                                                 A6
B. Calculation of adjusted p-values
        This appendix describes our algorithm for calculating familywise adjusted p-values. It is
based on the Westfall-Young (1993, algorithm 2.8) free step-down resampling method, modified
to utilize per-comparison p-values based on bootstrap estimates instead of asymptotic
approximations.
        For each parameter of interest, τj, define τˆ j as the estimated value from the actual data

and pcj as the asymptotic per-comparison p-value on the test of the null hypothesis that τj equals
zero. Define N as the number of bootstrap replications. The per-comparison bootstrap p-value
for τj is pbj, and the Westfall-Young familywise adjusted p-value for τj is paj.




/* Calculate bootstrap p-values (pbj) */
For j = 1 to J {
        paj = pbj = 0
}
For i = 1 to N {
    Draw a sample of households with replacement.
    For j = 1 to J {
        Calculateτ*ij , the estimated value of τ*j for this bootstrap replication.
        Calculate the p-value rij for the test that τ*ij = τˆ j .

        If rij < pcj, then pbj = pbj + 1/N
    }
}




                                                      A7
/* Calculate p-values for each replication under null hypothesis (sij), ordering by rij
       and imposing uniform p-value distribution across replications
       for each of J parameters */
Define rj as a vector of length N with elements rij
For j = 1 to J {
          Sort elements of rj so rkj is smallest value of rj when k is 1
          For k = 1 to N {
                   skj = (k-.5)/N
          }
}



/* Calculate adjusted p-value (paj) */
For the J parameters in the family of tests, sort pbj such that j indexes family members in
        descending order of significance, so pb1 is the smallest bootstrap p-value.
For k = 1 to N {
    qJ+1 = 1
    For j = J to 1 {
          qj = min(skj , qj+1)
          If qj < pbj, then paj = paj + 1/N
    }
}


/* Enforce monotonicity so that the order of outcomes according to bootstrap
       per-comparison p-values is weakly preserved according to adjusted p-values */
pa0 = 0
For j = 1 to J {
    paj = max(paj-1 , paj)
}




                                                    A8
C. Description of baseline covariates and outcomes
         Covariates (X) used in equations (1) - (3) were drawn from data collected from a baseline
survey conducted prior to random assignment. For analysis of adults, covariates included those
in Table C1 and six Legendre polynomials for adult date of birth. For analysis of youth, all the
covariates in Table C1 were used as well as those in Table C2, six Legendre polynomials for
youth date of birth, and five indicators for missing data on: special class for gifted students or did
advanced work; special school, class, or help for learning problem in past two years; special
school, class, or help for behavioral or emotional problems in past two years; problems that made
it difficult for him/her to get to school and/or to play active games or sports; suspended or
expelled from school in past two years.
         Descriptions of the 15 outcomes examined for adults and the 15 examined for youth are
given below.
         Adult economic self-sufficiency. Our measure of employment is an indicator for whether
the adult had worked for pay during the week prior to survey.41
         Welfare receipt is measured as being a beneficiary of Temporary Assistance for Needy
Families (TANF) at the time of the survey.
         Economic self-sufficiency is an indicator for working for pay during the previous week
and not receiving TANF.
         Earnings in 2001 is the amount self-reported to have been earned from all employers
before taxes and deductions during 2001.
         Government income is the amount received altogether in the form of TANF,
Supplemental Security Income (SSI), unemployment benefits, Social Security, General
Assistance and related programs in 2001.
         Adult physical health. To assess overall health, respondents were asked “In general is
your health excellent, very good, good, fair, or poor?” The analyses examined whether the
respondent reported that he or she was in fair or poor health.




41
  At the time of our survey in 2002, MTO adults primarily worked in white-collar and service occupations, with
hourly wages ranging from $7.44 at the 25th percentile to $12.47 at the 75th percentile. The data on occupation and
hourly wage are taken from survey self-reports about the main job in the week of the interview. The majority of
workers in white-collar occupations (46% of all employed) were cashiers, teacher's aides, secretaries, data-entry
keyers, receptionists, typists, bookkeepers, adjusters, technicians, teachers, supervisors/proprietors/sales, or clerks.
The majority of service workers (44% of all employed) were nursing aids, orderlies, janitors, maids, or guards. The
three most common blue-collar occupations (10% of all employed) were taxicab driver/chauffeur, laborer, and
packer.

                                                          A9
         Our measure of physical limitation was whether the respondent reported having at least a
little trouble “lifting or carrying groceries” or “climbing several flights of stairs,” two activities
from traditional measures of activities of daily living likely to be relevant in a sample of mostly
non-elderly adults (Ware et al., 1993).
         Respondents were asked questions from the National Health Interview Survey sequence
on asthma or wheezing attacks. As our dichotomous measure, we examined the fraction of
respondents who had an attack during the past year.
         Subjects self-reported their height and weight. We use the standard definition of obesity,
BMI ≥ 30 kg/m2 (National Institutes of Health 1998).
         Our measure of hypertension is based on the JNC7 stage 1 systolic and diastolic blood
pressure cut-points: systolic ≥ 140mm HG or diastolic ≥ 90mm HG (Chobanian et al., 2003).
Systolic and diastolic blood pressures were measured from a single reading near the end of the
survey from an Omron HEM-737. This device satisfied the American Association for the
Advancement of Medical Instrumentation standards for accuracy (Anwar et al., 1998). Subjects
were seated and had been at rest for at least 30 minutes.
         Adult mental health. Distress during the past 30 days was assessed using the K6 scale,
developed by Kessler et al. (2002). Additional psychometric analysis of the scale has been done
by Furukawa et al. (2003). This scale score can range from 0 to 24, which we normalize to a z-
score by subtracting the mean of 5.8 and dividing by the standard deviation of 5.4.
         Depression was assessed using the Composite International Diagnostic Interview - Short
Form (CIDI-SF; Kessler et al. 1998). If during a two-week period in the past year the respondent
reported dysphoric mood (feeling “sad, blue or depressed”) or anhedonia (having “lost interest in
most things”), then he or she was assigned a probability of having had a major depressive
episode (MDE) according to the number endorsed of seven possible symptoms corresponding to
those used for Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders - Fourth Edition (DSM-IV)
psychiatric diagnosis. The probability is based on a mapping between the CIDI-SF screening
questions and more detailed assessments in the National Comorbity Survey (Walters et al.
2003).42

42
  Version 1.0 of the World Health Organization’s CIDI-SF contained a skip pattern error for people who reported
dysphoric mood or anhedonia for “about half of the day” -- referred to here as “boundary cases. (CIDI-SF Memo:
Edits, available at: http://www3.who.int/cidi/CIDI-SFeditsmemo.pdf. Accessed on July 3, 2003.) Due to the skip
pattern error, boundary cases were not fully assessed to determine if the duration, intensity and frequency of their
anhedonia met the minimum criteria for MDE. Assigning an MDE probability of zero to all boundary cases is one
solution to this problem. We implement an alternative imputation that is also conservative but less extreme; we
impute the probability for boundary cases of meeting the minimum criteria for MDE. For those with no indication

                                                        A10
           For worrying, respondents were asked the two initial screening items from the CIDI-SF
sequence on generalized anxiety disorder, and we analyzed the fraction of the sample who
answered “yes” to “felt worried, tense, or anxious” or “worried a lot more than most people
would in your situation” (Kessler et al., 1998).
           Respondents were asked if they felt “calm and peaceful” at least most of the time during
the past month -- one of the items from the mental health inventory in the RAND Health
Insurance Experiment and the Short Form-36 (SF-36; Ware et al., 1993).
           Sleep was measured as the amount of time that participant usually spends sleeping each
night, and we analyzed the fraction that usually sleep at least 7 and less than 9 hours per night.
For discussion of the linkage between sleep and mental health, see Ford and Kamerow (1989).
           Youth education. Our measures of whether a youth had graduated from high school or
was still in school is based on a parental report.
           To assess idleness, we asked youth whether they were in school, on summer vacation
from school, working during the past week, or none of the above.
           Reading achievement was assessed using the Woodcock-Johnson Broad Reading
assessment, which includes letter-word identification and passage comprehension subtests.
           Math achievement was assessed using the Woodcock Johnson Revised Broad Math
assessment, which includes applied problems and calculation subtests. As discussed in
Sanbonmatsu et al. (2004), some systematic differences in scores on tests administered by
particular interviewers were detected for both reading and math tests, and the results presented in
Table 3 are adjusted for potential interviewer effects after controlling for census tract fixed
effects.



of anhedonia or anhedonia reported to be about half the day or less, we impute a probability of zero. For other cases
with some indication of anhedonia that was not fully assessed, we reduce the probability of MDE caseness using a
multiplicative factor of about one third to capture the probability that their anhedonia may not have been of
sufficient duration or intensity. This imputation is conservative under the assumption that the probability of
anhedonia with sufficient intensity and duration for MDE would be at least as high for cases with no dysphoric
mood as for those with dysphoric mood for “about half of the day,” because it is based on data from those reporting
no dysphoric mood but who did report some anhedonia and who were fully assessed for its duration and intensity.
Version 1.0 of the CIDI-SF also skipped symptom items if the respondent reported receiving medication for
depression, with the intention of scoring these individuals as having a probability of one for MDE. With changes in
prescription patterns since the CIDI-SF was developed a decade ago, the probability of MDE conditional on
receiving medication is now less than one. We assume that those receiving medication had dysphoric mood or
anhedonia and at least one other MDE symptom; since this sample has an overall probability of MDE of .81, we
then impute the probability of MDE for those receiving medication to also be .81. Our analysis shows that the
distributions of K6 distress scores were very similar for those receiving medication and for non-boundary cases with
at least one symptom of MDE (whose symptoms were fully assessed) -- providing some support for the
reasonableness of this procedure.

                                                        A11
        Youth physical health. Our analysis of youth health is based on self-reported
information. We asked questions drawn mainly from the National Health Interview Survey
about general health status, injuries, asthma attacks, height, and weight. Self-reported health is
strongly related to life expectancy among adults (see Idler and Kasl 1995). While less is known
about the predictive power of self-reported health in children, Case, Lubotsky, and Paxson
(2002) and Currie and Stabile (2003) find that reported poor health correlates strongly with
children’s chronic conditions, bed days, and hospitalization episodes.
        For asthma attacks, our measure follows the standard practice of combining attacks
requiring medical attention with other episodes of wheezing or whistling in the chest (Pearce et
al, 1998). The purpose of including the other episodes is to ameliorate potential confounding
with health care access.
        We asked for details of any injuries, accidents, or poisonings that required medical
attention or were serious enough to limit activities during the previous twelve months, and we
focused our analysis on non-sports injuries. We had hypothesized that non-sports injuries might
decrease due to a reduction in dangerous external factors in treatment group neighborhoods, but
that safety increases might be offset by greater sports participation and lead to no change or an
increase in sports injuries.
        To assess obesity, we collected self-reported height and weight and calculated the body
mass index for each individual. Other studies that have collected self-reports and measurements
indicate that older adolescents slightly over-report height and under-report weight and that the
correlation between self-reported and direct measures is around .9 (Goodman et al. 2000, Brener
et al. 2003). Our measure of obesity is body mass index greater than the 95th percentile of the
national norms for the youth’s age and gender. In interpreting this measure, it is worth noting
that national norms for height and weight are benchmarked to 1988-94 data and do not reflect the
distribution in 2003, when the population appears to have been heavier.
        Youth mental health. Our distress measure, developed by Kessler et al (2002) for the
National Health Interview Survey, is commonly scored by summing the scale scores of the items,
with the total ranging from 0-24; our results are reported as z-scores, scaling by the standard
deviation. This measure is commonly known as the K6 and is based on a six-item Likert scale
measuring how much of the time during the past 30 days the youth felt: “so depressed nothing
could cheer you up,” “nervous,” “restless or fidgety,” “hopeless,” “everything was an effort,” or
“worthless.” The sample mean is 5.0 and the standard deviation is 4.7.


                                                A12
       Our measure of serious depression involved a series of screening questions about the
duration and intensity of the feelings and the presence of related symptoms during the worst
period in life. A youth is considered to have had a Major Depressive Episode during his or her
lifetime if he or she met the following five conditions. A. The youth experienced a period in
which for most of the day he or she felt one of the following: sad, empty or depressed, very
discouraged or hopeless about how things were going in his or her life, or loss of interest and
boredom with most things usually enjoyed like work, hobbies, and personal relationships.
B. Either felt this way most of the day almost every day for a period of two weeks or longer, or
for a period of three days or longer and had a year or more in life when felt this way just about
every month for several days or longer. C. During times when mood was most severe and
frequent, the feelings usually lasted not less than 3 hours a day. D. These feelings were either
more than mild, sometimes felt so bad that nothing could cheer him or her up, or sometimes felt
so bad that he or she could not carry out daily activities. E. These feelings were accompanied
by changes in sleeping, eating, energy, his or her ability to keep mind on things, feeling badly
about his or herself, or other problems.
       Our measures of anxiety also involve a series of screening questions about the duration
and intensity of the feelings and the presence of related symptoms during the worst period in life.
A youth was considered to have had Generalized Anxiety Disorder during his or her lifetime if
the following four criteria were met: A. The youth reported there was a period when he or she
was either worrying a lot more about things than other people with the same problems, much
more nervous or anxious than most people with the same problems, or anxious or worried most
days. B. The youth reported being worried about nothing in particular, everything, or more than
one specific thing. C. The youth sometimes or often either found it hard to stop the worries or
anxiety or could not think about anything else no matter how hard he or she tried. D. The period
of being anxious, nervous, or worried lasted at least one month. Depression and anxiety were
chosen because they are sufficiently common in the population to ensure that their minimum
detectable effects were reasonable with our sample sizes. Since these serious events are still
relatively rare, we examined the prevalence of any event, rather than focusing on a limited time
such as the past year. Some of the reported events occurred prior to random assignment; we did
not attempt to date them precisely, but instead rely on the assumption that these were few in
number (since prevalence of reported events is extremely low at young ages) and that the
prevalence of these early events was similar on average between the randomly assigned groups.


                                               A13
       Youth risky behavior. Our measures of risky behavior drew upon survey self-reports
using items from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1997.
       Alcohol use was measured as any use within the past 30 days.
       Smoking was measured as any cigarette smoking within the past 30 days.
       Our measures of whether a female youth had borne a child or a male youth had fathered a
child were also based on self-reported responses to survey questions.

Additional references:
Anwar, Yusra Anis; Giacco, Sharon; McCabe, Ellen J.; Tendler, Beatriz E. and White, William
    B., 1998. “Evaluation of the Efficacy of the Omron HEM-737 Intellisense Device For Use
    On Adults According to the Recommendations of the Association for Advancement of
    Medical Instrumentation.” Blood Pressure Monitoring, 3, 261-265.
Brener, Nancy D.; McManus, Tim; Galuska, Deborah A.; Lowry, Richard and Wechsler,
    Howell, 2003. “Reliability and Validity of Self-reported Height and Weight Among High
    School Students.” Journal of Adolescent Health 32: 281-287.
Case, Anne C.; Lubotsky, Darren and Paxson, Christine H., 2002. “Economic Status and Health
    in Childhood: The Origins of the Gradient.” American Economic Review 92 (5): 1308-1334.
Chobanian, Aram V.; Bakris, George L.; Black, Henry R.; Cushman, William C.; Green, Lee A.;
    Izzo, Joseph L. Jr.; Jones, Daniel W.; Materson, Barry J.; Oparil, Suzanne; Wright, Jackson
    T. Jr. and Roccella, Edward J., 2003. “The Seventh Report of the Joint National Committee
    on Prevention, Detection, Evaluation, and Treatment of High Blood Pressure: the JNC 7
    report.” Journal of the American Medical Association, 289, 2560-2572.
Currie, Janet and Stabile, Mark, 2003. “Socioeconomic Status and Health: Why is the
    Relationship Stronger for Older Children?” American Economic Review 93(5), 1813-1823.
Furukawa, Toshiaki A.; Kessler, Ronald C.; Slade, T. and Andrews, G., 2003. “The
    Performance of the K6 and K10 Screening Scales for Psychological Distress in the
    Australian National Survey of Mental Health and Well-Being.” Psychological Medicine, 33,
    357-362.
Goodman, Elizabeth and Whitaker, Robert C., 2002. “A Prospective Study of the Role of
    Depression in the Development and Persistence of Adolescent Obesity.” Pediatrics 109:
    497-504.
Idler, Ellen L. and Kasl, Stanislav V. (1995). “Self-Ratings of Health: Do They Also Predict
    Changes in Functionality.” Journal of Gerontology: Social Sciences 50 (6): S344-353.
Kessler, Ronald C.; Andrews G.; Mroczek, D.K.; Ustun. T.B. and Wittchen, H.U., 1998. “The
    World Health Organization Composite International Diagnostic Interview Short-Form (CIDI-
    SF).” International Journal of Methods in Psychiatric Research, 7, 171-185.
Kessler, Ronald C.; Andrews, G.; Colpe, Lisa J.; Hiripi, Eva; Mroczek, Daniel K.; Normand,
    Sharon-Lise T.; Walters, Ellen E. and Zaslavsky, Alan M., 2002. “Short Screening Scales to
    Monitor Population Prevalences and Trends in Non-specific Psychological Distress.”
    Psychological Medicine, 32, 959-976.
National Institutes of Health, 1998. “Clinical Guidelines on the Identification, Evaluation, and
    Treatment of Overweight and Obesity in Adults--The Evidence Report.” Obesity Research,
    6(Supp 2), 51S-209S.
Pearce, Neal; Beasley, Richard; Burgess, Carl and Crane, Julian, 1998. Asthma Epidemiology:
    Principles and Methods. Oxford: Oxford University Press.


                                              A14
Walters Ellen E.; Kessler, Ronald C.; Nelson Christopher B. and Mroczek, Daniel M., 2002.
  “Scoring the World Health Organization's Composite International Diagnostic Interview
  Short Form (CIDI-SF).” (Accessed 10/26/04;
  http://www3.who.int/cidi/CIDISFScoringMemo12-03-02.pdf)
Ware, John E.; Snow, K.K.; Kosinski, M. and Gandek, B., 1993 SF-36 Health Survey: Manual
  and Interpretation Guide. Boston: The Health Institute, New England Medical Center.




                                           A15
                                     Table C1. Adult Baseline Characteristics
                           Control                  Experimental                          Section 8

                                                    CP       NCP     CP-                 CP     NCP      CP-
                           Mean            Mean    Mean      Mean    NCP        Mean    Mean    Mean     NCP
Variable
                             (i)            (ii)    (iii)    (iv)     (v)       (vi)    (vii)   (viii)    (ix)
Demographics
Age in years (as of
    December 2001)          39.6            39.7     38.1     41.2    -3.1*      40.1    38.3    42.6     -4.2*
Male                        .02            .01      .00      .02     -.01*      .02     .02     .02       .00
Baltimore site              .15            .15      .17      .13      .04       .15     .18     .10       .09*
Boston site                 .21            .22      .21      .22     -.02       .22     .18     .28      -.10*
Chicago site                .22            .23      .16      .30     -.14*      .23     .25     .19       .06
Los Angeles site            .16            .16      .21      .10      .11*      .15     .19     .09       .11*
New York site               .25            .25      .25      .24      .01       .25     .19     .34      -.15*
African-American            .66            .67      .67      .66      .01       .66     .70     .60       .10*
Other race                  .27            .26      .23      .29     -.05*      .26     .22     .31      -.09*
Hispanic ethnicity, any
    race                    .29            .29      .28      .29     -.02       .30     .27     .35      -.08*
Never married               .62            .62      .66      .58      .08*      .62     .65     .58       .07
Teen parent                 .24            .25      .26      .24      .02       .26     .30     .21       .08*
Economic and education
Working                     .25            .29      .29      .28      .02       .25     .26     .24      .03
On AFDC                     .75            .74      .76      .72      .04       .75     .78     .70      .08*
In school                   .16            .16      .20      .12      .07*      .16     .18     .12      .05*
High school diploma         .38            .41      .41      .42     -.01       .41     .41     .40      .01
General equivalency
    diploma                 .21            .18      .21      .15     .06*       .19     .20     .18      .01
Household
Had car                     .15            .17      .19      .15     .04        .16     .18     .14      .05
Household member with a
    disability              .16            .16      .15      .17     -.02       .17     .14     .20      -.06*
Household member
    victimized by crime
    during past 6 months    .41            .42      .46      .39      .07*      .43     .45     .39       .05
No teen children            .62            .59      .66      .53      .13*      .61     .67     .52       .15*
Household of size 2         .20            .23      .27      .19      .09*      .21     .23     .18       .05
Household of size 3         .32            .30      .31      .30      .01       .31     .30     .31      -.01
Household of size 4         .22            .23      .23      .24     -.01       .23     .23     .22       .00
Neighborhood and
    housing
Lived in neighborhood 5
    or more years           .62            .61      .60      .62     -.02       .63     .57     .72      -.15*
Moved more than 3 times
    in past 5 years         .11            .08+     .09      .07     .02        .09     .11     .06      .05*
Very dissatisfied with
    neighborhood            .46            .46      .52      .41     .11*       .47     .52     .39      .13*
Streets very unsafe at
    night                   .49            .48      .52      .45     .07*       .49     .53     .43      .10*




                                                       A16
                             Table C1. Adult Baseline Characteristics, continued
                               Control                    Experimental                                 Section 8

                                                          CP       NCP       CP-                     CP       NCP      CP-
                                Mean            Mean     Mean      Mean      NCP           Mean     Mean      Mean     NCP
 Variable
                                  (i)            (ii)     (iii)     (iv)      (v)           (vi)     (vii)    (viii)    (ix)
 Neighborhood and
     housing
 Lived in neighborhood 5
     or more years               .62            .61       .60      .62      -.02           .63      .57       .72      -.15*
 Moved more than 3 times
     in past 5 years             .11            .08+      .09      .07       .02           .09      .11       .06      .05*
 Very dissatisfied with
     neighborhood                .46            .46       .52      .41       .11*          .47      .52       .39      .13*
 Streets very unsafe at
     night                       .49            .48       .52      .45       .07*          .49      .53       .43      .10*
 Chats with neighbors at
     least once a week           .55              .52      .49       .55     -.06*          .50       .50      .50       .00
 Respondent very likely to
     tell neighbor if saw
     neighbor’s child
     getting into trouble        .56              .53      .50       .57     -.07*          .55       .56      .53       .03
 No family living in
     neighborhood                .65              .65      .66       .64      .02           .62       .63      .60       .03
 No friends living in
     neighborhood                .41              .40      .43       .38      .05           .38       .40      .34       .06
 Very sure would find an
     apartment in another
     part of city                .45              .45      .51       .40      .11*          .48       .54      .40       .14*
 To get away from gangs
     or drugs was primary
     or secondary reason
     for moving                  .78              .77      .79       .75      .04           .75       .77      .73       .05
 Better schools was
     primary or secondary
     reason for moving           .48              .47      .50       .46      .04           .52       .53      .49       .05
 Had applied for Section 8
     voucher before              .45              .41      .44       .39      .05           .39+      .38      .40      -.03

 N                             1080             1453       694       759                     993      585       408
Notes: AFDC = Aid to Families with Dependent Children. CP = complier; NCP = non-complier. * = difference
between treatment compliers and non-compliers is statistically significant at the 5 percent level. + = difference
between treatment and control mean is statistically significant at 5 percent level.




                                                        A17
                                Table C2. Youth Baseline Characteristics
                                                          Female                     Male

                                                    Exp    Sec8    Con        Exp     Sec8    Con
                                                    (1)     (2)    (3)        (4)      (5)    (6)
   African-American                                 .68     .64     .67       .64     .65     .59

   Special class for gifted students or did
     advanced work                                  .15     .17     .17       .17*    .15*    .27

   Special school, class, or help for learning
     problem in past two years                      .13     .13     .12       .29     .25     .30

   Special school, class, or help for behavioral
     or emotional problems in past two years        .07     .08     .05        .18    .17     .11

   Problems that made it difficult to get to
     school and/or to play active games             .03     .06     .06       .11*    .08     .05

   Problems that required special medicine
     and/or equipment                               .05     .07     .05       .13     .14     .09

   School asked to talk about problems child
     having with schoolwork or behavior in past
     two years                                      .19     .23     .19       .41     .37     .33

   Suspended or expelled from school in past
     two years                                      .09     .10     .07       .23     .20     .15

        Notes. Exp: Experimental. Sec8: Section 8. Con: Control. * indicates p-value <.05 on
difference between experimental or Section 8 and control group. Baseline data was collected at random
assignment, during 1994-1997. Surveys were completed in experimental, Section 8 and control groups
with 749, 510, and 548 respondents respectively ages 15-20 on 12/31/2001 for a total sample size of
1807.




                                                   A18
      D. Comparison of outcomes to the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth


                                Table D1. Risky behavior outcome means
                                                     MTO                            NLSY97
                                            Exp      Sec8     Control        adjusted   unadjusted
                                             (1)      (2)       (3)             (4)        (5)
 A. Females
  Used marijuana in past 30 days             .07         .08     .13            .13           .16
  Smoked in past 30 days                     .14         .14     .19            .25           .33
  Had alcohol in past 30 days                .14         .14     .21            .28           .44
  Been or gotten someone pregnant            .25         .33     .27            .21           .14
 B. Females -- gifted dropped
  Used marijuana in past 30 days             .07         .08     .14            .12           .15
  Smoked in past 30 days                     .14         .11     .20            .26           .33
  Had alcohol in past 30 days                .13         .12     .23            .28           .43
  Been or gotten someone pregnant            .26         .32     .27            .22           .14
 C. Males
  Used marijuana in past 30 days             .19         .21     .12            .21           .18
  Smoked in past 30 days                     .24         .29     .13            .29           .33
  Had alcohol in past 30 days                .21         .24     .14            .30           .46
  Been or gotten someone pregnant            .16         .19     .12            .16           .07
 D. Males -- gifted dropped
  Used marijuana in past 30 days             .18         .23     .13            .21           .18
  Smoked in past 30 days                     .22         .30     .12            .29           .33
  Had alcohol in past 30 days                .19         .22     .13            .30           .45
  Been or gotten someone pregnant            .17         .17     .12            .16           .07

Notes. Exp: Experimental. Sec8: Section 8. Con: Control. Columns 1-3 are unadjusted means using
MTO survey weights. Column 5 is the unadjusted sample mean of NLSY97 Round 3 outcomes for
ages 15-20 using NLSY97 survey weights. Using the same NLSY97 data, column 4 contains the
predicted values from regressions of outcomes on covariates, based on MTO covariate means.
Covariates were sixth order polynomial in age, race white, race other non-black, adult head age 19-29,
adult head age 30-39, adult head age 40-49, household size 2, household size 3, household size 4, adult
head has car, adult head employed, adult head GED or high school graduate, adult head receiving
welfare, missing parental interview, youth gifted classes, youth remedial classes, youth disabled, youth
special medical needs. MTO covariates are from the MTO baseline survey. NLSY97 age is as of
Round 3 interview; other NLSY covariates are from Round 1, recoded to match MTO baseline
covariates. Regressions were estimated separately for females and males and evaluated at the gender-
specific means of the MTO baseline covariates (except missing parental interview indicator evaluated at
NLSY97 mean). Panels B and D drop observations where youth had earlier been in gifted classes to
illustrate the lack of sensitivity to the covariate Imbalance shown in Table C2.


                                                   A19
E. Additional discussion of internal validity
        Regarding the internal validity of these results, two key concerns include the use of self-
reports and the possibility of attrition bias. Most of the outcomes used in this paper were self-
reported, and neither the participants nor the interviewers were blinded to the intervention. Thus,
it is possible that the estimated impacts are due to some sort of reporting bias. However, the
consistency between survey and administrative self-sufficiency estimates discussed in the main
text and the negligible estimates of treatment effects for many outcomes help rule out the most
obvious types of reporting bias. Given that the name of the demonstration is “Moving to
Opportunity” and that it was promoted by HUD as a pathway to better jobs, one might expect
employment and earnings to be the most likely outcomes to be exaggerated by the treatment
groups, but this did not turn out to be the case. Also, in related MTO research studying youth
arrests (Kling, Ludwig, and Katz 2005), self-reported and administrative data have generated
similar results.
        Additional supporting evidence finds strong beneficial effects on the mental health of
female youth (Kling and Liebman 2004). Female adults and youth may have experienced similar
outcomes from living in the same neighborhood, and the youth tend to have less awareness that
their household had been randomly assigned to a group in the MTO demonstration five years ago
and seem even less likely to provide biased reports.
        Because some participants and interviewers were aware of treatment status, it is possible
that some survey responses reflected what the participants thought the investigators wanted to
hear rather than the truth or that interviewers themselves (though not told whether a respondent
was a member of the intervention group) might surmise which group the respondent was in from
where the person lives and somehow administer the questions or record the answers differently.
If respondents were giving positive responses because they “won the lottery,” then we would
have expected the Section 8 group (which received the most desirable lottery outcome, an
unrestricted voucher) to report more positive responses than the Experimental group (which
received a geographically restricted voucher) – but this did not occur for any outcome. For
social desirability bias to be consistent with the results for youth, it would have to be very
complex – positive bias for female substance use and mental health, negligible for female
physical health, and negative for males – and the available evidence is not consistent with a
broad, systematic effect of this sort. On measures where one might expect a strong social



                                                A20
desirability bias, such as obesity, poor health, dropping out of high school, or being idle (not
working or in school), there are not significant treatment effects for youth. Moreover, using the
same type of demographic adjustments as in Table C1, we find that the MTO treatment groups
are within a couple of percentage points of similar youth in the NLSY97 on these measures (see
Table D1), whereas social desirability bias might predict that they would report significantly
more desirable behavior. A lack of systematic social desirability bias between the treatment and
control groups is consistent with a low level of awareness among youth about treatment status
from a housing voucher lottery that their parents participated in when they were ages 8-16 and
how it affected their residential location 4-7 years later when they were 15-20 years old. To the
extent that outcomes like risky behavior are under-reported by a constant factor (say, two-thirds
of the time) in all groups, the lower prevalence in self-reported data does reduce the statistical
power to detect treatment effects, but does not bias their direction or result in the appearance of
treatment effects when the true effects are zero.
        In terms of potential attrition bias, our effective survey response rate was 90 percent and
it is possible that the characteristics of those who were not interviewed differed systematically
across the three groups. However, response rates were similar across the randomly-assigned
groups, and our estimation models control for baseline characteristics in order to reduce the
sensitivity of our results to differential attrition. Of course, it is also possible that the individuals
who were not interviewed in the three groups differed in their unobservable characteristics.
Kling and Liebman (2004) conduct extensive bounds calculations for youth outcomes from the
MTO interim evaluation. They show that worse case assumptions about missing data can change
the results a great deal, but that the sign of summary measure estimates do not change under less
extreme assumptions about missing data.
        We have used the administrative data on employment, earnings, and welfare to compare
estimates for full sample and for the sample with which we completed surveys and did not find
significant differences. This analysis was based on the four states with individual-level UI data,
and the five states with individual-level welfare data. For example, the experimental group ITT
estimate of the five years after RA was .024 for employment and -.017 for welfare in the full
sample, and .038 for employment and -.022 for welfare in the sample with completed surveys
(using survey weights), with p-values on the differences of .25 for employment and .62 for
welfare. The point estimates of the employment rates for the survey sample were consistently



                                                  A21
higher than for the full administrative sample, and the p-values on this contrast for the six
employment and earnings measures in Table 4 ranged from .40 to .12. Further comparisons of
the full sample to everyone we attempted to interview regardless of completion status (and
therefore involving no attrition) found differences just as large or larger. Thus even these modest
and statistically insignificant differences seem more likely to be the result of sampling variation
from our subsampling of nonrespondents than of attrition bias.




                                                A22
F. Additional results for adults

                                  Table F1. List of Tables for Adult Results
Table                                                         Title

F2      Effects on Selected Mediating Factors

F3      Effects on Economic Self-Sufficiency

F4      Effects on Earnings and Welfare Receipt ─ Administrative Data

F5      Effects on Mental Health and Physical Health

F6      Effects on Economic Self-Sufficiency and Health by Age at Randomization

F7      Effects on Employment by Age at Randomization, Administrative Data

F8      Effects on Earnings by Age at Randomization, Administrative Data

F9      Effects on Voucher Use, Housing and Neighborhood Quality, and Safety

F10     Effects on Social Networks

F11     Effects on Education, Training, Health Behaviors and Health Care Access

F12     Effects on Mobility and Housing Assistance, Access to Transportation, and Relative Income

F13     Baseline Characteristics of Adult Survey Respondents and the Full Adult Sample

F14     Effects on Change in Employment within Zip Code Between 1994 and 2001




                                                        A23
                                   Table F2. Effects on Selected Mediating Factors
                                             Experimental versus Control                     Section 8 versus Control

                                CM        ITT       TOT       CCM         N            ITT       TOT       CCM           N
                                 (i)       (ii)      (iii)     (iv)      (v)            (vi)     (vii)     (viii)        (ix)
Average census tract            .448     -.119*    -.256*     .449      2533          -.097*    -.160*     .463         2073
  poverty rate [ADDR]                    (.007)    (.012)                             (.006)    (.010)
Average census tract            .132     .345*     .739*      .131      2533          .242*      .401*     .130         2073
   poverty rate below 30%                (.018)    (.031)                             (.020)     (.031)
   [ADDR]
Average census tract share      .228     -.063*    -.136*     .227      2533          -.055*    -.091*     .239         2073
   on public assistance                  (.004)    (.008)                             (.004)    (.006)
   [ADDR]
Average census tract share      .384     .074*     .159*      .386      2532          .056*      .093*     .379         2072
   of adults employed                    (.004)    (.008)                             (.004)     (.006)
   [ADDR]
Average census tract share      .215     .041*     .087*      .207      2530          .016*      .027*     .210         2071
   workers in professional               (.004)    (.008)                             (.004)     (.007)
   and managerial
   occupations [ADDR]
Respondent saw illicit          .457     -.118*    -.253*     .432      2481          -.104*    -.171*     .451         2023
   drugs being sold or                   (.022)    (.046)                             (.024)    (.039)
   used in neighborhood
   during past 30 days
   [SR]
Average census tract share      .898     -.074*    -.159*     .886      2533          -.025*    -.042*     .896         2073
   minority [ADDR]                       (.007)    (.014)                             (.007)    (.012)
Average census tract share         .058     .065*      .140*      .064      2533             .006     .010   .062      2073
    minority below 50%                     (.011)     (.024)                                (.010)   (.017)
    [ADDR]
Moved at least 10 miles            .106     .054*      .116*      .154      2424             .028     .046   .111      2005
    from baseline address                  (.016)     (.034)                                (.018)   (.030)
    [ADDR]
Housing has problem with           .541    -.049* -.104*          .479      2511             -.014    -.024  .500      2058
    mice, rats or                          (.022)     (.046)                                (.023)   (.039)
    cockroaches [SR]
Has a friend who graduated         .518     .053*      .113*      .513      2334             .032     .054   .511      1917
    college or who earns                   (.022)     (.047)                                (.025)   (.042)
    more than $30,000 a
    year [SR]
Attends church or religious        .426     -.031      -.066      .464      2521             .008     .014   .438      2064
    service at least once a                (.021)     (.046)                                (.024)   (.039)
    month [SR]
Notes. ADDR = address history from tracking file linked to Census data. Census tract characteristics are the average for an
individual’s addresses from randomization through 2001 weighted by duration. Except for “managerial and professional
occupations” (for which only 2000 Census data was used due to differences in the occupation classification used for the 1990
Census and 2000 Census), values for inter-census years are interpolated. SR = self-report. CM = control mean. Intent-to-
treat (ITT) from equation (1), using covariates in Table C1 and weights described in the text. TOT = Treatment-on-treated
from equation (2) estimated by two stage least squares with treatment group assignment indicator variables as the instruments
for the treatment take-up indicator variables. CCM = control complier mean, as defined in the text. * = statistically
significant at the 5 percent level. Standard errors, adjusted for heteroscedasticity, are in parentheses.




                                                             A24
                                    Table F3. Effects on Economic Self-Sufficiency
                                              Experimental versus Control                       Section 8 versus Control

                                 CM        ITT       TOT       CCM         N             ITT        TOT       CCM           N
                                 (i)        (ii)      (iii)      (iv)      (v)            (vi)       (vii)    (viii)        (ix)
Adult employed and not on       .453       .019      .040       .453      2521           .015        .025     .449         2066
  TANF [SR]                               (.020)    (.044)                              (.023)      (.038)
Employed [SR]                   .520       .015      .033       .533      2525           .024        .040     .522         2068
                                          (.021)    (.044)                              (.023)      (.038)
Earnings in 2001 [SR]           8839       125        268      9108       2386            -5          -9      9305         1950
                                          (449)      (960)                              (486)       (811)
Receiving TANF [SR]             .295       -.021    -.046       .325      2519          -.031       -.051     .320         2063
                                          (.019)    (.040)                              (.021)      (.034)
Income received from             2484       194        419      2248        2381           -110   -181       2297       1946
    government sources                     (184)      (398)                                (205) (336)
    during 2001 [SR]
Notes. TANF = Temporary Assistance for Needy Families. SR = self-report. CM = control mean. Intent-to-treat (ITT)
from equation (1), using covariates in Table C1 and weights described in the text. TOT = Treatment-on-treated from
equation (2) estimated by two stage least squares with treatment group assignment indicator variables as the instruments for
the treatment take-up indicator variables. CCM = control complier mean, as defined in the text. * = statistically significant at
the 5 percent level. Standard errors, adjusted for heteroscedasticity, are in parentheses.




                                                              A25
                      Table F4. Effects on Earnings and Welfare Receipt ─ Administrative Data
                                               Experimental versus Control                       Section 8 versus Control

                                 CM        ITT       TOT       CCM          N             ITT        TOT       CCM           N
                                  (i)       (ii)      (iii)     (iv)       (v)            (vi)       (vii)     (viii)       (ix)
A. Employment
Fraction of quarters             .508      -.017     -.036      .550      2910            .014        .022     .546         2411
   employed in 2001                       (.017)     (.035)                              (.017)      (.028)
   [ADMIN]
Fraction of quarters             .422      -.006     -.012      .468      2455            .001        .001     .447         2039
   employed in years 1                    (.013)     (.028)                              (.014)      (.023)
   through 5 after RA
   [ADMIN]
Fraction of quarters             .499      .002       .005      .532      2455            .008        .013     .531         2039
   employed in year 5                     (.018)     (.039)                              (.020)      (.032)
   after RA [ADMIN]
B. Earnings
Earnings in 2001 [ADMIN]        8490        -287      -612      9062      2910            41          67       8899         2411
                                           (400)     (853)                               (441)       (714)
Annualized earnings in          5948         -6       -13       5622      2455            90          143      5481         2039
   years 1 through 5 after                 (295)     (630)                               (345)       (546)
   RA [ADMIN]
Earnings in year 5 after RA     7924        128       273       7475      2455            370         587      7313         2039
   [ADMIN]                                 (417)     (890)                               (471)       (744)
C. TANF receipt
Fraction of quarters             .263      -.001     -.001      .281      2912            .005        .008     .265         2407
   received TANF in 2001                  (.015)     (.031)                              (.016)      (.026)
   [ADMIN]
Fraction of quarters             .276      -.011     -.024      .293      2041            .018        .029     .264         1569
   received TANF in year                  (.018)     (.040)                              (.021)      (.033)
   5 after RA [ADMIN]
D. TANF amount
Amount of TANF received         1406       -44        -92       1653      2912            -92         -150     1493         2407
   in 2001 [ADMIN]                         (88)      (187)                                (94)       (153)
Amount of TANF                    1316        -116       -263      1500     2041              7         11       1242       1569
     payments received in                     (96)      (219)                               (110)     (176)
     year 5 after RA
     [ADMIN]
Notes. ADMIN = administrative data. RA = random assignment. TANF = Temporary Assistance for Needy Families. CM
= control mean. Intent-to-treat (ITT) from equation (1), using covariates in Table C1 and weights described in the text. TOT
= Treatment-on-treated from equation (2) estimated by two stage least squares with treatment group assignment indicator
variables as the instruments for the treatment take-up indicator variables. CCM = control complier mean, as defined in the
text. Administrative data on employment and earnings are from state unemployment insurance (UI) records and data on
TANF receipt are from state and county welfare agencies. Data were obtained for California (LA county only for TANF),
Illinois, Maryland, Massachusetts and New York. TANF data were analyzed at the individual level. UI estimates are based
on cell data as described in the text, controlling for site and mean randomization quarter, baseline education, and baseline
work status. * = statistically significant at the 5 percent level. Standard errors, adjusted for heteroscedasticity, are in
parentheses.




                                                              A26
                                Table F5. Effects on Mental Health and Physical Health
                                               Experimental versus Control                        Section 8 versus Control

                                 CM         ITT       TOT       CCM          N             ITT        TOT       CCM           N
                                  (i)       (ii)       (iii)     (iv)       (v)            (vi)       (vii)     (viii)       (ix)
A. Mental health
Psychological distress, K6       .050      -.092*    -.196*      .150      2531           -.033       -.054     .028         2069
   z-score [SR]                            (.046)    (.099)                               (.051)      (.085)
Probability of major             .164       -.027    -.059       .196      2529           -.013       -.022     .165         2070
   depressive episode [SR]                 (.014)    (.031)                               (.016)      (.027)
Worried, tense, or anxious       .393       -.029    -.061       .456      2496           -.008       -.013     .411         2037
  [SR]                                     (.022)    (.047)                               (.024)      (.040)
Calm and peaceful [SR]           .466      .061*     .131*       .443      2530            .014        .024     .487         2069
                                           (.022)    (.047)                               (.024)      (.040)
Sleeps at least 7 and <9         .450       .033      .070       .447      2503            .016        .026     .443         2046
   hours per night [SR]                    (.022)    (.048)                               (.025)      (.041)
B. Physical health
Has fair or poor health          .330       .017      .036       .295      2530            .011        .019     .310         2073
   [SR]                                    (.019)    (.041)                               (.021)      (.036)
Has trouble carrying             .436       -.018    -.039       .423      2526           -.020       -.034     .418         2070
   groceries or climbing                   (.021)    (.045)                               (.023)      (.038)
   stairs [SR]
Had an asthma or wheezing        .212       -.013    -.027       .206      2529           -.010       -.017     .208         2071
   attack during past year                 (.018)    (.038)                               (.019)      (.032)
   [SR]
Obese, BMI≥30 [SR]               .468      -.048*    -.103*      .502      2450           -.046       -.077     .491         1999
                                           (.022)    (.047)                               (.025)      (.041)
Has hypertension, [M]            .297       .022      .048       .241      2315            .022        .037     .267         1900
   SBP≥140 or DBP≥90                       (.020)    (.045)                               (.023)      (.039)
Notes. M = direct measurement. SR = self-report. CM = control mean. SBP = systolic blood pressure. DBP = diastolic
blood pressure. Intent-to-treat (ITT) from equation (1), using covariates in Table C1 and weights described in the text. TOT
= Treatment-on-treated from equation (2) estimated by two stage least squares with treatment group assignment indicator
variables as the instruments for the treatment take-up indicator variables. CCM = control complier mean, as defined in the
text. * = statistically significant at the 5 percent level. Standard errors, adjusted for heteroscedasticity, are in parentheses.




                                                               A27
               Table F6. Effects on Economic Self-sufficiency and Health by Age at Randomization
                                     Age < 33 at RA                         Age ≥ 33 at RA                  Diff. by Age

                             CM        E-C ITT    S-C ITT            CM       E-C ITT    S-C ITT        E-C ITT     S-C ITT
                             (i)          (ii)         (iii)         (iv)       (v)           (vi)        (vii)       (viii)
 A. Economic self-sufficiency
 Adult employed and not     .467         .050          .021          .439       -.013         .010       -.063        -.011
    on TANF [SR]                        (.030)        (.033)                   (.028)        (.031)      (.040)       (.045)
 Employed [SR]               .555        .032          .032          .484       -.001         .015       -.033        -.017
                                        (.030)        (.033)                   (.028)        (.031)      (.041)       (.045)
 Earnings in 2001 [SR]       9643         589          -508          7980       -362          486         -951         994
                                         (659)        (691)                    (609)         (689)       (896)        (980)
 Receiving TANF [SR]         .334        -.036        -.042          .254       -.006        -.020        .030         .022
                                        (.027)        (.030)                   (.026)        (.028)      (.037)       (.040)
 Income received from        2420         -84          -382          2552       479           179         563          561
    government sources                   (252)        (277)                    (269)         (295)       (370)        (400)
    during 2001 [SR]
 B. Mental health
 Psychological distress,     -.021      -.090         -.051          .125       -.095        -.012       -.005         .039
    K6 z-score [SR]                     (.064)        (.069)                   (.067)        (.075)      (.092)       (.102)
 Probability of major        .153        -.021        -.013          .177       -.035        -.014       -.014        -.001
    depressive episode                  (.020)        (.021)                   (.021)        (.024)      (.029)       (.032)
    [SR]
 Worried, tense, or          .360        -.015         .026          .429       -.043        -.043       -.028        -.069
    anxious [SR]                        (.030)        (.033)                   (.031)        (.034)      (.043)       (.047)
 Calm and peaceful [SR]      .474        .051          .025          .457      .073*          .003        .022        -.023
                                        (.031)        (.033)                   (.031)        (.035)      (.044)       (.048)
 Sleeps at least 7 and <9    .479        .045          .027          .420       .020          .005       -.026        -.021
    hours per night [SR]                (.031)        (.034)                   (.032)        (.035)      (.045)       (.049)
 C. Physical health
 Has fair or poor health     .248        -.012        -.030          .416       .046          .054        .057        .084*
    [SR]                                (.026)        (.028)                   (.029)        (.033)      (.039)       (.043)
 Has trouble carrying        .332        -.038        -.043          .545       .001          .002        .039         .045
    groceries or                        (.029)        (.031)                   (.030)        (.033)      (.042)       (.045)
    climbing stairs [SR]
 Had an asthma or            .205        -.028        -.031          .221       .003          .011        .031         .042
    wheezing attack                     (.025)        (.026)                   (.025)        (.028)      (.035)       (.038)
    during past year
    [SR]
 Obese, BMI≥30 [SR]          .452        -.056        -.069*         .484       -.040        -.023        .015         .047
                                        (.031)        (.034)                   (.032)        (.035)      (.044)       (.049)
 Has hypertension, [M]       .227        -.030        -.010          .369      .075*          .055       .104*         .064
    SBP≥140 or                          (.027)        (.030)                   (.031)        (.035)      (.041)       (.046)
    DBP≥90
Notes. SR = self-report. M = direct measurement. SBP = systolic blood pressure. DBP = diastolic blood pressure. RA =
random assignment. CM = control mean. E-C: Experimental - Control. S-C: Section 8 - Control. Intent-to-treat (ITT) from
equation (2), using covariates in Table C1 and weights described in the text, where X also contains an indicator for age <33
and Z contains interactions of age<33 and age≥33 with the treatment indicator. The total number of completed surveys was
1793 for adults under age 33 and 1733 for those 33 and older. * = statistically significant at the 5 percent level. Standard
errors, adjusted for heteroscedasticity, are in parentheses.



                                                               A28
                Table F7. Effects on Employment by Age at Randomization ─ Administrative Data
                                     Age < 33 at RA                          Age ≥ 33 at RA                    Diff. by Age

                              CM       E-C ITT     S-C ITT            CM       E-C ITT     S-C ITT        E-C ITT      S-C ITT
                             (i)          (ii)         (iii)          (iv)       (v)           (vi)          (vii)       (viii)
 A. Fraction of quarters employed
 by calendar year, 4 states
 1998 [ADMIN]               .473        -.015         -.003          .378        -.022         .030         -.008         .034
                                        (.024)        (.027)                    (.024)        (.027)        (.034)       (.038)
 1999 [ADMIN]                 .520       .010         -.011          .394        -.006         .050         -.017         .061
                                        (.024)        (.028)                    (.024)        (.028)        (.034)       (.039)
 2000 [ADMIN]                 .537      .055*          .011          .440        -.009         .026         -.063         .014
                                        (.025)        (.028)                    (.026)        (.028)        (.036)       (.040)
 2001 [ADMIN]                 .549       .029          .030          .456        -.017        -.002         -.046        -.031
                                        (.026)        (.029)                    (.026)        (.029)        (.036)       (.041)
 B. Fraction of quarters employed
 by year since RA, 4 states
 [ADMIN]
 Year 1 After RA            .363         -.036        -.057*         .285        -.007         .016          .029        .072*
    [ADMIN]                             (.022)        (.024)                    (.022)        (.024)        (.031)       (.034)
 Year 2 After RA              .433       -.025        -.055          .324        .005          .033          .030        .088*
    [ADMIN]                             (.025)        (.029)                    (.025)        (.027)        (.035)       (.039)
 Year 3 After RA              .462       .024         -.019          .375        -.000         .032         -.024         .051
    [ADMIN]                             (.026)        (.030)                    (.026)        (.028)        (.037)       (.041)
 Year 4 After RA              .490      .055*          .029          .407        .002          .055         -.052         .026
    [ADMIN]                             (.027)        (.030)                    (.026)        (.030)        (.038)       (.042)
 Year 5 After RA              .544      .055*         -.005          .439        -.013         .023         -.068         .028
    [ADMIN]                             (.027)        (.031)                    (.027)        (.030)        (.038)       (.043)
 C. Employment in 2001 from
 administrative versus survey data
 Any positive earnings       .670        .017          .055          .549        -.017        -.020         -.035        -.075
    in 2001, 4 states                   (.028)        (.031)                    (.028)        (.031)        (.039)       (.044)
    [ADMIN]
 Any positive earnings       .690        .007          .006          .570        -.006         .006         -.013         .001
    in 2001, 4 states                   (.033)        (.039)                    (.034)        (.038)        (.047)       (.055)
    [SR]
 Any positive earnings       .701        .013          .014          .578        -.027        -.007         -.040        -.021
    in 2001, 5 states                   (.028)        (.034)                    (.029)        (.033)        (.041)       (.047)
    [SR]
Notes. ADMIN = administrative data. SR = self-report. RA = random assignment. CM = control mean. Intent-to-treat
(ITT) from equation (1), using covariates in Table C1 and weights described in the text, where X also contains an indicator
for age <33 and Z contains interactions of age<33 and age≥33 with the treatment indicator. * = statistically significant at the
5 percent level. Standard errors, adjusted for heteroscedasticity, are in parentheses. Administrative data on individual
earnings and employment are from California, Illinois, Maryland, and New York unemployment insurance records. Records
were obtained for 1615 adults less than 33 years old and 1560 adults 33 and older.




                                                               A29
                   Table F8. Effects on Earnings by Age at Randomization ─ Administrative Data
                                      Age < 33 at RA                           Age ≥ 33 at RA                      Diff. by Age

                               CM        E-C ITT     S-C ITT            CM       E-C ITT      S-C ITT         E-C ITT      S-C ITT
                            (i)            (ii)        (iii)            (iv)        (v)          (vi)           (vii)        (viii)
 A. Annual earnings by calendar
 year, 4 states
 1998 [ADMIN]              5377             68          -220           5140          8           588             -60          808
                                          (399)        (439)                       (454)        (496)           (605)        (659)
 1999 [ADMIN]                  6596        490          -302           6000         244          958             -246        1260
                                          (486)        (512)                       (539)        (594)           (728)        (781)
 2000 [ADMIN]                  7630       1117*         -247           6956         -171         253           -1288          501
                                          (540)        (574)                       (547)        (594)          (768)         (822)
 2001 [ADMIN]                  8870        480          -441           7252         -348         344             -828         785
                                          (608)        (662)                       (555)        (630)           (820)        (909)
 B. Annual earnings by year since
 RA, 4 states
 Year 1 After RA           3885            -489        -857*           3571          34          330             523         1187*
    [ADMIN]                               (350)        (360)                       (376)        (413)           (514)        (543)
 Year 2 After RA               4995        -377        -950*           4581         441          430             818         1380*
    [ADMIN]                               (436)        (439)                       (494)        (495)           (665)        (661)
 Year 3 After RA               5692        544          -438           5314         381          850             -163        1288
    [ADMIN]                               (490)        (509)                       (518)        (558)           (718)        (757)
 Year 4 After RA               6595       1011          256            6199         -68         1049           -1078          793
    [ADMIN]                               (560)        (585)                       (555)        (624)          (791)         (851)
 Year 5 After RA               7727       1748*         300            7276         -538         444           -2285*         144
    [ADMIN]                               (610)        (644)                       (594)        (684)           (857)        (929)
 C. Earnings in 2001 from
 administrative versus survey data
 Earnings in 2001, 4         8870          480          -441           7252         -348         344             -828         785
    states [ADMIN]                        (608)        (662)                       (555)        (630)           (820)        (909)
 Earnings in 2001, 4           8869        864          -765           7550          4           515             -861        1280
    states [SR]                           (718)        (746)                       (675)        (778)           (982)       (1087)
 Earnings in 2001, 5           9643        589          -508           7980         -362         486             -951         994
    states [SR]                           (659)        (691)                       (609)        (689)           (896)        (980)
Notes. ADMIN = administrative data. SR = self-report. RA = random assignment. CM = control mean. E-C: Experimental
- Control. S-C: Section 8 - Control. Intent-to-treat (ITT) from equation (1), using covariates in Table 1 and weights
described in the text, where X also contains an indicator for age <33 and Z contains interactions of age<33 and age≥33 with
the treatment indicator. * = statistically significant at the 5 percent level. Standard errors, adjusted for heteroscedasticity, are
in parentheses. Administrative data on individual earnings and employment are from California, Illinois, Maryland, and New
York unemployment insurance records. Records were obtained for 1615 adults less than 33 years old and 1560 adults 33 and
older.




                                                               A30
                  Table F9. Effects on Voucher Use, Housing and Neighborhood Quality, and Safety
                                                               Experimental - Control                 Section 8 - Control
                                               CM                ITT            N                      ITT           N
                                               (i)               (ii)          (iii)                   (iv)         (v)
A. Used MTO Voucher
Moved using MTO voucher [ADDR]                 .000              .467*          2533                  .602*         2073
                                                                 (.015)                               (.017)
B. Census tract characteristics
Average census tract poverty rate [ADDR]       .448             -.119*          2533                  -.097*        2073
                                                                (.007)                                (.006)
Average census tract share on public           .228             -.063*          2533                  -.055*        2073
   assistance [ADDR]                                            (.004)                                (.004)
Average census tract share of adults           .384              .074*          2532                  .056*         2072
   employed [ADDR]                                               (.004)                               (.004)
Average census tract share workers in          .215              .041*          2530                  .016*         2071
   professional and managerial                                   (.004)                               (.004)
   occupations [ADDR]
C. Neighborhood quality
Very or somewhat satisfied with                .476              .136*          2510                  .106*         2056
   neighborhood [SR]                                             (.022)                               (.024)
Neighborhood problems index [SR]               .539             -.126*          2510                  -.093*        2056
                                                                (.017)                                (.019)
Negative exterior conditions of buildings      .201             -.038*          2359                  -.029*        1921
   and neighborhood [OBS]                                       (.011)                                (.012)
D. Safety
Streets are safe or very safe during the day   .758              .090*          2501                  .090*         2049
    [SR]                                                         (.018)                               (.018)
Streets are safe or very safe at night [SR]    .554              .141*          2480                  .091*         2031
                                                                 (.022)                               (.024)
Member of household victimized by crime        .213             -.042*          2530                  -.055*        2071
  during past 6 months [SR]                                     (.017)                                (.018)
Saw drugs sold or used during past 30          .457             -.118*          2481                  -.104*        2023
   days [SR]                                                    (.022)                                (.024)
Police not coming when called is a             .342             -.128*          2338                  -.096*        1913
    problem in the neighborhood [SR]                            (.020)                                (.023)
E. Housing quality
Unit is in poor or fair condition [SR]         .473             -.096*          2504                  -.067*        2051
                                                                (.022)                                (.024)
Home problems index [SR]                       .340             -.050*          2512                   -.027        2059
                                                                (.013)                                (.014)
Interior of the home negative conditions       .190              -.013          2397                   -.016        1950
    index [OBS]                                                  (.010)                               (.011)
Exterior of the home negative conditions       .170             -.034*          2415                  -.028*        1969
   index [OBS]                                                  (.011)                                (.012)
Notes. ADDR = address history from tracking file linked to Census data on tract characteristics. Census tract characteristics
are averaged across individual addresses since RA, weighted by duration. Except for “managerial and professional
occupations” (for which only 2000 Census data was used due to differences in 1990 and 2000 occupation classifications), the
characteristics of an address are a linear interpolation from the 1990 Census and 2000 Census. SR = self-report. OBS =
interviewer observations. CM = control mean. Intent-to-treat (ITT) from equation (1), using covariates in Table C1 and
weights described in the text. * = statistically significant at the 5 percent level. Standard errors, adjusted for
heteroscedasticity, are in parentheses.


                                                            A31
                                            Table F10. Effects on Social Networks
                                                               Experimental - Control               Section 8 - Control
                                               CM                ITT             N                   ITT            N
                                                (i)               (ii)          (iii)                 (iv)         (v)
Has three or more close friends [SR]           .351              .017          2525                  .006         2071
                                                                (.021)                              (.023)
Visits friends or relatives in their home      .426              -.023        2525                  -.021         2064
   at least once a week [SR]                                    (.022)                              (.024)
Visits friends or relatives in own home        .428              -.023        2525                   .006         2061
   at least once a week [SR]                                    (.022)                              (.024)
Has diffuse network of friends in which        .276              -.016        2520                   .025         2062
   only a few friends know each other                           (.019)                              (.022)
   [SR]
Found current job through a friend,            .075              .002         2490                   .018         2041
   relative or acquaintance living in                           (.012)                              (.013)
   neighborhood [SR]
Has no friends who live in the                 .588              .022         2527                  .048*         2067
   neighborhood [SR]                                            (.022)                              (.024)
Chats with neighbor at least once a week       .492              .020         2523                   .015         2064
   [SR]                                                         (.022)                              (.024)
Has a friend who graduated college or          .518             .053*         2334                   .032         1917
   earns more than $30,000 a year [SR]                          (.022)                              (.025)
Attends church or religious service at         .426              -.031        2521                   .008         2064
   least once a month [SR]                                      (.021)                              (.024)
Believes people can be trusted [SR]            .097              .011         2505                   .006         2056
                                                                (.014)                              (.015)
Experienced discrimination in a shop,          .244             -.038*        2532                  -.045*        2072
   restaurant, the neighborhood, child’s                        (.018)                              (.019)
   school, or by police during the past 6
   months [SR]
Notes. SR = self-report. CM = control mean. Intent-to-treat (ITT) from equation (1), using covariates in Table C1 and
weights described in the text. * = statistically significant at the 5 percent level. Standard errors, adjusted for
heteroscedasticity, are in parentheses.




                                                            A32
                Table F11. Effects on Education, Training, Health Behaviors and Health Care Access
                                                               Experimental versus                    Section 8 versus
                                                                     Control                              Control
                                            CM                  ITT           N                      ITT            N
                                            (i)                 (ii)         (iii)                   (iv)          (v)
A. Education and training
Years of education completed [SR]          11.047               .020          2516                  -.104         2057
                                                               (.096)                               (.107)
Has high school diploma or GED [SR]         .586                -.006         2524                   .020         2063
                                                               (.017)                               (.020)
Participated in job training since          .181                -.018         2523                   .017         2064
   September 2000 [SR]                                         (.016)                               (.019)
B. Exercise and nutrition
Moderate physical exercise, fraction of     .471                .025          2516                  .049*         2064
   week engaged in [SR]                                        (.018)                               (.020)
Diet, fraction of week ate green            .670               .030*          2511                   .019         2059
   vegetables or fruit [SR]                                    (.014)                               (.015)
C. Smoking and drinking
Smoking [SR]                                .293                .010          2512                   .005         2059
                                                               (.020)                               (.022)
Binge drinking during past year [SR]        .073                .003          2483                   .006         2035
                                                               (.012)                               (.013)
D. Health care access
Has health insurance [SR]                   .849                      .018           2528                    .006  2067
                                                                     (.017)                                 (.018)
Has a usual place to go when sick [SR]          .945                  -.008          2530                    .011  2072
                                                                     (.011)                                 (.011)
Notes. SR = self-report. CM = control mean. Intent-to-treat (ITT) from equation (1), using covariates in Table C1 and
weights described in the text. * = statistically significant at the 5 percent level. Standard errors, adjusted for
heteroscedasticity, are in parentheses.




                                                           A33
      Table F12. Effects on Mobility and Housing Assistance, Access to Transportation, & Relative Income
                                                                  Experimental versus                      Section 8 versus
                                                                        Control                                Control
                                              CM                   ITT           N                        ITT            N
                                              (i)                  (ii)         (iii)                     (iv)          (v)
A. Mobility and housing assistance
Moved more than 10 miles from                 .106                .054*          2424                    .028          2005
   baseline address [ADDR]                                        (.016)                                (.018)
Currently receiving Section 8 [SR]            .255                .294*          2317                   .345*          1907
                                                                  (.021)                                (.023)
Lives in baseline neighborhood or still       .746                -.050*         2526                   -.086*         2065
   has friends there [SR]                                         (.020)                                (.021)
Lives in baseline neighborhood or has         .613                -.083*         2525                   -.080*         2064
   friends from there who come to visit                           (.022)                                (.023)
   at least a couple of times a year [SR]
Lives in baseline neighborhood or goes        .664                -.071*         2522                   -.084*         2062
   back to visit at least a couple of                             (.021)                                (.022)
   times a year [SR]
B. Access to transportation
Takes less than 15 minutes to get to          .921                 .015          2493                   -.003          2042
   nearest bus or train stop [SR]                                 (.012)                                (.015)
Someone in household has a car, van or        .381                 .011          2529                    .026          2070
   truck that runs [SR]                                           (.020)                                (.022)
Has a valid driver’s license [SR]             .454                 .016          2532                   -.002          2072
                                                                  (.020)                                (.023)
C. Relative income
Household income as fraction of median           .811                -.177*          2220                    -.174*         1817
    household income for the tract [SR]                              (.033)                                  (.034)
Notes. ADDR = address history from tracking file and linked to Census data. SR = self-report. CM = control mean. Intent-
to-treat (ITT) from equation (1), using covariates in Table C1 and weights described in the text. Relative income is
household income from 2001 divided by the median household income for the Census tract for the year 1999 in 2001 dollars.
* = statistically significant at the 5 percent level. Standard errors, adjusted for heteroscedasticity, are in parentheses.




                                                             A34
           Table F13. Baseline Characteristics of Adult Survey Respondents and the Full Adult Sample
                                               Controls                    Experimental                     Section 8
                                         Respon-       Full            Respon-        Full            Respon-        Full
               Variable                   dents       Sample            dents        Sample            dents        Sample
                                            (i)         (ii)             (iii)        (iv)              (v)           (vi)
 Demographics
 Age in years (as of December 2001)       39.6         39.6               39.7         39.9              40.1        40.0
 Male                                      .02           .02              .01          .02*              .02          .02
 Baltimore site                            .15           .15              .15          .15               .15          .15
 Boston site                               .21           .23              .22          .23               .22          .23
 Chicago site                              .22           .21              .23          .21*              .23          .21*
 Los Angeles site                          .16           .16              .16          .16               .15          .16
 New York site                             .25           .25              .25          .25               .25          .25
 African-American                          .66           .66              .67          .64*              .66          .64*
 Other race                                .27           .27              .26          .28*              .26          .27
 Hispanic ethnicity, any race              .29           .30              .29          .30*              .30          .31
 Never married                             .62           .63              .62          .62               .62          .62
 Teen parent                               .24           .25              .25          .25               .26          .26
 Economic and education
 Working                                   .25           .25              .29          .27               .25          .25
 On AFDC                                   .75           .74              .74          .74               .75          .75
 In school                                 .16           .16              .16          .16               .16          .17
 High school diploma                       .38           .38              .41          .42               .41          .40
 General equivalency diploma               .21           .22              .18          .18               .19          .20
 Household
 Had car                                   .15           .15              .17          .18               .16          .17
 Household member with a disability        .16           .16              .16          .16               .17          .15
 Household member victimized by
     crime during past 6 months            .41           .41              .42          .43               .43          .42
 No teen children                          .62           .63              .59          .60               .61          .61
 Household of size 2                       .20           .20              .23          .22               .21          .21
 Household of size 3                       .32           .32              .30          .30               .31          .30
 Household of size 4                       .22           .22              .23          .23               .23          .23
 Neighborhood and housing
 Lived in neighborhood 5+ years            .62           .61              .61          .60*              .63          .62
 Moved > 3 times in past 5 years           .11           .11              .08          .09               .09          .09
 Very dissatisfied with neighborhood       .46           .47              .46          .47               .47          .47
 Streets very unsafe at night              .49           .50              .48          .49               .49          .50
 Chats with neighbors 1+ / week            .55           .54              .52          .52               .50          .50
 Very likely to tell neighbor if saw
     their child getting into trouble      .56           .57              .53          .55*              .55          .54
 No family living in neighborhood          .65           .65              .65          .65               .62          .63
 No friends living in neighborhood         .41           .41              .40          .41               .38          .39
 Very sure would find an apartment
     in another part of city               .45           .45              .45          .46               .48          .49
 To get away from gangs or drugs
     was primary or secondary
     reason for moving                     .78           .78              .77          .77               .75          .76
 Better schools was primary or
     secondary reason for moving           .48           .47              .47          .47               .52          .51
 Had applied for S8 voucher before         .45           .44              .41          .42               .39          .39
 N                                        1080         1310               1453        1729               993         1209
Notes: S8 = Section 8. Table consists of the covariates included in the regression models; age is included in the model as a
sixth order Legendre polynomial rather than in years. * = p-value < .05 on difference between respondents and full sample.


                                                            A35
               Table F14. Effects on Change in Employment within Zip Code Between 1994 and 2001
                                                                    Experimental versus                       Section 8 versus
                                                                          Control                                 Control
                                                CM                   ITT           N                         ITT            N
                                                (i)                  (ii)         (iii)                      (iv)          (v)
Residence 1 year after RA
Change from 1994 to 1995 in log of             -.008                .010*           2462                    .013*          2028
   employment [ADDR]                                                (.003)                                  (.003)
Change from 1994 to 1996 in log of             -.023                 .005           2462                    -.000          2028
   employment [ADDR]                                                (.005)                                  (.006)
Change from 1994 to 1997 in log of             -.028                .015*           2462                    -.002          2028
   employment [ADDR]                                                (.007)                                  (.007)
Change from 1994 to 1998 in log of             -.011                 .007           2462                     -.006         2028
   employment [ADDR]                                                (.007)                                  (.008)
Change from 1994 to 1999 in log of              .015                 .005           2462                     -.012         2028
   employment [ADDR]                                                (.008)                                  (.009)
Change from 1994 to 2000 in log of              .056                 .001           2462                    -.029*         2028
   employment [ADDR]                                                (.009)                                  (.010)
Change from 1994 to 2001 in log of              .065                 .001           2462                    -.032*         2028
   employment [ADDR]                                                (.009)                                  (.010)
Residence in 2002
Change from 1994 to 1995 in log of              .005                 .004           2453                    .012*          2021
   employment [ADDR]                                                (.003)                                  (.005)
Change from 1994 to 1996 in log of             -.009                 -.006          2453                      .005         2021
   employment [ADDR]                                                (.007)                                  (.007)
Change from 1994 to 1997 in log of             -.014                 .004           2453                      .005         2021
   employment [ADDR]                                                (.008)                                  (.009)
Change from 1994 to 1998 in log of              .001                 .003           2453                     .001          2021
   employment [ADDR]                                                (.009)                                  (.009)
Change from 1994 to 1999 in log of              .024                 .002           2453                     -.003         2021
   employment [ADDR]                                                (.010)                                  (.010)
Change from 1994 to 2000 in log of              .050                 .002           2453                    -.007          2021
   employment [ADDR]                                                (.010)                                  (.011)
Change from 1994 to 2001 in log of              .050                 -.001          2453                    -.006          2021
   employment [ADDR]                                                (.011)                                  (.011)
Notes. RA = randomization. ADDR = address history from tracking file linked to zip code-level employment data.
Employment data is from the U.S. Census Bureau’s Zip Code Business Patterns for 1994 through 2001. Total employment
represents the sum of full- and part-time employees on the payroll of establishments in the zip code. For zip codes with
suppressed employment data, employment was imputed as the midpoint of the relevant range indicated by the data
suppression flag. Change in employment is defined as the log of employment in the later year minus the log of employment
in 1994. CM = control mean. Intent-to-treat (ITT) from equation (1), using covariates in Table C1 and weights described in
the text. * = statistically significant at the 5 percent level. Standard errors, adjusted for heteroscedasticity, are in parentheses.




                                                               A36
G. Additional results for youth

                                  Table G1. List of Tables for Youth Results
Table                                                           Title

G2      Effects for Youth Outcomes

G3      Effects for Neighborhood and Victimization Mediators

G4      Effects for Housing, Parenting, and School Mediators

G5      Effects for Peer and Adult Role Model Mediators

G6      Effects for Educational Mediators

G7      Effects for Health Mediators

G8      Effects for Residential Mobility




                                                          A37
                                     Table G2. Intent-To-Treat Effects for Youth Outcomes
                                                   Female                          Male                    Male - Female
Outcome                                   CM       E-C        S-C        CM       E-C        S-C           E-C       S-C
                                          (1)      (2)        (3)        (4)      (5)        (6)           (7)       (8)
A. Physical health
Overall health fair/poor [SR]             .101     .008      -.017       .045     .033       .027          .025      .044
                                                  (.029)     (.029)              (.019)     (.025)        (.035)    (.038)
Asthma attack in past year [SR]           .201     .002      -.048       .122     .016       .039          .014      .088
                                                  (.037)     (.038)              (.032)     (.039)        (.049)    (.056)
Non-sport injury in past year [SR]        .115     -.015     -.028       .062    .087*      .080*         .102*     .108*
                                                  (.025)     (.026)              (.026)     (.028)        (.036)    (.039)
Body Mass Index > 95th percentile         .173     -.009     -.042       .161     .026      -.012          .036      .030
  [SR]                                            (.034)     (.037)              (.037)     (.041)        (.049)    (.055)
B. Mental health
Psychological distress -- K6 scale        .268    -.289*     -.145       -.162    .095       .005         .385*      .150
  z-score [SR]                                    (.094)    (.106)               (.085)     (.100)        (.125)    (.143)
Ever had serious depression               .137     -.055     -.061       .031     .013       -.005         .068      .056
  symptoms [SR]                                   (.030)    (.032)               (.022)     (.024)        (.037)    (.040)
Ever had generalized anxiety              .121    -.069*    -.075*       .055     -.015     -.049*         .054      .026
  symptoms [SR]                                   (.027)    (.029)               (.024)     (.024)        (.036)    (.038)
C. Education
Graduated HS or still in school           .772     .064       .049       .759     -.044     -.040        -.108*     -.090
  [PRY]                                           (.036)     (.037)              (.037)     (.041)       (.051)     (.055)
In school or working [SR]                 .771     .040      -.019       .758     .018      -.007         -.022      .012
                                                  (.035)     (.037)              (.035)     (.040)       (.050)     (.054)
WJ-R reading z-score [WJR]                .059     .093       .046       -.110   -.087       .048         -.180      .002
                                                  (.084)     (.092)              (.096)     (.111)       (.125)     (.142)
WJ-R math z-score [WJR]                   .005     .119       .071       -.042    -.095      .019         -.214      -.052
                                                  (.095)     (.099)              (.097)     (.107)       (.132)     (.145)
D. Risky behavior
Used marijuana in past 30 days            .131    -.065*    -.072*       .118     .051       .055         .115*     .127*
  [SR]                                            (.029)    (.032)               (.030)     (.035)        (.041)    (.047)
Smoked cigarettes in past 30 days         .191     -.054     -.055       .125    .103*      .151*         .157*     .206*
  [SR]                                            (.033)    (.036)               (.032)     (.037)        (.046)    (.052)
Had alcohol in past 30 days [SR]          .206     -.060    -.091*       .140     .063       .061         .122*     .151*
                                                  (.037)    (.038)               (.033)     (.037)        (.049)    (.052)
Ever pregnant or gotten someone           .267     -.011      .036       .119     .028       .032          .039     -.004
  pregnant [SR]                                   (.040)     (.040)              (.031)     (.035)        (.051)    (.052)

Notes. CM: Control mean. E-C: experimental - control difference. S-C: Section 8 - control difference. SR: Self-report.
PRY: Parental report about youth. WJR: Woodcock Johnson Revised Assessment. Differences regression-adjusted, with
standard errors clustered by household. * indicates p-value <.05. Surveys were completed in experimental, Section 8, and
control groups with 749, 510, and 548 respondents respectively ages 15-20 on 12/31/2001.




                                                            A38
                          Table G3. Intent-To-Treat Effects for Neighborhood and Victimization Mediators
                                                    Female                          Male                    Male - Female
Outcome                                    CM       E-C       S-C         CM       E-C        S-C          E-C       S-C
                                           (1)      (2)       (3)         (4)      (5)        (6)          (7)       (8)
A. General Neighborhood
Youth lives in baseline                    .455    -.143*    -.148*       .485    -.101*    -.120*          .042     .028
 neighborhood [SR]                                 (.043)    (.046)               (.045)    (.048)         (.059)   (.064)
Poverty rate in current                    .402    -.086*    -.071*       .396    -.088*    -.064*         -.002     .008
  neighborhood [ADDRESS]                           (.017)    (.016)               (.019)    (.018)         (.025)   (.024)
Pct minority in neighborhood               .877     -.033     .017        .869     -.035     -.041         -.001    -.058*
  [ADDRESS]                                        (.020)    (.017)               (.021)     (.022)        (.028)   (.027)
Pct youth in neighbrhood not in            .120     -.014    -.014        .126     -.016     -.015         -.003    -.001
  school or work [ADDRESS]                         (.008)    (.008)               (.010)     (.011)        (.012)   (.013)
Pct adults in pro/mgmt occupations         .206    .042*      .016        .224     .020       .002         -.022    -.014
  [ADDRESS]                                        (.010)    (.009)               (.011)     (.010)        (.014)   (.013)
Not satisfied with neighborhood            .555    -.177*    -.203*       .511     -.100     -.059          .078     .143
 [PR]                                              (.051)    (.054)               (.051)     (.054)        (.073)   (.078)
Feels unsafe in neighborhood at            .437    -.170*    -.086        .509    -.178*    -.155*         -.008    -.069
  night [PR]                                       (.047)    (.054)               (.049)    (.052)         (.070)   (.076)
Fraction of 4 types of                     .107     -.018    -.006        .134     -.024      .005         -.006     .011
  discrimination in ‘hood [SR]                     (.019)    (.019)               (.019)     (.025)        (.027)   (.030)
Fraction of 6 problems with                .565    -.164*    -.128*       .509    -.102*     -.064          .062     .064
  neighborhood [PR]                                (.037)    (.041)               (.039)     (.037)        (.054)   (.056)
Saw drugs in neighborhood                  .437    -.104*    -.122*       .441     -.042     -.026          .062     .095
  1+/week in past 30 days [SR]                     (.047)    (.051)               (.047)     (.056)        (.066)   (.075)
Heard gunshots in 'hood 1+/week            .118     -.040    -.053        .155     -.034    -.075*          .006    -.022
 in past 30 days [SR]                              (.031)    (.028)               (.031)    (.032)         (.043)   (.043)
B. Victimization
Household member was crime                 .275     -.082    -.096*       .247     -.014     -.058          .068     .038
 victim past 6 mths [PR]                           (.044)    (.043)               (.044)     (.046)        (.062)   (.063)
Saw someone shot or stabbed in             .150     -.043    -.047        .209     -.016     -.030          .027     .017
  past 12 mths [SR]                                (.036)    (.034)               (.039)     (.046)        (.053)   (.057)
Was “jumped” in past 12 months             .085     -.006     .005        .181     .010      -.003          .015    -.008
 [SR]                                              (.029)    (.028)               (.038)     (.041)        (.047)   (.049)

Notes. CM: Control mean. E-C: experimental - control difference. S-C: Section 8 - control difference. ADDRESS: Address
history from tracking file, linked to Census. SR: Self-report. PRY: Parental report about youth. PR: Parental report about
household. Differences regression-adjusted, with standard errors clustered by household. * indicates p-value <.05. For PR
measures, analysis was conducted at household level using household average right-hand side variables. Surveys were
completed in experimental, Section 8, and control groups with 749, 510, and 548 respondents respectively ages 15-20 on
12/31/2001. Types of discrimination were: at school or work, neighborhood recreation program, shopping or restaurant, with
police. Problems with neighborhood were: litter, graffiti, public drinking, abandoned buildings, people hanging out, police
not coming. Types of criminal victimization were: purse or wallet snatched, threatened with weapon, beaten or assaulted,
break-in to home, stabbed or shot.




                                                             A39
                      Table G4. Intent-To-Treat Effects for Housing, Parenting, and School Mediators
                                                  Female                            Male                    Male - Female
Outcome                                  CM       E-C        S-C         CM        E-C        S-C          E-C         S-C
                                         (1)      (2)        (3)         (4)       (5)        (6)          (7)         (8)
A. Housing
Overall housing condition is            .477      -.071      -.020       .507      -.055      -.098        .016       -.078
  fair/poor [PR]                                 (.049)     (.054)                (.050)     (.053)       (.071)     (.076)
Fraction of 7 problems with home        .334      -.048      -.035       .333      -.052      -.038       -.004      -.003
  [PR]                                           (.025)     (.029)                (.028)     (.029)       (.038)     (.042)
Fraction of 7 problems with home        .216     -.055*     -.013        .222      -.022     -.030         .033      -.017
  interior [OBS]                                 (.022)     (.026)                (.025)     (.030)       (.035)     (.040)
Fraction of 7 problems with home        .218     -.062*     -.039        .227      -.037     -.034         .024       .006
  exterior [OBS]                                 (.024)     (.029)                (.026)     (.029)       (.037)     (.039)
B. Parenting Practices
Mother /primary caregiver is very       .670      .035       .024        .842      -.056     -.054        -.091      -.078
  supportive [SR]                                (.045)     (.049)                (.034)     (.039)       (.056)     (.063)
Parent knows all about friends &        .258      .012      -.050        .173      -.044     -.034        -.056       .016
  whereabouts [SR]                               (.039)     (.041)                (.036)     (.041)       (.054)     (.059)
No adult present after school [SR]      .242      .046      -.010        .301      .068       .061         .022       .071
                                                 (.050)     (.055)                (.051)     (.059)       (.070)     (.079)
Fraction days/week family eats          .571      .042       .034        .596      -.021      .016         -.063      -.019
  together [PR]                                  (.039)     (.040)                (.040)     (.042)       (.058)     (.059)
Fraction of 4 types of parental         .370      .022       .023        .418      -.034      -.010        -.056      -.033
  contact w/schl [PR]                            (.031)     (.033)                (.033)     (.033)       (.046)     (.047)
C. School Environment
% free lunch [ADMIN]                    .516     -.053*      .000        .524    -.079*      -.033        -.026      -.033
                                                 (.022)     (.022)               (.024)      (.026)       (.032)     (.033)
% limited English proficient            .155     -.030*     -.004        .163    -.033*     -.032*        -.003      -.028
 [ADMIN]                                         (.014)     (.016)               (.014)     (.015)        (.019)     (.021)
% white [ADMIN]                         .114     .061*       .012        .112    .065*       .067*         .004       .055
                                                 (.020)     (.020)               (.021)     (.026)        (.029)     (.033)
Pupil-teacher ratio [ADMIN]             18.6      .533      -.252        17.4    1.402*       .607         .868       .859
                                                 (.358)     (.459)               (.414)      (.441)       (.544)     (.633)
Percentile rank on state exam           .240      .040       -.013       .188     .063*       .037         .023       .050
  [ADMIN]                                        (.024)     (.024)                (.026)     (.027)       (.034)     (.035)
Fraction of 5 positive school           .621      -.001      .039        .599      .028      -.008         .029      -.047
  climate items [SR]                             (.033)     (.034)                (.031)     (.037)       (.045)     (.049)

Notes. CM: Control mean. E-C: experimental - control difference. S-C: Section 8 - control difference. ADMIN: State data
on schools. OBS: interviewer observation of housing unit. SR: Self-report. PRY: Parental report about youth. PR: Parental
report about household. Differences regression-adjusted, with standard errors clustered by household. * indicates p-value
<.05. For PR measures, analysis was conducted at household level using household average right-hand side variables.
Surveys were completed in experimental, Section 8, and control groups with 749, 510, and 548 respondents respectively ages
15-20 on 12/31/2001. Problems with home were: peeling paint, plumbing, rats or mice, cockroaches, broken locks, broken
windows, heat. Interviewer observations of problems with home interior were: cracks in walls, peeling paint, mold, cigarette
smoke, noisy inside, noisy outside, cluttered. Interviewer observations of problems with home exterior were: condition of
unit, condition of other units on block, metal bars on unit, metal bars on other units, condition of block, broken windows,
junk on block. Items parental knows everything about were: who friends are, who with when not home.




                                                           A40
                        Table G5. Intent-To-Treat Effects for Peer and Adult Role Model Mediators
                                                  Female                            Male                    Male - Female
Outcome                                  CM       E-C        S-C          CM       E-C        S-C           E-C        S-C
                                         (1)      (2)        (3)          (4)      (5)        (6)           (7)        (8)
A. Peers
Has at least one close friend [PRY]      .890     .036      -.013        .917      .008       .051         -.028       .064
                                                 (.025)     (.034)                (.027)     (.029)        (.036)     (.044)
Has 5 or more friends [SR]               .382     .050      -.004        .530      .024       .067         -.026       .071
                                                 (.044)     (.046)                (.047)     (.051)        (.064)     (.070)
Friends involved in school               .615     .071       .050        .710      -.013      .010         -.083      -.040
  activities [SR]                                (.045)     (.048)                (.042)     (.049)        (.062)     (.071)
Has friends who use drugs [SR]           .295     .002      -.001        .327     .127*      .161*         .125*      .161*
                                                 (.043)     (.044)                (.046)     (.051)        (.062)     (.067)
Has friends who carry weapons            .098     .009       .031        .157      .037       -.033         .028       -.064
  [SR]                                           (.026)     (.030)                (.039)     (.036)        (.045)     (.046)
Has relatives or friends who             .154     .005       -.029       .187      -.063      -.055         -.068      -.027
  belong to a gang [SR]                          (.035)     (.031)                (.032)     (.037)        (.046)     (.047)
Friends from baseline visit new          .178     -.018      -.007       .164      -.022      -.047        -.004      -.040
  neighborhood [SR]                              (.036)     (.041)                (.035)     (.036)        (.050)     (.055)
Visits baseline ‘hood but doesn't        .234     -.026     -.012        .205      .034       .022          .061       .034
  live there [SR]                                (.037)     (.043)                (.040)     (.044)        (.054)     (.061)
B. Adult Role Models
Likely neighbors intervene vs.           .497    .166*       .105        .575      .052       -.026        -.114       -.131
  graffiti [PR]                                  (.049)     (.057)                (.050)     (.056)       (.071)      (.080)
Likely neighbors intervene if kids       .343     .099       .038        .370      .086       .067         -.013       .029
  skipping school [PR]                           (.053)     (.058)                (.050)     (.056)       (.075)      (.083)
Structured activity after school         .275     .050       .004        .248      .064       .051         .015        .047
  [SR]                                           (.043)     (.042)                (.041)     (.047)       (.060)      (.064)
Attended 1+ church youth                 .380     .006       -.050       .313      -.020      .012         -.025       .062
  activities per month [SR]                      (.048)     (.048)                (.041)     (.045)       (.062)      (.065)
Saw father at least once a week in       .253     .068       .078        .365      -.043      -.017        -.111       -.095
  past 12 months [SR]                            (.040)     (.046)                (.044)     (.047)       (.057)      (.065)
Father has been very supportive          .235     .026       -.000       .271      .033       -.006        .007        -.006
  [SR]                                           (.039)     (.043)                (.041)     (.043)       (.055)      (.060)
Comfortable talking about                .305    .133*       .061        .397      -.005     -.009        -.138*      -.069
  problems w/3+ adults [SR]                      (.042)     (.048)                (.046)     (.051)       (.062)      (.070)
Has 4+ adults who care and will          .448     .070       .028        .498      .003      -.042         -.067      -.070
  help if trouble [SR]                           (.047)     (.047)                (.046)     (.053)       (.066)      (.072)

Notes. CM: Control mean. E-C: experimental - control difference. S-C: Section 8 - control difference. SR: Self-report.
PRY: Parental report about youth. PR: Parental report about household. Differences regression-adjusted, with standard
errors clustered by household. * indicates p-value <.05. For PR measures, analysis was conducted at household level using
household average right-hand side variables. Surveys were completed in experimental, Section 8, and control groups with
749, 510, and 548 respondents respectively ages 15-20 on 12/31/2001. No adult present was: no adult at either 3:45, 5:30, or
7:30 on selected day of week. Parental contact with school (for any child in household) was: went to general school meeting,
went to a school event, volunteered at school, volunteered for team or club.




                                                           A41
                                 Table G6. Intent-To-Treat Effects for Educational Mediators
                                                    Female                             Male                    Male - Female
Outcome                                   CM        E-C        S-C          CM       E-C         S-C           E-C        S-C
                                          (1)       (2)        (3)          (4)      (5)         (6)           (7)        (8)
A. School Engagement
Always pays attention in class            .490     .118*      -.002         .484     -.013       .066          -.131      .068
  [SR]                                             (.056)     (.062)                (.056)      (.062)        (.078)     (.087)
Works hard in school [SR]                 .508      .058       .028         .449     -.101      -.013         -.158*     -.040
                                                   (.058)     (.061)                (.056)      (.068)        (.079)     (.091)
B grades or higher last year [SR]         .415      -.008     -.018         .293     -.055     -.105*         -.047      -.088
                                                   (.047)     (.050)                (.042)     (.044)         (.062)     (.067)
Always finishes homework [SR]             .505      .027      -.003         .406     -.029      -.078         -.057      -.074
                                                   (.060)     (.066)                (.055)      (.062)        (.082)     (.091)
At least 5 hours/week of                  .488      .052       .045         .354     .056        .110          .005       .065
  homework [SR]                                    (.057)     (.063)                (.053)      (.061)        (.078)     (.087)
At least 5 hours/week of reading          .377      -.006     -.026         .250     .023        .028          .030       .054
  [SR]                                             (.045)     (.051)                (.042)      (.049)        (.060)     (.068)
B. Educational Track
Ever took SAT, ACT, or AP                 .426      -.047      .037         .358     -.037       .045          .010       .009
  exams [SR]                                       (.046)     (.052)                (.048)      (.053)        (.067)     (.074)
Ever took algebra or higher math          .833      .012      -.005         .827    -.085*      -.055         -.097      -.050
  [SR]                                             (.033)     (.039)                (.037)      (.035)        (.050)     (.053)
Gifted class in past 2 years [PRY]        .068      .057       .010         .147     -.040      -.039         -.097      -.049
                                                   (.031)     (.034)                (.039)      (.037)        (.050)     (.051)
Special education in past 2 years         .154      .037      -.002         .324     .014       -.038         -.023      -.035
  [PRY]                                            (.038)     (.038)                (.050)      (.052)        (.063)     (.065)
C. Educational Problems
Ever repeated a grade [PRY]               .200     .096*       .009         .326     -.028      -.049         -.124*     -.058
                                                   (.036)     (.037)                (.041)      (.042)        (.054)     (.056)
Late for school once a month or           .679      -.020      .033         .616     .030        .060          .050       .027
  more [SR]                                        (.042)     (.048)                (.046)      (.051)        (.061)     (.070)
Absent from school 5% or more of          .426      -.076     -.040         .389     -.002       .005          .074       .045
  the school year [SR]                             (.047)     (.052)                (.045)      (.052)        (.065)     (.073)
School requested meet about prob          .184      -.034      -.012        .337     .044        .061          .078       .072
  past 2 yrs [PRY]                                 (.039)     (.046)                (.050)      (.058)        (.064)     (.073)
Was suspended/expelled from               .117      .011       .042         .301     -.033      -.080         -.044      -.122
  school past 2 yrs [PRY]                          (.035)     (.042)                (.050)      (.056)        (.060)     (.070)
D. Future Expectations
Believes chances high will                .543      .073       .034         .449     -.044      -.053         -.117      -.088
  complete college [SR]                            (.046)     (.049)                (.044)      (.048)        (.064)     (.069)
Believes chances high will find           .742      .055       .007         .652     -.003       .039         -.059       .032
  good job as adult [SR]                           (.037)     (.044)                (.043)      (.047)        (.056)     (.065)

Notes. CM: Control mean. E-C: experimental - control difference. S-C: Section 8 - control difference. SR: Self-report.
PRY: Parental report about youth. Differences regression-adjusted, with standard errors clustered by household. * indicates
p-value <.05. Surveys were completed in experimental, Section 8, and control groups with 749, 510, and 548 respondents
respectively ages 15-20 on 12/31/2001. Some items not asked for youth ages 19-20, resulting in smaller sample sizes: no
adult present after school, fraction of school climate items, pays attention, works hard, finishes homework, 5+ hours
homework, gifted class, special education, school requested meeting, suspended/expelled. School climate was: teachers
interested in students, students disruptive, cheating on tests, discipline fair, felt safe. Structured activity was: at school,
church or community center -- participating in a sport, club, tutoring, or other organized activity.



                                                             A42
                                      Table G7. Intent-To-Treat Effects for Health Mediators
                                                     Female                           Male                 Male - Female
Outcome                                     CM       E-C        S-C         CM       E-C        S-C        E-C       S-C
                                            (1)      (2)        (3)         (4)      (5)        (6)        (7)       (8)
A. Healthy environment
Fraction of past 7 days did aerobic        .353      .055       .022       .555      .029       .020      -.027     -.003
  exercise [SR]                                     (.032)     (.040)               (.033)     (.036)     (.045)    (.053)
Fraction of past week moderate             .412      .045      -.023       .476      .067       .045       .023      .068
  activity [SR]                                     (.033)     (.040)               (.034)     (.037)     (.047)    (.054)
Participates in sport after school         .032     .061*       .006       .138      .014       .033      -.047      .027
  [SR]                                              (.022)     (.017)               (.030)     (.038)     (.037)    (.042)
Fraction of past 7 days some               .574      .028       -.036      .568      .010       .036       -.019     .072
  fruits/vegetables [SR]                            (.032)     (.035)               (.030)     (.032)     (.044)    (.048)
Fraction of 6 asthma triggers [PR]         .187      .011       .021       .212      .003       .014       -.007     -.007
                                                    (.023)     (.024)               (.021)     (.023)     (.029)    (.032)
B. Access to care
Youth has health insurance [PRY]           .873      -.011      .003       .809     .081*       .047      .092*      .044
                                                    (.029)     (.034)               (.034)     (.039)     (.044)    (.049)
Talked to a doctor about health in         .736      .052      -.035       .728      -.058     -.142*     -.110     -.108
  past 6 mths [PRY]                                 (.046)     (.059)               (.056)     (.067)     (.073)    (.089)
C. Adult mental health
Adult distress K6 z-score [PR]             .170     -.275*     -.193        -.058    .160       .096      .436*      .289
                                                    (.112)     (.124)               (.103)     (.110)     (.152)    (.169)
Adult probability of depression            .187      -.039     -.066       .138      .003       .038      .043       .104*
 [PR]                                               (.034)     (.036)               (.030)     (.037)    (.047)     (.052)
Adult fraction worried, tense or           .424      -.071     -.073       .453      -.053     -.024      .018        .049
 anxious [PR]                                       (.050)     (.055)               (.051)     (.056)    (.073)     (.079)
Adult fraction calm and peaceful           .375     .140*      .142*       .508      -.062     -.113     -.202*     -.256*
 [PR]                                               (.049)     (.053)               (.050)     (.058)    (.071)     (.079)
Adult fraction sleeping 7-8                .362     .118*       .078       .409      .089       .058      -.028      -.020
 hours/night [PR]                                   (.052)     (.056)               (.049)     (.057)    (.074)     (.081)

Notes. CM: Control mean. E-C: experimental - control difference. S-C: Section 8 - control difference. SR: Self-report.
PRY: Parental report about youth. PR: Parental report about household. Differences regression-adjusted, with standard
errors clustered by household. * indicates p-value <.05. For PR measures, analysis was conducted at household level using
household average right-hand side variables. Surveys were completed in experimental, Section 8, and control groups with
749, 510, and 548 respondents respectively ages 15-20 on 12/31/2001. Asthma triggers were: rats or mice, cockroaches, wall-
to-wall carpet, pets with fur, cigarette smoke, mold.




                                                              A43
                                 Table G8. Intent-To-Treat Effects for Residential Mobility
                                                   Female                            Male                     Male - Female
Outcome                                  CM        E-C        S-C         CM        E-C        S-C           E-C        S-C
                                          (1)       (2)        (3)         (4)       (5)        (6)           (7)        (8)
  Program move [ADDRESS]                 .000     .471*      .556*        .000     .415*      .568*         -.056       .012
                                                  (.034)     (.039)                (.034)     (.039)        (.047)     (.056)
  One or more moves [ADDRESS]            .643     .143*      .203*        .687     .084*      .092*         -.059      -.112*
                                                  (.043)     (.039)                (.036)     (.038)        (.055)     (.052)
  One or more moves [PR]                 .623      .075      .093*        .654      .012      -.009         -.063      -.103
                                                  (.045)     (.046)                (.047)     (.046)        (.066)     (.065)
  Two or more moves                      .298     .125*      .141*        .301      .079      .159*         -.046       .017
[ADDRESS]                                         (.043)     (.047)                (.042)     (.049)        (.058)     (.066)
  Two or more moves [PR]                 .266      .035       .094        .301      -.023      .063         -.059      -.031
                                                  (.045)     (.050)                (.043)     (.049)        (.065)     (.072)
  Number of moves [ADDRESS]              1.04     .374*      .442*        1.14     .208*      .375*         -.166      -.067
                                                  (.091)     (.094)                (.089)     (.105)        (.124)     (.138)
  Number of moves [PR]                   1.11      .057       .213        1.25     -.101      -.022         -.158      -.234
                                                  (.114)     (.123)                (.120)     (.127)        (.175)     (.173)

Notes to Tables A3-A8. CM: Control mean. E-C: experimental - control difference. S-C: Section 8 - control difference.
PR: parental report about household. ADDRESS: Address history from tracking file, linked to Census. ADMIN:
Administrative data from school reported to attend or last attended. Differences regression-adjusted, using equation (1) with
standard errors clustered by household. * indicates p-value <.05. For PR measures, analysis was conducted at household
level using household average right-hand side variables. Sample is ages 15-20 as of 12/31/01.




                                                            A44
