NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE ECONOMICS OF FRAUDULENT ACCOUNTING
Simi Kedia
Thomas Philippon
Working Paper 11573
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11573
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2005

We are grateful to Franklin Allen, Chris Hennessy and Yishay Yafeh for their discussions, and to Darren
Roulstone for his detailled comments. We also thank Natasha Burns, Greg Mankiw and the seminar
participants at NYU, USC, UCLA, Chicago GSB, and NBER CF and EFG. The views expressed herein are
those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by Simi Kedia and Thomas Philippon. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

The Economics of Fraudulent Accounting
Simi Kedia and Thomas Philippon
NBER Working Paper No. 11573
August 2005, Revised February 2006
JEL No. E0, G3
ABSTRACT

We argue that earnings management and fraudulent accounting have important economic
consequences. In a model where the costs of earnings management are endogenous, we show that
in equilibrium, bad managers hire and invest too much in order to pool with the good managers. This
behavior distorts the allocation of economic resources among firms. We test the predictions of the
model using new historical and firm-level data. First, we show that periods of high stock market
valuations are systematically followed by large increases in reported frauds. We then show that
during periods of suspicious accounting, firms hire and invest excessively, while insiders exercise
options and sell stocks. When the misreporting is detected, firms shed labor and capital and
productivity improves. In the aggregate, our model seems able to account for periods of jobless and
investment-less growth.

Simi Kedia
Department of Finance and Economics
Rutgers Business School
111 Washington Street
Newark, NJ 07102
skedia@rbsmail.rutgers.edu
Thomas Philippon
New York University
Stern School of Business
Department of Finance
44 W 4th Street, Suite 9-190
New York, NY 10012-1126
and NBER
tphilipp@stern.nyu.edu

Introduction
Fraudulent accounting by management is costly for shareholders. The market adjusted
return over the three-days surrounding the announcement of a restatement to financial
statements is associated with an average return of —10% (see GAO (2002)). Though the
losses to shareholders are large and apparent, the impact of fraudulent accounting on the
wider economy is not well understood. It is not known, for instance, whether earnings
management lowers economic eﬃciency, or whether it simply redistributes income from
shareholders to insiders. In this paper, we examine the economic consequences of fraudulent
accounting, with a particular focus on the dynamics of employment and investment.
The dramatic case of Enron’s restatement illustrates our point. On November 8, 2001,
Enron announced that it would restate its earnings for the period 1997 through 2001. This
restatement recorded a $1.2 billion reduction to shareholders equity. The stock price of
Enron declined from more than $30 to less than $1 between October 16, 2001 and November
28, 2001. The period of misreporting was characterized by substantial stock sales by Enron
insiders (see Figure 1). Less well known, but equally important, is the fact that during
this same period Enron grew faster than any other firm in its industry. The book value of
Enron’s assets nearly tripled, from $23.5 billion in 1997 to $65.5 billion in 2000. Tobin’s
Q increased from 1.32 to 1.8. At its peak, Enron employed more than 20,000 employees
worldwide. After its restatement Enron shrank rapidly. Today, about 500 employees remain
and Enron’s creditors expect to receive about one-fifth of the estimated $63 billion they are
owed.
In this paper, we report that Enron is a typical — if somewhat extreme — example of
fraudulent accounting in periods of high financial valuations. We also show that the joint
dynamics of misreporting, insiders’ trades, employment and investment can be explained
by a simple model of multi-dimensional signalling.
We study the problem of a manager whose productivity is private information, and
who makes observable hiring and investment decisions. Bad managers who want to hide
their poor quality must not only manage their earnings, but also hire and invest like good
managers. It is not suﬃcient to merely misreport performance. In equilibrium, the bad
managers hire and invest excessively, distorting the allocation of resources among firms.

2

Prior and concurrent theoretical work has not emphasized these implications.1 In our
model, real costs of manipulation arise endogenously because earnings management distorts
the hiring and investment decisions of the firms.
Our main contribution is then to test the predictions of the model using two newly
collected data sets. The first prediction is that the incidence of fraudulent accounting will
be higher when price-earnings ratios are high.2 We use historical data on actions by the
Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), from 1936 to 2003, to capture the incidence
of fraudulent accounting. We find that periods with high price-earnings ratios are associated with significant increases in the number of civil injunctive actions and administrative
proceedings by the SEC.
Testing the second set of predictions requires firm level data, and we use a sample
of firms that have restated their earnings between January 1997 and June 2002. In the
model, earnings management boosts stock prices, allowing managers to make profitable
trades, and managers with larger stock and option holdings are more likely to engage in
earnings management. Recently, Beneish and Vargus (2002), Bergstresser and Philippon
(2002), Burns and Kedia (2004), Bartov and Mohanram (2004) and Roulstone (2005) have
confirmed these predictions. Similarly, our data shows that, during the misreported periods,
CEOs exercise a significantly higher fraction of their exercisable options than the CEOs of
comparable firms.
We then focus on the dynamics of employment and investment. We find that, during the
periods where they misreport, firms hire and invest more than comparable firms matched
on age, industry and initial size. Hiring and investment are significantly lower after the
restated period. There is no counter-factual experiment that would allow us to learn what
would have happened if these companies had not been able to misreport their earnings, but
our theory suggests that the firms managed their earnings during this period in order to
produce the profit numbers consistent with their rapid growth. Our theory also explains
why these firms shrank quickly after the restatements were announced.
Other explanations cannot account for the joint dynamics of firm value, hiring, invest1
See Narayanan (1985), Stein (1989), Guttman, Kadan, and Kandel (2004), Goldman and Slezak (2003),
Povel, Singh, and Winton (2004), Bolton, Scheinkman, and Xiong (2003), Friebel and Guriev (2005).
2
This prediction depends on which parameter drives the variation of P/E. We will argue that the prediction is likely to hold in historical time series, and we discuss why it may not hold in a cross section of
countries or firms.

3

ment, and insider trading. First, the measured relative productivity growth of restating
firms stays constant before, during and after the restated period. This suggests that restatements are not simply driven by unobserved negative technology shocks. Second, the
pattern of insider exercises suggests that managerial optimism does not explain the observed dynamics of investment and employment. Third, Desai, Hogan, and Wilkins (2005)
and Karpoﬀ, Lee, and Martin (2005) have recently shown that earnings management is
costly for managers, who would not have engaged in such activities unless they believed
that earnings management had a causal eﬀect on firm value. Finally, our results are qualitatively and quantitatively consistent with event studies of the impact of restatements on
firm value.
The macroeconomic consequences are potentially large. The publicly traded firms that
restated their earnings in 2000 and 2001 created between 350,000 and 500,000 jobs between
1997 and 2000, and destroyed between 250,000 and 600,000 jobs between 2000 and 2002.
Moreover, we find that other, non-restating firms did not expand their employment and
investment to compensate for the losses of the restating firms. In fact, in industries with a
high incidence of restatements, non-restating firms also exhibit slow growth in investment
and employment, together with strong productivity growth.
In their review of the earnings management literature, Healy and Wahlen (1999) argue
that “prior research has focused almost exclusively on understanding whether earnings
management exists and why.”3 They also point to a crucial question that the academic
research has left unanswered: What is the eﬀect of earnings management on the allocation
of resources? To the best of our knowledge, our paper is the first to provide evidence on this
issue. Our paper is also the first to show that earnings management can explain periods of
jobless and investment-less growth.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 1 presents the model. Section 2 examines,
with historical data, the relationship between stock market valuation and the incidence of
fraudulent accounting. Section 3 uses firm level data to examine the dynamics of employment and investment for fraudulent firms, and the link between restatements and corporate
governance. Section 4 discusses the interpretation of the results and the extent to which
we can conclude that there is a causal link between earnings manipulation and employment
3

See for instance Sloan (1996) and Teoh, Welch, and Wong (1998).

4

dynamics. Section 5 focuses on the dynamics of non-restating firms. Section 6 concludes.

1

Model

We now present a model of earnings manipulation. We first describe the case where the
underlying cash flows are exogenous. This case has been the main focus of the literature
so far, but it is not particularly useful for thinking about the real eﬀects of fraudulent
accounting. We then show that real ineﬃciencies arise from the interaction of endogenous
hiring and investment decisions with the opportunity to manipulate earnings.

1.1

Exogenous Fundamental Earnings

The model has two periods, t = 1, 2, and a large number of firms whose fundamental
earnings x depend on the quality of their managers. There are two types of managers. Half
are bad, x = xL , and half are good, x = xH . We assume that both xL and xH are strictly
positive. The type of a manager is known only to the manager. Absent any manipulation,
earnings are x at t = 1, and φx at t = 2. Realized earnings in periods t, yt , are equal to
fundamental earnings plus discretionary accruals, at . The risk free rate is normalized to 0,
and accruals always have a zero net present value. Hence,
y1 = x + a ,
y2 = φx − a .
Each firm has one share, and all earnings are paid out as dividends. Hence, each stock
holder receives yt in period t. Managers know x, and they own α ∈ (0, 1) shares that
they must sell at the end of the first period. If they manage their earnings, managers are
caught and punished with some probability, and we let γ be the expected punishment. The
appendix shows how to extend the model to allow for endogenous trading. Goldman and
Slezak (2003) show how to endogenize α in a model with unobserved managerial eﬀort.
Let λ be the fraction of bad managers who manipulate (strategy m) and 1−λ the fraction
of bad managers who report honestly (strategy o). Let λ̂ be the market belief about λ. We
focus on equilibria where good managers report honestly. The set of equilibria depends
in general on the details of the information structure,4 and on the functional form for the
4

See Guttman, Kadan, and Kandel (2004)

5

punishment technology γ.5 In this respect, our setup is special, but it is not arbitrary. One
clear result in the literature on earnings management is that stock prices react strongly to
announcements of earnings restatements. Therefore, pooling does occur in the real world.
We do not pretend to show theoretically that pooling should be expected, but rather, we
focus on pooling equilibria because they appear empirically relevant.
Note that, without manipulation, φ would be the price-earnings ratio. In our model, φ
captures the rational expectation of earnings growth.6 Assuming eﬃcient financial markets,
the actual market value of the firm, as a function of its current earnings, is
(
)
³
´
VL =³ φx
L if y1 = xL
´
V y1 , λ̂ = E [y2 | y1 ] =
,
VH λ̂ if y1 = xH
where

³ ´
xH + λ̂xL
λ̂
VH λ̂ = φ
−
a,
1 + λ̂
1 + λ̂

and

a = xH − xL .
The expected utilities of managers under strategies o and m are
U o = αVL ; U m = αVH − γ .
Definition 1 An equilibrium is a market belief λ̂ such that bad managers choose max (U o , U m )
and λ = λ̂.
Proposition 1 The partially pooling equilibrium is characterized by:
• If γ ≥ αφ (xH − xL ), no earnings are manipulated
• If γ ≤ 12 α (φ − 1) (xH − xL ), all the bad managers manipulate
• If

1
2 α (φ − 1) (xH

− xL ) < γ < αφ (xH − xL ), then the solution is interior and the

fraction of bad managers who manipulate satisfies
1 + λ̂
5

φ − λ̂

=

α
(xH − xL ) .
γ

(1)

It is possible to construct equilibria where good managers separate from bad managers if the probability
of detection increases with the amount of manipulation. Piotroski and Roulstone (2005) provide evidence
on the impact of potential legal liability costs on insider trading decisions.
6
Other factors driving the P/E ratio could be market risk aversion, or irrational beliefs about earnings
growth. Our results do not depend on where φ is coming from, and we do not need to take a stand on the
long standing debate about time variation in P/E.

6

Proof. Under condition 1, λ̂ = 0 is not an equilibrium since VH (0) > VL + αγ . Under
condition 1, λ̂ = 1 is not an equilibrium either, since VH (1) < VL + αγ . Otherwise, equation
(1) comes from the indiﬀerence condition U o = U m .
Equation (1) shows that, in equilibrium, earnings management increases with the amount
of stocks owned by the manager α, with the undistorted price earnings ratio φ, and with
the diﬀerence between the fundamental values of good and bad managers. The appendix
describes the equilibrium when we allow for endogenous trading decisions, together with
liquidity shocks. It is straightforward to show that insider trades forecast earnings growth,
and that the price impact reduces the equilibrium amount of earnings management.

1.2

Endogenous Factor Demand

Our main focus in this paper is on the allocation of resources among firms. To study
this question, we extend the model to incorporate managerial production decisions. By
assumption, when fundamental earnings are exogenous, earnings manipulation does not
eﬀect the eﬃciency of the economy. To overcome this problem, the literature has typically
introduced ad-hoc costs of manipulation. Here we show that this assumption is unnecessary.
Ineﬃciencies arise automatically when the hiring and investment decisions are endogenous
— and observable — because the need to mimic the good types distorts all the observable
actions of the bad types.
Suppose that the production technology is Leontief with scale θ, which is private information of the manager. Assume for simplicity that labor is the only factor of production,
supplied at price w. Profits are given by
x = min (n, θ) − wn .
The critical assumption here is that good managers should optimally hire more than bad
managers — an assumption that seems plausible. The Leontief technology makes the formula
easier to read, but the results generalize to any production function that is super-modular
in (n, θ).7 Assume that w < 1 and that θ ∈ {1, 1 + ∆} for bad and good managers,
7
An example is when managers influence the productivity of their companies and output is y = θf (n) for
some increasing function f (.). A case that would not deliver the same result is y = θ +f (n) because it makes
optimal employment independent of the type of the manager. The evidence supports the super-modular
case, since for instance, managers of large companies are paid more than managers of small companies.

7

respectively. The first best level of employment is simply
½
¾
1 for bad managers
∗
n (θ) = θ =
,
1 + ∆ for good managers
but since n is observable, bad managers who manipulate must hire just like good ones,
therefore
nm = 1 + ∆ .
So we have the following true profits:
x∗H

= (1 − w) (1 + ∆) ,

x∗L = 1 − w ,
xm
= 1 − w (1 + ∆) .
L
Discretionary accruals have to make up not only for the fundamental diﬀerence in quality
∆ (1 − w), but also for the ineﬃcient allocation of resources ∆w :
a = x∗H − xm
L =∆ .
Making n observable creates misallocations and real costs. Unlike previous models, we do
not need to assume that manipulating accruals is costly in and of itself. The market value
of a firm reporting high earnings is
³ ´
λ̂x∗ + x∗H
λ̂
−
a,
VH λ̂ = φ L
1 + λ̂
1 + λ̂
and the equilibrium condition
U o = U m ⇔ VH = VL +

γ
α

leads to
1 + λ̂
φ (1 − w) − λ̂

=

α∆
.
γ

Proposition 2 The fraction λ̂ of managers who manipulate their earnings increases with
the undistorted price-earnings ratio φ, and with the number of shares owned by managers
α, and decreases with the cost of manipulation γ.

8

Bergstresser and Philippon (2002) and Burns and Kedia (2004), among others, have
already confirmed the comparative statics with respect to α. The straightforward extension
— presented in the appendix — of our model to endogenous trading is consistent with the
evidence in Roulstone (2005), that insider purchases are higher before the release of good
news, and lower before the release of bad news. In the empirical analysis below, we will
focus on the predictions of the model that have not been tested in the literature so far:
1. If time variation in the P/E ratio is driven by changes in φ, then violations of accounting rules are more likely when price-earnings ratios are high. We have shown
that λ̂ increases with φ. However, φ is not the actual P/E ratio, it is the P/E ratio of
the undistorted economy. To give empirical content to this prediction, the appendix
shows that the observed P/E ratio is always strictly increasing in φ, as long as xL is
strictly positive.
2. Firms managing earnings hire and invest like successful firms. A direct implication of
this prediction is that fraudulent firms end up larger than predicted by their technology. Hence, one would expect to see these firms shrink after they are exposed.

2

Historical Evidence from SEC Actions

We now use historical data to examine the relation between P/E ratios and the incidence of
fraud. Our maintained hypothesis in this section is that φ is the driving force behind changes
in the P/E ratio over time. The model of section 1 makes it clear that some parameters
create a positive correlation between P/E ratios and accounting manipulation, while other
parameters create a negative correlation. Shocks to variables such as the punishment for
cheating γ create a negative relation between incidence of fraud and P/E ratios. Indeed,
the law and finance literature shows that γ and P/E ratios are negatively related across
countries.8 On the other hand, we expect φ to be more relevant in US time series, both
because we believe that the other parameters of the model are unlikely to change very
much from one year to the next and because many economic shocks can lead to variation
in φ over time: discount rate shocks, shocks to expected aggregate growth as in Bansal
8

See La Porta, Lopez-de Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny (1998), La Porta, Lopez-de Silanes, Shleifer, and
Vishny (2002) and Shleifer and Wolfenzon (2002).

9

and Yaron (2002), time variation in risk-aversion as in Campbell and Cochrane (1999), and
bubbles as in Scheinkman and Xiong (2003) or Allen, Morris, and Shin (2005). Therefore,
we look at the historical time series as if it was generated predominantly by changes in φ,
and we expect to find a positive correlation between P/E ratios and accounting fraud. This
prediction is shared by essentially all models of earning management. The evidence that
we present here is therefore relevant for a large class of models. In the next section, we
will investigate the particular predictions of our model using firm level data on hiring and
investment.
We use the annual reports of the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), from 1936
to 2003, to capture the incidence of fraudulent accounting. The SEC classifies its actions
into several categories. We use the longest available series, which combines civil injunctive
actions and administrative proceedings initiated in each year (ACTt ). Civil injunctive
actions usually involve securities fraud. Administrative proceedings involve allegations that
a firm or individual has violated GAAP or that an individual has caused a firm or other
individuals to act unlawfully. To control for the increase in the number of publicly traded
companies in the US , we adjust the number of SEC actions using the regression
ACTt = α + βNtP ublic
where NtP ublic

F irms is

F irms

+ εSEC
,
t

the number of publicly listed firms obtained from CRSP.

We obtain historical data on P/E from the web site of Robert Shiller.9 Figure 2 plots
³
´
Pt−1
1 Pt
the adjusted number of SEC actions εSEC
and
the
two-year
average
P/E
ratio
+
t
2 Et
Et−1

from 1936 to 2003. The two series are positively correlated at medium run frequencies. To
confirm the visual impression, we estimate the linear regression
¶
µ
1 Pt
Pt−1
SEC
εt
=
7.46 ×
+
+ ut , R2 = 44%
s.e. = 1.03
2 Et Et−1
As predicted by the model, there is a tight correlation between SEC actions and market
valuations in historical data. This shows that the link between market valuations and fraudulent activity is not exclusively an experience of the late 1990s. The historical evidence is
also consistent with recent work emphasizing the strategic complementarity in the release of
accounting information, like Hertzberg (2005b), or changes in ethical behavior, like Shleifer
(2004).
9

http://www.econ.yale.edu/~shiller/

10

An important issue here is that SEC actions are endogenous. An increase in the number
of SEC actions can come from an increase in frauds, an increase in scrutiny, or both. One
would naturally expect the SEC to increase its investigations when frauds go up. In this
case, the number of SEC actions would overestimate the true increase in fraud. However,
this does not change our qualitative interpretation of the evidence. It simply means that
we may need to scale down our estimated elasticity of fraud cases to market valuations.10
On the other hand, there are good reasons to believe that the number of reported SEC
cases might underestimate the true incidence of fraud. The SEC has limited resources and
cannot expand very quickly. Therefore, in the short run, we would expect the detection
technology to exhibit decreasing returns to scale. Consequently, the number of SEC actions
would increase less than one for one with the number of frauds.

3

Firm Level Evidence from the 1990s

In this section, we use firm level data to test the other predictions of the model. Firm
level data allow for more direct tests of the hypothesis presented above. We first describe
the data. Next, we briefly discuss insider trading, an area where much work has already
been done. We then turn to the dynamics of hiring and investment, that we are the first
to investigate. Finally, we show that companies with good governance — a possible proxy
for γ — are less likely to engage in earnings manipulations. We conclude this section by a
discussion of alternate explanations for our findings.

3.1

Data

To capture alleged fraudulent accounting, we use the list of firms that restated their earnings
in the late 1990s. This list was compiled by the General Accounting Oﬃce (GAO) in 2002
(GAO (2002)). The GAO “identified 919 financial restatements by 845 public companies
from January 1, 1997 to June 30, 2002, that involved accounting irregularities resulting
in material misstatements of financial results.” These financial restatements occur when a
company, either voluntarily or prompted by its auditors or regulators, revises public financial
10

This is similar, for instance, to the issues of unobserved labor eﬀort and capacity utilization in the
business cycle literature.

11

information that was previously reported.11 Six-hundred-forty-five of these companies were
publicly traded. The distribution of announcements per year shows a clear upward trend
(see Table 1). The number of identified restatements rose from 92 in 1997 to 225 in 2001.
“The proportion of listed companies on NYSE, Amex and NASDAQ identified as restating
their financial reports tripled from 0.89% in 1997 to 2.5% in 2001. From January 1997
through June 2002, about 10% of all listed companies announced at least one restatement.”
Moreover, later restatements involved larger firms: the average market capitalization of
restating companies quadrupled between 1997 and 2002, from $500 million to $4 billion,
while the average size of listed companies increased only about 60% over the same period.
The GAO also reports the reasons for the restatements. Errors in revenue recognitions
account for roughly 40% of the cases while those due to improper cost accounting explain
16%. Issues with loans, like write-oﬀs, reserves, and bad loans account for 14% of the cases.
Issues with assets and inventories, like goodwill, write downs, and valuation account for
another 9% of restatements. The remaining 20% of cases are linked to R&D, M&A, securities
(Enron for instance), reclassifications of debt payments and related party transactions. It
is useful to keep in mind that only 16% of the restatements can be formally attributed
to external parties’ actions like the SEC or independent auditors. Further, many firms
do not mention in their reports the real reason for their restatements, unless they are
somehow forced to do so (see GAO for details). Restatements are not fully anticipated by
the market; the market-adjusted return over the three trading days surrounding the initial
announcement is -10%. For the 575 restatements for which six months of data were available
around the announcement, the six month abnormal holding period return was -18%.
We match the GAO data to COMPUSTAT through company name. Out of the 645
publicly traded companies, 560 firms were covered by COMPUSTAT. For 539 firms, we were
able to obtain the beginning and end dates of the restated period, in addition to the date
on which the restatement was announced. The restated period or the fraudulent period is
the period for which the financial data was eventually restated. This restated period, over
which the fraud was allegedly committed, lasts for an average of five quarters (see Table 1).
It takes an average of two quarters from the end of the restated period to the announcement
11

These announcements exclude stock splits, changes in accounting principles, and other restatements that
were not made to correct mistakes in the application of accounting standards.

12

of the restatement. We also collected data on the size of the restatement.12 We were able
to obtain this information for 396 firms. The average ratio of restated earnings over lagged
sales is -6% and 80% of the restatements are negative, i.e., involve negative revisions to
reported net income. This variable is winsorized so that the maximum is no more than +1
and the minimum no less than -1.
Table 1 also displays the summary statistics for the other variables of interest. The
growth rates reported are the 1-year log diﬀerences and have been winsorized so that the
maximum is no more than +1 and the minimum no less than -1. To capture hiring decisions
we calculate the growth rate of the number of employees (COMPUSTAT Data Item 29),
which, for non-restating COMPUSTAT firms over the period 1991 to 2003, was 4%. To
capture investment decisions, we look at the growth rate of property plant and equipment
(COMPUSTAT Data Item 73). The average growth in property, plant, and equipment for
non-restating COMPUSTAT firms was 7% per year. The second measure of investment
activity that we examine is the ratio of capital expenditures (COMPUSTAT Data Item 30)
to property plant and equipment. According to these three measures, restating firms grew
slightly faster that non-restating firms over the whole sample, but the diﬀerences are very
small relative to the standard deviations of these variables.
The unconditional dynamics of restating and non-restating firms are also remarkably
similar with respect to the growth rate of market values and sales. We use sales per employee
to measure labor productivity. The growth rate of sales per employee is 5% for both restating
and non-restating firms. We also compute a measure of total factor productivity growth
(henceforth, TFP) by estimating the shares of labor and capital for each industry, at the two
digit SIC level.13 To capture insider trading activity, we get data on CEO option exercises
12

Size of restatement is the average annual impact of the restatement on net income.
Sales are deflated using the GDP deflator, while PP&E are deflated using the non-residential investment
deflator. For firm i in industry j at time t, with deflated sales sit , number of employees nit and deflated
PP&E kit , we define the growth of TFP as
13

dT F P = d log sit − αj d log nit − (1 − αj ) d log kit ,
where αj is the industry-mean ratio of compensation of employees over operating income + compensation
of employees. Needless to say, there are issues with measuring productivity in COMPUSTAT. We do not
have firm specific price deflators and we do not have good measures of inventories or intermediate inputs.
Nonetheless, when we average across the firms in the sample, we find that this measure yields a good estimate
of aggregate TFP growth computed from the NIPA. In the rest of the paper, we will always report the
results for both TFP and labor productivity (deflated sales per employee).

13

from EXECUCOMP. Option exercises are captured by the ratio of the value realized from
option exercises normalized by the total value realizable from options. The total value
realizable from options is the sum of the value realized from option exercises and the value
of exercisable options. We find no diﬀerence in the unconditional value of this ratio between
restating and non-restating firms. Overall, Table 1 shows that the unconditional dynamics
of restating and non-restating firms are quite similar. We now show that the conditional
dynamics are remarkably diﬀerent.

3.2

Insider Trading

Since there already exists a large literature on earnings management and insider trading
(see for instance Bartov and Mohanram (2004) or Roulstone (2005)), and since our main
focus is on the investment-employment dynamics, we examine only briefly the prediction
that insider trading is higher during the restated period.
Data on option exercises of CEOs is obtained from EXECUCOMP. Our sample consist
of all the firms in EXECUCOMP with non-missing value for the variables of interest. Since
EXECUCOMP covers only S&P 1500 firms, only 140 restating firms have available data on
value of option exercises in EXECUCOMP. We estimate
yit = β bef ore 1t<τ (i) + β during 1t∈τ (i) + β af ter 1t>τ (i) + φj + φt + γxit−1 + uit , t = 1991..2003 ,
In these regressions, yit is the ratio of the value realized from option exercises over the total
value realizable from options, and τ (i) is the restated period for firm i, and τ (i) = ∅ for
firms that do not restate. The RHS variables include industry and time dummies φj and
φt as well as some control variables xi,t−1 discussed below. A positive estimated coeﬃcient
β during implies that the CEOs of restating firms exercised relatively more options than
the CEOs of comparable firms in their industry during the period in which they were
misreporting.14 The coeﬃcients β bef ore and β af ter show if they did the same before and
after the suspicious period. In these comparisons, the null hypothesis is that β = 0. We
can also compare β over time to see if the dynamics of restating firms changed significantly
around the restated period. In this case, the null hypothesis is that β bef ore = β during .
Table 2 shows that β during is significantly greater than zero and also significantly greater
14

Ofek and Yermack (2000), looking at US executives, document that nearly all executive stock option
exercises are followed by share sales.

14

than β bef ore . This result holds if we control for the lagged growth rate of the stock price,
and lagged Tobin’s Q, and the magnitude of the eﬀect is stable across these specifications,
between 5% and 6%. This is economically large given that the unconditional mean of y is
18% (see Table 1). All these results are consistent with the evidence discussed earlier. We
refer the reader to the existing literature for robustness checks and extensions, and we move
on the the unexplored area of employment and investment dynamics.

3.3

Earnings Restatements and the Dynamics of Employment and Investment

We want to compare the dynamics of hiring and investment for restating firms around the
restated period. We first create a control group of non-restating firms that are matched in
age, industry and initial size. For every restating firm, we choose all non-restating firms
that appear in COMPUSTAT in the same year as the restating firm, or in 1991 for the
firms already present at the beginning of our sample. We then select non-restating firms
that operate in the same industry (defined as two-digit SIC code), and that are in the same
initial book asset quintile. We exclude observations in government, health and education
sectors and firms which have less than three observations for asset and sales growth over
this time period. We adjust the variables of interest by substracting the mean of this control
group.
ĝit = git − ḡC(i)t

(2)

where C (i) is the control group for firm i.
Figure 3 plots the mean adjusted growth rates, as in equation (2), for four key variables: total market value, number of employees, PP&E and TFP. All these variables are
constructed with the data as reported by the firm in real time, and do not include the eﬀects
of the restatements. The horizontal axis measures time in years relative to the restated period, which is time 0 by definition. Time +1 is one year after the end of the restated period,
and time -1 is one year before the beginning of the restated period. Note that the length of
the restated period varies across firms, so time 0 may include more than one year of data
for some firms. Also note that 97% of the restatements are announced either at time 0 or at
time 1. The figure shows that the market value of restating firms grew at a faster rate than
that of the control group before the restated period, at the same rate during the restated
15

period, and more slowly afterwards. A similar picture emerges with respect to growth in
PP&E and the number of employees. On the other hand, productivity is flat. One must
keep in mind, however, that the sales were probably over-stated, so that true productivity
probably increased.
We now turn to more formal econometric tests to substantiate this evidence.
ĝit = β bef ore 1t<τ (i) + β during 1t∈τ (i) + β af ter 1t>τ (i) + uit , t = 1991..2003 ,
where τ (i) is the restated period for firm i. A positive estimated coeﬃcient β during implies
that the restating firms grew faster than comparable firms in their industry during the
period in which they were misreporting. The coeﬃcients β bef ore and β af ter show if they grew
diﬀerently before and after the suspicious period. In these comparisons, the null hypothesis
is that β = 0. We can also compare β over time to see if the dynamics of restating firms
changed significantly around the restated period. In this case, the null hypothesis is that
β bef ore = β during , for instance.
The results are presented in Table 3. The growth of employment in fraudulent firms
is 3.7% higher during the fraudulent period. As predicted by the model the growth of
employment is significantly lower after the restatement. A similar dynamic is seen with
investment activity. The growth rate of investment, i.e., PP&E is about 5% higher during
the restated period and 6% lower after the restated period. The same pattern is seen when
we examine capital expenditures normalized by PP&E. It appears that restating firms
were growing rapidly in the years prior to the restated period. These firms most likely
misreported in order to continue portraying themselves as high growth firms. This is also
what the dynamics of market value suggest. The growth in market value was 5.2% higher
before the restatement and 4% lower afterwards, and it was the same during the restated
period, suggesting that the firms did not surprise the market during this period.15
The null hypothesis that β during is the same as β af ter can be rejected at less than 1%
level for all the variables except productivity. We can safely conclude that growth rates
of assets, employees, capital and market values were higher during the restated periods
15
A similar picture emerges when we examine analyst forecasts obtained from IBES for 408 restating
firms. For the two years prior to the restated period, in 62% of quarters restating firms beat analyst forecast
by an average of 18 cents. During the restated peirod, a similar fraction of quarters (59%) were associated
with exceeding analyst forecasts though the mean forecast error was only 6 cents. This is indicative of firms
managing earnings to just beat analyst forecasts and continue to portray themselves as growth firms.

16

than after, as predicted by the model. Interestingly, the growth rates of TFP and labor
productivity are not significantly diﬀerent across firms and over time. As the period after
the restatement is not associated with lower productivity, it is unlikely that restatements
were the result of negative TFP shocks. Moreover, as the sales in the restated period were
inflated by fraudulent accounting for a large fraction of firms, the true productivity probably
increased after the restatement.
We now turn to the sub-sample of firms for which we were able to collect information
on the size of the restatement. We investigate whether larger restatements were associated
with larger drops in employment and investment. Table 4 shows that this is indeed the
case (remember that restatements are negative numbers). On the other hand, we do not see
much eﬀect on sales, and restatements have the opposite eﬀect on productivity, although it
is not significant.

3.4

Predicting Restatements: the Role of Governance

We now attempt to test the prediction that higher values of γ decrease the incidence of
fraud. It is diﬃcult to find a quantitative measure of γ, let alone one that is available for a
large sample of firms. We will rely on recent research by Gompers, Ishii, and Metrick (2003)
on the role of corporate governance. Good governance can increase γ either because it makes
it easier to detect manipulations, or because it increases the range of punishments available
to shareholders. In both cases, we would expect a negative relation between governance
and manipulation.16 We test this prediction by running predictive logit regressions in the
cross-section of firms present in our sample in 2002
¢
¡
P (restati,02 ) = F θ0 Xi,96 + αI(i) ,

where restati,02 is a dummy variable for any restatement by firm i between 1997 and 2002,
F (.) is the logistic function, αI(i) is a set of 2-digits industry dummies, and Xi,96 includes
age, assets and Tobin’s Q in 1996, as well as governance variables measured in 1995.17 The
governance variables come from the Institutional Investor Research Center (IRRC). IRRC
follows 24 governance provisions that appear beneficial to management, and which may be
16
Note that variation in governance across firms, like investor protection across countries discussed earlier,
creates a negative correlation between fraud and P/E ratios.
17
The first year before the beginning of our sample where the data is available.

17

harmful to shareholders. Gompers, Ishii, and Metrick (2003) have used all 24 provisions to
construct an index of bad governance, and have shown that the index is negatively correlated
with Tobin’s Q. Recently, Bebchuk, Cohen, and Ferrell (2004) have argued that staggered
boards, limits to shareholder bylaw amendments, super-majority requirements, poison pills
and golden parachutes account for most of the correlation.
In our data set, 770 firms have IRRC data available in 1995, and 99 of them restated.
Table 5 shows that firms with poor governance in 1995 were more likely to restate between 1997 and 2002 than comparable firms in the same industry. Among the individual
provisions, we find that classified boards are significant. Of course, we do not want to infer
causality from these reduced form regressions. Nonetheless, these results show that there
is information in the governance provisions studied by Gompers, Ishii, and Metrick (2003).
The timing of our regression also rules out the issue of reverse causality to the extent that
the accounting scandals of the late bubble period were not anticipated in 1995. On the
other hand, the issue that we cannot address is omitted variable bias, since one could imagine that good firms, or honest managers, would be more likely to choose good governance
provisions, and at the same time would be less likely to commit frauds.

3.5

Alternate Interpretations

The empirical facts that we have documented are all consistent with the model of section
1. In this section, we specify three alternate interpretations and explain why they are not
consistent with the overall evidence.
First, one might argue that restatements do not reflect genuine manipulations, but rather
excessive optimism by some managers. This view is refuted by the selection criteria of the
GAO sample, that of including only those restatements that involve accounting irregularities
resulting in material misstatements. Nonetheless, for the sake of the argument, let us
assume that some managers are overly optimistic, that this leads them to misstate their
financial results, and that GAO experts are not able to distinguish these honest mistakes
from intentional manipulations. This might explain the relatively higher growth rates before
the restatement, and relatively lower growth rates afterwards. However, this optimistic
interpretation is inconsistent with the fact that managers sell the stock of their companies
during the misreported period.
18

Second, one could argue that all firms are ex-ante identical, and that firms with negative
productivity shocks are forced to restate, while other firms with positive shocks are not.
We have shown, however, that measured productivity growth does not decrease following
the restatements. Thus, true productivity probably increases since measured productivity
was likely overstated during the suspicious period. Moreover, these shocks could not have
been randomly distributed among firms, since restating firms were growing faster than their
industry peers during the restated period, and since their managers were selling more than
the usual amount of shares.
Lastly, one might argue that earnings manipulation is a side eﬀect of exogenous overvaluation. The issue here is not whether manipulating firms were over-valued, but whether
the same dynamics of investment and employment would have happened without manipulation. Several reasons lead us to conclude that the dynamics would have been very diﬀerent
if earnings manipulation had not been possible.
First, we match our restating firms to a control group of firms in the same industry, and
with similar characteristics. If the exogenous over-valuation was industry-age-size specific, it
would also aﬀect the control group, and would be irrelevant for us. For instance, our results
cannot be explained simply by a bubble aﬀecting young firms in the computer industry.
Second, if earnings management was not important, why would managers have engaged
in this dangerous activity? The personal costs to the managers — in the form of reduced
opportunities in the labor market — are substantial, as documented recently by Desai, Hogan,
and Wilkins (2005) and Karpoﬀ, Lee, and Martin (2005). Clearly, the managers believed
that earnings manipulation was eﬀective, otherwise they would have abstained from it. This
argument applies not only to the decision whether to manipulate or not, but also to the
decision of how much to manipulate, since Table 4 shows that the size of the drop in
employment and investment is related to the extent of the manipulation.
Third, we have quantitative evidence on the eﬀect of the manipulation on the value of
the firm. Event studies reported in GAO (2002) show that stock prices drop by an average
of 10% on the day that the restatements are announced. In other words, had the market
known before that the reported earnings were not correct, the valuation of the firm would
have been 10% lower, on average. This is exactly the number that we report in Figure
3: a negative 10% growth in market value over the year following the end of the restated
19

period.
We conclude that managers believed that firm value was significantly aﬀected by earnings
manipulation, and that the quantitative impact was very much in line with the numbers that
we report. This speaks directly to the causal link between manipulation and the dynamics
of firm value, and therefore of investment and employment. These dynamics would not have
been the same if the firms had published the true numbers throughout the period.
However, while manipulation is a necessary condition, it is not a suﬃcient one: unobserved technology shocks are also necessary to create room for asymmetric information in
the first place. Our findings therefore support the following interpretation, which is simply
one way to rephrase the model of section 1. Some firms, previously successful, discover that
their potential growth has slowed down. To avoid, or at least to delay, the expected drop
in market value, the managers engage in earnings manipulations and continue hiring and
investing as before, while at the same time selling their stocks. It is a decline in growth opportunities that leads to earnings management, but it is earnings management that causes
the misallocation of resources.

4

Aggregate Employment Growth

We now investigate the aggregate impact of earnings manipulations. The evidence presented here goes beyond the predictions of the model of section 1, but it is relevant for two
reasons: first, to show that the mechanisms that we have emphasized do not wash out in
the aggregate, and second, to stimulate future research.

4.1

Restating Firms

A clear picture of the raw data can be obtained by looking at the dynamics of firms that
announced a restatement in 2000 (111 firms) and 2001(120 firms). The number of people
employed in these 231 restating firms over the period 1997 to 2002 is displayed in Figure 4.
The left panel of the figure compares the 231 restating firms to aggregate non-farm payrolls
obtained from the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS). Employment in restating firms went
up by 0.5 million (+25%) between 1997 and 1999, and down by 0.6 million between 2000
and 2002. Over the same period, non-farm payrolls went up by 6.7% and then down by
1.5%. The relative increases and decreases in employment for restating firms are clearly
20

much larger than for the economy as a whole. A potential concern in this analysis is that
some firms drop out of the sample after the announcement of the restatement, sometimes
due to delisting, sometimes due to bankruptcy.
In the left panel, we implicitly assign zero employees to firms that drop out. For instance,
complete data for Enron is available only until 2000. To the extent that some firms drop
out of the sample, but, unlike Enron, continue operating, the left panel may overestimate
the true dynamics. To address this issue, we construct a constant sample of firms for which
we have complete data over this period. This constant sample comprises 74 firms that
restate in 2000 and 96 firms that restate in 2001. The right panel of Figure 4 compares
the employment in these restating firms to a constant sample of non-restating firms in
COMPUSTAT. Restating firms grew more rapidly than non-restating firms from 1997 to
1999 and declined much faster afterwards. The right panel also gives a sense of the coverage
of our data set: a bit less than a third of total non-farm payrolls.18 Clearly, the truth lies
somewhere in between the left panel and the right panel. If most restating firms are like
Enron, then the left panel is the better approximation. If most restating firms continue
operating with a reduced, but still significant, number of employees, then the right panel is
more appropriate.

4.2

Dynamics of Non Restating Firms

The dynamics of restating firms, that make them grow faster than comparable firms in the
restated period and slower afterwards, is also likely to impact other non-restating firms in
their industry. Some non-restating firms surely engaged in earnings management, but probably to a lesser extent than firms that eventually had to restate. In this case, our control
group is not valid and our results under-estimate the true impact of earnings management.
Moreover, investors may draw negative inferences about all firms that belong to an industry where many accounting frauds have been revealed, even if most of the firms were
actually honest. This suggests that the announcement of a restatement could have negative
implications for other, non-restating, firms in the industry. On the other hand, there are
equilibrium reasons to expect that non-restating firms might actually benefit from the an18

But a much larger share of output (more than 1/2), since only large firms with relatively high labor
productivity are included.

21

nouncements of restatements by their competitors. If they did not themselves manage their
earnings, and if investors do not become suspicious of them, non-restating firms should expand in response to the negative shocks aﬀecting other firms in their industry. They should
try to steal market shares from the restating firms, and hire some of the laid-oﬀ workers.
We investigate the impact of restatements on non-restating firms by creating a panel of
industries at the 2-digit SIC level using only the non-restating firms.19 For each variable of
interest, we take the mean across non-restating firms in a particular year and industry as
our LHS variable, ḡjt . We then estimate
ḡjt = β R̄j,t + φt + φj + ujt , t = 1991..2003 ,

(3)

where R̄j,t is the fraction of firms in industry j that restated up to time t. We also include
year and industry dummies. We estimate this for all the relevant variables studied earlier.
The results are in Table 6. Non-restating firms grow more slowly when they belong to an
industry that had a lot of announced restatements in the preceding years. Interestingly,
sales per employee and TFP grow significantly faster following a wave of restatements.
In other words, fraudulent industries are characterized by high labor productivity growth
together with negative employment and investment growth, even for firms that did not
have to restate their earnings. The fact that sales per employee and TFP increase is not
consistent with the interpretation of restatements simply as negative productivity shocks.
The evidence is consistent with models that emphasize the strategic interactions between
firms in the release of information (Hertzberg (2005a)).
The potential impact of these industry dynamics on overall employment is large. To
get a sense of the magnitudes involved, we can obtain the predicted drop in employment by
multiplying the estimated β in the above regression with the average number of restating
firms R̄t across all industries. Figure 5 plots the employment growth predicted by the
evolution of the average R̄t , and compares it to the actual employment growth between 1995
and 2002. Note, however, that general equilibrium eﬀects mean that our coeﬃcient from
the cross-section of industries will over-estimate the true impact on aggregate employment
growth. The cross-sectional estimate is obtained for given factor prices (labor, capital,
intermediate inputs). In the aggregate, a drop in labor demand, for instance, would drive
19

At least between January 1997 and June 2002. It is possible that some of these firms will restate after
June 2002.

22

down the wage, and mitigate the actual drop in employment (see Philippon (2004) for a
general equilibrium model).

5

Conclusion

Earnings management distorts the allocation of resources in the economy, especially in
periods of high financial valuations. When hiring and investment decisions are observable,
bad managers hire and invest too much in order to mimic good managers. When they are
caught and forced to restate, their firms shrink quickly. We find strong support for these
theoretical predictions in historical and firm level data. Restating firms grow at significantly
higher rates during the periods where they misreport, relative to firms matched on age, size,
and industry. Growth in restating firms is significantly slower than growth in matched firms
in the years after the restatement.
The dynamics of hiring and investment in restating firms break the link between productivity and factor demands. The period after the restatement is characterized by strong
productivity growth, while labor and capital demands fall. Thus, waves of earnings restatements can be followed by periods of jobless growth and low investment. Philippon (2004)
studies imperfect governance in a standard real business cycle model, calibrated to the US
economy, and finds that imperfect governance amplifies business cycle dynamics. Earnings
management is a particular case of imperfect governance. It can impact aggregate dynamics through two opposing channels. On the one hand, the ineﬃcient allocation of resources
among firms, created by earnings management, tends to reduce aggregate activity. On the
other hand, greater hiring and investment by misreporting firms tend to increase aggregate activity. A full understanding of the macroeconomic implications is a task for future
research.

23

Appendix
A

A Brief Review of the Literature on Earnings Management

In this section, we discuss previous research on earnings management, following Dechow,
Kothari, and Watts (1998). Economists write models about cash flows, but in practice,
investors look at earnings. Why? Because earnings forecast future cash flows. Consider a
firm, and assume that sales follow a random walk
st = st−1 + εt .
Earnings (assuming a constant profit rate π) are
et = πst ,
and we assume that accounts receivable (rect ) and payable (payt ) are constant fractions of
sales and total costs
rect = αst , and payt = β (1 − π) st .
In this simplified setup, cash flows are simply given by
ct ≡ et + ∆payt − ∆rect

= πst + [β (1 − π) − α] εt ,

so we see that
Et [ct+1 ] = πst = et .
To forecast future cash flows, and therefore to compute the value of the firm, we start with
earnings. The value of the firm at the end of period t is
Vt =

et
,
r

where r is the risk-adjusted discount rate. Dechow, Kothari, and Watts (1998) expand this
model to take into account other important features of accruals, such as depreciation, and
show that, empirically, accruals are indeed the better predictors of future cash flows.
What we would like the reader to take away from this brief discussion is that earnings
forecast cash flows and that, to a first order, investors are right to focus on earnings when
assessing the value of a firm. The problem, however, is that earnings can be manipulated.
For instance, accruals, defined in our example as ∆rect −∆payt , cannot be verified. Investors
need to trust a manager who claims high earnings coming from large future receivables.
Unfortunately, there are documented cases of earnings management.

24

1. Firms avoid negative numbers. There is a higher-than-expected frequency of firms
with slightly positive earnings changes. Burgstahler and Dichev (1997), and see
Guttman, Kadan, and Kandel (2004) for a model, and Durtschi and Easton (2005)
for discussion.
2. Who manipulates earnings? Bergstresser and Philippon (2002) and Burns and Kedia
(2004) show that managers with many stock options are more likely to engage in
earnings management.
3. Accruals are mispriced. Sloan (1996) documents the presence of negative excess returns after large positive accruals. In fact, excess returns follow high accruals that coincide with insider selling the stock, as shown by Beneish and Vargus (2002). Richardson, Sloan, Soliman, and Tuna (2005) provide further evidence on which types of
accruals are actually mispriced.

B

Extension of the Model to Endogenous Trading Decisions

In this section, we briefly show how the model extends to the case where trading is an
endogenous decision for some managers. A fraction δ of managers are hit by liquidity
shocks and have to trade. The remaining 1 − δ decide to trade or not, based on their private
information. Managers who are not hit by a liquidity shock consume at the end of period
2.
Claim Good managers do not trade unless they have to, and bad managers who have
manipulated always trade.
The proof of the claim is straightforward. Good managers are better oﬀ waiting since
they would have to sell below the market price. Bad managers who manipulated their
earnings at t = 1 are better oﬀ trading since their manipulation will be found out at time
t = 2.
³
´
λ̂xL + δxH
λ̂
= φ
−
a,
VH λ̂, trade
δ + λ̂
δ + λ̂
VH (notrade) = φxH ,
The equilibrium condition becomes
δ + λ̂
δφ − λ̂

=

α
(xH − xL ) .
γ

Comparing this formula to the one in section 1, we can see that endogenous trading reduces
the incentives to manipulate because of the price impact. Like in the noise trading literature,
a higher δ induces more insider trading by decreasing the price impact.

25

C

Observed Price Earnings Ratios

In this section of the appendix, we show that the actual P/E ratio — with earnings management — increases with φ, the P/E ratio of the benchmark economy without earnings
management. This is not trivial because earnings are inflated and prices are lower in the
distorted economy. In the mixed strategy equilibrium of section 1, we have V H − V L = αγ
and V L = φxL . The aggregate market valuation is therefore
V̄ = (1 + λ) V H + (1 − λ) V L = 2φxL + (1 + λ)

γ
,
α

and aggregate reported earnings are
¡
¢
ȳ = xH + xL + λ xH − xL .

¢
¡
The equilibrium condition (1 + λ) αγ = xH − xL (φ − λ) leads to
¡ H
¢
x − xL αφ − γ
λ=
.
(xH − xL ) α + γ
Therefore, the observed log-P/E ratio is
log (P/E) = log

¡¡ H
¡
¢
¡
¢¢
¡
¢¢
x + xL φ − λ xH − xL − log xH + xL + λ xH − xL .

We are interested in the link between the actual log-P/E ratio and the benchmark log-P/E
ratio. We use λ0 to denote the derivative of λ with respect to φ, and we get
¡ H
¢
¡
¢
¡
¢
x + xL − λ0 xH − xL
λ0 xH − xL
d log (P/E)
=
−
dφ
(xH + xL ) φ − λ (xH − xL ) xH + xL + λ (xH − xL )
¡
¢¤
¡ H
¢£
¢¡
x + xL xH + xL + xH − xL λ − λ0 (1 + φ)
,
=
[(xH + xL ) φ − λ (xH − xL )] [xH + xL + λ (xH − xL )]
Moreover
¡ H
¢
¡
¢
x − xL αφ − γ − xH − xL α (1 + φ)
λ − λ (1 + φ) =
= −1
(xH − xL ) α + γ
0

thus

¡
¢
2xL xH + xL
d log (P/E)
=
dφ
[(xH + xL ) φ − λ (xH − xL )] [xH + xL + λ (xH − xL )]

which shows that the observed P/E ratio increases with the undistorted P/E ratio φ as long
as xL > 0.

26

References
Allen, F., S. Morris, and H. S. Shin (2005): “Beauty Contests, Bubbles, and Iterated
Expectations in Asset Markets,” forthcoming Review of Financial Studies.
Bansal, R., and A. Yaron (2002): “Risks For the Long Run: A Potential Resolution of
Asset Pricing Puzzles,” forthcoming, Journal of Finance.
Bartov, E., and P. Mohanram (2004): “Private Information, Earnings Manipulations,
and Executive Stock-Option Exercises,” The Accounting Review, 79(4), 889—920.
Bebchuk, L., A. Cohen, and A. Ferrell (2004): “What Matters in Corporate Governance?,” mimeo Harvard Law School.
Beneish, M. D., and M. E. Vargus (2002): “Insider Trading, Earnings Quality, and
Accrual Mispricing,” The Accounting Review, 4, 755—791.
Bergstresser, D., and T. Philippon (2002): “Manager Incentives and Earnings Management,” forthcoming Journal of Financial Economics.
Bolton, P., J. Scheinkman, and W. Xiong (2003): “Executive Compensation and
Short-Termist Behavior in Speculative Markets,” NBER WP 9722.
Burgstahler, D. C., and I. D. Dichev (1997): “Earnings Management to Avoid Losses
and Earnings Decreases,” Journal of Accounting and Economics, 24, 99—126.
Burns, N., and S. Kedia (2004): “The Impact of Performance-Based Compensation on
Misreporting,” forthcoming Journal of Financial Economics.
Campbell, J. Y., and J. H. Cochrane (1999): “By Force of Habit: A ConsumptionBased Explanation of Aggregate Stock Market Behavior,” Journal of Political Economy,
107, 205—251.
Dechow, P. M., S. P. Kothari, and R. L. Watts (1998): “The Relation Between
Earnings and Cash Flows,” Journal of Accounting and Economics, 25, 133—168.
Desai, H., C. Hogan, and M. Wilkins (2005): “Reputational Penalties for Aggressive Accounting: Management Turnover and Earning Restatement,” Accounting Review,
forthcoming.
Durtschi, C., and P. D. Easton (2005): “Earnings Management? Alternative Explanations for Observed Discontinuities in the Frequency Distribution of Earnings, Earnings
Changes, and Analyst Forecast Errors,” mimeo.
Friebel, G., and S. M. Guriev (2005): “Earnings Manipulation and Incentives in Firms,”
Working Paper Universite de Toulouse.

27

GAO (2002): “Financial Statement Restatements,” General Accounting Oﬃce, Report to
the U.S. Senate.
Goldman, E., and S. L. Slezak (2003): “The Economics of Fraudulent Misreporting,”
mimeo.
Gompers, P., J. Ishii, and A. Metrick (2003): “Corporate Governance and Equity
Prices,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, pp. 107—155.
Guttman, I., O. Kadan, and E. Kandel (2004): “Adding the Noise: A Theory of
Compensation-Driven Earnings Management,” mimeo.
Healy, P. M., and J. M. Wahlen (1999): “A Review of the Earnings Management
Literature and its Implications for Standard Setting,” Accounting Horizons, 13, 365—383.
Hertzberg, A. (2005a): “Managerial Incentives, Misreporting, and the Timing of Social
Learning: A Theory of Slow Booms and Rapid Recessions,” mimeo Northwestern.
(2005b): “Speculative Trading and Corporate Misreporting,” mimeo Northwestern.
Karpoff, J. M., D. S. Lee, and G. S. Martin (2005): “The Cost to Firms of Cooking
the Books,” mimeo.
La Porta, R., F. Lopez-de Silanes, A. Shleifer, and R. W. Vishny (1998): “Law
and Finance,” Journal of Political Economy, 106, 1113—1155.
(2002): “Investor Protection and Corporate Valuation,” Journal of Finance, 57,
1147—1170.
Narayanan, M. P. (1985): “Managerial Incentives for Short Term Results,” Journal of
Finance, pp. 1469—1484.
Ofek, E., and D. Yermack (2000): “Taking Stock: Equity-Based Compensation and the
Evolution of Managerial Ownership,” Journal of Finance, 55, 1367—1384.
Philippon, T. (2004): “Corporate Governance over the Business Cycle,” forthcoming
Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control.
Piotroski, J. D., and D. T. Roulstone (2005): “Evidence on the Non-Linear Relation
Between Insider Trading Decisions and Future Earnings Information,” mimeo Chicago
GSB.
Povel, P., R. Singh, and A. Winton (2004): “Booms, Busts, and Fraud,” mimeo.
Richardson, S. A., R. G. Sloan, M. T. Soliman, and A. I. Tuna (2005): “Accrual
Reliability, Earnings Persistence and Stock Prices,” mimeo.

28

Roulstone, D. (2005): “Insider Trading and the Information Content of Earnings Announcements,” mimeo Chicago GSB.
Scheinkman, J., and W. Xiong (2003): “Overconfidence and Speculative Bubbles,”
Journal of Political Economy, 111, 1183—1219.
Shleifer, A. (2004): “Does Competition Destroy Ethical Behavior?,” American Economic
Review Papers and Proceedings, 94, 414—418.
Shleifer, A., and D. Wolfenzon (2002): “Investor Protection and Equity Markets,”
Journal of Financial Economics, 66, 3—27.
Sloan, R. (1996): “Do Stock Prices Fully Impound Information in Accruals About Future
Earnings?,” The Accounting Review, 71, 289—315.
Stein, J. C. (1989): “Eﬃcient Capital Markets, Ineﬃcient Firms: A Model of Myopic
Corporate Behavior,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, pp. 655—669.
Teoh, S.-H., I. Welch, and T. J. Wong (1998): “Earnings Management and The PostIssue Underperformance in Seasoned Equity Oﬀerings,” Journal of Financial Economics,
50, 63—99.

29

Table 1 : Descriptive Statistics
Variable

Mean

Std. Dev.

Min

Max

12393

0.18

0.29

0

1

Book Assets ($)

97560

3869

28938

0.20

1264032

Age (years)

97560

12.76

12.18

1

53

Market Value (growth rate)

79649

0.05

0.42

-1

1

Sales (growth rate)

97560

0.11

0.36

-1

1

Number of Employees (growth rate)

81133

0.04

0.30

-1

1

Prop. Plant & Equip. (growth rate)

92949

0.09

0.37

-1

1

Cap. Exp./ PPE

83625

0.32

0.30

-0.52

1

Total Factor Productivity (growth rate)

78445

0.04

0.30

-2

2

Sales per Employee (growth rate)

81133

0.05

0.32

-2

2

Value Realized / Exercisable Value

1358

0.18

0.29

0

1

Book Assets ($)

5565

3319

22319

0.25

705983

Age (years)

5565

14.62

13.82

1

53

Market Value (growth rate)

5039

0.06

0.44

-1

1

Sales (growth rate)

5565

0.12

0.35

-1

1

Number of Employees (growth rate)

5019

0.06

0.32

-1

1

Prop. Plant & Equip. (growth rate)

5397

0.10

0.39

-1

1

Cap. Exp./ PPE

5036

0.36

0.30

-0.08

1

Total Factor Productivity (growth rate)

4895

0.04

0.29

-2

1.83

Sales per Employee (growth rate)

5019

0.05

0.30

-2

2

Reported Length of Restated Period
(quarters)

539

4.70

3.71

1

20

Delay between End of Restated Period
and Announcement (quarters)

539

2.21

2.19

0

22

Restated Earnings over Lagged Sales

396

-0.06

0.20

-1

1

year

Freq.

Percent

1997

63

11.01

1998

65

11.36

1999

114

19.93

2000

123

21.50

2001

138

24.13

2002

69

12.06

Total

572

100

D
is
t ri
bu

tio

n

of

An
n

ou

nc
em

en
ts

by

Ye
a

r

Restating Firms

Non Restating Firms

Value Realized / Exercisable Value

Obs

Note: Value Realized / Exercisable Value is (value realized from options exercised) / (value realized from options exercised + value of exercisable
options) from EXECUCOMP. Age is current year minus first year the firm appears in COMPUSTAT. Sample period is 1991-2003.

Table 2 : Insider Trading
Before is a dummy for years preceding the restated period. During is a dummy for restated years. After is a dummy for years following the restated
period. All regressions include year and industry (2-digit SIC) fixed effects. The sample period is 1991-2003. Coefficients are in bold; t-statistics are below
the coefficients. Standard errors are robust and corrected for firm level clustering.
Value Realized from Options Exercised over Value of Exercisable Options

Dependent Variable
(i)

(ii)

(iii)

0.001

0.005

-0.001

0.04

0.23

-0.07

0.053

0.063

0.056

2.17

2.11

2.06

-0.006

0.009

0.004

-0.23

0.32

0.15

Before

During

After
0.025
Lagged Growth Rate of Stock Price
2.62
0.063
Lagged Market Value
6.19
-0.06
Lagged Book Value
-5.73
R2

0.107

0.128

0.124

N

9436

6464

7878

0.0317

0.0484

0.0337

pvalue (Before=During)

Table 3 : Adjusted Dynamics of Restating Firms
The regressions use only restating firms and the dependent variables are relative to the mean of a control group, matched by size, age, and industry. Before
is a dummy for years preceding the restated period. During is a dummy for restated years. After is a dummy for years following the restated period. Sample
period is 1991-2003. Coefficients are in bold, t-statistics are below the coefficients. Standard errors are robust and corrected for firm level clustering.
Sales per
TFP (growth rate) Employee (growth
rate)

Dependent
Variable

Market Value
(growth rate)

Sales (growth
rate)

Number of
Employees
(growth rate)

Prop. Plant &
Equip. (growth
rate)

Cap. Exp./ PPE

Method

ols, difference
from matched
firms

ols, difference
from matched
firms

ols, difference
from matched
firms

ols, difference
from matched
firms

ols, difference
from matched
firms

ols, difference
from matched
firms

ols, difference
from matched
firms

0.052

0.041

0.039

0.043

0.034

-0.001

0.001

7.57

6.6

6.36

5.99

4.51

-0.13

0.24

-0.002

0.028

0.037

0.038

0.034

-0.005

-0.005

-0.17

2.47

3.3

3.06

3.58

-0.55

-0.48

-0.04

-0.035

-0.035

-0.055

-0.017

0.007

0.003

-4.92

-4.14

-4.66

-6.13

-2.64

1.08

0.41

R2

0.014

0.015

0.019

0.02

0.016

0

0

N

5039

5565

5019

5397

5036

4895

5019

0.0014

0.2373

0.892

0.9793

0.1944

0.6677

0.5897

0.0074

0

0

0

0

0.3038

0.4938

0

0

0

0

0

0.3527

0.7863

Before

During

After

pvalue
(Before=During)
pvalue
(During=After)
pvalue
(Before=After)

Table 4 : Adjusted Dynamics around Announcement of Restatement
The regressions use only restating firms and the dependent variables are relative to the mean of a control group, matched by size, age, and industry.
Coefficients are in bold, t-statistics are below the coefficients.
Effect of Size of Restatement
Dependent
Variable

Market Value (log
Sales (log change)
change)

Number of
Employees (log
change)

Prop. Plant &
Equip. (log
change)

Cap. Exp./ PPE

TFP (log change)

Sales per
Employee (log
change)

end of year of
announcement end of previous
year

end of year of
announcement end of previous
year

end of year of
announcement end of previous
year

end of year of
announcement end of previous
year

end of year of
announcement

end of year of
announcement end of previous
year

end of year of
announcement end of previous
year

0.161

0.062

0.195

0.287

0.221

-0.141

-0.112

2.08

0.66

2.33

2.95

3.55

-1.61

-1.28

-0.055

-0.04

-0.028

-0.032

-0.015

-0.013

-0.009

-3.74

-2.18

-1.72

-1.67

-1.15

-0.74

-0.54

R2

0.013

0.001

0.016

0.025

0.039

0.008

0.005

N

337

349

338

340

315

331

338

Restated Earnings
over Lagged Sales

Constant

Table 5 : Predicting Restatement using Corporate Governance
Logit Models estimated in one cross-section in 2002 by pseudo maximum likelihood, with robust standard errors.
Governance is measure in 1995 using IRRC, Q age and assets are measured in 1996, and restatements happen
between 1997 and 2002. Coefficients are in bold, t-statistics are below the coefficients. Out of the 770 firms in the
sample, 99 have a restatement.
Dependent Variable is Dummy for Restatement between 1997 and 2002.
Independent Variables,
all measured in 1998

(i)

(ii)

(iii)

(iv)

(v)

(vi)

0.267
Bebchuck et al. index
2.95
0.158
Gompers et al. index
3.45
0.616
Classified Board
2.33
0.437
Poison Pills
1.74
0.886

Limits to Amend
Corporate Charter

1.51
0.298

Golden Parachute
1.26
0.535

0.555

0.474

0.452

0.447

0.44

1.99

2.07

1.79

1.73

1.71

1.68

0.272

0.246

0.263

0.245

0.245

0.259

2.9

2.58

2.8

2.71

2.68

2.81

0.334

0.297

0.405

0.416

0.428

0.381

0.61

0.52

0.75

0.78

0.81

0.71

770

770

770

770

770

770

Log Tobin's Q

Log Age

Log Assets

N

Table 6 : Industry Dynamics of Non-Restating Firms
Panel of industries created at the 2-digit SIC level from COMPUSTAT. Only firms that do not restate are included. Dependent variables are industry
means. Sample period 1991-2003. Coefficients in bold, t-statistics below coefficients. All regressions include industry fixed effects and year fixed effects.

Market Value
(growth rate)

Sales (growth
rate)

Number of
Employees
(growth rate)

Prop. Plant &
Equip. (growth
rate)

Cap. Exp./ PPE

TFP (growth
rate)

Sales per
Employee
(growth rate)

ols

ols

ols

ols

ols

ols

ols

-0.394

-0.315

-0.467

-0.428

-0.167

0.202

0.232

-2.57

-3.07

-4.26

-3.72

-2.04

2.02

2.31

Year & Industry Fixed
Effects

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

N

796

796

796

796

796

796

796

R2

0.316

0.244

0.157

0.288

0.35

0.069

0.067

Dependent Variable

Average Number of
Restatements in Industry
in Previous Years

Figure 1: Insider Trading at Enron
Bars are shares sold, in millions on the left axis, line is average transaction price, in dollar on the right axis. Source: Thomson
Financials.

3

1996 1997 1998

70
40

0

0

40

1

50

50

1

2

60

60

2

3

70

4

80

Jeffrey Skilling
80

Kenneth Lay

1999 2000 2001

1996 1997 1998

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

80
60
20

0

0

20

40

40

1

60

2

1

Richard Causey
80

Andrew Fastow

1999 2000 2001

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

Figure 2: P/E Ratio and SEC Actions

0

-100

10

0

20

100

30

200

40

300

P/E ratios are from Shiller. SEC actions come from the annual reports of the SEC and include civil injunctive actions and
administrative proceedings. The number of SEC actions is first regressed on the number of publicly traded companies, from
CRSP. The figure shows the residual from this preliminary regression

1940

1960
P/E

1980
Adjusted SEC Actions

2000

Figure 3: Dynamics of Firms Restating Earnings
Growth rates are relative to a control group of firms matched on size, age and industry.

-.1

-.05

0

.05

.1

Mean Growth Rates Relative to Control Group

-3

-2

-1
0
1
Year Relative to Restated Period
Marlet Value Growth
PP&E Growth

2

Employees Growth
TFP Growth

3

Figure 4: Employment Dynamics of Firms Announcing Restatements in 2000 or 2001
Number of employees, in millions.

1997

1998

1999

Restating

2000

2001
Payrolls

2002

42
40

2.3

2.4

120

36

2.6

2.4

125

38

2.8

2.5

130

3

2.6

3.2

2.7

Constant Sample
135

Including Exits

1997

1998

1999

Restating

2000

2001

2002

Non Restat.

-.01

0

.01

.02

.03

Figure 5: Employment Growth Predicted by Lagged Restatements

1994

1996

1998

Actual Non Farm Payroll

2000
Predicted

2002

