NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

UNDERSTANDING THE EFFECTS OF
GOVERNMENT SPENDING ON CONSUMPTION
Jordi Galí
J. David López-Salido
Javier Vallés
Working Paper 11578
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11578
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2005

We wish to thank Alberto Alesina, Javier Andrés, Florin Bilbiie, Günter Coenen, Gabriel Fagan,Eric Leeper,
Ilian Mihov, Valery Ramey, Michael Reiter, Jaume Ventura, Lutz Weinke, co-editor Roberto Perotti, two
anonymous referees, and seminar participants at the Bank of Spain, Bank of England, CREI-UPF,
IGIER-Bocconi, INSEAD, York, Salamanca, NBER Summer Institute 2002, the 1st Workshop on Dynamic
Macroeconomics at Hydra, the EEA Meetings in Stockholm and the 2nd International Research Forum on
Monetary Policy for useful comments and suggestions. Galí acknowledges the Þnancial support and
hospitality of the Banco de España, and CREA-Barcelona Economics for research support. Anton Nakov
provided excellent research assistance. This paper was written while the last author was working at the
Research Department of the Banco de España. The opinions and analyses are the responsability of the
authors and, therefore, do not necessarily coincide with those of the Banco de España or the Eurosystem.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by Jordi Galí, J. David López-Salido and Javier Vallés. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Understanding the Effects of Government Spending on Consumption
Jordi Galí, J. David López-Salido and Javier Vallés
NBER Working Paper No. 11578
August 2005
JEL No. E32, E62
ABSTRACT

Recent evidence suggests that consumption rises in response to an increase in government spending.
That finding cannot be easily reconciled with existing optimizing business cycle models. We extend
the standard new Keynesian model to allow for the presence of rule-of-thumb consumers. We show
how the interaction of the latter with sticky prices and deficit financing can account for the existing
evidence on the effects of government spending.

Jordi Galí
MIT Department of Economics
50 Memorial Drive E52-359
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
jgali@upf.edu
J. David López-Salido
Banco de España
Alcala 48
28014 Madrid
SPAIN
davidl@bde.es
Javier Vallés
Oficina Económica
Presidencia del Gobierno
28071 Madrid
SPAIN
jvalles@presidencia.gob.es

1

Introduction

What are the eﬀects of changes in government purchases on aggregate economic activity? How are those eﬀects transmitted? Even though such questions are central
to macroeconomics and its ability to inform economic policy, there is no widespread
agreement on their answer. In particular, though most macroeconomic models predict that a rise in government purchases will have an expansionary eﬀect on output,
those models often diﬀer regarding the implied eﬀects on consumption. Since the
latter variable is the largest component of aggregate demand, its response is a key
determinant of the size of the government spending multiplier.
The standard RBC and the textbook IS-LM models provide a stark example of
such diﬀerential qualitative predictions. The standard RBC model generally predicts
a decline in consumption in response to a rise in government purchases of goods
and services (henceforth, government spending, for short). In contrast, the IS-LM
model predicts that consumption should rise, hence amplifying the eﬀects of the
expansion in government spending on output. Of course, the reason for the diﬀerential
impact across those two models lies in how consumers are assumed to behave in
each case. The RBC model features inÞnitely-lived Ricardian households, whose
consumption decisions at any point in time are based on an intertemporal budget
constraint. Ceteris paribus, an increase in government spending lowers the present
value of after-tax income, thus generating a negative wealth eﬀect that induces a
cut in consumption.1 By way of contrast, in the IS-LM model consumers behave in
a non-Ricardian fashion, with their consumption being a function of their current
disposable income and not of their lifetime resources. Accordingly, the implied eﬀect
1

The mechanisms underlying those eﬀects are described in detail in Aiyagari et al. (1990), Baxter
and King (1993), Christiano and Eichenbaum (1992), and Fatás and Mihov (2001), among others.
In a nutshell, an increase in (non-productive) government purchases, Þnanced by current or future
lump-sum taxes, has a negative wealth eﬀect which is reßected in lower consumption. It also induces
a rise in the quantity of labor supplied at any given wage. The latter eﬀect leads, in equilibrium,
to a lower real wage, higher employment and higher output. The increase in employment leads, if
suﬃciently persistent, to a rise in the expected return to capital, and may trigger a rise in investment.
In the latter case the size of the multiplier is greater or less than one, depending on parameter values.

1

of an increase in government spending will depend critically on how the latter is
Þnanced, with the multiplier increasing with the extent of deÞcit Þnancing.2
What does the existing empirical evidence have to say regarding the consumption
eﬀects of changes in government spending? Can it help discriminate between the
two paradigms mentioned above, on the grounds of the observed response of consumption? A number of recent empirical papers shed some light on those questions.
They all apply multivariate time series methods in order to estimate the responses
of consumption and a number of other variables to an exogenous increase in government spending. They diﬀer, however, on the assumptions made in order to identify
the exogenous component of that variable. In Section 2 we describe in some detail
the Þndings from that literature that are most relevant to our purposes, and provide
some additional empirical results of our own. In particular, and like several other
authors that preceded us, we Þnd that a positive government spending shock leads
to a signiÞcant increase in consumption, while investment either falls or does not
respond signiÞcantly. Thus, our evidence seems to be consistent with the predictions
of models with non-Ricardian consumers, and hard to reconcile with those of the
neoclassical paradigm.
After reviewing the evidence, we turn to our paper’s main contribution: the development of a simple dynamic general equilibrium model that can potentially account
for that evidence. Our framework shares many ingredients with recent dynamic optimizing sticky price models, though we modify the latter by allowing for the presence
of rule-of-thumb behavior by some households.3 Following Campbell and Mankiw
2

See, e.g., Blanchard (2001). The total eﬀect on output will also depend on the investment
response. Under the assumption of a constant money supply, generally maintained in textbook
versions of that model, the rise in consumption is accompanied by an investment decline (resulting
from a higher interest rate). If instead the central bank holds the interest rate steady in the face
of the increase in government spending, the implied eﬀect on investment is nil. However, any
“intermediate” response of the central bank (i.e., one that does not imply full accommodation of
the higher money demand induced by the rise in output) will also induce a fall in investment in the
IS-LM model.
3
See, e.g., Rotemberg and Woodford (1999), Clarida, Gali and Gertler (1999), or Woodford
(2003) for a description of the standard new Keynesian model.

2

(1989), we assume that rule-of-thumb consumers do not borrow or save; instead,
they are assumed to consume their current income fully. In our model, rule-of-thumb
consumers coexist with conventional inÞnite-horizon Ricardian consumers.
The introduction of rule-of-thumb consumers in our model is motivated by an
extensive empirical literature pointing to substantial deviations from the permanent
income hypothesis. Much of that literature provides evidence of “excessive” dependence of consumption on current income. That evidence is based on the analysis
of aggregate time series4 , as well as natural experiments using micro data (e.g. response to anticipated tax refunds).5 That evidence also seems consistent with the
observation that a signiÞcant fraction of households have near-zero net worth.6 On
the basis of that evidence, Mankiw (2000) calls for the systematic incorporation of
non-Ricardian households in macroeconomic models, and for an examination of the
policy implications of their presence.
As further explained below, the existence of non-Ricardian households cannot in
itself generate a positive response of consumption to a rise in government spending.
To see this, consider the following equilibrium condition
mpnt = µt + ct + ϕnt
where mpnt , ct , and nt represent the (logs) of the marginal product of labor, consumption, and hours worked, respectively. The term ct + ϕnt represents the (log)
marginal rate of substitution, with parameter ϕ > 0 measuring the curvature of the
marginal disutility of labor. Variable µt is thus the wedge between the marginal rate
of substitution and the marginal product of labor, and can be interpreted as the
sum of both the (log) wage and price markups, as discussed in Galí, Gertler, and
López-Salido (2005).
Consider Þrst an economy with a constant wedge, µt = µ for all t. Notice that
4

See, e.g. Campbell and Mankiw (1989), Deaton (1992) and references therein.
See, e.g., Souleles (1999), and Johnson, Parker and Souleles (2004).
6
See, e.g., Wolﬀ (1998)
5

3

the particular case of µ = 0 corresponds to the perfectly competitive case often assumed in the RBC literature. According to both theory and evidence, an increase
in government purchases raises hours and, under standard assumptions, lowers the
marginal product of labor. Thus, it follows that consumption must drop if the previous condition is to be satisÞed. Hence, a necessary condition for consumption to
rise in response to a Þscal expansion is the existence of a simultaneous decline in
the wedge µt . This motivates the introduction in our framework of the assumption
of sticky prices in goods markets (and, at least in one version of our model, of imperfectly competitive labor markets), complementing the presence of non-Ricardian
consumers. As described below, our model predicts responses of aggregate consumption and other variables that are in line with the existing evidence, given plausible
calibrations of the fraction of rule-of-thumb consumers, the degree of price stickiness,
and the extent of deÞcit Þnancing, .
Beyond the narrower focus of the present paper, a simple lesson emerges from our
analysis: allowing for deviations from the strict Ricardian behavior assumed in the
majority of existing macro models may be required in order to capture important
aspects of the economy’s workings.7 Our proposed framework, based on the simple
model of rule-of-thumb consumers of Campbell and Mankiw (1989), while admittedly
ad-hoc, provides in our view a good starting point.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the existing
empirical literature and provides some new evidence. Section 3 lays out the model
and its diﬀerent blocks. Section 4 contains an analysis of the model’s equilibrium
dynamics. Section 5 examines the equilibrium response to a government spending
shock under alternative calibrations, focusing on the response of consumption and its
consistency with the existing evidence. Section 6 summarizes the main Þndings of
the paper and points to potential extensions and directions for further research.
7

In a companion paper (Galí, López-Salido and Vallés (2005)), we study the implications of
rule-of-thumb consumers for the stability properties of Taylor-type rules.

4

2

An Overview of the Evidence

In the present section we start by summarizing the existing evidence on the response
of consumption (and some other variables) to an exogenous increase in government
spending, and provide some new evidence of our own. Most of the existing evidence
relies on structural vector autoregressive models, with diﬀerent papers using alternative identiÞcation schemes. Unfortunately, the data does not seem to speak with a
single voice on this issue: while some papers uncover a large, positive and signiÞcant
response of consumption, others Þnd that such a response is small and often insignificant. As far as we know, however, there is no evidence in the literature pointing
to the large and signiÞcant negative consumption response that would be consistent
with the predictions of the neoclassical model.
Blanchard and Perotti (2002) and Fatás and Mihov (2001) identify exogenous
shocks to government spending by assuming that the latter variable is predetermined
relative to the other variables included in the VAR. Their most relevant Þndings for
our purposes can be summarized as follows. First, a positive shock to government
spending leads to a persistent rise in that variable. Second, the implied Þscal expansion generates a positive response in output, with the associated multiplier being
greater than one in Fatás and Mihov (2001), but close to one in Blanchard and Perotti (2002). Third, in both papers the Þscal expansion leads to large (and signiÞcant)
increases in consumption. Fourth, the response of investment to the spending shock
is found to be insigniÞcant in Fatás and Mihov (2001), but negative (and signiÞcant)
in Blanchard and Perotti (2002).
Here we provide some complementary evidence using an identiÞcation strategy
similar to the above mentioned papers. Using U.S. quarterly data, we estimate the
responses of several macroeconomic variables to a government spending shock. The
latter is identiÞed by assuming that government purchases are not aﬀected contemporaneously (i.e. within the quarter) by the innovations in the other variables contained

5

in a VAR.8 Our VAR includes a measure of government spending, GDP, hours worked,
consumption of nondurables and services, private nonresidential investment, the real
wage, the budget deÞcit, and personal disposable income. In a way consistent with
the model developed below, both government spending and the budget deÞcit enter
the VAR as a ratio to trend GDP, where the latter is proxied by (lagged) potential
output. The remaining variables are speciÞed in logs, following convention.9 .
Figure 1 displays the estimated impulse responses. Total government spending
rises signiÞcantly and persistently, with a half-life of about four years. Output rises
persistently in response to that shock, as predicted by the theory. Most interestingly,
however, consumption is also shown to rise on impact and to remain persistently above
zero. A similar pattern is displayed by disposable income; in fact, as shown in the
bottom right graph, the response of consumption tracks, almost one-for-one, that of
disposable income. With respect to the labor variables, our point estimates imply that
both hours and the real wage rise persistently in response to the Þscal shock, although
with some delay relative to government spending itself.10 By contrast investment falls
slightly in the short run, though the response is not signiÞcant. Finally, the deÞcit
8

Qualitatively, the results below are robust to the use of military spending (instead of total
government purchases) as a predetermined variable in the VAR, as in Rotemberg and Woodford
(1992).
9
We use quarterly U.S. data over the period 1954:I-2003:IV. The series were drawn from Estima’s
USECON database (mnemonics reported in brackets below). These include government (Federal
+ State + Local) consumption and gross investment expenditures (GH), gross domestic product
(GDPH), a measure of aggregate hours obtained by multiplying total civilian employment (LE)
by weekly average hours in manufacturing (LRMANUA), nonfarm business hours (LXNFH), the
real compensation per hour in the nonfarm business sector (LXNFR), consumption of nondurable
and services (CNH+CSH), non-residential investment (FNH), and the CBO estimate of potential
GDP (GDPPOTHQ). All quantity variables are in log levels, and normalized by the size of the
civilian population over 16 years old (LNN). We included four lags of each variable in the VAR.
Our deÞcit measure corresponds to gross government investment (GFDI+GFNI+GSI) minus gross
government savings (obtained from the FRED-II database). The resulting variable, expressed in
nominal terms was normalized by the lagged trend nominal GDP (GDPPOTQ). Finally, disposable
income corresponds to real personal disposable income, also drawn from the FRED-II.
10
Fatas and Mihov (2001) also uncover a signiÞcant rise in the real wage in response to a spending
shock, using compensation per hour in the non-farm business sector as a measure of the real wage.
The positive comovement between hours and the real wage in response to a shock in military spending
was originally emphasized by Rotemberg and Woodford (1992). See also Rotemberg and Woodford
(1995).

6

rises signiÞcantly on impact, remaining positive for about two years.
Our point estimates in Figure 1 imply a government spending multiplier on output,

dYt+k
,
dGt

of 0.78 on impact (k = 0), and of 1.74 at the end of the second year

(k = 8). Such estimated multipliers are of a magnitude similar to the ones reported
by Blanchard and Perotti (2002). They are also roughly consistent with the range of
estimated short-run expenditure multipliers generated by a variety of macroeconometric models.11 Most importantly for our purposes is the observation that the multiplier
on consumption is always positive, going from 0.17 on impact to 0.95 at the end of
the second year.
Table 1 illustrates the robustness of these Þndings to alternative speciÞcations of
the VAR, including number of variables (four vs. eight variable), sample period (full
postwar, post Korean war, and post-1960), and deÞnition of government spending
(excluding and including military spending).12 The left panel of the table reports the
size of the multipliers on output and consumption at diﬀerent horizons (on impact,
one-year, and two-year horizons, respectively).13 While the exact size of the estimated
multipliers varies somewhat across speciÞcations, the central Þnding of a positive
response of consumption holds for the vast majority of cases.14
As mentioned above, some papers in the literature call into question (or at least
qualify) the previous evidence. Perotti (2004) applies the methodology of Blanchard
and Perotti (2002) to several OECD countries. He emphasizes the evidence of subsample instability in the eﬀects of government spending shocks, with the responses
in the 80s and 90s being more muted than in the earlier period. Nevertheless, the
sign and magnitude of the response of private consumption in Perotti’s estimates
largely mimics that of GDP, both across countries and across sample periods. Hence,
11
See Hemming, Kell and Mahfouz (2002) and the survey of the evidence provided in IMF (2004,
chapter 2).
12
See Table 1 for details.
13
The right panel is used below for the purposes of model calibration.
14
The only exception corresponds to the small VAR speciÞcation over the full sample period and
excluding military spending. Yet, the underlying impulse responses (not shown) indicate that the
slightly negative impact eﬀect on consumption is quickly reversed in that case.

7

his Þndings support a positive comovement between consumption and income, conditional on government spending shocks, in a way consistent with the model developed
below (though at odds with the neoclassical model).15
Mountford and Uhlig (2004) apply the agnostic identiÞcation procedure originally
proposed in Uhlig (1997) to identify and estimate the eﬀects of a “balanced budget” and a “deÞcit spending” shock.16 They Þnd that government spending shocks
crowd out both residential and non-residential investment, but they hardly change
consumption (the response of the latter is small and insigniÞcant).
Ramey and Shapiro (1998) use a narrative approach to identify shocks that raise
military spending, and which they codify by means of a dummy variable (widely
known as the "Ramey-Shapiro dummy"). They Þnd that nondurable consumption
displays a slight, though hardly signiÞcant decline, while durables consumption falls
persistently, but only after a brief but quantitatively large rise on impact. They also
Þnd that the product wage decreases, even though the real wage remains pretty much
unchanged.17
Several other papers have used subsequently the identiÞcation scheme proposed
by Ramey and Shapiro in order to study the eﬀects of exogenous changes in government spending on diﬀerent variables. Thus, Edelberg, Eichenbaum and Fisher (1999)
show that a Ramey-Shapiro episode triggers a fall in real wages, an increase in nonresidential investment, and a mild and delayed fall in the consumption of nondurables
and services, though durables consumption increases on impact. More recent work
by Burnside, Eichenbaum and Fisher (2003) using a similar approach reports a ßat
response of aggregate consumption in the short run, followed by a small (and insigniÞcant) rise in that variable several quarters after the Ramey-Shapiro episode is
15

The response of private investment to the same shock tends to be negative, especially in the
second sample period.
16
This method is based on sign and near-zero restrictions on impulse responses.
17
Ramey and Shapiro (1998) provide a potential explanation of the comovements of consumption
and real wages in response to a change in military spending, based on a two-sector model with costly
capital reallocation across sectors, and in which military expenditures are concentrated in one of the
two sectors (manufacturing).

8

triggered.
Another branch of the literature, exempliÞed by the work of Giavazzi and Pagano
(1990), has uncovered the presence of “non-Keynesian eﬀects” (i.e. negative spending
multipliers) during large Þscal consolidations, with output rising signiÞcantly despite
large cuts in government spending. In particular, Perotti (1999) Þnds evidence of a
negative comovement of consumption and government spending during such episodes
of Þscal consolidation (and hence large spending cuts), but only in circumstances
of “Þscal stress” (deÞned by unusually high debt/GDP ratios). In “normal” times,
however, the estimated eﬀects have the opposite sign, i.e. they imply a positive
response of consumption to a rise in government purchases. Nevertheless, as shown
in Alesina and Ardagna (1998), the evidence of non-Keynesian eﬀects during Þscal
consolidations can hardly be interpreted as favorable to the neoclassical model since,
on average, cuts in government spending raise both output and consumption during
those episodes.18
Overall, we view the evidence discussed above as tending to favor the predictions of
the traditional Keynesian model over those of the neoclassical model. In particular,
none of the evidence appears to support the kind of strong negative comovement
between output and consumption predicted by the neoclassical model in response to
changes in government spending. Furthermore, in trying to understand some of the
empirical discrepancies discussed above it is worth emphasizing that the bulk of the
papers focusing on the response to changes in government spending in "ordinary"
times tend to support the traditional Keynesian hypothesis, in contrast with those
that focus on "extraordinary" Þscal episodes (associated with wars or with large Þscal
consolidations triggered by explosive debt dynamics).
In light of those considerations, we view the model developed below as an attempt to account for the eﬀects of government spending shocks in “normal” times,
as opposed to extraordinary episodes. Accordingly, we explore the conditions under
18

See Table 6 in Alesina and Ardagna (1998).

9

which a dynamic general equilibrium model with nominal rigidities and rule-of-thumb
consumers can account for the positive comovement of consumption and government
purchases that arises in response to small exogenous variations in the latter variable.

3

A New Keynesian Model with Rule-of-Thumb
Consumers

The economy consists of two types of households, a continuum of Þrms producing
diﬀerentiated intermediate goods, a perfectly competitive Þrm producing a Þnal good,
a central bank in charge of monetary policy, and a Þscal authority. Next we describe
the objectives and constraints of the diﬀerent agents. Except for the presence of
rule-of-thumb consumers, our framework consists of a standard dynamic stochastic
general equilibrium model with staggered price setting à la Calvo.19

3.1

Households

We assume a continuum of inÞnitely-lived households, indexed by i ∈ [0, 1]. A fraction
1 − λ of households have access to capital markets where they can trade a full set
of contingent securities, and buy and sell physical capital (which they accumulate
and rent out to Þrms). We use the term optimizing or Ricardian to refer to that
subset of households. The remaining fraction λ of households do not own any assets
nor have any liabilities, and just consume their current labor income. We refer to
them as rule of thumb households. Diﬀerent interpretations for that behavior include
myopia, lack of access to capital markets, fear of saving, ignorance of intertemporal
trading opportunities, etc. Our assumptions imply an admittedly extreme form of
non-Ricardian behavior among rule of thumb households, but one that captures in
a simple and parsimonious way some of the existing evidence, without invoking a
19

Most of the recent monetary models with nominal rigidities abstract from capital accumulation.
A list of exceptions includes King and Watson (1996), Yun (1996), Dotsey (1999), Kim (2000) and
Dupor (2002). In our framework, the existence of a mechanism to smooth consumption over time
is important in order for the distinction between Ricardian and non-Ricardian consumers to be
meaningful, thus justifying the need for introducing capital accumulation explicitly.

10

speciÞc explanation. Campbell and Mankiw (1989) provide some aggregate evidence,
based on estimates of a modiÞed Euler equation, of the quantitative importance of
such rule of thumb consumers in the U.S. and other industrialized economies.20
3.1.1

Optimizing Households

Let Cto , and Lot represent consumption and leisure for optimizing households. Preferences are deÞned by the discount factor β ∈ (0, 1) and the period utility U (Cto , Lot ).
A typical household of this type seeks to maximize
E0

∞
X

β t U(Cto , Nto )

(1)

t=0

subject to the sequence of budget constraints
o
Pt (Cto + Ito ) + Rt−1 Bt+1
= Wt Pt Nto + Rtk Pt Kto + Bto + Dto − Pt Tto

(2)

and the capital accumulation equation
o
Kt+1

= (1 − δ)

Kto

µ

Ito
+φ
Kto

¶

Kto

(3)

At the beginning of the period the consumer receives labor income Wt Pt Nto , where
Wt is the real wage, Pt is the price level, and Nto denotes hours of work. He also
receives income from renting his capital holdings Kto to Þrms at the (real) rental cost
Rtk . Bto is the quantity of nominally riskless one-period bonds carried over from period
t − 1, and paying one unit of the numéraire in period t. Rt denotes the gross nominal
return on bonds purchased in period t. Dto are dividends from ownership of Þrms, Tto
denote lump-sum taxes (or transfers, if negative) paid by these consumers. Cto and Ito
denote, respectively, consumption and investment expenditures, in real terms. Pt is
the price of the Þnal good. Capital adjustment costs are introduced through the term
³ o´
φ KIto Kto , which determines the change in the capital stock induced by investment
t

spending Ito . We assume φ0 > 0, and φ00 ≤ 0, with φ0 (δ) = 1, and φ(δ) = δ.
20

Mankiw (2000) reviews more recent microeconomic evidence consistent with that view.

11

In what follows we specialize the period utility—common to all households— to
take the form:
N 1+ϕ
U (C, L) ≡ log C −
1+ϕ
where ϕ ≥ 0.
The Þrst order conditions for the optimizing consumer’s problem can be written
as:

Pt Qt = Et

½

1 = Rt Et {Λt,t+1 }
·
µ
µ o ¶
¶¸¾
It+1
0
k
Λt,t+1 Rt+1 + Qt+1 (1 − δ) + φt+1 −
φt+1
o
Kt+1
Qt =

φ0

1
³ o´

(4)
(5)
(6)

It
Kto

where Λt,t+k is the stochastic discount factor for real k-period ahead payoﬀs given by:
Λt,t+k ≡ β

k

µ

o
Ct+k
Cto

¶−1

(7)

and where Qt is the (real) shadow value of capital in place, i.e., Tobin’s Q. Notice
that, under our assumption on φ, the elasticity of the investment-capital ratio with
1
respect to Q is given by − φ00 (δ)δ
≡ η.

21

We consider two alternative labor market structures. First we assume a competitive labor market, with each household choosing the quantity of hours supplied given
the market wage. In that case the optimality conditions above must be supplemented
with the Þrst-order condition:
Wt = Cto (Nto )ϕ

(8)

Under our second labor market structure wages are set in a centralized manner
by an economy-wide union. In that case hours are assumed to be determined by
Þrms (instead of being chosen optimally by households), given the wage set by the
union. Households are willing to meet the demand from Þrms, under the assumption
21

See Basu and Kimball (2003) for a critical assessment of the predictions of new Keynesian models
with endogenous capital accumulation and a proposal for reconciling those predictions with some of
the evidence, based on the notion of costly investment planning.

12

that wages always remain above all households’ marginal rate of substitution. In
that case condition (8) no longer applies. We refer the reader to section 3.6 below
and Appendix 1 for a detailed description of the labor market under this alternative
assumption.
3.1.2

Rule-of-Thumb Households

Rule-of-thumb households are assumed to behave in a "hand-to-mouth" fashion, fully
consuming their current labor income. They do not smooth their consumption path
in the face of ßuctuations in labor income, nor do they intertemporally substitute
in response to changes in interest rates. As noted above we do not take a stand on
the sources of that behavior, though one may possibly attribute it to a combination
of myopia, lack of access to Þnancial markets, or (continuously) binding borrowing
constraints.
Their period utility is given by
U (Ctr , Lrt )

(9)

and they are subject to the budget constraint:
Pt Ctr = Wt Pt Ntr − Pt Ttr

(10)

Accordingly, the level of consumption will equate labor income net of taxes:
Ctr = Wt Ntr − Ttr

(11)

Notice that we allow taxes paid by rule-of-thumb households (Ttr ) to diﬀer from
those of the optimizing households (Tto ). Under the assumption of a competitive labor
market, the labor supply of rule-of-thumb households must satisfy:
Wt = Ctr (Ntr )ϕ

(12)

Alternatively, when the wage is set by a union, hours are determined by Þrms’
labor demand, and (8) does not apply. Again we refer the reader to the discussion
below.
13

3.1.3

Aggregation

Aggregate consumption and hours are given by a weighted average of the corresponding variables for each consumer type. Formally:
Ct ≡ λ Ctr + (1 − λ) Cto

(13)

Nt = λ Ntr + (1 − λ) Nto

(14)

and

Similarly, aggregate investment and the capital stock are given by
It ≡ (1 − λ) Ito
and
Kt ≡ (1 − λ) Kto

3.2

Firms

We assume a continuum of monopolistically competitive Þrms producing diﬀerentiated intermediate goods. The latter are used as inputs by a (perfectly competitive)
Þrm producing a single Þnal good.
3.2.1

Final Goods Firm

The Þnal good is produced by a representative, perfectly competitive Þrm with a
constant returns technology:
Yt =

µZ

1

Xt (j)

0

²p −1
²p

dj

p
¶ ²p²−1

where Xt (j) is the quantity of intermediate good j used as an input and ²p > 1.
ProÞt maximization, taking as given the Þnal goods price Pt and the prices for the
intermediate goods Pt (j), all j ∈ [0, 1], yields the set of demand schedules
µ
¶−²p
Pt (j)
Xt (j) =
Yt
Pt
³R
´ 1−²1
1
p
as well as the zero proÞt condition Pt = 0 Pt (j)1−²p dj
.
14

3.2.2

Intermediate Goods Firm

The production function for a typical intermediate goods Þrm (say, the one producing
good j) is given by:
Yt (j) = Kt (j)α Nt (j)1−α

(15)

where Kt (j) and Nt (j) represent the capital and labor services hired by Þrm j.22 Cost
minimization, taking the wage and the rental cost of capital as given, implies:
µ
¶ µ ¶
Kt (j)
α
Wt
=
Nt (j)
1−α
Rkt
Real marginal cost is common to all Þrms and given by:

where Ψ ≡ α−α (1 − α)−(1−α) .

¡ ¢α
M Ct = Ψ Rtk (Wt )1−α

Price Setting Intermediate Þrms are assumed to set nominal prices in a staggered
fashion, according to the stochastic time dependent rule proposed by Calvo (1983).
Each Þrm resets its price with probability 1−θ each period, independently of the time
elapsed since the last adjustment. Thus, each period a measure 1 − θ of producers
reset their prices, while a fraction θ keep their prices unchanged.
A Þrm resetting its price in period t will seek to maximize
max
Et
∗
Pt

∞
X
k=0

θk Et {Λt,t+k Yt+k (j) ((Pt∗ /Pt+k ) − M Ct+k )}

subject to the sequence of demand constraints Yt+k (j) = Xt+k (j) =

³

Pt∗
Pt+k

´−²p

Yt+k

and where Pt∗ represents the price chosen by Þrms resetting prices at time t.
The Þrst order condition for the above problem is:
∞
X
k=0

22

θk Et {Λt,t+k Yt+k (j) ((Pt∗ /Pt+k ) − µp M Ct+k )} = 0

Without loss of generality we normalize total factor productivity to unity.

15

(16)

where µp ≡

²p
²p −1

is the gross "frictionless" price markup, and the one prevailing in

a zero inßation steady state. Finally, the equation describing the dynamics for the
aggregate price level is given by:
h
i 1
1−²p
∗ 1−²p 1−²p
Pt = θ Pt−1 + (1 − θ) (Pt )

3.3

(17)

Monetary Policy

In our baseline model the central bank is assumed to set the nominal interest rate
rt ≡ Rt − 1 every period according to a simple linear interest rate rule:
(18)

rt = r + φπ π t

where φπ ≥ 0 and r is the steady state nominal interest rate. An interest rate rule of
the form (18) is the simplest speciÞcation in which the conditions for indeterminacy
and their connection to the Taylor principle can be analyzed. Notice that it is a
particular case of the celebrated Taylor rule (Taylor (1993)), corresponding to a zero
coeﬃcient on the output gap, and a zero inßation target. Rule (18) is said to satisfy
the Taylor principle if and only if φπ > 1. As is well known, in the absence of
rule-of-thumb consumers, that condition is necessary and suﬃcient to guarantee the
uniqueness of equilibrium.23

3.4

Fiscal Policy

The government budget constraint is
Pt Tt + Rt−1 Bt+1 = Bt + Pt Gt
where Tt ≡ λ Ttr + (1 − λ) Tto . Letting gt ≡

Gt −G
, tt
Y

≡

Tt −T
,
Y

(19)
and bt ≡

(Bt /Pt−1 )−(B/P )
,
Y

we henceforth assume a Þscal policy rule of the form
tt = φb bt + φg gt
23

(20)

The “Taylor principle” refers to a property of interest rate rules for which an increase in inßation
eventually leads to a more than one-for-one rise in the nominal interest rate (see Woodford (2001)).

16

where φb and φg are positive constants.
Finally, government purchases (in deviations from steady state, and normalized
by steady state output) are assumed to evolve exogenously according to a Þrst order
autoregressive process:
gt = ρg gt−1 + εt

(21)

where 0 < ρg < 1, and εt represents an i.i.d. government spending shock with
constant variance σ 2ε .

3.5

Market Clearing

The clearing of factor and good markets requires that the following conditions are
satisÞed for all t :
Nt =

Z

1

Nt (j) dj

0

Kt =

Z

1

Kt (j) dj

0

Yt (j) = Xt (j)

for all j

and
Yt = Ct + It + Gt

3.6

(22)

Linearized Equilibrium Conditions

In the present section we derive the log-linear versions of the key optimality and
market clearing conditions that will be used in our analysis of the model’s equilibrium
dynamics. Some of these conditions hold exactly, while others represent Þrst-order
approximations around a zero-inßation steady state. Henceforth, and unless otherwise
noted, lower case letters denote log-deviations with respect to the corresponding
steady state values (i.e., xt ≡ log XXt ).

17

3.6.1

Households

Next we list the log-linearized versions of the above households’ optimality conditions,
expressed in terms of the aggregate variables. The log-linear equations describing the
dynamics of Tobin’s Q and its relationship with investment are given respectively by
k
} − (rt − Et {π t+1 })
qt = β Et {qt+1 } + [1 − β(1 − δ)] Et {rt+1

(23)

it − kt = η qt

(24)

and

The log-linearized capital accumulation equation is:
kt+1 = δ it + (1 − δ) kt

(25)

The log-linearized Euler equation for optimizing households is given by
cot = Et {cot+1 } − (rt − Et {π t+1 })

(26)

Consumption for rule-of-thumb households is given, to a Þrst order approximation
by
crt
where trt ≡

Ttr −T r
.
Y

=

µ

W Nr
Cr

¶

(wt +

nrt )

−

µ

Y
Cr

¶

trt

(27)

As shown in the Appendix, the analysis is simpliÞed by assuming that steady state
consumption is the same across household types, i.e. C r = C o = C, an outcome that
can always be guaranteed by an appropriate choice of T r and T o . Since the focus of
our paper is on the diﬀerential responses to shocks, as opposed to steady state diﬀerences across households, we view that assumption as being largely innocuous, while
simplifying the algebra considerably.24 In particular, under the above assumption,
24

Notice that under perfectly competitive labor markets marginal rates of substitution are equalized across households. The assumption of equal consumption levels in the steady state thus implies
that N r = N o = N as well. As discussed below, under our alternative labor market structure
equality of hours across household types holds independently of their relative level of consumption.
See Appendix 1 for details.

18

the log-linearized expressions for aggregate consumption and hours take the following
simple form:
ct = λ crt + (1 − λ) cot

(28)

nt = λ nrt + (1 − λ) not

(29)

and

Under perfectly competitive labor markets, we can log-linearize expressions (8),
(12), and combine them with (28) and (29) to obtain:
wt = ct + ϕ nt

(30)

Under the assumption of imperfectly competitive labor markets, one can also
interpret equation (30) as a log-linear approximation to a generalized wage schedule
of the form Wt = H(Ct , Nt ). In that case, and under the assumption that each Þrm
decides how much labor to hire (given the wage), Þrms will allocate labor demand
uniformly across households, independently of their type. Accordingly, we will have
Ntr = Nto for all t.25 In Appendix 1 we show how a wage schedule of that form arises
in an economy in which wages are set by unions in order to maximize a weighted
average of the utility of both types of households.
Independently of the assumed labor market structure we can derive an intertemporal equilibrium condition for aggregate consumption of the form:
ct = Et {ct+1 } − σ (rt − Et {π t+1 }) − Θn Et {∆nt+1 } + Θτ Et {∆trt+1 }

(31)

In the case of perfectly competitive labor markets, the previous equation results
from combining (8), (12), (26), (27), (28) and (29), and the associated coeﬃcients are
25

We implicitly assume that the resulting wage markup is suﬃciently high (and ßuctuations
suﬃciently small) that the inequalities H(Ct , Nt ) > Ctj Ntϕ for j = r, o are satisÞed at all times.
Both conditions guarantee that both type of households will be willing to meet Þrms’ labor demand
at the prevaling wage. Notice also that consistency with balanced-growth requires that H can be
written as Ct h(Nt ) (which happens to be consistent with (30)).

19

given by:
σ ≡ (1 − λ)Γ [µp ϕγ c + (1 − α)]
Θn ≡ λ Γ(1 − α)(1 + ϕ)ϕ
Θt ≡ λ Γµp ϕ
where Γ ≡

1
,
µp ϕγ c +(1−α)(1−λ(1+ϕ))

and γ c ≡

C
Y

is the steady state consumption-output

ratio (which, does not depend on λ, as shown in Appendix 2 ). See Appendix 3 for
details of the derivation.
By contrast, under the assumption of an imperfectly competitive labor market,
(31) can be derived from combining (30), (26), (27), (28), (29), as well as the assumption nrt = not = nt . In that case the expressions for the coeﬃcients in (31) are given
by:
σ ≡ (1 − λ)Φγ c µp
Θn ≡ λΦ(1 − α)(1 + ϕ)
Θt ≡ λΦµp
where Φ ≡

1
.
γ c µp −λ(1−α)

Notice that independently of the labor market structure assumed we have limλ→0
σ = 1, limλ→0 Θn = 0, and limλ→0 Θτ = 0, i.e., as the fraction of rule-of-thumb
consumers becomes negligible, the aggregate Euler equation approaches its standard
form given our utility speciÞcation.
Discussion A number of features of the above equilibrium conditions are worth
stressing. First, notice that the Euler equation (31) is the only log-linear equilibrium
condition involving aggregate variables which displays a dependence on λ, the fraction
of rule of thumb households..
Second, the presence of rule-of-thumb households generates a direct eﬀect of employment on the level of consumption (and, thus, on aggregate demand), beyond the
20

eﬀect of the long-term interest rate. This can be seen by "integrating" (31) to obtain
the following expression in levels:
ct = Θn nt −

Θτ trt

−σ

∞
X
k=0

Et {rt+k − πt+k+1 }

Thus, for any given path of real interest rates and taxes, an expansion in government purchases has the potential to raise aggregate consumption through its induced
expansion in employment and the consequent rise in the real wage, labor income and,
as a result, consumption of rule-of-thumb households. In turn, the resulting increase
in consumption would raise aggregate demand, output and employment even further,
thus triggering a multiplier eﬀect analogous to the one found in traditional Keynesian
models.
Third, the ultimate eﬀect of government purchases on aggregate consumption
depends on the response of taxes (accruing to rule-of-thumb households) and the
expected long term real rate. Those responses will, in turn, be determined by the
Þscal and monetary policy rules in place. Nevertheless, it is clear from the previous
equation that in order for aggregate consumption to increase in response to a rise in
government spending, the response of taxes and interest rates should be suﬃciently
muted. We return to this point below, when analyzing the sensitivity of our results
to alternative calibrations of those policies.
3.6.2

Firms

Log-linearization of (16) and (17) around the zero inßation steady state yields the familiar equation describing the dynamics of inßation as a function of the log deviations
of the average markup from its steady state level

where λp =

(1−βθ)(1−θ)
θ

π t = β Et {π t+1 } − λp µ
bpt

(32)

µ
bpt = (yt − nt ) − wt

(33)

and, ignoring constant terms,

21

or, equivalently,
µ
bpt = (yt − kt ) − rtk

(34)

Furthermore, as shown in Woodford (2003), the following "aggregate production
function" holds, up to a Þrst order approximation:
yt = (1 − α)nt + αkt
3.6.3

(35)

Market clearing

Log-linearization of the market clearing condition of the Þnal good around the steady
state yields:
yt = γ c ct + γ i it + gt
where γ i ≡
3.6.4

I
Y

(36)

represents the share of investment on output in the steady state.

Fiscal Policy

Linearization of the government budget constraint (19) around a steady state with
zero debt and a balanced primary budget yields
bt+1 = (1 + ρ) (bt + gt − tt )
where ρ ≡ β −1 − 1 pins down the steady state interest rate. Plugging in the Þscal
policy rule assumed above we obtain:
bt+1 = (1 + ρ) (1 − φb ) bt + (1 + ρ) (1 − φg ) gt

(37)

Hence, under our assumptions, a necessary and suﬃcient condition for non-explosive
debt dynamics is given by (1 + ρ) (1 − φb ) < 1, or equivalently
φb >

ρ
1+ρ

22

4

Analysis of Equilibrium Dynamics

Combining all the equilibrium conditions and doing some straightforward, though
tedious, substitutions we can obtain a system of stochastic diﬀerence equations describing the log-linearized equilibrium dynamics of the form
A Et {xt+1 } = B xt + εt

(38)

where xt ≡ (nt , ct , π t , kt , bt , gt−1 )0 . The elements of matrices A and B are all
functions of the underlying structural parameters, as shown in Appendix 3. We start
by describing the calibration that we use as a benchmark.
Each period is assumed to correspond to a quarter. We set the discount factor
β equal to 0.99. We assume a steady state price markup µp equal to 0.2. The rate
of depreciation δ is set to 0.025. The elasticity of output with respect to capital, α,
is assumed to be 13 , a value roughly consistent with observed income shares, given
the assumed steady state price markup. All the previous parameter values remain
unchanged in the analysis below. Next we turn to the parameters for which we conduct some sensitivity analysis, distinguishing between the non-policy and the policy
parameters.
Our baseline setting for the weight of rule-of-thumb households λ is 12 . This is
within the range of estimated values in the literature of the weight of the rule-ofthumb behavior (see Mankiw (2000)). The fraction of Þrms that keep their prices
unchanged, θ, is given a baseline value of 0.75, which corresponds to an average price
duration of one year. We set the baseline value for the elasticity of wages with respect
to hours (ϕ) equal to 0.2. This is consistent with Rotemberg and Woodford’s (1997,
1999) calibration of the elasticity of wages with respect to output of 0.3 combined
with an elasticity of output with respect to hours of 23 . Finally, we follow King and
Watson (1996), and set η (the elasticity of investment with respect to q) equal to 1.0
in our baseline calibration.
The baseline policy parameters are chosen as follows. We set the size of the
23

response of the monetary authority to inßation, φπ , to 1.5, a value commonly used in
empirical Taylor rules (and one that satisÞes the so-called Taylor principle). In order
to calibrate the parameters describing the Þscal policy rule (20) and the government
spending shock (21) (i.e. φg , φb , and ρg ) we use the VAR-based estimates of the
dynamic responses of government spending and deÞcit (see Table 1 for details). In
particular, we set the baseline value of the parameter ρg = 0.9 that matches the
half-life of the responses of government spending. The latter value reßects the highly
persistent response of government spending to its own shock. We obtain the values
of the parameter φg from the diﬀerence between the estimated impact responses
of government spending and deÞcit, respectively. As can be seen from Table 1, our
(average) estimates suggest a value for that parameter equal to 0.10. Interestingly, the
estimates in Table IV of Blanchard and Perotti (2002) imply a corresponding estimate
of 0.13, very much in line with our estimates and baseline calibration. Finally, and
given ρg and φg , we calibrate parameter φb such that the dynamics of government
spending (21) and debt (37) are consistent with the horizon at which the deÞcit is
back to zero in our estimates. Hence, in our baseline calibration we set φb = 0.33,
in line with the estimated averages for diﬀerent subsamples, as described in Table
1. Finally, we set γ g = 0.2, which roughly corresponds to the average share of
government purchases in GDP in postwar U.S. data.
Much of the sensitivity analysis below focuses on the share of rule-of-thumb households (λ) and its interaction with parameters ρg , θ, η, ϕ and φπ . Given the importance
of the Þscal rule parameters in the determination of aggregate consumption (and, indirectly, of other variables) we will also analyze the eﬀect of alternative values for the
policy parameters φb and φg .

24

4.1

Rule-of-Thumb Consumers, Indeterminacy, and the Taylor Principle

Next we provide a brief analysis of the conditions that guarantee the uniqueness of
equilibrium. A more detailed analysis of those conditions for an economy similar to
the one considered here (albeit without a Þscal block) can be found in Galí, LópezSalido and Vallés (2004). In that paper we show how the presence of rule-of-thumb
consumers can alter dramatically the equilibrium properties of an otherwise standard
dynamic sticky price model. In particular, under certain parameter conÞgurations
the economy’s equilibrium may be indeterminate (and thus may display stationary
sunspot ßuctuations) even when the interest rate rule is one that satisÞes the Taylor
principle (which corresponds to φπ > 1 in our model).
Figure 2 illustrates that phenomenon for the model developed in the previous
section. In particular the Þgure displays the regions in (λ, θ) space associated with
either a unique equilibrium or indeterminacy, when the remaining parameters are
kept at their baseline values. We see that indeterminacy arises whenever a high
degree of price stickiness coexists with a suﬃciently large weight of rule-of-thumb
households. Both frictions are thus seen to be necessary in order for indeterminacy
to emerge as a property of the equilibrium dynamics. The Þgure also makes clear that
the equilibrium is unique under our baseline calibration (λ = 12 , θ = 0.75). We refer
the reader to Galí, López-Salido and Vallés (2004) for a discussion of the intuition
underlying that violation of the Taylor principle.26

5

The Eﬀects of Government Spending Shocks

In the present section we analyze the eﬀects of shocks to government spending in
the model economy described above. In particular, we focus on the conditions under which an exogenous increase in government spending has a positive eﬀect on
26

See also Bilbiie (2005) for a subsequent analysis in a model without capital accumulation, and
for a re-assessment of the evolution of Fed policies over the postwar period, in light of that analysis.

25

consumption, as found in much of the existing evidence. Throughout we restrict
ourselves to conÞgurations of parameter values for which the equilibrium is unique.
Figure 3 shows the contemporaneous response of output, consumption and investment (all normalized by steady state output) to a positive government spending
shock, as a function of λ, the fraction of rule-of-thumb consumers. The size of the
shock is normalized to a one percent of steady state output. Given the above normalizations, the plotted values can be interpreted as impact multipliers. We restrict
the range of λ values considered to those consistent with a unique equilibrium. The
remaining parameters are kept at their baseline values. Figure 3.A corresponds to
the economy with competitive labor markets, Figure 3.B to its imperfectly competitive counterpart. In the former case, consumption declines for most values of λ
considered, except for implausible large ones. The (absolute) size of the decline is,
however, decreasing in λ, reßecting the oﬀsetting role of rule-of-thumb behavior on
the conventional negative wealth and intertemporal substitution eﬀects triggered by
the Þscal expansion. When imperfect labor markets are assumed, the possibility of
crowding-in of consumption emerges for values of λ above a threshold value of roughly
1
,
4

a more plausible value. Notice also that the government spending multiplier on

inßation and output rises rapidly when λ increases, attaining values roughly in line
with the empirical evidence reviewed in section 2.
Figure 4 displays the dynamic responses of some key variables in our model to
a positive government spending shock under the baseline calibration, and compares
them to those generated by a neoclassical economy. The latter corresponds to a particular calibration of our model, with no price rigidities and no rule-of-thumb consumers
(θ = λ = 0). Again we consider two alternative labor market structures, competitive
and non-competitive. In each case the top-left graph displays the pattern of the three
Þscal variables (spending, taxes and the deÞcit) in response to the shock considered.
Notice that the pattern of both variables is close to the one estimated in the data
(see Figure 1), consistently with our calibration of the Þscal policy rule. The Þgures

26

illustrates the amplifying eﬀects of the introduction of rule-of-thumb consumers and
sticky prices: the response of output and consumption is systematically above that
generated by the neoclassical model.27 Furthermore, in the baseline model, and in
contrast with the neoclassical model, the increase in aggregate hours coexists with an
increase in real wages. Overall we view the model’s predictions under the assumption of imperfectly competitive labor markets as matching the empirical responses,
at least qualitatively.
Figure 5 shows the government spending (impact) multipliers on output, consumption, and investment, as a function of ρg , the parameter measuring the persistence
of the spending process. In order to avoid excessive dispersion, we henceforth report
Þndings only for the non-competitive labor market speciÞcation, which the analysis
above pointed to as the most promising one given our objectives. Each of the four
graphs in the Figure corresponds to a diﬀerent parameter conÞguration. The top-left
graph is associated with our baseline calibration. Notice that that in that case the
crowding-in eﬀect on consumption (and the consequent enhancement of the output
multiplier) is decreasing in ρg . The intuition for that result is straightforward: higher
values of that parameter are associated with stronger (negative) wealth eﬀects lowering the consumption of Ricardian households. Yet, we see that even for values of
ρg as high as 0.9 a positive (though relatively small) eﬀect on aggregate consumption
emerges. Notice also that the response of investment to the same shock is negative
over the admissible range of ρg . Yet, for values of the latter parameter close to unity
(i.e., near-random walk processes for government spending) that response becomes
negligible.28
The other graphs in Figure 5 report analogous information for three alternative
27

That monotonicity contrasts with some of the patterns observed in the data; we conjecture this
is unrelated to the issue at hand and could be Þxed by the introduction of habit formation and other
mechanisms that generate inertia in aggregate demand.
28
As shown below the response of investment depend crucially upon the speciÞcation of capital adjustment costs. Lower capital adjustment costs tend to increase the (negative) response of
investment (see middle panel of Figure 6).

27

"extreme" calibrations. Each calibration assumes a limiting value for one (or two)
parameters, while keeping the rest at their baseline values. Thus, the flexible price
scenario assumes θ = 0, the no rule-of-thumb economy assumes λ = 0, whereas
the neoclassical calibration combines both ßexible prices and lack of rule-of-thumb
consumers (θ = λ = 0). Notice that when prices are fully ßexible, or when all
consumers are Ricardian (or when both features coexist, as under the neoclassical
calibration) consumption is always crowded-out in response to a rise in government
spending, independently of the degree of persistence of the latter. This illustrates
the diﬃculty of reconciling the evidence with standard dynamic general equilibrium
models, as well as the role played by both sticky prices and rule-of-thumb consumers
to match that evidence.
The graphs in Figure 6 summarize the sensitivity of the impact multipliers to
variations in three non-policy parameters to the government spending shock. The
Þrst graph explores the sensitivity of the impact multipliers to the degree of price
stickiness, as indexed by parameter θ. Notice that the size of the response of output
is increasing in the degree of price rigidities, largely as a result of a stronger multiplier
eﬀect on consumption. Given baseline values for the remaining parameters, we see
that values of θ slightly higher than 0.5 are consistent with a positive response of
aggregate consumption. That range for θ includes the values generally viewed as
consistent with the micro evidence and, hence, used in most calibrations. The two
middle and bottom graphs show the impact multipliers when the degree of capital
adjustment costs, η, and the wage elasticity parameter, ϕ change. High capital
adjustment costs (i.e., low η) tend to dampen the fall in investment, but enhance
the positive response of consumption and output. Finally, we notice that the impact
multipliers are relatively insensitive to changes in ϕ.
Figure 7 illustrates the sensitivity of the model’s predictions to the three policy
parameters (φπ ,φg , φb ), each considered in turn. The top graph shows an inverse
relationship between the size of the impact multipliers and the strength of the central

28

bank’s response to inßation (φπ ). Intuitively, a large φπ leads to a larger increase in the
real rate in response to the higher inßation induced by the Þscal expansion; as a result
consumption of Ricardian households declines further, dampening the total eﬀect on
aggregate consumption. That Þnding should not be surprising once we realize that in
staggered price setting models like ours the central bank can approximate arbitrarily
well the ßexible price equilibrium allocation by following an interest rate rule that
responds with suﬃcient strength to changes in inßation. Hence, an increase in φπ
aﬀects the output and consumption multipliers in a way qualitatively similar to an
increase in price ßexibility (i.e. a decline in θ), as described above.
Finally, the second and third graphs show the sensitivity of the multiplier to
variations in the two parameters of the Þscal rule. In particular, and of most interest
given our objectives, we see how a positive comovement of consumption and output in
response to government spending shocks requires a suﬃciently high response of taxes
to debt (a high φb ), and a suﬃciently low response of taxes to current government
spending (i.e. a low φg ). Such a conÞguration of Þscal parameters will tend to imply a
large but not-too-persistent deÞcit in response to an increase in government spending,
a pattern largely consistent with the empirical evidence described in Section 2.

6

Summary and Assessment of the Model

The analysis above has shown how the interaction between rule-of-thumb behavior
by some households (for which consumption equals labor income) and sticky prices
(modeled as in the recent new Keynesian literature), make it possible to generate an
increase in consumption in response to a persistent expansion in government spending,
in a way consistent with much of the recent evidence. Rule-of-thumb consumers partly
insulate aggregate demand from the negative wealth eﬀects generated by the higher
levels of (current and future) taxes needed to Þnance the Þscal expansion, while
making it more sensitive to current disposable income. Sticky prices make it possible
for real wages to increase (or, at least, to decline by a smaller amount) even in the face
29

of a drop in the marginal product of labor, as the price markup may adjust suﬃciently
downward to absorb the resulting gap. The combined eﬀect of a higher real wage and
higher employment raises current labor income and hence stimulates the consumption
of rule-of-thumb households. The possible presence of countercyclical wage markups
(as in the version of the model with non-competitive labor markets developed above)
provides additional room for a simultaneous increase in consumption and hours and,
hence, in the marginal rate of substitution, without requiring a proportional increase
in the real wage.
Most importantly, our framework generates a positive comovement of consumption
and government spending under conÞgurations of parameter values that are empirically plausible, and those conventionally assumed in the business cycle literature.
Thus, we view our results as providing a potential solution to the seeming conßict
between empirical evidence and the predictions of existing DSGE models regarding
the eﬀects of government spending shocks.
In the present paper we kept both the model and its analysis as simple as possible,
and focused on a single issue. As a result, we left out many possible extensions and
avenues for further exploration. Thus, for instance, our theoretical analysis assumes
that government spending is Þnanced by means of lump-sum taxes (current or future).
If only distortionary income taxes were available to the government, the response of
the diﬀerent macroeconomic variables to a government spending shock will generally
diﬀer from the one obtained in the economy with lump-sum taxes analyzed above,
and will depend on the composition and timing of the taxation.29
Allowing for staggered nominal wage setting or some form of real wage rigidity
constitutes another potentially useful extension of our framework, one that is likely
to have a signiÞcant eﬀect on the response of real wages and, hence, of labor income
and consumption to any Þscal shock.
29

An example of work in that direction is given by Bilbiie and Straub (2004), who study the
interaction of distortionary taxes and rule of thumb households, albeit in a model without capital
accumulation.

30

Another avenue worth pursuing is the introduction of rule-of-thumb consumers
in medium-scale DSGE models of the sort developed by Smets and Wouters (2003)
and Christiano, Eichenbaum and Evans (2005). Those models incorporate many of
the features that have been shown to be useful in accounting for diﬀerent aspects of
economic ßuctuations, and which have been assumed away in the model developed
above. Such a richer version of our model could be taken to the data, and generate
estimates of the quantitative importance of rule of thumb consumers and their role
in shaping historical economic ßuctuations.30
A number of papers have documented a stronger interest rate response to changes
in inßation during the past two decades, relative to the pre-Volcker era.31 There is
also substantial evidence pointing to a rise in asset market participation over the
postwar period, which in the context of our model could be interpreted as a decline
in the fraction of rule of thumb consumers. The model developed above predicts
a reduction in the government spending multiplier on consumption and output, in
response to both developments. In that spirit, Bilbiie, Meier and Muller (2005)
explore the implications of those changes in the context of a model similar to ours,
and suggest those developments may explain part of the observed decline in Þscal
multipliers uncovered by Perotti (2004) and others.
Finally, one would want to consider some of the normative implications of our
framework: in a model with the two types of consumers considered above, the monetary and Þscal policy responses to shocks of diﬀerent nature can be expected to
have distributional eﬀects, which should be taken into account in the design of those
policies. Exploring the implications of the present model for optimal monetary policy
design constitutes an additional interesting avenue for future research.32

30

See Coenen and Straub (2004) and Erceg, Guerrieri and Gust (2005) for promising early eﬀorts
in that direction.
31
See, e.g. Clarida, Galí and Gertler (2000).
32
This is the road taken by Amato and Laubach (2003), albeit in the context of an alternative
model of rule-of-thumb behavior.

31

Appendix 1: Alternative Labor Market Structures
In the present Appendix we describe two alternative models of wage determination
that generate a log-linear aggregate equilibrium condition corresponding to (30) in
the text.
Perfectly Competitive Labor Markets
When households choose optimally their labor supply taking wages as given the
intratemporal optimality condition takes the form,
Wt = Ctj (Ntj )ϕ
or, in logs
wt ≡ cjt + ϕ njt

(39)

for j = r, o.
Notice that under our assumption of equality of steady state consumption across
household types, steady state hours will also be equated. Hence we can write
nt = λnrt + (1 − λ)not
which together with (28) and (39) allows us to obtain the aggregate equilibrium
condition
wt ≡ ct + ϕ nt

Wage-setting by Unions
Consider a model with a continuum of unions, each of which represents workers
of a certain type. Eﬀective labor input hired by Þrm j is a CES function of the
quantities of the diﬀerent labor types employed,
µZ 1
¶ ²w²w−1
²w −1
Nt (j) =
Nt (j, i) ²w di
0

32

where ²w is the elasticity of substitution across diﬀerent types of households. The
fraction of rule-of-thumb and Ricardian consumers is uniformly distributed across
worker types (and hence across unions). Each period, a typical union (say, representing worker of type z) sets the wage for its workers in order to maximize the objective
function
·

¸
·
¸
1
Nt1+ϕ (z)
1
Nt1+ϕ (z)
max λ
Wt (z)Nt (z) −
+ (1 − λ)
Wt (z)Nt (z) −
Ctr (z)
1+ϕ
Cto (z)
1+ϕ
subject to a labor demand schedule
Nt (z) =

µ

Wt (z)
Wt

¶−²w

Nt

Since consumption will generally diﬀer between the two types of consumers, the
union weighs labor income with their respective marginal utility of consumption (i.e.
1
Ctr

and

1
).
Cto

Notice that, in writing down the problem above, we have assumed that

the union takes into account the fact that Þrms allocate labor demand uniformly
across diﬀerent workers of type z, independently of their household type. It follows
that, in the aggregate, we will have Ntr = Nto = Nt for all t .
The Þrst order condition of this problem can be written as follows (after invoking
symmetry, and thus dropping the z index)
µ
¶
1−λ
λ
+
Wt = µw
r
o
MRSt
M RSt
where M RStr ≡ Ctr Ntϕ , M RSto ≡ Cto Ntϕ , and µw ≡

(40)

²w
.
²w −1

Log-linearizing expression (40) and ignoring constant terms yields the wage schedule
wt = χr mrsrt + χo mrsot

where χr ≡

λW
,
MRS r µw

χo ≡

= e
ct + ϕ(χr + χo ) nt

(1−λ) W
,
MRS o µw

and e
ct ≡ χr crt + χo cot .

Notice that, to the extent that tax policy equates steady state consumption across
household types (i.e. C r = C o ) we will have M RS r = M RS o and, hence, χr = λ and
33

χo = 1 − λ. We can then rewrite the previous equilibrium condition as
wt ≡ ct + ϕ nt
which corresponds to the equation (30) in the text.
Under the present scenario we assume that the wage markup µw is suﬃciently large
(and the shocks suﬃciently small) so that the conditions Wt > M RStj for j = r, o
are satisÞed for all t. Both conditions guarantee that both type of households will be
willing to meet Þrms’ labor demand at the prevailing wage.

34

Appendix 2. Steady State Analysis
In this short appendix we show that the steady state ratio of aggregate consumption to total output does not depend upon the fraction of rule-of-thumb consumers.
In doing so, we just notice that the market clearing condition for Þnal goods implies:
G
I
−
Y
Y
δα
= 1 − ¡ Y ¢ − γg
α K
δα
= (1 − γ g ) −
(ρ + δ) µp

γc = 1 −

where the last equality follows from the fact that in the steady state Rk =

α Y
µp K

(implied by the constant marginal cost) and Rk = (ρ + δ) (implied by a constant Q).
Notice that this share of consumption on total output it is independent of the share
of rule-of-thumb consumers and our assumption on the labor market structure.

35

Appendix 3. Derivation of the Reduced Dynamical System
The equilibrium conditions describing the model dynamics are given by expressions (30)-(37). Now we reduce those conditions to the Þve variable system (38) in
terms of hours, consumption, inßation, capital and government spending.
The Þrst equation in the system (38) corresponds to the linearized capital accumulation equation (25), with it substituted out using market clearing condition (36)
and replacing yt subsequently using the production function (35):
µ
¶
δα
δ(1 − α)
δ γc
δ
kt +
nt −
ct −
gt
kt+1 = 1 − δ +
1−e
γc
1−e
γc
1 − γec
1 − γec

(41)

where e
γ c = γ c +γ g . In order to derive the second equation in (38) we start by rewriting

the inßation equation (32) in terms of variables contained in xt . Using (33) and (30)
we obtain an expression for the marginal cost as a function of the consumption output
ratio and aggregate hours
µt = yt − ct − (1 + ϕ) nt

(42)

Substituting the previous expression (42) into (32), and making use of (35) yields
the second equation in (38)
π t = β Et {π t+1 } + λp [ct − yt + (1 + ϕ) nt ]
= β Et {π t+1 } + λp ct − αλp kt + (α + ϕ)λp nt

(43)

Aggregate Euler Equation: the Case of Perfectly Competitive Labor
Markets As noticed above, under the assumption of perfectly competitive labor
markets, we can log-linearize expressions (8), (12), and combine them with (28) and
(29) to yield expression (30). From log-linearizing expression (12) we obtain an
expression for the evolution of the hours worked by the rule-of-thumb consumers
36

nrt = ϕ−1 (wt − crt )
We now substitute the previous expression as well as (30) into expression (27).
After rearranging terms this yields crt as a function only of aggregate variables,
[µp γ c ϕ + (1 − α)] crt = (1 − α)(1 + ϕ) ct + (1 − α)(1 + ϕ)ϕ nt − µp ϕ trt

(44)

As before noticed, we also apply the operator (1 − L−1 ) to expression (28), which
yields
ct − Et {ct+1 } = λ [crt − Et {crt+1 }] + (1 − λ) [cot − Et {cot+1 }]
Finally, we substitute expressions (44) and (26) into the previous one, which after
rearranging terms, yields the Euler equation for aggregate consumption presented in
the main text
ct = Et {ct+1 } −
where
Γ≡

1
σ
e

1
(rt − Et {π t+1 }) − Θn Et {∆nt+1 } + Θτ Et {∆trt+1 }
σ
e

≡ (1 − λ)Γ [µp ϕγ c + (1 − α)], Θn ≡ λΓ(1 − α)(1 + ϕ)ϕ, Θt ≡ λΓµp ϕ, and

1
.
γ c µp ϕ+(1−α)(1−λ(1+ϕ))

Aggregate Euler Equation: the Case of Imperfectly Competitive Labor
Markets We Þrst substitute expression (30) into expression (27), this yields

crt

µ

¶
µ ¶
WN
Y
=
[ct + (1 + ϕ)nt ] −
trt
C
C
(1 − α)
(1 − α)(1 + ϕ)
1 r
=
ct +
nt −
t
p
p
µ γc
µ γc
γc t

We proceed to use the operator (1 − L−1 ) into the previous expression yielding
crt − Et {crt+1 } =

(1 − α)
[ct − Et {ct+1 }] +
γ c µp
(1 − α)(1 + ϕ)
1
[nt − Et {nt+1 }] − [trt − Et {trt+1 }]
p
γc µ
γc
37

(45)

We also apply the operator (1 − L−1 ) to expression (28), which yields
ct − Et {ct+1 } = λ [crt − Et {crt+1 }] + (1 − λ) [cot − Et {cot+1 }]
Finally, we substitute expressions (45) and (26) into the previous one, which after
rearranging terms yields an Euler-like equation for aggregate consumption:
ct

γ c µp (1 − λ)
= Et {ct+1 } −
(rt − Et {π t+1 })
γ c µp − λ (1 − α)
λ (1 + ϕ) (1 − α)
Et {∆nt+1 }
−
γ c µp − λ (1 − α)
λ µp
+
Et {∆trt+1 }
p
γ c µ − λ (1 − α)

or, more compactly,
ct = Et {ct+1 } −
where

1
σ
e

1
(rt − Et {π t+1 }) − Θn Et {∆nt+1 } + Θt Et {∆trt+1 }
σ
e

≡ γ c Φ(1 − λ)µp , Θn ≡ λΦ(1 − α)(1 + ϕ), Θt ≡ λΦµp , and Φ ≡

1
,
γ c µp −λ(1−α)

which are the coeﬃcients of this expression in the text.
Plugging into the Euler equation the interest rate rule (18), the Þscal rule (20),
and using the fact the government spending follows a Þrst order autoregressive process
(21) we obtain the third equation in (38):
ct − Θn nt +

φπ
1
π t = Et {ct+1 } + Et {π t+1 } − Θn Et {nt+1 }
σ
e
σ
e
+Θt φb ∆bt+1 + Θt φg (ρg − 1) gt

(46)

In order to derive the fourth equation we Þrst combine (42) and (34) to obtain
rtk = ct − kt + (1 + ϕ)nt . The latter expression and the interest rate rule (18), allows
us to rewrite the equations describing the dynamics of Tobin’s q and investment as
follows:
it − kt = β Et {(it+1 − kt+1 )}
+η[1 − β(1 − δ)] [Et {ct+1 } − kt+1 + (1 + ϕ) Et {nt+1 }]
−ηφπ πt + η Et {π t+1 }
38

Finally, substituting the relationship
¶
µ
1
[(1 − α)nt − γ c ct − gt − (1 − γec − α)kt ]
it − kt =
1−e
γc

(which can be derived by combining the goods market clearing condition with the
production function) into the previous equation and rearranging terms we obtain the
fourth equation of our dynamical system
(1 − α) nt − γ c ct − (1 − e
γ c − α) kt + (1 − γec )ηφπ π t = [ω(1 + ϕ) + β(1 − α)] Et {nt+1 }
+(ω − βγ c ) Et {ct+1 }

−[ω + β(1 − e
γ c − α)] kt+1

+(1 − e
γ c )η Et {π t+1 }

(47)

+(1 − βρg ) gt
where ω ≡ η[1 − β(1 − δ)](1 − γec ) > 0.

The last two equations of the system correspond to expression (37) describing the

debt accumulation and the autoregressive process for government spending (21).
Hence the system of equations (41), (43), (46), (47), (37), and (21) can be written
in a matrix form as follows

A Et {xt+1 } = B xt + εt
where xt ≡ [nt , ct , π t , kt , bt , gt−1 ]0 , and









A≡
δ
0
0
0
1
0
1−e
γc
0
0
β
0
0
0
1
−Θn
1
0
Θt φb
Θt (ρg − 1)φg
σ
e
ω(1 + ϕ) + β(1 − α) ω − βγ c (1 − e
γ c )η −[ω + β(1 − e
γ c − α)]
0
(1 − βρg )
0
0
0
0
1
−(1 + ρ)(1 − φg )
0
0
0
0
0
1

39












δ(1−α)
1−e
γc


 −(α + ϕ)λp


−Θn
B≡

1
−α


0
0

δ γc
δα
− 1−e
0
1 − δ + 1−e
0
0
γc
γc
−λp
1
αλp
0
0
φπ
1
0
Θt φb
0
σ
e
−γ c (1 − e
γ c )ηφπ e
γc + α − 1
0
0
0
0
0
(1 + ρ)(1 − φb ) 0
0
0
0
0
ρg

40











References
Aiyagari, Rao, Lawrence Christiano and Martin Eichenbaum (1990): “Output,
Employment and Interest Rate Eﬀects of Government Consumption”, Journal of
Monetary Economics, 30, 73-86.
Alesina, Alberto, Silvia Ardagna, Roberto Perotti and Fabio Schiantarelli (2002):
“Fiscal Policy, ProÞts, and Investment,” American Economic Review, 92 (3), 571-589.
Alesina, Alberto and Silvia Ardagna, (1998): “Tales of Fiscal Adjustment”, Economic Policy, No. 27, October 1998, pp. 489-545.
Amato, Jeﬀery D., and Thomas Laubach (2003): “Rule-of-Thumb Behavior and
Monetary Policy,” European Economic Review , vol. 47, 5, pages 791-831
Basu, Susanto, and Miles Kimball (2003): “Investment Planning Costs and the
Eﬀects of Monetary and Fiscal Policy,” University of Michigan, mimeo.
Baxter, Marianne and Robert King (1993): “Fiscal Policy in General Equilibrium”, American Economic Review, 83, 315-334.
Bilbiie, Florin O. (2005): “Limited Asset Market Participation, Monetary Policy,
and Inverted Keynesian Logic,” mimeo, Nuﬃeld College, Oxford U.
Bilbiie, Florin O. and Roland Straub (2005): “Fiscal Policy, Business Cycles and
Labor Market Fluctuations,” European University Institute, mimeo.
Bilbiie, Florin O., André Maier, and Gernot J. Müller (2005): “Asset Market
Participation, Monetary Policy, and the Eﬀects of U.S. Government Spending: What
Accounts for the Declining Fiscal Mulitplier?,” Goethe University, Frankfurt, mimeo.
Campbell, John Y. and N. Gregory Mankiw (1989): “Consumption, Income, and
Interest Rates: Reinterpreting the Time Series Evidence,” in O.J. Blanchard and S.
Fischer (eds.), NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1989, 185-216, MIT Press.
Clarida, Richard, Jordi Galí, and Mark Gertler (2000): “Monetary Policy Rules
and Macroeconomic Stability: Evidence and Some Theory,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, vol. CXV, issue 1, 147-180.
Christiano, Lawrence and Martin Eichenbaum (1992): “ Current Real Business
41

Cycles Theories and Aggregate Labor Market Fluctuations”, American Economic
Review, 82, 430-450.
Blanchard, Olivier (2003): Macroeconomics, Third Edition, Prentice Hall
Blanchard, Olivier and Roberto Perotti (2002): “An Empirical Characterization
of the Dynamic Eﬀects of Changes in Government Spending and Taxes on Output,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics,117, 4, 1329-1368.
Bohn, Henning (1998): ”The Behavior of Public Debt and DeÞcits”, The Quarterly
Journal of Economics 113(3), 949-964.
Burnside, Craig, Martin Eichenbaum and Jonas Fisher (2003): ”Fiscal Shocks
and their Consequences”, NBER WP 9772.
Campbell, John Y. and N. Gregory Mankiw (1989): “Consumption, Income, and
Interest Rates: Reinterpreting the Time Series Evidence,” in O.J. Blanchard and S.
Fischer (eds.), NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1989, 185-216, MIT Press
Calvo, Guillermo (1983): “Staggered Prices in a Utility Maximizing Framework”,
Journal of Monetary Economics, 12, 383-398.
Clarida, Richard, Jordi Galí and Mark Gertler (1999): ” The Science of Monetary
Policy: A New Keynesian Perspective”, Journal of Economic Literature, 37, 16611707.
Coenen, G. and R. Straub (2004): “Non-Ricardian Households and Fiscal Policy
in an Estimated DSGE Model of the Euro Area,” mimeo.
Deaton, A. (1992), Understanding Consumption, Clarendon Lectures in Economics, Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1992.
Dotsey, Michael (1999): “Structure from Shocks,” Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Working Paper 99-6.
Dupor, Bill (2002): “Interest Rate Policy and Investment with Adjustment Costs,”
mimeo.
Edelberg, Wendy, Martin Eichenbaum, and Jonas Fisher (1999), “Understanding
the Eﬀects of Shocks to Government Purchases,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 2,

42

166-206.
Erceg, C.J., Guerrieri, L. and Gust, C. J., (2005): “SIGMA A New Open Economy
Model for Policy Analysis,” Federal Reserve Board, International Finance Discussion
Papers, no. 835.
Erceg, C.J., Guerrieri, L. and Gust, C. J., (2005): “Expansionary Fiscal Shocks
and the Trade DeÞcit”, FRB International Finance Discussion Paper No. 825.
Fatás, Antonio and Ilian Mihov (2001): “The Eﬀects of Fiscal Policy on Consumption and Employment: Theory and Evidence,” INSEAD, mimeo.
Galí, Jordi, J.David López-Salido and Javier Vallés (2004): “Rule-of- Thumb
Consumers and the Design of Interest Rate Rules”, Journal of Money, Credit and
Banking, Vol. 36 (4), August 2004, 739-764.
Giavazzi, Francesco, and Marco Pagano (1990): “Can Severe Fiscal Contractions
be Expansionary? Tales of Two Small European Countries” in O.J. Blanchard and
S. Fischer (eds.), NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1990, MIT Press
Hemming, Richard, Michael Kell and Selma Mahfouz (2002): “The eﬀectiveness
of Fiscal Policy in Stimulating Economic Activity-A Review of the Literature,” IMF
WP 02/208
IMF (2004), World Economic Outlook, 2004, IMF Washington D.C. April 2004.
Johnson, D; J. Parker, and N. Souleles (2004): “Household Expenditure and the
Income Tax Rebates of 2001”, NBER Working Paper 10784, September 2004.
Kim, Jinill (2000): “Constructing and estimating a realistic optimizing model of
monetary policy,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 45, 2, 329-359
King, Robert, and Mark Watson (1996): “Money, Prices, Interest Rates and the
Business Cycle” Review of Economics and Statistics, 78, 35-53
Mankiw, N. Gregory (2000): “The Savers-Spenders Theory of Fiscal Policy,”
American Economic Review, 90, 2, 120-125.
Mountford, Andrew and Harald Uhlig (2000): “What are the Eﬀects of Fiscal
Policy Shocks?, mimeo, Humboldt University, Berlin, june 2004.

43

Perotti, Roberto (1999): “Fiscal Policy in Good Times and Bad,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114, 4, 1399-1436.
Perotti, Roberto (2004):“Estimating the Eﬀects of Fiscal Policy in OECD Countries, IGIER, March 2004.
Ramey, Valerie, and Matthew Shapiro (1998): “Costly Capital Reallocation and
the Eﬀect of Government Spending,” Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public
Policy, 48, 145-194.
Rotemberg, Julio and Michael Woodford (1992): “Oligopolistic Pricing and the
Eﬀects of Aggregate Demand on Economic Activity”, Journal of Political Economy,
100, 1153-1297.
Rotemberg, Julio and Michael Woodford (1995): “Dynamic General Equilibrium
Models with Imperfectly Competitive Products Markets”, in Thomas F. Cooley (ed.),
Frontiers in Business Cycle Research, Princeton University Press.
Rotemberg, Julio and Michael Woodford (1997): ”An Optimization Econometric
Framework for the Evaluation of Monetary Policy” in O.J. Blanchard and S. Fischer
(eds.), NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1997, MIT Press.
Rotemberg, Julio and Michael Woodford (1999):”Interest Rate Rules in an Estimated Sticky Price Model” in J.B. Taylor (ed.), Monetary Policy Rules, University
of Chicago Press and NBER.
Taylor, John B. (1993): “Discretion versus Policy Rules in Practice,” Carnegie
Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy , December 1993, 39, 195-214.
Wolﬀ, Edward (1998): ”Recent Trends in the Size Distribution of Household
Wealth”, Journal of Economic Perspectives 12, 131-150.
Woodford, Michael (2003) Interest and Prices, Chapter 4, Princeton University
Press.
Yun, Tack (1996): “Nominal Price Rigidity, Money Supply Endogeneity, and
Business Cycles,” Journal of Monetary Economics 37, 345-370.

44

Table 1. Estimated Eﬀects of Government Spending Shocks
Estimated Fiscal Multipliers
Implied
Output
Consumption
Fiscal Parameters
1stQ 4thQ 8thQ 1stQ 4thQ 8thQ ρg
φg
φb
1948:I-2003:IV
Baseline Spending
Small VAR
0.51 0.31 0.28 0.04 0.09 0.19 0.85 0.10 0.10
Larger VAR
0.41 0.31 0.68 0.07 0.11 0.49 0.80 0.06 0.06
Excluding Military
Small VAR
0.15 -0.12 0.34 -0.11 0.24 0.32 0.95 0.005 0.60
Larger VAR
0.36 0.62 1.53 0.03 0.51 0.68 0.94 0.005 0.60
1954:I-2003:IV
Baseline Spending
Small VAR
0.74 0.75 1.22 0.14 0.46 0.73 0.95 0.13 0.20
Larger VAR
0.68 0.70 1.74 0.17 0.29 0.95 0.95 0.10 0.30
Excluding Military
Small VAR
0.63 1.95 2.60 0.25 1.41 1.12 0.95 0.05 0.50
Larger VAR
0.74 2.37 3.50 0.37 1.39 1.76 0.95 0.01 0.50
1960:I-2003:IV
Baseline Spending
Small VAR
0.91 1.05 1.32 0.19 0.59 0.84 0.95 0.13 0.20
Larger VAR
0.81 0.44 0.76 0.20 0.25 0.45 0.95 0.08 0.20
Excluding Military
Small VAR
0.72 1.14 1.19 0.17 0.78 0.68 0.94 0.03 0.50
Larger VAR
1.13 1.89 2.08 0.40 1.14 1.07 0.98 0.01 0.55
Note: The "large" VAR corresponds to the 8-variable VAR described in the text; the
"small" VAR estimates are based on a 4-variable VAR including government spending, output, consumption, and the deÞcit. Government spending excluding military was obtained
as GFNEH+GSEH+GFNIH+GSIH. For each speciÞcation ρg is the AR(1) coeﬃcient that
matches the half-life of the estimated government spending response. Parameter φg is obtained as the diﬀerence of the VAR-estimated impact eﬀects of government spending and
deÞcit, respectively. Finally, given ρg and φg , we calibrate the parameter φb such that
the dynamics of government spending (21) and debt (37) are consistent with the horizon
at which the deÞcit is back to steady state, matching our empirical VAR responses of the
Þscal deÞcit.

45

Figure 1
The Dynamic Effects of a Government Spending Shock
0.36

0.24

0.12

0.00

0.5

0.27

0.4

0.18

0.3

0.09

0.2

0.00

0.1

-0.09

0.0
0

5

10

15

20

-0.18
0

5

government spending

10

15

20

0

5

consumption

0.48

0.32

10

15

20

15

20

15

20

deficit

1.2

0.48

0.8

0.36

0.4

0.24

0.0

0.12

0.16

0.00

-0.16
0

5

10

15

-0.4

0.00

-0.8

-0.12

20

0

5

hours

10

15

20

0

investment

0.75

5

10

disposable income

0.3

0.30
0.25

0.2

0.20

0.50

0.15
0.1
0.10
0.25

0.05

0.0

0.00
0.00

-0.1
0

5

10

gdp

15

20

-0.05
0

5

10

real wage

15

20

0

5

10

consumption and income

Note: Estimated impulse responses to a government spending shock in the large VAR. Sample Period 1954:I-2003:IV. The horizontal axis represents quarters
after the shock. Confidence intervals correspond +/- 1 standard deviations of empirical distributions, based on 1000 Monte Carlo replications. The right
bottom panel plots the point estimates of both consumption (solid line) and disposable income (dashed line)

Figure 2. Determinacy Analysis

Note: Based on the model with competitive labor markets, remaining
parameters at their baseline values.

Figure 3. Impact Multipliers: Sensitivity to λ
A. Competitive Labor Market
2

1.5

1

Output

0.5

0

Investment
Consumption

-0.5
0

0.3

0.5

0.6

0.7

rule of thumb share (λ)

B. Non-Competitive Labor Market
2

1.5

1
Output
Consumption
0.5

0
Investment
-0.5
0

0.3

rule of thumb share (λ)
Note: Baseline calibration for remaining parameters.

0.5

Figure 4. The Dynamic Effects of a Government Spending Shock:
Baseline vs. Neoclassical Models
A. Competitive Labor Market
government spending, debt and deficit
1
govt spending
taxes
0.5

output
1
0.5

0
deficit
-0.5
0

4

16

20

0

0

4

Baseline

-0.2
0

Neoclassical
4

16

20

-0.02
0

4

20

16

20

16

20

16

20

16

20

real wages

2
1

0

16

0

hours

0

20

0.02

0.2
0

16
investment

consumption

4

16

20

0.6
0.4
0.2
0
-0.2
0

4

Horizon

Horizon

B. Non-Competitive Labor Market
government spending, debt and deficit
1
0.5
0

output
2

government spending
taxes

Baseline
1

deficit

-0.5
0

4

16

20

0

0

consumption
1

0.1

0.5

0

Neoclassical
4
investment

0
0

4

16

20

-0.1
0

4

hours

real wages
2

2

1

1
0

0
0

4

16
Horizon

20

0

4
Horizon

Note: Baseline calibration (circles), neoclassical calibration (dashes).

Figure 5. Impact Multipliers: Sensitivity to ρg
Alternative Calibrations
(Non Competitive Labor Market)
Baseline Non Competitive Labor
10

No Rule-of-Thumb Consumers
1

←Output

5

0.5
Consumption→

0

0
Investment

-5
0

0.5

1

-0.5
0

Flexible Prices
1

0.5

0.5

0

0

0.5

1

Neoclassical

1

-0.5
0

0.5

1

-0.5
0

0.5

Persistence of Gov Spending Shock (ρ )
g

1

Figure 6. Impact Multipliers:
Sensitivity to Non-Policy Parameters (θ, ϕ, η)
Sensitivity to θ
3
2.5
2
1.5

output
1
0.5

consumption
0

investment
-0.5
0

0.25

θ

0.6

0.75

Sensitivity to η
3
2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
0
-0.5
0.1

1

5

η

8

Sensitivity to phi
3
2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
0
-0.5
0

0.1

0.3

phi

Figure 7. Impact Multipliers:
Sensitivity to Policy Parameters (φπ, φg, φb)
4
3.5
3
2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
0
1

1.5

2

φπ

2.5

2
Output
1.5

1
Consumption
0.5

Investment

0
0

φg

0.2

0.7

2

1.5

1

0.5

0
0

0.05

φb

0.2

1

