NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INSURING CONSUMPTION AND HAPPINESS
THROUGH RELIGIOUS ORGANIZATIONS
Rajeev Dehejia
Thomas DeLeire
Erzo F.P. Luttmer
Working Paper 11576
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11576
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2005

The authors thank Bill Evans, Roland Fryer, Jonathan Gruber, and seminar participants at Duke University,
the PSE Conference on Economics of Religion, and the Upjohn Institute for helpful comments and
suggestions. We especially thank Roberta Gatti for helping us conceive of and begin this project. All errors
are our own. This paper was completed while DeLeire was on leave from the Department of Economics at
Michigan State University. The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and should not be
interpreted as those of the Congressional Budget Office. The views expressed herein are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by Rajeev Dehejia, Thomas DeLeire and Erzo F.P. Luttmer. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Insuring Consumption and Happiness Through Religious Organizations
Rajeev Dehejia, Thomas DeLeire and Erzo F.P. Luttmer
NBER Working Paper No. 11576
August 2005, Revised June 2006
JEL No. D12, H31, J60, Z12
ABSTRACT

This paper examines whether involvement with religious organizations insures an individual's stream
of consumption and of happiness. Using data from the Consumer Expenditure Survey (CEX), we
examine whether households who contribute to a religious organization are able to insure their
consumption stream against income shocks and find strong insurance effects for whites. Using the
National Survey of Families and Households (NSFH), we examine whether individuals who attend
religious services are able to insure their stream of happiness against income shocks and find strong
happiness insurance effects for blacks but smaller effects for whites. Overall, our results are
consistent with the view that religion provides an alternative form of insurance for both whites and
blacks though the mechanism by which religious organizations provide insurance to each of these
groups appears to be different.

Rajeev H. Dehejia
Department of Economics
Columbia University
420 W. 118th St., Rm. 1022
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
rd247@columbia.edu
Thomas DeLeire
Congressional Budget Office
U.S. Congress
Ford House Office Building
Second and D Streets, S.W.
Washington, DC 20515
thomas.deleire@cbo.gov

Erzo Luttmer
Kennedy School of Government
Harvard University
79 John F. Kennedy Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
erzo_luttmer@harvard.edu

1. Introduction
In the standard life-cycle model of consumption with perfect capital markets, the
optimal consumption path is insensitive to transitory income shocks (Friedman 1957). In
practice, however, individuals have only limited opportunities in the formal capital
market to borrow against expected future income and, as a result, a range of alternative
mechanisms has arisen to insure consumption against income shocks. Individuals may
“self-insure” by holding extra savings (Leland 1968) or by having other household
members increase their labor supply after a negative shock (Cullen and Gruber 2000).
Similarly, if markets are complete, consumption should not vary across
individuals in response to idiosyncratic income shocks (Cochrane 1991, Mace 1991,
Deaton 1992a). In practice, however, private insurance companies do not offer insurance
against income risk, likely because private information about income prospects would
lead to severe adverse selection. Given the trade-off between moral hazard and the value
of insurance, the government only provides partial insurance against income risk, mainly
through the tax and transfer system and programs like unemployment insurance.
Informal insurance provided by families, the local community, or social networks
may overcome some of the adverse selection and moral hazard issues plaguing formal
insurance, because these groups may be better able to monitor the behavior of those with
income shocks and because selection into or out of such groups is costly. For example,
Putnam (2000) argues that community (and hence also religious) organizations play an
important role in providing social capital and in fostering norms of mutual aid and
reciprocity among individuals. Iannaccone (1992) and Berman (2000) show that many of
the costs of religious participation, such as adherence to religious strictures, can be

1

rationalized as mechanisms to prevent free-riding on benefits provided by the religious
group; in other words, religious organizations have mechanisms to limit adverse
selection. Moreover, the monitoring of fellow members of the organization is likely to
reduce moral hazard. One would therefore expect religious organizations to be well
positioned to provide consumption insurance against income shocks, which is one of the
hypotheses we investigate in this paper.1
Religious organizations also may influence their members in non-material ways,
in particular by influencing beliefs, attitudes, and values. For example, Guiso, Sapienza,
and Zingales (2003) suggest that religious belief is positively associated with attitudes
conducive to economic growth. Similarly, religious beliefs can dampen or exacerbate the
impact of stressful shocks on well-being by altering the value that the individual attaches
to such a shock. For example, Clark and Lelkes (2005) show that, in cross-sectional
European data, marital dissolution has a greater negative impact on the happiness of
Catholics than the non-religious, but that members of all religious organizations
experience a smaller impact of unemployment on happiness compared to non-members.
In this paper, we use longitudinal U.S. data to examine whether members of religious
organizations experience a smaller impact of income shocks on their subjective selfreported happiness. Such “happiness insurance” could both be driven by consumption
insurance provided by the religious organization and by the members of religious
organizations attaching less value to changes in material circumstances.
We use two data sources to examine whether religion provides insurance in
response to income shocks: the Consumer Expenditure Survey (CEX) to examine
1

This adds to the possible benefits of religious participation suggested by the literature, which include
increased utility in the afterlife and the consumption of religious goods in the present (see, inter alia, Azzi
and Ehrenberg 1975, Iannaccone 1990, and Biddle 1992).

2

consumption insurance and the National Survey of Families and Households (NSFH) to
examine happiness insurance. In our baseline specification, we find that religious
participation (measured in the CEX as making any contribution to a religious
organization) reduces the impact of income changes on consumption by roughly 40
percent. This estimate is mainly driven by white households, which constitute the
majority of the sample. The consumption insurance effect is imprecisely estimated for
blacks, and, as a result, we can neither reject that it is zero nor reject that it is as large for
blacks as for the rest of the sample. We find marginally significant evidence of happiness
insurance in the full sample, but this estimate is mainly driven by the black subsample.
Blacks experience significant happiness insurance by regularly attending religious
services; attending weekly rather than once a year approximately fully offsets the effect
of income shocks on happiness. For whites, however, we find no statistically significant
happiness insurance effect of religious attendance in the baseline specification, though
the point estimate indicates that attending weekly rather than once a year offsets about
one third of the effect of income shocks on happiness.
The finding that religious organizations serve an insurance function has two
implications for government-provided social insurance. First, there will be less demand
for social insurance in more religious areas and by more religious individuals, which is
indeed what Stasavage and Scheve (2005, 2006) find using both individual-level data on
preferences for social spending and country-level social insurance expenditure. Second,
it implies that social insurance may crowd out insurance provided by religious
organizations. Hungerman (2005) and Gruber and Hungerman (2005) show that
government social insurance spending in fact crowds out religious charitable spending.

3

The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we present a brief review of the
literature. In Section 3, we discuss our two data sets. In Section 4, we outline our
specifications and discuss identification issues. In Section 5, we present our results.
Section 6 concludes.

2. Previous Literature
The first major study to examine the economics of religious participation is Azzi
and Ehrenberg (1975). They model participation in church activities based on the idea
that the stream of benefits from participation extends to the afterlife (“the salvation
motive”), while they also allow that people derive enjoyment from church activities (“the
consumption motive”) and that religious membership can increase the probability of
succeeding in business (“the social-pressure motive”). Their model implies that
participation in church activities will increase with age because individuals are investing
in the afterlife.
In an excellent overview of the growing literature on the economics of religion,
Iannaccone (1998) discusses a range of studies of the economic consequences or
correlates of religious participation, for example Freeman’s (1986) finding that blacks
that attend church are less likely to smoke, drink, or engage in drug use. Iannaccone also
reviews models of religious participation, including those of “religious capital”, which
can help to explain why religious participation increases later in life and why as wages
increase religious participation will be reflected to a greater extent through contributions
rather than though attendance. Using the CEX and the General Social Survey, Gruber

4

(2004) provides evidence for this hypothesis, finding an implied elasticity of attendance
with respect to religious giving of -0.9.
More recent studies have focused on the consequences of religious participation.
Gruber (2005) finds that increased religious participation leads to higher educational
attainment and income, less dependence on social insurance programs and higher rates of
marriage. To establish causality, he instruments an individual’s own religious attendance
by the local density of other ethnic groups sharing the same denomination. Using micro
data, MacCulloch and Pezzini (2004) find that religious participation reduces the taste for
revolution, while based on macro data, Barro and McCleary (2003) argue that there is a
causal link between religiosity and economic growth.
There is also a large literature examining the correlation between religious
participation and subjective measures of wellbeing and distress (Diener et al. 1999,
Parmagent 2002, and Smith et al. 2003).2 While we know of no other study looking at
the ability of religious participation to buffer against income shocks, a number of studies
find that it can attenuate the effect of traumatic events on subjective wellbeing or
depression (Ellison 1991 and Strawbridge et al. 1998). Based on European data, Clark
and Lelkes (2005) find that religiosity may dampen or exacerbate the happiness effect of
a traumatic event depending on the denomination and the type of the event.
Religious organizations may be one of many institutions that provide informal
insurance. Families can help insure their members against shocks, though evidence
suggests that in the U.S. insurance provided by families is far from perfect (Cox 1987 and
Altonji et al. 1997). In developing countries, there is considerable evidence of

2

There is also a large literature on the correlation between religious belief and health outcomes. See, for
example, McCullough et al. (2000).

5

households partially sharing income risk (Deaton 1992b and Townsend 1994). This has
spawned a large literature on self-enforcing risk-sharing agreements and other informal
insurance schemes such as group lending or mutual credit (for example, Foster and
Rosenzweig 2001, Gertler and Gruber 2002, and Genicot and Ray 2003). Religion has
received relatively little attention in this context with the notable exception of Chen
(2004), who shows that individuals particularly affected by the Asian financial crisis
were more likely to increase their religious participation and interprets this as religious
organizations providing “ex-post” insurance for individuals hit by negative shocks.

3. Data
The data for our empirical analysis come from two sources. First, we use the
CEX to examine whether participation in religious organizations (measured by financial
contributions to these organizations) provides consumption insurance against changes in
income. Second, we use the NSFH to examine whether participation (measured by
attendance at religious services) provides happiness insurance against changes in income.

3.1 The Consumer Expenditure Survey
We use data from the 1986 through 2000 panels of the Consumer Expenditure
Survey (CEX).3 The CEX is a nationally representative survey of roughly 5,000
households per year, is the basic source of data for the construction of the items and
weights in the market basket of consumer purchases to be priced for the Consumer Price
Index, and is widely regarded as the best source of U.S. consumption expenditure data. It

3

Beginning in 2001, the CEX changed the way in which it collected information on contributions. We
only use data up to 2000 to help ensure that the data is comparable across years.

6

contains information on the characteristics of each household member including their
relationships, income and demographics, as well as detailed household-level information
on expenditures. Each household is interviewed up to four times at three-month
intervals. Three months of expenditure data are collected retrospectively at each
quarterly interview. Income over the past 12 months is asked only in the first and fourth
interviews. In the fourth interview, data on five types of contributions—contributions to
religious organizations, charitable organizations, political organizations, educational
organizations, and miscellaneous contributions—over the past year are collected.
We consider two measures of consumption based on the expenditure data reported
in the CEX, non-durable consumption and total consumption. Non-durable consumption
consists of expenditure on food to be consumed in the home, food consumed outside of
the home, alcohol, tobacco, clothing, personal care, and transportation. Total
consumption includes non-durables plus durables (furniture, appliances, and consumer
goods), housing, and housing related expenses (home mortgage interest and home
maintenance). We prefer using expenditures on non-durables as our measure of
consumption because expenditures on durables do not measure the consumption flow
from them and, therefore, provide a rather noisy measure of true consumption.
Consumption of goods provided in-kind is not measured in the Consumer Expenditure
Survey. We measure the change in consumption as the difference in log quarterly
expenditure between the first and last interviews. Our measure of income is log real
household income (in 1998 dollars) and the change in household income is the difference
in log income between the first and fourth interviews.

7

We use contributions to religious organizations as our measure of religious
participation. About 40 percent of households make a contribution to a religious
organization and these contributions represent about 1.2 percent of household income in
the CEX. These findings are consistent with other sources; according to Iannaccone
(1998), total religious contributions represent roughly 1 percent of GNP.

3.2 National Survey of Families and Households
We use the first two waves of the NSFH, a nationally representative sample of
individuals, age 19 or older, living in households, and able to speak English or Spanish
(Sweet, Bumpass, and Call 1988 and Sweet and Bumpass 1996). The first wave of
interviews took place in 1987-88, and a second wave of interviews took place in 1992-94.
Though the questionnaires are not identical in both waves, many questions were asked
twice making it possible to treat the data as a panel of about 10,000 individuals.
The main outcome variable we use is self-reported happiness, which is the answer
to the question: “Next are some questions about how you see yourself and your life. First
taking things all together, how would you say things are these days?” Respondents
answered on a seven-point scale where 1 is defined as “very unhappy” and 7 is defined as
“very happy” but intermediate values are not explicitly defined. Because this question is
asked in both surveys, we are able to measure the change in individual-level happiness
between 1987/88 and 1992/94. The use of self-reported happiness measures has become
increasingly popular in economics; see, for example, Frey and Stutzer 2002,
Blanchflower and Oswald 2004, and Gruber and Mullainathan 2005. One of the

8

conclusions of this literature is that self-reported happiness is a useful proxy for wellbeing, and responds to economic variables as expected.
We use attendance of religious services as a measure of participation in religious
organizations. In our baseline specification we use the percentile location of an
individual in the distribution of attendance, but we also use a dummy for attending more
than the median as a robustness check. The distribution of religious service attendance is
reported in Table 1.

3.3 Baseline Sample
Of the 100,549 households interviewed in the 1986 through 2000 panels of the
CEX, 44,270 households are present in both the first and fourth interviews and were not
coded by the BLS as an incomplete income respondent. In the NSFH 7,486 main
respondents have non-missing happiness in both waves, out of a total of 10,005
observations in the NSFH panel. In both the CEX and the NSFH, we restrict the baseline
sample to those where the head and spouse are under the age of 60 at the last interview in
order to minimize the relatively predictable income shock from retirement. This
restriction yields a final CEX sample of 31,787 households of which 27,190 are white,
3,322 are black, and 1,275 are of other races, while the final NSFH sample consists of
5,716 respondents of which 4,697 are white or Hispanic, 924 are black, and 95 are from
other race/ethnic groups.

9

4. Empirical Strategy
4.1 Specifications
Our empirical test of whether religious organizations help insure their members
against income shocks consists of two parts. First, using the CEX, we examine whether
religious contributions insure a household’s consumption against changes in income, and
second, using the NSFH, we examine whether religious attendance buffers an
individual’s happiness against income shocks.
To examine whether religious affiliation insures a household’s consumption or an
individual’s happiness, we run regressions of the form:

(1)

∆Outcomei = ∆Incomei β1 + Religi β2 + ∆Incomei×Religi β3 + Xi β4 + δt + εi,

where ∆Outcomei, is either the change in log consumption or the change in happiness,
∆Incomei is the change in log income, Religi the measure of religiosity (contributions in
the CEX, attendance in the NSFH) and Xi an extensive set of demographic controls in
levels and first differences. Finally, δt is a set of month × year-of-interview dummies and
εi is an error term.4
Unless indicated otherwise, all variables in levels are the average of the responses
in both interviews and all variables in first difference are the response in the last
interview minus the response in the first interview.5 In our baseline specification, we use
4

Because in the NSFH the time period between the first and second interview is not always the same, we
include both a full set of month×year dummies for the first interview and a full set of month×year dummies
for the second interview. In the CEX, the time period between interviews is constant, so a single set of
month×year dummies suffices.
5
This specification ensures that the variables in levels and first differences are orthogonal by construction.
We therefore do not have to worry that the estimate on the level variable is affected by noise in the first
difference variable.

10

log household income rather than log per capita household income as our measure of
income. While changes in per capita income may be a more accurate measure of the
severity of an income shock, per capita income can also change because of other life
events such as marriage, childbirth or death. The direct impact of these life events on
happiness may depend on religious attendance, thus possibly contaminating our estimates
of insurance. We also top and bottom code the change in log income at +/– 100 log
points around the race-specific mean income change in order to rule out that a few
observations with exceptional income shocks drive our estimates.
Under complete consumption insurance, changes in own income should not affect
changes in own consumption or own happiness once changes in economy-wide
consumption (in this case, captured by δt) have been controlled for. That is, a finding that
β1 is zero can be interpreted as evidence in favor of complete insurance. Generally, most
studies in the consumption literature reject complete consumption insurance (see, for
example, Cochrane 1991, Nelson 1994, and Attanasio and Davis 1996), though some do
not (see, for example, Mace 1991). In the happiness literature, most studies with large
enough sample sizes find a significant positive effect of changes in own income on
changes in happiness, though a substantial part of this effect appears to be only temporary
(Diener and Biswas-Diener 2002, Di Tella et al. 2005, and Gardner and Oswald, 2005).
If religious organizations provide insurance for their members, changes in income
should have a smaller effect on the outcome variable for their members, yielding a
negative coefficient on the interaction term. Thus, an estimate of β3 < 0 is consistent with
religious organizations providing insurance.

11

4.2 Econometric Issues
A. Measurement error in income
A major concern is that income is measured with error. Thus, changes in income
will be noisy and will lead to potentially severe downward bias in β1, the effect of income
on consumption or happiness. Fortunately for our objective, to assess whether religious
membership provides insurance, we do not need to assess the effect of income on
expenditure. Rather, we need to compare the effect of income on consumption or
happiness for participants compared to non-participants. Unless measurement error in
income varies with religious participation, the measurement error should lead to the same
bias in β1 and β3, and the ratio of β1 to β3 should be unaffected by measurement error.6

B. Measurement error in religious participation
The CEX does not measure religious participation by attendance but rather by
contributions to religious organizations. By contrast, the NSFH measures attendance.
An important issue is whether contributions effectively measure participation.
Unfortunately, we are unable to assess this directly because the CEX reports
contributions but not attendance while the NSFH reports attendance but not contributions.
Iannaconne (1998), however, reports that the determinants of religious participation are
similar regardless of whether one measures participation by attendance or by
contributions. The contribution to religious organizations is only measured in the last
interview in the CEX. We discuss whether the timing of the measurement of religious

6

In Dehejia, DeLeire, and Luttmer (2005) we examine whether income volatility varies by religious
participation as a rough indicator of differential measurement error by religious participation. We find no
large differences in income volatility by religious participation.

12

contributions could mechanically explain our findings in Section 5.1, but we conclude
that this is unlikely.

C. Endogeneity of religious participation with respect to income shocks
A concern with using religious participation as an independent variable in our
specifications is that it could be endogenous with respect to income shocks that have a
smaller impact on consumption or happiness (e.g., if those with temporary negative
shocks would be more likely to increase attendance than those with permanent negative
shocks). This has been suggested by the recent work of Chen (2004) in Indonesia. While
we cannot test for such a differential effect directly (because we cannot distinguish
permanent from temporary shocks), we examine whether income shocks in general affect
attendance using data from the NSFH and find only a very small and statistically
insignificant effect of income shocks on attendance; a negative income shock of 100 log
points would increase attendance by 0.6 percentiles (results not presented; see Dehejia,
DeLeire, and Luttmer 2005). Thus, while our effect goes in the same direction as Chen’s
(2004) finding for Indonesia, the magnitude of the effect is not economically meaningful
in the U.S. Given the small magnitude of this effect, we will use average attendance over
the two waves in our subsequent specifications, because this reduces measurement error
in the attendance variable.7
In the CEX, contributions are measured in the final period, and thus it is a concern
if changes in income affect religious contributions. It is unclear in which direction the
bias will go. On the one hand, if positive income shocks are more likely to be permanent
income shocks than negative ones and if people are more likely to contribute after a
7

We use average attendance in both periods, but find similar results if we use first period attendance.

13

positive shock, then those who contribute disproportionately experienced permanent
income shocks and therefore have a greater consumption response to the income shock.
This would bias us away from finding consumption insurance effects. On the other hand,
if negative shocks were disproportionally permanent shocks and if those experiencing a
loss are less likely to contribute, then the bias would go the other way.

D. Does religious involvement proxy for other characteristics that provide insurance?
While all our regressions include an extensive list of household and individual
control variables, one may be concerned that religious participants have different
observable characteristics and that these characteristics explain their lower sensitivity to
income shocks. We deal with this concern in three ways. First, we create a matched
sample in which each religious participant is matched to a non-participant using the
nearest-neighbor method such that the predicted probability of being a participant is
roughly equal for the participant and non-participant.8 Thus, the matching procedure
creates a sample in which the distribution of observable characteristics, to the extent they
correlate with religious participation, is similar for participants and non-participants.
When we run our regression on this matched sample, we are less concerned about the
insurance effect of religious participation being driven by differences in observable
characteristics.

8

For purposes of the matching routine a religious participant is defined as a religious contributor in the
CEX and as someone with religious attendance above the own-race median in the NSFH. A nonparticipant matched to multiple participants is only entered once in the regression but with a weight that is
equal to the number of participants to which it was matched. While the matched sample contains all
participants, some non-participants may not be matched. Thus, the matched sample contains fewer
observations than the original sample.

14

Second, we not only interact the income shock with actual religious participation,
but we also include an interaction with predicted religious participation, where the
predicted value is based on the observable characteristics included as controls in our
regression. A finding that the insurance effect is driven by actual religious participation
rather than predicted religious participation is suggestive evidence that the insurance
effect comes from religious participation rather then observable characteristics correlated
with religious participation.
Third, we control for as many of the omitted variables for which religion could be
a proxy as possible. In particular, the concern is that religious attachment could pick up
individuals who are more risk averse (hence likely to have other forms of insurance) or
more patient (hence likely to have greater savings and the ability to self-insure). Thus,
we control for whether or not individuals buy other forms of insurance and, in some
specifications, for homeownership and their level of wealth and financial assets.
We also conduct a number of additional checks that help alleviate our concern
that potentially unobservable differences between participants and non-participants may
be driving our results.9 First, we determine whether our estimates of the insurance effect
change as we add blocks of control variables to our models. Second, we determine how
sensitive our estimates are to the addition of controls for wealth, homeownership and
insurance interacted with changes in income. These simple tests help to determine
whether religious participation is merely a proxy for unobservable individual
characteristics that drive the insurance effect.

9

These additional checks are simple versions of the procedures formalized in Altonji, Elder, and Taber
(2005) that use the amount of selection on observable variables as an estimate of the amount of potential
selection on unobservable variables.

15

5. Results
5.1 Does Religious Participation Provide Consumption Insurance?
In this section, we report results from our analyses using the CEX to examine
whether religious participation, as measured by making a contribution to a religious
organization, insures consumption against changes in income. Table 2, panel A, reports
our baseline specification.10 In the first column, we see that changes in log household
income are positively associated with changes in log non-durable consumption: for a noncontributor, a one-percent increase in income leads to a 0.115 percent increase in
consumption, which implies incomplete consumption insurance. Households who are
religious contributors do not have consumption growth that is different than noncontributors. Does religious membership offset the association between changes in
income and changes in non-durable consumption? The coefficient on the interaction term
between changes in log household income and membership in a religious organization is
-0.046 and is significant at the ten percent level. We calculate the “implied degree of
insurance” as the fraction by which religious membership reduces the consumption
response to income shocks: 0.046/0.115 = 39.7 percent, which is significant at the one
percent level.11

10

The regression also includes the following controls: log real household income, a dummy for income
being zero or missing, average age of head and spouse, age squared/100, household size, the change in
household size between interviews, the presence of children in the household, the change in the presence of
children between interviews, education (dummy variables for high school graduate, some college, college
graduate, professional degree), marital status (dummy variables for widowed, divorced, separated, and
never married), change in marital status, a dummy for owning a life insurance policy, and year by month
dummies. In results, not shown, in which we only include control variables measured in changes, our
results change little: the implied insurance effect for whites becomes 0.401 (0.096).
11
It may seem surprising at first that the interaction term (-0.046) only has a p-value of 0.08 but that the
implied degree of insurance is statistically significant at the 1 percent level. The reason for this is that the
coefficient on income changes and the coefficient on the interaction are positively correlated due to
sampling variation and that, as a result, their ratio is more precisely estimated.

16

In the second column, for white households, we find a similar implied degree of
insurance of 40 percent. For black households, reported in the third column, we see an
even larger implied degree of insurance, but one that is not statistically significant.
However, given the relatively large standard error, we cannot reject a hypothesis that the
insurance effect for black households is equal to that of white households.
In panels B through G of Table 2, we report a number of specification checks and
sensitivity analyses.12 In panel B of Table 2, we present results in which we also add
predicted religious participation (from a probit of religious participation on log household
income, the full set of demographic controls described above, and a full set of year by
month dummy variables) and the interaction of predicted religious participation with the
change in log household income. The results show that the insurance effect does not
appear to be driven solely by observable differences in demographics between
contributors and non-contributors.13
In panel C of Table 2, we report results using the matched sample. The estimated
degree of insurance of religious participation in the matched sample is very similar to our
estimate using the original sample. This confirms the conclusion from panel B that the

12

Further robustness checks are presented in Dehejia, DeLeire, and Luttmer (2005): we measure income
and consumption in per capita terms; we remove the top and bottom coding of income changes; and we
define religious membership as a dummy variable equal to 1 if a household contributes more than the racespecific median contribution, conditional on the contribution being positive to religious organizations in a
year. The results of these robustness checks are very similar to our baseline results. In other robustness
checks, which are not shown, we allow for separate insurance effects for increases and decreases in
income; we find that our insurance effects are driven by smaller consumption responses to declines in
income: for whites, the implied degree of insurance for downward shocks is 1.179 (0.354) but for upward
shocks it is 0.185 (0.341), a statistically significant difference at the five percent level.
13
In an additional specification check, we fully interact the indicator for religious participation with all
control variables. The results change little when we do this: e.g. the implied degree of insurance for whites
becomes 0.411 (0.098).

17

results are not driven by observable characteristics that are correlated with religious
participation.14
In panel D, we examine whether charitable contributions also have an insurance
effect on households. While it is conceivable that some types of charitable contributions
could also provide households with the kind of social capital that could provide insurance
in times of need, this does not seem plausible for most charitable contributions. Thus, if
we were to observe charitable contributions also yielding an insurance effect, we would
be concerned that the estimated insurance effect is an artifact of contributions (religious
or charitable) being measured only in the last interview or that making contributions is a
proxy for an omitted variable that provides the insurance effect. In panel D, however,
when we add an indicator for the household having made a charitable contribution and an
interaction between having made a charitable contribution and the change in log
household income, we see that charitable contributions do not have a significant
insurance effect on consumption, reducing concerns about the causal interpretation of the
insurance effect of religious contributions.
In panel E, we use the change in log total consumption expenditure as our
dependent variable instead of using just the non-durable component. The results show
that we continue to find substantial insurance effects for the total sample and for white

14

In additional analyses (not reported), conducted to help alleviate the concern that unobservable
differences might be responsible for our results we, first, determine whether our estimates of the insurance
effect change as we add blocks of control variables to our models and second, we determine how sensitive
our estimates are to the addition of controls for wealth, homeownership and insurance interacted with
changes in income. When adding blocks of controls, we start with only demographic controls, add controls
for education, add the level of income as control, and finally add all remaining controls. We find that the
implied degree of insurance changes very little: e.g. for whites it is 0.394 (0.093), 0.396 (0.092), 0.395
(0.093), and 0.386 (0.097) respectively. Also when we add additional interactions with income changes,
the implied degree of insurance changes little: e.g. for whites it is 0.492 (0.206), 0.336 (0.106), 0.355
(0.156), and 0.398 (0.233) respectively as we interact income changes with wealth, homeownership,
insurance, and finally all three.

18

households when using total consumption. In panel F, we drop the age restriction that we
imposed on our sample in order to avoid retirement-related income shocks. The
estimated insurance effects without the age restriction are similar to our baseline results
for the significant effects.
In Table 3, we split the results by the education level of the household head (high
school or less versus more than high school), by household wealth, and by income.15
There are two motivations for this. First, the willingness of religious organizations to
insure their members may vary by education, wealth, or income (with organizations
plausibly being more willing to insure low-skill, low-wealth, or low-income members).
Second, access to alternative, formal sources of insurance could also vary by education,
wealth, and income. We find a significant insurance effect for the low-education, lowwealth, and low-income white samples, generally somewhat larger in magnitude than the
results for whites in our baseline specification. For the high-education and high-wealth
white subsamples, we find no significant insurance effect of religious participation
though we do find a significant insurance effect (at the 10 percent level) for the highincome white subsample. Thus, consistent with our priors, religious organizations mostly
provide consumption insurance to more needy households. For black households, we
find a marginally significant insurance effect for the low-education subsample.

5.2 Does Religious Attendance Provide Happiness Insurance?
In Table 4, we report the results of our analyses using the NSFH to examine
whether religious participation can buffer the happiness consequences of income shocks.

15

We report results only for white and black households. Results for the full sample are very similar to
those for the white sample.

19

The first column of panel A presents our baseline specification for the full sample. As
before, a negative coefficient on the interaction term can be interpreted as religious
participation providing an insurance effect. We estimate the implied degree of insurance
as the degree to which going from the 25th percentile of the attendance distribution
(roughly attending once a year) to the 75th percentile (attending weekly) reduces the
impact of an income shock on happiness.16 The implied degree of insurance for the full
sample is 65% and statistically significant at the 10% level. Thus, roughly speaking,
active religious participation buffers about two thirds of the reduction in happiness from a
negative income shock.
In columns (2) and (3), we restrict the samples to whites and to blacks and find
that our results are driven primarily by blacks. For whites, the estimate of the implied
degree of insurance is about a third, but it is not statistically significant. For blacks,
however, the implied degree of insurance is significant at the 1 percent level and the point
estimate suggests roughly full insurance. It is intriguing that our consumption insurance
effects primarily show up for whites while the happiness insurance effects are strongest
for blacks. We discuss and interpret this finding more extensively in Section 6.
Panels B and C of Table 4 explore whether the baseline results could be driven by
differences in observable characteristics between active religious participants and less
active ones. In panel B, we interact income shocks both with actual and with predicted
religious attendance. We find that actual rather than predicted religious attendance drives
16

We measure the implied degree of insurance as the effect of a 50 percentile point increase in attendance
for comparability with Table 2: if we had measured attendance as a dichotomous variable (like membership
in Table 2), the average attendance among the high attendance group would by definition be 50 percentile
points higher than the average attendance in the low attendance group. Formally, the implied degree of
insurance is calculated as -0.5 β3 / (β1 + 0.25 β3), where β1 is the coefficient on the change in income, β3 is
the coefficient on the interaction term, and (β1 + 0.25 β3) is the happiness sensitivity to income shocks of
someone at the 25th percentile of the attendance distribution. In specification E, where attendance is
measured by a dummy variable, the implied degree of insurance is given by -β3/β1.

20

our baseline results. Thus actual religious attendance, rather than observable
characteristics correlated with attendance, provides the insurance effect.17 In panel C,
we match each individual with above-median religious attendance to an individual with
below-median attendance that has the same predicted probability of attending above the
median, where the prediction is based on same set of control variables as in our baseline
specification. We find that the insurance effects in our matched sample are very similar
to those in our baseline sample, though the estimate is no longer marginally statistically
significant for the full sample.18
Panels D to F provide robustness checks for the happiness insurance results that
are analogous to those provided for the consumption insurance results in Table 2. In
particular, we test the sensitivity of our baseline results to: in panel D, running the
regressions as an ordered probit rather than OLS; in panel E, measuring religious
attendance with an indicator for attending more than the race-specific mean; and, in panel
F, eliminating the age restriction.19 In all cases, the insurance effect of religious
participation is statistically significant for blacks, with point estimates generally
indicating close to full insurance. For whites, the insurance effect is never statistically
17

In two additional specification checks, in which we fully interact the indicator for religious participation
with all control variables and we only include control variables measured in changes. Our results change
little: the implied insurance effects for blacks become 1.18 (0.29) and 1.15 (0.30), respectively.
18
In additional analyses (not reported), conducted to help alleviate the concern that unobservable
differences might be responsible for our results, we first determine whether our estimates of the insurance
effect change as we add blocks of controls variables to our models and, second, we determine how sensitive
our estimates are to the addition of controls for wealth, homeownership and insurance interacted with
changes in income. When adding blocks of controls, we starting with only demographic controls, add
controls for education, third add the level of income as control, and finally add all remaining controls, and
find that the implied degree of insurance changes very little: e.g. for blacks it is 1.16 (0.31), 1.17 (0.31),
1.16 (0.32), and 1.25 (0.38) respectively. Also when we add additional interactions with income changes,
the implied degree of insurance changes little: e.g. for blacks it is 1.25 (0.40), 1.22 (0.35), 1.13 (0.36), and
1.20 (0.44) respectively as we interact income changes with wealth, homeownership, insurance and all
three.
19
We also test the sensitivity of our baseline results to measuring income in per capita terms, eliminating
the top and bottom coding of income shocks, and measuring religious attendance as times per month rather
than as percentiles. The results, reported in Dehejia, DeLeire, and Luttmer (2005), are very similar.

21

significant, though the point estimates generally indicate a degree of insurance that is
economically meaningful.20
In Table 5, we examine the insurance effect of religious attendance for
subsamples of the data. We split the sample by education, liquid financial assets, per
capita income, and the intensity of religious belief. In panel A among black individuals,
we find a significant insurance effect for less educated individuals. For more educated
individuals, we find an insurance effect, but one that is not statistically significant.
Among whites, the implied degree of insurance for the less educated is large but not
statistically significant, whereas for the more educated there is an insignificant effect in
the opposite direction. In panels B and C, when we split the data by financial assets and
by per capita income, which are presumably closely correlated with education and each
other, we get very similar results. Thus, these findings echo the earlier consumption
insurance results: the insurance effects are strongest for less educated, lower wealth and
lower income individuals, whether it concerns consumption insurance (Table 3) or
happiness insurance (Table 5).
Finally, in panel D, we split our results by intensity of religious beliefs as
measured by the average response to two statements about the Bible.21 We find that
those with the greatest intensity of beliefs experience the largest insurance effect; among
blacks this effect is significant and large in magnitude, and among whites this effect
20

In other robustness checks, which are not shown, we allow for separate insurance effects for increases
and decreases in income; we find that our insurance effect is somewhat stronger for negative income
shocks, but the insurance effect is no longer statistically significant when we restrict shocks to only positive
or only negative shocks. Hence, we lack power to distinguish whether the insurance effect is driven by
positive or negative shocks.
21
Because this question is only relevant for Christians, we drop those reporting a non-Christian religious
affiliation from the sample in panel D. The statements are “The Bible is God's word and everything
happened or will happen exactly as it says” and “The Bible is the answer to all important human problems”
and the response to each statement was recorded on a 5-point scale from “strongly agree” to “strongly
disagree.”

22

points in the direction of insurance though it is not significant. Various mechanisms
could give rise to this finding. Religious organizations could treat all participants equally
but those with more intense beliefs might receive more doctrinal solace from attending
after experiencing a negative income shock. Alternatively, those with more intense
beliefs may be more attached to their religious organization (in ways not captured by
frequency of attending religious service) and the religious organization may channel
assistance to more attached members. However, in unreported regressions, we found that
the intensity of beliefs by itself does not provide happiness insurance against income
shocks. Thus, just believing is not sufficient; one needs to participate in a religious
organization to receive happiness insurance.22
It will not be possible for our results to distinguish between the spiritual, social
and material channels though which religious participation may provide happiness
insurance. However, by examining the insurance effect of other social activities, we can
at least determine whether religious organizations play a special role in this regard.
These results are presented in Table 6. In panel A, we interact a range of social activities
with income shocks. For blacks, we find that all social activities go in the direction of
providing insurance for happiness against income shocks, but that only getting together
socially and going to social events at a church, synagogue or mosque are marginally
statistically significant. For whites, all activities (other than going to a bar) go in the
direction of insurance, but none are even close to statistical significance. In panel B, we
examine the effect of participating in organizations such as political and service groups,
leisure groups, work-related activities, and religious organizations. These activities
22

Another split we consider is by religious denomination (available for the NSFH but not the CEX) and
examine whether religious participation insures against shocks other than income. We do not find any
significant results; see Dehejia, DeLeire, and Luttmer (2005).

23

generally do not provide a statistically significant degree of insurance, except for whites
active in service or political organizations and blacks participating in church-related
events (other than religious service). We conclude that participation in religious
organizations stands out from other measures of social capital in its ability to provide
happiness insurance against income shocks.

5.3 Discussion
We find it interesting that the mechanism behind the insurance effects of
participation in religious organizations appears to differ by race. However, given that our
results are based on two different outcomes and two different measures of religious
participation and because there are no statistically significant differences in the insurance
effects between blacks and whites, our results are merely suggestive that the form of
insurance provided by religious organizations differs by race.
Of course, because we use the same measure of participation for blacks and
whites within each data set, the difference in measures alone is unlikely to explain the
differences in insurance effects by race. By contrast, if either attendance or contributions
differentially measures participation for blacks and whites, then this difference could
explain the differences in insurance effects by race. For example, this could arise if all
white participants, but not all black participants, of religious organizations make
contributions or if all black participants, but not all white participants of religious
organizations attend religious services. For this reason, our statistical confidence that the
form of insurance provided by religious organizations differs by race is limited.

24

Nonetheless, this finding is consistent with evidence from the sociological
literature. Cnaan (2002) finds that percent white membership of a congregation is a
significant and positive predictor of a congregation’s financial commitment to giving,
even after controlling for the income and total budget of the congregation. Chaves and
Higgins (1992) find that the form in which members of religious organizations help each
other differs by race. Mutual help in black churches is more likely to be in-kind (and thus
less likely to be measured by the CEX) while mutual help in white religious organizations
is more likely to be in cash or as a loan (thus showing up in expenditures in the CEX).
Nelson (1997) notes that the level of trust between different families belonging to the
same church is often remarkably low in poor black communities, and that this lack of
trust may also inhibit short-term loans between members of the church community.
The relatively small and insignificant happiness insurance effect for whites
suggests a stigma attached to receiving assistance, though we do not have direct evidence
for this. Furthermore, moral or doctrinal support for those experiencing difficulties tends
to be greater in black churches than in white churches, leading to substantial happiness
insurance. Nelson (2004), for example, notes that many poor black church members
place less emphasis on material sources of happiness; instead, they view those in the
middle class as people “who had lost their religious fervor by becoming too concerned
with material goods.” For many African Americans, the church is the community
(Carson 1990). Church services tend to be community-oriented and relatively long (often
over 2 hours), and there are many well-attended social and community related church
events. Thus, relative to whites, African Americans who do not belong to a church may
have fewer alternative sources of (emotional) support when they fall on hard times.

25

While these explanations seem plausible, further research on the exact mechanisms by
which religious organizations provide insurance remains desirable.
One drawback of the data we use to identify the insurance effects of participation
in religious organizations is that we cannot identify the mechanism by which this
participation buffers against changes in income. The amount of cash assistance provided
by religious organizations would have to be large to explain these insurance effects.
Alternatively, participating in religious organizations may provide individuals with
sufficient contacts within their community to enable them to receive aid directly from
other individuals when required.
One likely mechanism by which religious organizations may provide
consumption insurance is by allowing their members to reduce the amount of their
contributions in years following a reduction in their income. By doing so, members
would be able to reduce other forms of consumption by less. From our analysis using the
NSFH, we observe no decline in attendance in response to a change in income.23 A
decline in contributions in response to a change in income, therefore, would be a form of
insurance since the religious organizations would be continuing to provide services while
allowing the member to make fewer (or no) contributions.
Unfortunately, we are unable to identify the extent of this possible insurance
mechanism since we only observe annual religious contributions in the fourth interview
in the CEX data.

23

These results are reported in Dehejia, DeLeire, and Luttmer (2005).

26

6. Conclusion
We find that religious participation partially insures consumption and happiness
against income shocks. This finding has important implications for the public provision
of social insurance. Social insurance is less valuable for those who are already partly
insured through their religious organization, implying that the optimal level of social
insurance is inversely related to the religious participation of the population. 24
Conversely, social insurance can crowd out insurance provided by religious
organizations. Thus, even where church and state are officially separated, governments
providing less social insurance will indirectly stimulate the demand for insurance from
religious organizations and thus mostly likely strengthen the influence of religious
organizations.

24

Of course, insurance provided by religious organizations may crowd out other forms of private insurance,
such as that provided by extended families.

27

References
Altonji, Joseph G., Todd E. Elder, and Christopher Taber (2005). “Selection on
Observable and Unobservable Variables: Assessing the Effectiveness of Catholic
Schools.” Journal of Political Economy, 113(1):151-184.
Altonji, Joseph G, Fumio Hayashi, and Laurence J. Kotlikoff (1997). “Parental Altruism
and Inter Vivos Transfers: Theory and Evidence.” Journal of Political Economy, 105(6):
1121-1166.
Attanasio, Orazio and Steven J. Davis (1996). “Relative Wage Movements and the
Distribution of Consumption.” Journal of Political Economy, 104(6): 1227-1262.
Azzi, Corry and Ronald G. Ehrenberg (1975). “Household Allocation of Time and
Church Attendance.” Journal of Political Economy, 83(1): 27-56.
Barro, Robert J., and Rachel McCleary (2003). “Religion and Economic Growth.”
National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 9682.
Berman, Eli (2000). “Sect, Subsidy, and Sacrifice: An Economist's View of Ultraorthodox Jews.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 115(3): 905-953.
Biddle, Jeff E. (1992). “Religious Organizations.” In Charles T. Clotfelter (ed.), Who
Benefits From the Non-Profit Sector? Chicago: University of Chicago.
Blanchflower, David G. and Andrew J. Oswald (2004). “Well-Being over Time in
Britain and the USA,” Journal of Public Economics, 88(7-8): 1359-1386.
Carson, Emmett (1990), “Patterns of Giving in Black Churches.” In Robert Wuthnow and
Virginia Hodgkinson (eds.), Faith and Philanthropy in America: Exploring the Role of
Religion in America’s Voluntary Sector. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass Publishers: 232-252.
Chaves, Mark, and Lynn Higgins (1992), “Comparing the Community Involvement of
Black and White Congregations,” Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion, 31(4):
425-440.
Chen, Daniel (2004). “Club Goods and Group Identity: Evidence from the Islamic
Resurgence During the Indonesian Financial Crisis.” manuscript, University of Chicago.
Clark, Andrew and Orsolya Lelkes (2005) “Deliver us from Evil: Religion as Insurance.”
manuscript, PSE, Paris.
Cnaan, Ram (2002). The Invisible Caring Hand: American Congregations and the
Provision of Welfare. New York: New York University Press.

28

Cochrane, John A. (1991). “A Simple Test of Consumption Insurance.” Journal of
Political Economy, 99(5): 957-976.
Cox, Donald (1987). “Motives for Private Income Transfers.” Journal of Political
Economy, 95(3): 508-546.
Cullen, Julie Berry and Jonathan Gruber (2000). “Does Unemployment Insurance Crowd
Out Spousal Labor Supply?” Journal of Labor Economics, 18(3):546-472.
Deaton, Angus (1992a). Understanding Consumption. Oxford, Clarendon Press.
Deaton, Angus (1992b). “Household Saving in LDCs: Credit Markets, Insurance, and
Welfare.” Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 94(2): 253-273.
Dehejia, Rajeev, Thomas DeLeire, and Erzo F.P. Luttmer (2005). “Insuring Consumption
and Happiness Through Religious Organizations.” National Bureau of Economic
Research Working Paper No. 11576.
Diener, Ed and Robert Biswas-Diener (2002). “Will Money Increase Subjective WellBeing?” Social Indicators Research, 57: 119-169.
Diener, Ed, Eunkook M. Suh, Richard E. Lucas, and Heidi L. Smith (1999). “Subjective
Well-being: Three Decades of Progress.” Psychological Bulletin, 125(2): 276-303.
Di Tella, Rafael, John Haisken-De New, and Robert MacCulloch (2005), “Adaptation to
Income and Status in an Individual Panel.” Manuscript, Harvard University.
Ellison, Christopher G. (1991). “Religious Involvement and Subjective Well-Being.”
Journal of Health and Social Behavior, 32(1): 80-99.
Foster, Andrew and Mark Rosenzweig (2001). “Imperfect Commitment, Altruism, and
the Family: Evidence from Transfer Behavior in Low-Income Rural Areas.” Review of
Economics and Statistics, 83(3): 389-407.
Freeman, Richard B. (1986). “Who Escapes? The Relation of Churchgoing and other
Background Factors to the Socioeconomic Performance of Black Male Youths from
Inner-city Tracts.” In Richard B. Freeman and Harry J. Holzer (eds.), The Black Youth
Employment Crisis. Chicago, University of Chicago Press: 353-376.
Frey, Bruno S. and Alois Stutzer (2002). “What Can Economists Learn from Happiness
Research?” Journal of Economic Literature, 40(2): 402-35.
Friedman, Milton (1957). A Theory of the Consumption Function. Princeton: Princeton
University Press.
Gardner, Jonathan and Andrew J. Oswald (2005). “Money and Mental Health: A Study
of Medium-Sized Lottery Wins.” Manuscript, University of Warwick.
29

Genicot, Garance, and Debraj Ray (2003). “Group Formation in Risk-Sharing
Agreements.” Review of Economic Studies, 70(1): 87-113.
Gertler, Paul and Jonathan Gruber (2002). “Insuring Consumption Against Illness.”
American Economic Review, 92(1): 51–70.
Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales (2003). “People’s Opium? Religion and
Economic Attitudes.” Journal of Monetary Economics, 50 (2003): 225-282.
Gruber, Jonathan (2004). “Pay or Pray? The Impact of Charitable Subsidies on Religious
Attendance.” Journal of Public Economics, 88(12): 2635-2655.
Gruber, Jonathan (2005). “Religious Market Structure, Religious Participation, and
Outcomes: Is Religion Good for You?” Advances in Economic Analysis and Policy, 5(1),
Article 5. Available at http://www.bepress.com/bejeap/advances/vol5/iss1/art5.
Gruber, Jonathan and Daniel M. Hungerman (2005). “Faith-Based Charity and Crowd
Out during the Great Depression.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working
Paper No. 11332.
Gruber, Jonathan and Sendhil Mullainathan (2005). “Do Cigarette Taxes Make Smokers
Happier?” Advances in Economic Analysis and Policy, 5(1), Article 4. Available at
http://www.bepress.com/bejeap/advances/vol5/iss1/art4
Hungerman, Daniel M. (2005). “Are Church and State Substitutes? Evidence from the
1996 Welfare Reform.” Journal of Public Economics, 89(11-12): 2245-67.
Iannaccone, Laurence R. (1990). “Religious Participation: A Human Capital Approach.”
Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion, 29(3): 297-314.
Iannaccone, Laurence R. (1992). “Sacrifice and Stigma: Reducing Free-riding in Cults,
Communes, and Other Collectives.” Journal of Political Economy, 100(2): 271-291.
Iannaccone, Laurence R. (1998). “Introduction to the Economics of Religion.” Journal of
Economic Literature, 36(3): 1465-1495.
Leland, Hayne E. (1968). “Saving and Uncertainty.” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
82(3):465-473.
MacCulloch, Robert and Silvia Pezzini (2004). “The Role of Freedom, Growth and
Religion in the Taste for Revolution.” Manuscript, Imperial College London.
Mace, Barbara J. (1991). “Full Insurance in the Presence of Aggregate Uncertainty.”
Journal of Political Economy, 99(5): 928-56.

30

McCullough, Michael E., William T. Hoyt, David B. Larson, Harold G. Koenig, and Carl
Thoresen (2000). “Religious Involvement and Mortality: A Meta-Analytic Review.”
Health Psychology, 19(3): 211-222.
Nelson, Julie A. (1994). “On Testing for Full Insurance using Consumer Expenditure
Survey Data.” Journal of Political Economy, 102(2): 384-394.
Nelson, Timothy J. (1997). “The Church and the Street: Race and Poverty in an InnerCity Congregation.” In Contemporary American Religion: An Ethnographic Reader,
edited by Penny Edgell Becker and Nancy Eiesland. Alta Mira Press.
Nelson, Timothy J. (2004). Every Time I Feel the Spirit: Religious Ritual and
Experience in an African American Church. New York: New York University Press.
Pargament, Kenneth I. (2002). “The Bitter and the Sweet: An Evaluation of the Costs and
Benefits of Religiousness.” Psychological Inquiry, 13(3): 168-181.
Putman, Robert D. (2000). Bowling Alone: The Collapse and Revival of American
Community. New York: Simon & Schuster.
Stasavage, David, and Ken Scheve (2005). “Religion and Preferences for Social
Insurance.” Manuscript, London School of Economics.
Stasavage, David, and Ken Scheve (2006). “The Political Economy of Religion and
Social Insurance in the United States, 1910-1939,” Manuscript, London School of
Economics.
Strawbridge, William J., Sarah J. Shema, Richard D. Cohen, Robert E. Roberts, and
George A. Kaplan (1998). “Religiosity Buffers Effects of Some Stressors on Depression
but Exacerbates Others.” Journals of Gerontology, 53B(3): 118-126.
Smith, Timothy B., Michael E. McCullough, and Justin Poll (2003). “Religiousness and
Depression: Evidence for a Main Effect and the Moderating Influence of Stressful Life
Events.” Psychological Bulletin, 129(4): 614-636.
Sweet, James A., and Larry L. Bumpass (1996). “The National Survey of Families and
Households - Waves 1 and 2: Data Description and Documentation,” Center for
Demography and Ecology, University of Wisconsin-Madison
(http://www.ssc.wisc.edu/nsfh/home.htm).
Sweet, James A., Larry L. Bumpass, and Vaughn Call (1988). “The Design and Content
of The National Survey of Families and Households,” Center for Demography and
Ecology, University of Wisconsin-Madison, NSFH Working Paper No. 1.
Townsend, Robert M. (1994). “Risk and Insurance in Village India.” Econometrica,
62(3): 539-591.

31

Table 1: Distribution of Religious Attendance
Full Sample

White

Black

Percentile
in own
distribution
1%
5%
10%
25%
50%
75%
90%
95%
99%

Times /
year
0
0
0
1
13
50
78
104
189

Times /
year
0
0
0
1
12
44
76
104
182

Times /
year
0
0
1
7
27
52
104
156
234

Mean
Std. deviation
N

29.3
40.4
5716

27.1
38.0
4697

40.7
48.3
924

Note: Each attendance measure is the the average of the non-missing
values of that variable for waves 1 and 2.

Table 2: Religious Organization Membership and Consumption Effects of Income Shocks
Variable
a. Baseline specification
Change in ln HH income
Member of a religious organization
Interaction
Implied degree of insurance
Adjusted R2

Full Sample
(S.E.)
Coeff.

White
(S.E.)
Coeff.

Black
(S.E.)
Coeff.

0.115** (0.012)
0.008
(0.012)
-0.046*
(0.025)
0.397** (0.087)
0.0215

0.113** (0.012)
0.011
(0.013)
-0.045*
(0.027)
0.399** (0.094)
0.0217

0.108** (0.038)
-0.015
(0.026)
-0.068
(0.069)
0.636
(0.419)
0.0764

b. Horserace between actual and predicted membership
Change in ln HH income
0.124** (0.026)
0.127** (0.029)
0.070
(0.070)
Member of a religious organization
0.008
(0.012)
0.011
(0.013)
-0.013
(0.026)
Predicted membership
(absorbed by demographic controls)
Interaction with actual membership
-0.042
(0.029)
-0.040
(0.032)
-0.081
(0.076)
Interaction with predicted membership
-0.031
(0.083)
-0.046
(0.094)
0.125
(0.207)
Implied degree of insurance
0.342
(0.243)
0.315
(0.267)
1.152
(1.773)
Adjusted R2
0.0215
0.0217
0.0776
c. Matched sample
Implied degree of insurance
Adjusted R2

0.422**
(0.179)
0.0172

d. Horserace between charitable contributions and church membership
Change in ln HH income
0.110** (0.015)
Member of a religious organization
0.004
(0.010)
Made charitable contribution
0.010
(0.008)
Interaction with religious membership
-0.046** (0.021)
Interaction with charitable contribution
-0.006
(0.023)
Implied degree of insurance (religious)
0.418** (0.159)
Implied degree of insurance (charity)
0.055
(0.126)
Adjusted R2
0.0195

0.488** (0.196)
0.0141

0.280
(0.483)
0.0708

0.111** (0.017)
0.007
(0.011)
0.007
(0.008)
-0.055** (0.024)
-0.001
(0.028)
0.500** (0.137)
0.009
(0.152)
0.0197

0.082** (0.036)
-0.028
(0.024)
0.030
(0.035)
0.021
(0.054)
-0.042
(0.084)
-0.251
(0.521)
0.505
(0.501)
0.0658

e. Change in log total consumption expenditure used as dependent variable
Implied degree of insurance
0.171** (0.053)
0.193** (0.060)
2
Adjusted R
0.0371
0.0367
f. No age restriction on the sample
Implied degree of insurance
Adjusted R2

0.439** (0.073)
0.0195

0.503** (0.088)
0.0196

0.217

(0.137)
0.0927

-0.129
(0.477)
0.0654

Note: Standard errors are calculated accounting for the complex survey design of the CEX and are reported between parenthesis. Standard errror for
the implied degree of insurance is calculated by the delta method. Significance levels: *: 10 percent; ** 5 percent.All regressions also include the
controls for log real household income, a dummy for income being zero or missing, average age of head and spouse, age squared/100, household size
the change in household size between interviews, the presence of children in the household, the change in the presence of children between
interviews, education (dummy variables for high school graduate, some college, college graduate, professional degree), marital status (dummy
variables for widowed, divorced, separated, and never married), change in marital status, a dummy for owning a life insurance policy, and year by
month dummies. The sample sizes for the total, white, and black samples are 31787, 27,190, and 3,322 respectively.

Table 3: Consumption Effects by Respondent Characteristics
Whites

Blacks
Implied
degree of
∆ ln HH
income Membership Interaction insurance

Implied
degree of
∆ ln HH
income Membership Interaction insurance

Coeff.
(S.E.)

Coeff.
(S.E.)

Coeff.
(S.E.)

Coeff.
(S.E.)

Adj. R2

0.524** 0.0330 11588
(0.157)
0.283
0.0271 15602
(0.204)

0.126**
(0.042)
0.049
(0.082)

-0.022
(0.044)
0.003
(0.058)

-0.127*
(0.067)
0.037
(0.132)

1.007*
(0.528)
-0.757
(3.271)

0.1068 1919

-0.047
(0.039)
-0.032
(0.048)

0.412** 0.0347 13580
(0.113)
0.335
0.0306 13610
(0.216)

0.119**
(0.033)
0.020
(0.159)

-0.034
(0.031)
0.056
(0.093)

-0.103
(0.077)
0.058
(0.172)

0.869
(0.583)
-2.826
(9.290)

-0.062
(0.032)
-0.030
(0.043)

0.687** 0.0291 13358
(0.190)
0.206* 0.0319 13832
(0.129)

0.106**
(0.037)
0.167
(0.134)

-0.011
(0.039)
-0.069
(0.077)

-0.064
(0.086)
-0.124
(0.173)

0.600
(0.527)
0.742
(0.630)

Coeff.
(S.E.)

Coeff.
(S.E.)

Coeff.
(S.E.)

a. By educational attainment
High school or less
0.123**
(0.018)
Some college or more
0.095**
(0.023)

0.005
(0.021)
0.017
(0.015)

-0.065
(0.043)
-0.027
(0.038)

b. By liquid financial assets
$2000 or less
0.114**
(0.016)
More than $2000
0.094**
(0.028)

0.019
(0.018)
-0.004
(0.017)

0.002
(0.019)
0.021
(0.015)

Respondent characteristic

c. By per capita income
$15000 or less
More than $15000

Coeff.
(S.E.)

0.090**
(0.017)
0.147**
(0.023)

Adj. R2

N

N

0.1453 1403

0.0946 2612
0.2915

710

0.1002 2322
0.1757 1000

Note: Standard errors are calculated accounting for the complex survey design of the CEX and are reported between parenthesis. Significance levels: *: 10 percent; ** 5 percent. All regressions
also include the controls from the baseline regression (table 2, panel a). Financial assets and per capita income are measured in 2005 constant dollars.

Table 4: Religious Attendance and the Happiness Effects of Income Shocks

Variable
a. Baseline Specification
Change in ln HH income
Religious attendance (percentile)
Interaction
Implied degree of insurance
Adjusted R2

Full Sample
(S.E.)
Coeff.

White
(S.E.)
Coeff.

0.267** (0.102)
-0.131
(0.111)
-0.262
(0.183)
0.649*
(0.352)
0.0290

0.181
(0.110)
-0.073
(0.119)
-0.104
(0.202)
0.335
(0.569)
0.0365

b. Horserace between actual and predicted attendance
Change in ln HH income
0.277** (0.115)
0.222*
(0.121)
Actual religious attendance
-0.095
(0.116)
-0.024
(0.123)
Predicted religious attendance
(absorbed by demographic controls)
Interaction with actual att.
-0.283
(0.213)
-0.189
(0.231)
Interaction with predicted att.
0.101
(0.454)
0.408
(0.510)
Implied degree of insurance
0.687*
(0.387)
0.541
(0.533)
2
Adjusted R
0.0289
0.0365

Black
Coeff.

(S.E.)

0.780** (0.323)
-0.506
(0.377)
-1.164** (0.516)
1.189** (0.333)
0.0215

0.717*
-0.687

(0.401)
(0.419)

-1.049
(0.661)
-0.347
(1.306)
1.153** (0.371)
0.0217

c. Matched Sample
Implied degree of insurance
Adjusted R2

0.607
(0.371)
0.0345

0.422
(0.453)
0.0483

1.148**
0.0668

d. Ordered Probit
Implied degree of insurance
Adjusted R2

0.609*
(0.341)
0.0120

0.250
(0.548)
0.0147

1.227** (0.341)
0.0307

e. Attending more than the race-specific median
Implied degree of insurance
0.505
(0.385)
2
Adjusted R
0.0296

0.324
(0.553)
0.0364

1.155** (0.554)
0.0137

f. No age restriction on the sample
Implied degree of insurance
Adjusted R2

0.541
(0.459)
0.0347

0.999** (0.308)
0.0203

0.687** (0.307)
0.0293

Note: Robust standard errors between parenthesis. Significance levels: *: 10 percent; ** 5 percent. All regressions also include
controls for log real household income, employment by gender, employment change by gender, age, age squared, gender,
household size, the change in household size between interviews, any children under 18 in the household, the change the
presence of chidren in the household, education (dummy variables for high school graduate, some college, college graduate,
professional degree), marital status (dummy variables for widowed, divorced, separated, and never married), change in marital
status, race (black and other race-ethnicity), religious affiliation (12 dummies), private health insurance coverage in wave 2, and
year by month dummies. Independent variables with missing values or logs of dollar amounts less than $100/year are dummied
out. The sample sizes for the full, white and black sample are 5716, 4697 and 924 respectively. In the matched sample, the
sample sizes are 4123, 3299 and 665 respectively.

Table 5: Happiness Effects by Respondent Characteristics
∆ ln HH Religious
income attendance
Coeff.
Coeff.
(S.E.)
Respondent characteristic (S.E.)

Whites
Implied
Interaction Insurance
Adj. R2
Coeff.
Coeff.
(S.E.)
(S.E.)

a. By educational attainment
High school or less
0.257*
(0.154)
0.085
Some college or more
(0.154)

-0.175
(0.176)
0.042
(0.164)

-0.376
(0.296)
0.176
(0.274)

1.154
(0.753)
-0.680
(1.459)

b. By liquid financial assets
$2000 or less
0.277
(0.193)
More than $2000
0.125
(0.135)

-0.145
(0.238)
-0.047
(0.137)

-0.363
(0.365)
0.062
(0.243)

0.977
(0.801)
-0.221
(0.965)

0.452**
(0.189)
0.018
(0.133)

-0.089
(0.226)
-0.067
(0.139)

-0.364
(0.344)
0.094
(0.248)

0.505
(0.391)
-1.141
(4.822)

0.108
(0.144)
0.289
(0.205)

0.022
(0.186)
-0.138
(0.199)

0.240
(0.333)
-0.319
(0.318)

-0.713
(1.197)
0.759
(0.485)

c. By per capita income
$15000 or less
More than $15000
d. By intensity of beliefs
Below median
Above median

N

0.0298 2353
0.0413 2333

0.0345 1626
0.0342 3071

0.0412 1588
0.0374 2989

0.0353 2389
0.0453 2029

∆ ln HH Religious
income attendance
Coeff.
Coeff.
(S.E.)
(S.E.)

Blacks
InterImplied
action Insurance
Adj. R2
Coeff.
Coeff.
(S.E.)
(S.E.)

1.079**
(0.410)
0.339
(0.556)

-0.492 -1.640**
(0.485) (0.651)
-0.211
-0.732
(0.593) (0.899)

1.225**
(0.362)
2.349
(3.234)

1.101**
(0.436)
0.300
(0.477)

-0.234 -1.843**
(0.570) (0.714)
-0.793
0.068
(0.502) (0.730)

1.439**
(0.397)
-0.108
(1.239)

0.698
(0.469)
0.519
(0.462)
0.533
(0.390)
1.545**
(0.696)

-1.107*
(0.565)
0.172
(0.556)

-1.347*
(0.706)
-0.346
(0.830)

1.863*
(0.967)
0.400
(0.783)

-0.515
-0.774
(0.499) (0.696)
0.004 -2.270**
(0.725) (0.988)

1.140
(0.755)
1.162**
(0.284)

N

0.0203

568

0.0078

355

0.0136

584

0.0205

340

0.0390

503

0.0374

354

0.0215

508

0.0070

387

Note: Robust standard errors between parenthesis. Significance levels: *: 10 percent; ** 5 percent. All regressions also include the controls from the baseline regression (table 4,
panel a). Financial assets and per capita income are measured in 2005 constant dollars. The median of belief intensity is determined relative to the own sample.

Table 6: Other mechanisms of happiness insurance
Whites

Mechanism
a. Social Activities
Getting together socially with
friends / neighbors / relatives /

∆ ln HH
income

Activity

Coeff.
(S.E.)

Coeff.
(S.E.)

Blacks

InterImplied
action Insurance
Coeff.
(S.E.)

Coeff. Adj. R
(S.E.)

2

∆ ln HH
income

Activity

N

Coeff.
(S.E.)

Coeff.
(S.E.)

Inter- Implied
action Insurance
Coeff.
(S.E.)

Coeff. Adj. R
(S.E.)

2

N

0.210
(0.167)

-0.014
-0.041
(0.052) (0.090)

0.485
(0.885)

0.0365 4697

0.516*
(0.289)

-0.335** -0.234
(0.109) (0.152)

1.662*
(0.877)

0.0257

924

Group recreational activity

0.147*
(0.079)

-0.005
-0.014
(0.027) (0.048)

0.206
(0.707)

0.0356 4697

0.204
(0.189)

-0.032
-0.067
(0.080) (0.117)

0.989
(1.805)

0.0146

924

Going to a bar

0.089
(0.074)

0.038
0.045
(0.031) (0.051)

-0.671
(0.797)

0.0363 4697

0.227
(0.175)

-0.037
-0.124
(0.095) (0.126)

2.423
(3.987)

0.0122

924

Going to social event at church /
synagogue / mosque

0.182**
(0.075)

-0.023
-0.051
(0.039) (0.052)

0.783
(0.870)

0.0366 4697

0.487**
(0.238)

0.141
-0.226*
(0.101) (0.118)

1.734*
(0.926)

0.0191

924

0.202**
(0.065)

0.001
-0.280**
(0.073) (0.138)

1.384**
(0.592)

0.0371 4697

0.137
(0.158)

0.162
-0.036
(0.201) (0.331)

0.261
(2.249)

0.0226

924

Work-related organization

0.120*
(0.068)

0.026
0.044
(0.072) (0.125)

-0.370
(0.592)

0.0364 4697

0.121
(0.168)

0.529** 0.032
-0.266
(0.202) (0.317)
(2.882)

0.0283

924

Leisure groups

0.148*
(0.085)

-0.137** -0.031
(0.069) (0.120)

0.206
(0.721)

0.0368 4697

0.090
(0.210)

0.187
0.113
-1.263
(0.200) (0.324)
(6.218)

0.0147

924

Religious organizations

0.191**
(0.074)

-0.117
-0.150
(0.085) (0.120)

0.785
(0.485)

0.0377 4697

0.330
(0.236)

0.198
-0.346
(0.207) (0.301)

0.0145

924

b. Activity in organizations
Service or political organization

1.048**
(0.492)

Note: Robust standard errors between parenthesis. Significance levels: *: 10 percent; ** 5 percent. All regressions also include the controls from the baseline regression (table 4, panel a). All the
variables on social activities are measured on a 0-4 scale with 0 corresponding to "never", 1 to "several times a year", 2 to "about once a month", 3 to "about once a week" and 4 to "several times pe
week." For these variables, the implied degree of insurance is the reduction in the happiness impact of income shocks associated with attendance going from 1 to 3. "Getting together socially with
friends / neighbors / relatives / colleagues" is measured as the average of four separate questions asked about getting together socially with each of these classes of people. "Activity in organization
equals 1 if the respondent reports to attend at least "several times per year" an event of such an organization. Service and policital organizations include service, fraternal, veterans' and political
groups. The sample sizes for the white and black sample are 4697 and 924 respectively.

Appendix Table 1: Summary Statistics from the Consumer Expenditure Survey: 1986-2000
Full Sample
White
Standard
Standard
Variable
Mean Deviation
Mean Deviation
Contributes to a religious organization
0.38
0.49
0.38
0.49

Black
Mean
0.37

Standard
Deviation
0.48

Ln HH nondurable consumption
Nondurable consumption (quarterly, in
thousands of $1998)
∆ Ln nondurable consumption

8.02

0.72

8.07

0.70

7.68

0.74

3.98
-0.015

3.48
0.717

4.13
-0.012

3.55
0.722

2.88
-0.035

2.62
0.679

Ln HH income
Missing ln income
HH income (in thousands of $1998)
∆ Ln HH income
∆ Ln HH income (bottom/top coded)
Missing ∆ Ln HH income

10.42
0.0004
43.41
0.038
0.043
0.007

0.79
0.021
30.84
0.602
0.416
0.085

10.48
0.0005
45.16
0.037
0.042
0.008

0.77
0.022
31.17
0.589
0.409
0.089

9.98
0
29.39
0.032
0.039
0.002

0.84
0
23.17
0.683
0.456
0.049

Separated
Divorced
Widowed
Never Married
∆ Separated
∆ Divorced
∆ Widowed
∆ Never Married
Kids under 18 present in HH
∆ Kids under 18 present in HH
Household size
∆ Household size
Age
Age2/100
High school
Some college
College degree
Post college degree
White
Black
Other race
Ln wealth
Wealth zero or missing
∆ Ln wealth
Owns home
Owns life insurance policy
N

0.04
0.14
0.03
0.17
-0.0004
-0.0006
-0.0002
-0.0038
0.45
-0.004
2.93
0.026
40.16
17.18
0.25
0.20
0.12
0.09
0.86
0.11
0.03
6.19
0.23
0.001
0.68
0.53
31787

0.19
0.35
0.17
0.37
0.078
0.094
0.046
0.086
0.49
0.203
1.52
0.568
10.26
8.43
0.33
0.30
0.25
0.22
0.35
0.31
0.18
3.98
0.42
0.96
0.47
0.50

0.03
0.14
0.03
0.15
-0.0004
-0.0005
-0.0003
-0.0038
0.44
-0.003
2.90
0.026
40.23
17.24
0.25
0.21
0.13
0.09
1
0
0
6.52
0.20
0.009
0.71
0.53
27190

0.16
0.34
0.16
0.36
0.077
0.096
0.044
0.085
0.49
0.200
1.48
0.551
10.27
8.45
0.34
0.30
0.25
0.23
0
0
0
3.88
0.40
0.96
0.45
0.50

0.12
0.17
0.06
0.29
-0.0013
-0.0011
0.0002
-0.0042
0.55
-0.007
3.06
0.029
39.78
16.86
0.23
0.17
0.07
0.04
0
1
0
3.60
0.47
-0.058
0.43
0.53
3322

0.32
0.38
0.23
0.45
0.089
0.073
0.059
0.094
0.49
0.219
1.70
0.669
10.20
8.33
0.30
0.28
0.19
0.15
0
0
0
3.79
0.50
0.96
0.50
0.50

Appendix Table 2: Summary Statistics from the NSFH: 1987/88 and 1992/94

Variable
Self-reported happiness
∆ Self-reported happiness
Percentile in religious attendance

Full Sample
Standard
Mean Deviation
5.31
1.05
-0.05
1.62

White
Standard
Mean Deviation
5.33
1.03
-0.05
1.61

Black
Standard
Mean Deviation
5.22
1.03
-0.01
1.61

0.48

0.25

0.46

0.26

0.57

0.23

Ln HH income
Missing ln income
HH income (in thousands of $1998)
∆ Ln HH income
∆ Ln HH income (bottom/top coded)
Missing ∆ ln income

10.08
0.04
55.21
0.18
0.18
0.25

0.86
0.20
52.69
0.87
0.57
0.43

10.16
0.03
58.68
0.18
0.18
0.23

0.81
0.18
55.27
0.86
0.56
0.42

9.61
0.08
36.59
0.14
0.16
0.35

0.81
0.18
31.97
0.86
0.56
0.42

Separated
Divorced
Widowed
Never Married
∆ Separated
∆ Divorced
∆ Widowed
∆ Never Married
Kids under 18 present in HH
∆ Kids under 18 present in HH
Household size
∆ Household size
Age
Age2/100
High school
Some college
College degree
Post college degree
White
Black
Other race
Female
Ln wealth
Wealth zero or missing
∆ Ln wealth
Owns home
Covered by private health insurance
No religion
Jewish
Baptist
Episcopalian
Lutheran

0.05
0.14
0.02
0.15
-0.01
0.01
0.01
-0.07
0.57
-0.03
3.23
0.08
37.03
14.53
0.38
0.26
0.11
0.11
0.82
0.16
0.02
0.60
6.94
0.18
0.24
0.57
0.78
0.06
0.02
0.19
0.01
0.04

0.16
0.30
0.14
0.32
0.26
0.33
0.13
0.29
0.43
0.49
1.36
1.52
9.09
7.07
0.48
0.44
0.31
0.31
0.38
0.37
0.13
0.49
3.60
0.39
1.17
0.43
0.40
0.23
0.13
0.39
0.12
0.20

0.03
0.13
0.02
0.12
-0.01
0.01
0.01
-0.07
0.57
-0.02
3.19
0.06
36.91
14.44
0.38
0.26
0.12
0.12
1
0
0
0.59
7.32
0.15
0.27
0.61
0.79
0.06
0.02
0.12
0.02
0.05

0.14
0.29
0.12
0.29
0.24
0.34
0.12
0.28
0.43
0.49
1.31
1.47
9.02
7.01
0.48
0.44
0.32
0.33
0
0
0
0.49
3.40
0.35
1.21
0.42
0.39
0.24
0.14
0.33
0.13
0.22

0.10
0.16
0.05
0.28
-0.02
0.03
0.02
-0.07
0.58
-0.07
3.39
0.12
37.74
15.13
0.38
0.27
0.07
0.04
0
1
0
0.65
4.92
0.37
0.08
0.40
0.68
0.03
0.00
0.53
0.00
0.00

0.14
0.29
0.12
0.29
0.24
0.34
0.12
0.28
0.43
0.49
1.31
1.47
9.02
7.01
0.48
0.44
0.32
0.33
0
0
0
0.49
3.94
0.48
0.94
0.44
0.45
0.24
0.14
0.33
0.13
0.22

Methodist
Mormon
Presbyterian
Congregational
Protestant, no denomination
Other Christian
Other religions / missing

0.07
0.02
0.02
0.01
0.01
0.07
0.01

Frequency of (0-4 scale):
Getting together socially with friends /
neighbors / relatives / colleagues
1.27
Group recreational activity
0.89
Going to a bar
0.77
0.97
Going to social event at church
Participation in the following types of organizations:
Service or policital organization
0.14
0.19
Work-related organization
Leisure groups
0.38
0.30
Religious organizations
N

5716

0.25
0.14
0.15
0.08
0.09
0.25
0.08

0.07
0.02
0.03
0.01
0.01
0.07
0.00

0.25
0.15
0.17
0.08
0.10
0.25
0.06

0.06
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.08
0.01

0.25
0.15
0.17
0.08
0.10
0.25
0.06

0.66
1.00
0.94
1.03

1.27
0.81
0.80
1.00

0.64
0.96
0.95
1.05

1.25
1.33
0.62
0.80

0.64
0.96
0.95
1.05

0.35
0.40
0.48
0.46

0.14
0.20
0.39
0.28

0.35
0.40
0.49
0.45

0.13
0.17
0.32
0.40

0.35
0.40
0.49
0.45

4697

924

