                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             WHAT ARE FIRMS? EVOLUTION FROM
                               BIRTH TO PUBLIC COMPANIES

                                            Steven N. Kaplan
                                             Berk A. Sensoy
                                             Per Strömberg

                                         Working Paper 11581
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w11581


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 2005




Kaplan: University of Chicago Graduate School of Business and NBER, Sensoy: University of Chicago
Graduate School of Business, and Strömberg: SIFR. This research has been supported by the Kauffman
Foundation, by the Lynde and Harry Bradley Foundation and the Olin Foundation through grants to the
Center for the Study of the Economy and the State, and by the Center for Research in Security Prices. We
thank the venture capital partnerships for providing data. We thank Andres Almazan, Ulf Axelson, George
Baker, Ola Bengtsson, Effi Benmelech, Patrick Bolton, Zsuzsanna Fluck, Oliver Hart, Thomas Hellman,
Bengt Holmstrom, Josh Lerner, Jeremy Stein, Krishnamurthy Subramanian, Lucy White, Luigi Zingales, and
seminar participants at the CEPR Summer Symposium at Gerzensee, Federal Reserve Bank of New York,
Harvard University, NBER Entrepreneurship Group, Stockholm School of Economics, and the University
of Chicago for helpful comments. Address correspondence to Steven Kaplan, University of Chicago
Graduate School of Business, 5807 South Woodlawn Avenue, Chicago, IL 60637 or e-mail at
skaplan@uhicago.edu.The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by Steven N. Kaplan, Berk A. Sensoy and Per Strömberg. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
What Are Firms? Evolution from Birth to Public Companies
Steven N. Kaplan, Berk A. Sensoy and Per Strömberg
NBER Working Paper No. 11581
August 2005
JEL No. L2, G3

                                            ABSTRACT




We study how firm characteristics evolve from early business plan to initial public offering to public
company for 49 venture capital financed companies. The average time elapsed is almost 6 years.
We describe the financial performance, business idea, point(s) of differentiation, non-human capital
assets, growth strategy, customers, competitors, alliances, top management, ownership structure, and
the board of directors. Our analysis focuses on the nature and stability of those firm attributes. Firm
business lines remain remarkably stable from business plan through public company. Within those
business lines, non-human capital aspects of the businesses appear more stable than human capital
aspects. In the cross-section, firms with more alienable assets have substantially more human capital
turnover.



Steven Kaplan                                          Per Stromberg
Graduate School of Business                            Swedish Institute for Financial Research
The University of Chicago                              Saltmätargatan 19A
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue                             SE-113 59 Stockholm
Chicago, IL 60637                                      SWEDEN
and NBER                                               and NBER
skaplan@gsb.uchicago.edu                               per.stromberg@cifr.org

Berk Sensoy
Graduate School of Business
The University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
bsensoy@gsb.uchicago.edu
Introduction

           Since Coase (1937), economists have attempted to understand why firms exist and what constitutes

firms.1 Despite the long history of theory and empirical work, there is little systematic or non-case evidence

concerning what constitutes a firm at birth and how a firm evolves from birth to mature company. In this

paper, we provide such evidence by studying 49 venture capital-financed firms from early business plan to

initial public offering (IPO) to public company (three years after the IPO).

           This exercise has two goals. First, we provide a systematic description of the early life and evolution

of an important sample of firms. Second, we consider how our findings can be interpreted in relation to

existing theories of the firm and what new theories might try to explain.

           Our analysis begins with the identification and classification of firm characteristics when the firms

are very young (at the time of an early business plan). Fewer than half the sample firms have revenues at

that time. For each sample firm, we describe the financial performance, business idea, point(s) of

differentiation, non-human capital assets and technology, growth strategy, customers, competitors, alliances,

top management, ownership structure, and board of directors. We then consider how firm financial measures

and firm characteristics evolve by describing the firms at the IPO and at the third annual report after the IPO.

We pay particular attention to measuring if those characteristics remain constant, change, or disappear.

           After describing the initial characteristics and evolution of these firms, we examine two cross-

sectional relationships. We consider the relation between human capital turnover and the nature of firm

assets. Then, we consider the division of value between human and non-human capital assets by estimating

the determinants of founder ownership.

           In describing the initial characteristics of firms and how they evolve, we try to shed light on different

theories of the firm. While some of these theories are motivated by specific examples or cases, we provide

some of the first systematic and (relatively) large sample evidence on these issues.

           Several theories emphasize the difference between non-human and human assets. For example, the

basic assumption of the Hart-Moore framework is that firms are defined by their non-human assets. In the

1
    Both Holmstrom and Roberts (1998) and Gibbons (2004) describe and summarize some of this work.


                                                          1
words of Hart (1995), “a firm’s non-human assets, then, simply represent the glue that keeps the firm

together, whatever this may be … Control over non-human assets leads to control over human assets… If

non-human assets do not exist, then it is not clear what keeps the firm together.” (p. 57). Holmström (1999)

comes to a similar conclusion, but argues that firm ownership of non-human assets allows the firm to

structure internal incentives and to influence external parties (e.g., suppliers) who contract with the firm.

            Two aspects of our analysis address these theories. First, we try to identify the “glue” that holds

firms together and determine the extent to which the glue derives from non-human or human assets. Second,

to the extent that the theories are static theories (in that they assume a non-human asset or glue already

exists), we provide evidence as to the stage of a firm at which the glue emerges or “sticks” and how the

“glue” evolves over a firm’s life cycle.

            We also relate our results to theories of the firm that emphasize the existence of specific assets or

resources that are critical to the firm’s evolution and growth. In particular, Wernerfelt (1984) and Rajan and

Zingales (2001b) focus on critical resources. A critical resource may be a person, “an idea, good customer

relationships, a new tool, or superior management technique.” According to these theories, a “firm is a web

of specific investments built around a critical resource or resources… At some point, the critical resource

becomes the web of specific investment itself.” [Zingales (2000)]. One can interpret this latter statement as

something of a dynamic theory. By examining firms’ resources (non-human and human assets) early in their

lives and over time, we shed light on the nature of critical resources and the periods in which they are

critical.

            The theories above (as well as others such as Hart and Moore (1994)) also have implications for how

rents are divided between providers of human (founders) and non-human capital and the ability of firms to

raise outside financing. When specific human capital is more crucial, these models suggest that the specific

human capital will capture more of the rents and make it more difficult to finance firms. With our data, we

estimate the magnitude of the rents retained by specific human capital (founders) and the relation of those

rents to the nature of the firms’ assets.




                                                           2
        This analysis also sheds light on the “new firms” described in Zingales (2000) and Rajan and

Zingales (2001a). They argue that today’s new firms differ from the old, traditional firms of the (early) 20th

century. Old firms are “asset-intensive and highly vertically integrated … [their] boundaries are clear cut

and sufficiently stable that one can take them for granted.” New firms, on the other hand, tend to be “non-

vertically integrated, human capital intensive organizations operating in highly competitive environments.”

Rajan and Zingales (2001a) argue that alienable assets – assets that can be assigned or pledged to other firms

– have become less important relative to human capital and inalienable assets (e.g., business processes or

knowledge). In fact, Zingales (2000) suggests that in today’s corporations “human capital is emerging as the

most crucial asset.”

        Related to the theoretical questions concerning the role of human and non-human capital assets is an

old and ongoing debate among venture capitalists (VCs). Some VCs believe that the company’s business

and market are the key determinants of success while others believe that the key determinant is the

company’s management team. While VCs try to invest in companies with both strong businesses and strong

management (see Kaplan and Strömberg (2004)), different VCs claim to weigh one or the other more heavily

at the margin. For example, Donald Valentine of Sequoia Capital, the VC investor in Cisco, is a well-known

proponent of the business / market view. Others favor the best available management team view. Quindlen

(2000) discusses these two views from the VC perspective (p. 33-35). This debate is often characterized as

whether one should bet on the jockey (management) or bet on the horse (the business / market).

        Our results can be summarized as follows. The companies in our sample experience dramatic

growth in revenue, assets, and market capitalization, but do not become profitable. While the companies

grow dramatically, their core businesses appear remarkably stable. Only one firm changes its core line of

business in the sense that the company produces a different product or service, or abandons its initial market

segment to serve a different one. Rather than changing businesses, firms typically maintain or broaden their

offerings within their initial market segments. The firms also sell to similar customers and compete against

similar competitors in the three stages of the life cycle we examine. This suggests that the firms’ business

lines become fixed or elemental at a relatively early stage in a firm’s life cycle.



                                                        3
           Almost uniformly, firms claim that they are differentiated by a unique product, technology, or

service at all three stages of the life cycle we examine. At the same time, however, the stated importance of

expertise (which one might interpret as specific human capital) declines. Roughly half of the firms stress the

importance of expertise at the business plan while fewer than 15% do so by the IPO and third annual reports.

           With regard to non-human capital assets, firms stress the importance of proprietary intellectual

property (IP), patents, and physical assets in all three stages. Patents and physical assets become increasingly

important over time.

           While the points of differentiation, alienable assets, customers, and competitors remain relatively

constant, the human capital of the sample firms changes more substantially. At the time of the annual report,

one-half of the CEOs at the business plan remain; only one-quarter of the next four top executives remain.

           At this point, the results provide some insight into the Hart-Moore-Holmström view that a firm must

be organized around non-human capital assets. Consistent with this view, we find that non-human capital

assets form very early in a firm’s life. Identifiable lines of business and important physical, patent, and IP

assets are created in these firms by the time of the early business plan, are relatively stable, and do not

change or disappear as specific human capital assets turn over.

           This should not be interpreted as saying that specific human capital is unnecessary or unimportant.

Obviously, a specific person has to have the initial idea and start the firm. Proprietary, but non-patented

intellectual property is indeed critical to many firms. In contrast to non-human assets, however, the

importance of specific people and initial expertise diminishes early in the firm’s life cycle. Once the firm’s

non-human assets are established, it seems possible (and not unusual) to find other people to run the firm.2

           These findings also have implications for the critical resource theories. The early emergence and

stability of non-human assets are consistent with those assets being critical resources. The instability of the

human assets suggests that to the extent that the initial critical resource is a specific person or founder, the

“web of specific investments built around the founder(s)” itself becomes the critical resource relatively early

in a firm’s life.


2
    For evidence consistent with this, see Bertrand and Schoar (2003).

                                                             4
        Our cross-sectional analysis provides further support to our interpretations of the Hart-Moore-

Holmström and critical resource theories. Firms with more alienable assets at the time of the business plan

have substantially more human capital turnover over time. Again, this suggests that specific human capital is

more critical before alienable assets have formed.

        Our results also are consistent with recent theoretical work by Aghion, Dewatripont, and Stein

(2005). Their model studies the tradeoffs between academic and private sector research. Based on control

right considerations, they predict that once an idea becomes the property of a private firm (rather than an

academic institution), it will be developed along relatively narrow lines.

        From a practitioner perspective, we interpret the greater stability of the lines of business in our

sample relative to that of management teams as favoring the business / market view of VC investing over the

best available management team view. The results suggest that VCs are regularly able to find management

replacements or improvements for good businesses. At least in our sample, we do not find cases in which

VCs invest in good managers who move the firms into different businesses.

        We then consider the division of rents. Using ownership stakes just before the IPO, we estimate the

percentage of value that founders retain for their ideas rather than for incentive purposes. For their human

capital assets specific to the company, our estimates suggest that founders retain from 10% to 19% of the

value created by the firm. Regardless of whether these estimates are interpreted as small or large, they

appear to be much lower than those for an earlier time period in Baker and Gompers (1999). This finding

raises some doubt regarding the claim in Zingales (2000) that more recent, “new” firms are more dependent

on specific human capital and, therefore, should allot a greater fraction of the value created to founders.

        We view this study and methodology as an early empirical step in studying the nature and evolution

of firms. While we believe that the results are novel and useful in interpreting theories of the firm, we

acknowledge that the sample is indeed a special one in that the firms are all VC-funded and eventually went

public. There are two reasons we chose to study this sample. First, we were able to obtain a relatively large

data set. Second, as we discuss in the paper, VC-funded firms represent a substantial fraction of all IPOs (at

least 39%) and a higher fraction of all start-ups that ultimately go public.



                                                        5
        At the same time that this is an economically important sample to study, there are two reasons why

the results may be special to this sample. First, VCs may choose to fund only those companies in which

specific human capital is relatively unimportant. Zingales (2000) argues that VCs will invest in and organize

firms such that the organization is not too dependent on any specific entrepreneur or individual. Kaplan and

Strömberg (2003) find that VC contracts are carefully designed to give the VCs sufficient control rights to

organize firms and replace founders and management when appropriate. Second, VCs may have special

skills that can be interpreted as specific human capital. Hellman and Puri (2000 and 2002) find that VC-

backed firms introduce products and professionalize management more quickly than non-VC-backed firms.

This type of human capital may substitute for the human capital of a specific founder. A logical avenue for

future research is to consider whether our results hold for non-VC backed firms.

        Our work is closely related to three other research efforts. Bhide (2000) studies 100 companies from

Inc. Magazine’s list of 500 fastest growing companies in 1989. Based on interviews with founders, Bhide

finds that over 70% of those companies are founded by people who replicated or modified an idea

encountered in their previous employment. They do relatively little planning before starting the business.

Partly as a result, these companies frequently adjust their business plans as they operate. Bhide contrasts

these companies to VC-funded companies which he argues are more likely to “have innovative ideas and a

verifiable record of … achievement (p. 111).” Our study complements his in that we focus on VC funded

companies. In addition, we focus more on the nature of the initial attributes of a company, how those

attributes evolve, and how those attributes affect outcomes.

        Our work also is related to the papers that emerged from the Stanford Project on Emerging

Companies (Baron and Hannan (2002), Baron et al. 1999, Baron et. al. 2001; Hannan et al. 2000; and

Hellman and Puri (2000 and 2002)). Like we do, they study a panel of young firms – high technology firms

in Silicon Valley – but they ask a different set of questions. Baron and Hannan (2002) summarize the

findings of their papers as showing that initial employment models are important and tend to persist. When

they are changed, employee turnover increases and performance declines.




                                                       6
        Finally, Santos and Eisenhardt (2004) provide a case-based study of five new information

technology firms. They study how those firms attempted to claim their initial market, how they demarcated

that market, and how they used acquisitions to consolidate that market.

        The paper proceeds as follows. Section I describes our sample. Section II describes the initial

financial characteristics, business idea, point(s) of differentiation, assets and technology, growth strategy,

customers, competitors, strategic alliances, management, ownership structure, and board of directors of the

sample firms and their evolution. Section III presents our cross-sectional estimates. Section IV summarizes

and discusses our results.



I.      Sample

        The sample consists of forty-nine companies that went public in an IPO and for which we obtained

an early business plan or business description at the time of a VC financing. We obtained twenty-nine of the

companies from the sample of VC financed companies in Kaplan and Strömberg (2003). We obtained an

additional twenty companies by asking several VCs to provide business plans of companies they had

financed that had subsequently gone public.

        For all of the companies in the sample, we have copies of the business plans and / or the venture

capitalist investment memos that describe the company at the time of venture capital funding. (We do not

find meaningful differences in the two types of documents. Accordingly, in what follows, we drop the

distinction and collectively refer to them as business plans.) We are able to identify the early (and often

initial) characteristics of these firms. For all of the sample companies, we also have detailed descriptions of

the companies at the time of their IPOs. We obtain IPO descriptions from S-1 registration statements and

424B prospectuses filed with the SEC. When available, we collect the company’s annual report that is

closest to 36 months after the IPO, a period roughly equal to the time from the business plan to the IPO. If

an annual report is not available 36 months after the IPO, we collect the latest annual report that is at least 12

months after the IPO. We obtain annual report descriptions from SEC form 10-K filings.




                                                        7
        For ten companies, we do not record an annual report observation: three companies were taken over

and one went bankrupt less than one year after the IPO; five companies are public, but have not filed an

annual report more than twelve months after the IPO; one company is a Canadian firm which does not file

annual reports with the SEC. We retain the business plan and IPO observations for all forty-nine firms.



        A.      Description

        Table 1 presents summary information for our sample. The median company is 24 months old as of

the business plan, so these documents describe the companies when they are young. As we document below,

these companies are early stage businesses at the time of the business plan; the median company had no

revenue in the most recently ended fiscal year at the time of the business plan.

        The median time elapsed between the business plan and the IPO in our sample is 34 months, with a

further median gap of 33 months between the IPO and the annual report observations. The IPO observation

is therefore quite close to the midpoint of the business plan and annual report observations. The median total

time elapsed is 63 months; the average is 68 months. Since the median total time elapsed is more than twice

the median company age at our first observation, our 3 observations should be sufficiently spaced in time to

have the opportunity to observe meaningful time series variation in company characteristics.

        Of the 48 companies whose founders we were able to identify, 21 have one founder, 16 have two co-

founders, and 11 were co-founded by three or more individuals.

        The frequency distributions in table 1 show that the bulk of the sample companies were founded in

the early-to-mid nineties while the business plans describe the companies in the mid-to-late nineties. Thirty-

one of the forty-nine IPOs took place in 1998, 1999, or 2000, at the height of the technology boom. The

industry breakdown of our sample is heavily weighted towards high-technology firms: 17 in biotech, 15 in

software/information technology, 3 in telecom, 5 in healthcare, 5 in retail, and 4 in other industries, of which

3 are high-tech companies. The time frame of the sample, therefore, also corresponds to the period in which

“new firms” emerged as described in Zingales (2000) and Rajan and Zingales (2001b).




                                                       8
        Finally, table 1 shows our companies’ status as of July 31, 2005. 27 are still active, independent

companies. 15 have been acquired, and 7 have failed and gone bankrupt.



        B.       Sample selection issues

        In this section, we discuss potential selection issues. Most importantly, our sample includes only

VC-backed firms because it is from our VC contacts that we were able to obtain the necessary data. VC-

backed firms represent only a small fraction of all entrepreneurial firms and are unlikely to be representative

of the typical entrepreneurial firm because of various constraints, conditions, and practices governing venture

capitalists’ selection of their portfolio companies. For example, VCs typically invest several million dollars

in any given company. For such an investment to make sense, the VC must expect the portfolio company to

be able to use the capital and offer a return that is a multiple of the VCs’ investment. Typical mom-and-pop

stores or other low-risk, low-reward start-up firms are not in a position to do either of these.

        Even though they are not representative of all start-ups, VC-backed start-ups are an important subject

for study because they tend to include the most promising start-ups that end up having a disproportionate

impact on the economy. In particular, VC funded companies typically comprise a substantial fraction of

young companies that go public in any given year. According to the National Venture Capital Association

(2004), about 39% of all IPOs from 1993 to 2003 are VC-financed companies. This understates the fraction

of IPOs of young companies that are VC financed because some of the non-VC financed IPOs are mature

companies such as divisions of public companies (spin-offs or equity carve-outs) or companies returning to

the public markets after having gone private. We discuss results that may be special to VC-backed firms as

we come to them in the paper and in the conclusion.

        Among the VC-financed universe of firms, our sample of portfolio companies and financings is not a

random sample in that we obtained the data from VC firms with whom we have a relationship. The 29

companies from Kaplan and Strömberg (2003) are taken from a sample of 119 VC-backed companies. As

Kaplan and Strömberg (2003) do not find any obvious bias in the 119 companies, we do not think there are

any obvious biases in the 29 companies that went public. The additional 20 companies provided by VCs at



                                                        9
our request represent those companies that the VCs had financed and subsequently taken public. The VCs

who agreed to participate provided all the relevant business plans they could find so there should not be a

selection bias for any particular VC.

        Finally, it is possible that there is some bias in the VCs who decide to participate. Such a bias would

affect our results only if those VCs invest in companies with atypical initial assets that evolve in an atypical

way. For example, the VCs in our sample may focus on one of non-human or human capital over the other.

Although this is possible, we have no reason to believe the participating VCs are atypical in this sense.

        The industries of the sample firms are representative of the industries that VCs invest in. At the

same time, however, investments in biotech and healthcare are over-represented – 45% of our sample versus

roughly 20% of the overall VC market – while investments in software, information technology and telecom

are under-represented relative to the overall VC market (see National Venture Capital Association (2004)).

Because biotech firms, in particular, are oversampled and potentially different from other types of

companies, we report most of our results separately for biotech and non-biotech firms.



II.     Results

        A.        Financials and Employees

        Table 2 summarizes the financial and employment histories of our firms.       Consistent with

describing the firms at an early stage, revenues, assets, and employees of the sample firms are small at the

time of the business plans. They increase by orders of magnitude between the business plan and the annual

report. Negative profits are the norm at the business plan. Despite increases in revenues, assets, employees,

and market capitalization, the median firm does not become profitable through the post-IPO annual report.



                  A.1    Revenue

        At the business plan, the median company reports no revenue in the prior fiscal year. Average

revenue is $5.5 million, reflecting seven companies with revenues over $10 million.




                                                       10
        At the IPO, the median and average revenue figures increase dramatically to $7.2 million and $40.5

million. Four companies go public with no revenue in the latest fiscal year; another nine have less than $1

million in revenues. By the annual report, revenues increase by another order of magnitude, to a median of

$35.1 million and an average of $179.0 million. The huge percentage changes are consistent with the

revenue levels. Both the biotech and non-biotech firms experience substantial growth, but the biotech firms

begin from a smaller base.

        The extremely rapid revenue growth exhibited by our sample suggests that they are successful in

supplying products and services to quickly growing segments of the economy. We believe that the

evolution of company characteristics we consider in this paper is particularly interesting in light of this rapid

growth. Rapid revenue growth into the millions of dollars per year is characteristic, according to Bhide

(2000), of the types of start-ups VCs try to select.



                 A.2     Employees and revenue per employee

        The median company has 22 employees at the business plan, 124 at the IPO, and 378 at the annual

report. Because retail companies tend to be more labor-intensive than others in our sample, panel B provides

employee statistics excluding the five retail companies. The median number of employees for non-retail

companies is 18, 102, and 256 at the business plan, IPO, and annual report.

        Revenue per employee also increases dramatically over time, from a median of 0 at the business plan

to $50.5 thousand at the IPO and $124.6 thousand at the annual report. The increase for the non-retail

subsample is similar to that of the overall sample.



                 A.3     Assets

        Asset growth for the sample parallels revenue growth, suggesting the need for large investment

outlays to generate such rapid growth. The median company’s book assets at the business plan, IPO, and

annual report are, respectively, $2.6 million, $19.6 million, and $96.7 million; the average company’s are

$5.9 million, $44.3 million, and $274.9 million.



                                                       11
                A.4      Earning Before Interest and Taxes (EBIT)

        Our companies are unprofitable at the time of the business plan – when we can measure profitability.

The losses increase from the business plan through the IPO and annual report. This is consistent with the

patterns for recent IPOs described in Fama and French (2003), particularly for young firms. The median

company’s EBIT for the fiscal year prior to the business plan, IPO, and annual report are, respectively, -

$0.78 million, -$6.7 million, and -$25.6 million. Bhide (2000, p. 155) writes that “the financial projections

of VC-backed firms usually anticipate negative cash flows for several years.” These projections are borne

out in our sample -- only 17%, 18%, and 15% of firms, respectively, are profitable at the business plan, IPO,

and annual report. The patterns of medians are similar for both biotech and non-biotech firms. However,

biotech firms are less likely to be profitable, with 13%, 6%, and 0%, respectively, profitable at the business

plan, IPO, and annual report.



                A.5      Market capitalization and market-to-assets ratio

        We calculate market capitalization at the business plan as the value of the company after a VC

financing that occurs within six months of the date of the business plan. Market capitalization at the IPO is

calculated as the first trading day’s closing price times the number of shares outstanding following the

offering. Market capitalization at the annual report is the average of the high and low stock prices during the

last quarter of the year covered by the annual report times the number of shares outstanding as of the issue

date of the report. We do not have a market capitalization figure at the annual report for one company whose

shares were delisted.

        The median market capitalization increases sharply from $17.9 million at the business plan to $232.4

million at the IPO, and then declines to $176.9 million at the annual report. The corresponding median

market-to-assets ratios are 5.4, 13.9, and 1.8. The market capitalization figures indicate a roughly tenfold

increase in value from business plan to IPO, a period of roughly 3 years. These companies, despite their




                                                       12
negative profits, are highly valued. The decline in the market capitalization after the IPO is consistent with

(and likely driven by) the technology stock “bust” from 2000 to 2002.



        B.      Business

                1. Line of business

        Panel A of table 3 presents a description of each company’s business as described in each of the

three relevant documents. For each company, we determine if the description of the business changes from

one point in time to the next. We categorize the changes in two ways. First, we consider whether firms

change their line of business. The line of business changes if the firm sells to a completely different set of

customers or if the firm markedly changes the products or services it offers. Second, we consider whether

firms broaden, narrow, or maintain their initial business model or line of business. If Apple Computer were

in the sample, we would classify Apple as having the same line of business it had when it started – personal

computers sold to the same customers – but with a line of business that had broadened.

        These comparisons admittedly have a subjective component to them. We report the individual

descriptions to give the reader a sense of the type and magnitude of these changes. The descriptions have

been coarsened to protect the anonymity of the portfolio companies and VC firms. The descriptions in the

business plans and other documents are always at least a paragraph and usually much longer. We base our

measurements and conclusions on the more detailed descriptions to which we have access.

        At the end of panel A, we report the percentage of companies that fall into each category. One

notable result emerges quickly in this table. While we observe broadening or narrowing of the business, only

one of the forty-nine firms in our sample changes its line of business. For example, a biotech firm may

decide to narrow its focus from disease prevention in general to focusing on a specific type of vaccine

(company 36). Or an e-commerce firm might broaden its e-commerce offerings to include more services and

infrastructure offerings (company 31). We do not observe any of the firms undertaking acquisitions

unrelated to the original business. We also do not observe radical shifts in focus such as a medical

equipment company switching to drug development. Company 49 undergoes the greatest change, moving



                                                       13
from offering a new computing platform to a new operating system to a suite of software programs, each

time dropping the previous idea, but even in this case there is a general focus on personal computing.

        This result suggests that the initial business lines and / or the accompanying attributes of those

businesses do not change and, therefore, appear to be core to our sample firms. The result is consistent with

the assertion of Bhide (2000, p.155) that “VC-backed firms face less pressure to change their plans than do

[other] promising start-ups.”

        For the most part, companies tend to broaden or at least not reduce their offerings within markets.

For the 48 companies that did not change their line of business, panel A of table 3 shows that only 13%

narrowed their lines of business between the business plan and IPO, 8% narrowed between the IPO and

annual report, and only 13% had narrower offerings at the annual report than at the business plan. Over the

corresponding periods, 42%, 42%, and 37%.of the firms keep their offerings roughly the same, while 46%,

50%, and 50% broaden their offerings.

        Non-biotech firms differ from biotech firms in that non-biotech firms rarely narrow their line(s) of

business while biotech firms are more likely to narrow and less likely to broaden their line(s) of business.



                 2. Origin of business idea

        Panel B of table 3 classifies the origin of the business idea. Of the 34 companies for which we were

able to find a definitive source, 5 were formed as spin-offs or joint ventures of already existing companies,

15 were started to exploit an idea the founder(s) had as a result of previous jobs, and 14 were based on

academic research. Again, there is a clear difference for biotech firms which are more likely to be based on

academic research while non-biotech firms are most likely to be based on ideas from previous jobs.3




3
 See Gompers et al. (2005) who study the background of founders in a large sample of venture-backed start-ups. The
margin between forming new ventures as start-ups (entrepreneurship) or within established firms (intrapreneurship) has
been analyzed to some extent (e.g., Gromb and Scharfstein 2002). Also, see Aghion et al. (2005) who study the role of
non-profit academic institutions in innovation.



                                                          14
                 3. Business strategy

        Panel B also classifies our companies’ business plan strategies into the categories of Baron, Hannon,

and Burton (1999). Innovators are companies striving to create novel products for new, undeveloped

markets. Enhancers are companies striving to improve upon products for already developed markets.

Marketers are companies whose core competency lies in the marketing, distribution, and sales of their

products. Technology/marketing hybrids are companies that share characteristics of the marketers as well as

innovators/enhancers. Cost refers to companies who compete primarily by providing their product at low

cost. We classify 24 firms (49%) as innovators, 11 (22%) as enhancers, 5 (10%) as marketers, 6 (12%) as

technology/marketing hybrids, and 3 (6%) as cost. This distribution is similar to that of Baron et al.’s (1999)

larger sample of 149 companies: 50%, 19%, 13%, 11%, and 7%, respectively.



        C.       Point of differentiation

        In table 4, we classify how the sample firms differentiate themselves from their competitors over the

sample period. We rely on the distinguishing characteristics stated by the companies themselves.

        We mention two caveats in interpreting these results. First, it is possible that the business plans are

overly positive because the entrepreneurs are marketing their companies to the VCs. While possible, we do

not find any appreciable difference between business plans (prepared by the firms) and investment memos

(prepared by the VCs) with respect to the variables we analyze. Second, it is possible that the descriptions in

the public documents – IPO prospectuses and Annual Reports – differ from those in the business plan

because of legal liability concerns rather than business reasons.

        By far the most important factor, cited by 100%, 98%, and 92% of companies, respectively, at the

business plan, IPO, and annual report, is a belief that the company offers a unique product and/or technology.

        A small number of firms – 6%, 12%, and 13% – cite the comprehensiveness of their products as

differentiating at the three relevant dates.




                                                       15
        Customer service becomes an increasingly important source of differentiation over time, increasing

from 8% to 16% to 26% as a differentiating factor, respectively at the business plan, IPO, and annual report.

Not surprisingly, customer service is relatively more important in the non-biotech firms.

        Alliances and partnerships are of modest importance throughout with 12%, 12%, and 8% of the firms

referring to them at the business plan, IPO and annual report.

        At the business plan, 45% of companies cite the expertise of their management and other employees

as distinguishing characteristics. This suggests that specific human capital plays an important role in the

early life of many of these companies. The percentage of firms that cite expertise declines to 14% at the IPO

and 13% at the annual report. This result is suggestive of an increasingly important role for non-human

capital compared to specific human capital as companies mature. There is not much difference in the

importance of expertise between biotech and non-biotech firms.

        A small number of firms – 4%, 2%, and 5% – also cite scientific advisors, another human capital

related resource – as important.

        Finally, a small number of firms – 6%, 8%, and 8% – cite reputation as important. This may reflect

human or non-human capital reputation.

        The transition percentages shown in table 4 indicate that self-reported company distinguishing

characteristics are generally stable over time. The columns labeled “yes to no” and “no to yes” show the

percentage of firms for which a given characteristic was (was not) cited at one time but was not (was) cited at

a later time. The one exception is the large reduction in firms citing management or employee expertise as a

differentiating characteristic from the business plan to the IPO.

        Overall, self-reported distinguishing characteristics suggest that non-human capital assets are more

important than specific human capital assets initially, and that the relative importance increases over time.



        D.       Assets and Technology

        In table 5, we describe the types of assets owned by our firms. We note whether each firm mentions

patents, physical assets, and / or non-patented intellectual property as important or central to the business.



                                                       16
For example, while all firms have some physical assets, those physical assets do not necessarily differentiate

or add value to the business. In particular, specific physical assets are generally not critical to software firms.

        We classify the patents and physical assets as alienable assets because they can potentially be sold or

assigned to other companies. We classify non-patented intellectual property as some kind of process,

technique, or knowledge that the company believes is an important asset, but is not patented or assignable.

Such non-patented intellectual property may or may not be tied to specific human capital.

        A firm can have both patented and non-patented intellectual property. In the table, when we refer to

proprietary intellectual property, this includes both patented and non-patented intellectual property. The

distinction does not affect the percentages because all firms with patented intellectual property also claim to

have non-patented intellectual property.

        Table 5 indicates that patents and physical assets become increasingly important from the business

plan to the IPO to the annual report. At the business plan, 29% of companies own or are the exclusive

licensees of patents; at the IPO, 49%; and at the annual report, 62%. While patents and exclusive licenses

are most important for biotech firms, they also are important for non-retail, non-biotech firms.

        Physical assets are relatively unimportant for biotech firms and always important for retail firms.

Physical assets become increasingly important for non-retail, non-biotech firms, going from 9% to 18% to

29% from business plan through annual report. When patents and physical assets are combined as alienable

assets, we find that 43%, 67%, and 82% of the sample firms have such assets, respectively, at the business

plan, IPO, and annual report.

        Proprietary intellectual property is important for almost all of the non-retail firms – both biotech and

non-biotech. Intellectual property, therefore, whether patented or not, is substantially more important than

physical assets. This implies that the non-retail companies in the sample are based largely on ideas or

knowledge rather than physical capital. This is consistent with arguments in Zingales (2000) that firms are

increasingly defined by intellectual rather than physical capital.




                                                        17
        E.      Growth strategy

        In table 6, we document the elements and evolution of the companies’ growth strategies. At all

times, the firms are strongly oriented towards internal growth. The most cited strategies at the business plan,

IPO and annual report are to produce new or upgraded products (59%, 82% and 72%, respectively), followed

by obtaining additional customers through increased market penetration or market leadership (49%, 71%,

and 56%, respectively). Companies also plan to expand geographically (20%, 43%, and 21%, respectively).

All three types of internal growth peak at the time of the IPO. It is worth noting that the emphasis on internal

growth and, particularly, new products, is consistent with the result in table 5 that these companies rely

heavily on differentiated products and technologies.

        External growth through alliances and partnerships or through acquisitions becomes relatively more

important over time. At the business plan, 29% and 2%, respectively, of the firms look for growth through

alliances or acquisitions. By the time of the third annual report, this has increased to 51% and 28%,

respectively. At all times, biotech companies are more likely to pursue alliances – typically with large

pharmaceutical companies for the development, testing, and / or distribution of their products.

        The transition percentages show that growth strategies tend to broaden between the business plan

and IPO. The percentages in the “no to yes” column are all considerably larger than those in the “yes to no”

column. By the IPO, companies are trying to grow along more dimensions than at the business plan.

        Surprisingly, growth strategies seem to narrow somewhat between the IPO and annual report.

Except for acquisitions, the percentages in the “yes to no” column are larger than those in the “no to yes”

column. Two explanations are possible. Perhaps some of the growth strategies cited at the IPO were

unsuccessful and, therefore, abandoned. Another explanation is increased conservatism due to the decrease

in market capitalization and net income.



        F.      Customers

        In table 7, we describe the evolution of our companies’ customers. At the business plan, only 47%

actually have customers; by the IPO, 90% have customers; and by the annual report, 95% have customers.



                                                       18
At all stages, biotech firms are less likely to have customers than the non-biotech firms. All of these

percentages are consistent with the revenue results presented in table 2.

        Roughly 85% of the sample companies target businesses as customers while 15% target consumers

as customers. These percentages are stable through all stages, consistent with the results on the stability of

the business model in table 3.

        We characterize the evolution of company customer bases as broadening, narrowing, or staying

about the same. An example of a broadening customer base would be a company that targets its products to

medium-sized businesses at the business plan, but targets its products to both medium-sized and large

(Fortune 500) companies at the IPO. The majority of the companies address a similar customer base over

time, consistent again with the stability of the business models in the sample. Roughly one-third of the firms

broaden their customer bases. About one-quarter broaden from business plan to IPO and another 15%

broaden from IPO to annual report. A small fraction of the sample firms narrows their customer base.

        These results suggest that the dramatic revenue increases in table 2 are primarily driven by selling

more to an initial customer type either through increased market penetration or by selling additional

products. The revenue increases are likely driven secondarily by selling to new types of customers.



        G.      Competitors

        Table 8 describes the competition faced by the sample companies. At the business plan, 84% of the

companies note that they face competition in their target markets. Typically this competition includes other

startups as well as established firms. Of the other 16% of companies, 10% do not mention competition while

6% (three companies) claim that their product or market niche is so unusual that they face no real

competition. All 49 companies note that they have competition by the IPO.

        The type of competition named remains fairly stable with 56% of the firms claiming to face similar

competitive threats over all three stages. Roughly 40% see a broadening in the types of companies they

compete with while one company sees a narrowing. Again, this result seems consistent with the stability of

the business model found in table 3.



                                                       19
        H.       Strategic alliances and other partnerships

        The use of strategic alliances provides some evidence regarding firm boundaries because such

alliances allow firms to contract to cooperate and share resources without merging. Table 9 summarizes the

use and evolution of strategic alliances and other similar partnership arrangements by the sample companies.

        The use of strategic alliances increases from business plan to IPO and then is approximately flat

from IPO to annual report. The increase is particularly large for the biotech firms. At the business plan, 35%

of the companies mention strategic alliances. This increases to 67% at the IPO and 69% at the annual report.

For biotech companies, 18%, 82%, and 82%, respectively, have alliances at the business plan, IPO and

annual report; for non-biotech companies, the corresponding percentages are 44%, 59%, and 64%. Among

companies with strategic alliances, the median (average) number of alliances increases over time from 2 (2.2)

at the business plan to 3 (3.3) at the IPO to 4 (5.4) at the annual report.

        Although strategic alliances are not as common before the IPO, those that do exist are more stable

through the IPO. Among companies with strategic alliances at the business plan, a median (average) 67%

(60%) of those alliances still exist at the IPO. Among companies with strategic alliances at the IPO, only

42% (46%) survive to the annual report. Overall, only a median 20% (average 39%) of alliances at the

business plan still exist at the annual report.



        I.       Management

        The previous tables have focused largely on the non-human capital elements of the sample

companies. We now turn our attention to the human capital elements of the firms.

        Panel A of table 10 characterizes the top five executives described in the business plan, IPO

prospectus, and annual report. At the time of the business plan, the management teams are incomplete,

particularly the biotech firms: six of the companies (12%), five of which are in biotech, do not have a CEO;

only 42% list a chief financial officer (CFO) as one of the top five executives; and only 38% list a sales or




                                                         20
marketing executive (CMO). Consistent with the importance of technology, 77% of the firms list a Chief

Scientist, Chief Technical Officer, Vice President of Engineering (CTO), or similar as a top five executive.

        By the time of the IPO and annual report, CFOs have become increasingly important, with 80% and

85% of the companies listing a CFO as a top five executive. The importance of sales and marketing remains

fairly constant over time with 38%, 37%, and 41% of companies having a VP of marketing or similar as a

top five executive at the business plan, IPO, and annual report. Biotech companies are much less likely to

have such a person as a top five manager. The importance of a chief technology or science officer is stable at

the IPO (at 77%), but declines substantially (to 47%) by the annual report

        Panel A also provides information on the involvement of founders. Founders are heavily involved

with the companies at the time of the business plan. We can identify a founder as the CEO of 77% of the 43

companies with a CEO (33 companies). We also can identify a founder as being on the board in 92% of the

companies in which the founder is not the CEO and we have board information. A founder is a top five

manager or on the board of all 47 companies for which we have board and management data.

        Involvement of founders declines steadily over time. By the time of the IPO, only 57% of the CEOs

are founders while 92% of the firms still have a founder as a top executive or a director. By the time of the

annual report, 46% of the CEOs are founders while only 72% of the firms still have a founder as a top

executive or a director. This suggests that over time, founders move from operating positions to board

positions to no involvement with the company.

        Panel B describes the previous backgrounds of the top five executives listed in the business plan.

We characterize 42% of these executives with a background in general management, 25% in technical or

technology management, 16% in science or other technical jobs, 9% with marketing backgrounds, and 8%

with backgrounds in finance or accounting. The biotech company executives are more likely to have a

technical management or science background while the non-biotech company executives are more likely to

have a general management background. Nevertheless, for both types of firms, it seems, then, that a fairly

broad set of skills are employed to manage our sample companies, even when they are very young. These

companies employ the skills of experienced professionals fairly early on.



                                                      21
        In panel C, we address the stability of human capital in more detail. CEO turnover is relatively low

from the business plan to the IPO with 84% of the CEOs remaining in place. Turnover of the other top

executives is greater with only 55% remaining in place from business plan to IPO. Turnover of both the

CEO and the other top five executives is more common after the company has gone public. Only 59% of the

CEOs retain their jobs between the IPO and the annual report while only 36% of the other top five executives

remain the same. Overall, therefore, turnover is substantial. From the business plan to the annual report,

exactly 50% of the CEOs and only 25% of the other top five executives remain the same.

        The third row of panel C reports whether the former CEOs remain with the company in some

capacity. At the IPO and annual report, respectively, only 29% and 11% of the former CEOs remain with the

firms, suggesting, for the most part, that former CEOs leave the sample companies. The fourth row of panel

C, presents a similar calculation for the former next four executives. To an even greater extent, those former

executives leave the sample companies.

        The relatively high incidence of founder and early executive departures is interesting. It may

indicate that those founders and executives are particularly good at starting companies / providing early

critical resources. Once the non-human capital is sufficiently established, these founders go on to do the

same thing at other companies. We ascertain the extent to which this is true in by considering what the

departing founders and executives do after leaving the firm.

        We search for evidence of subsequent job or founder history in another young company for the

departing executives in the CapitalIQ, VentureEconomics, and VentureOne databases. If they do not appear

in these databases, it is unlikely that they went to another VC-backed or high profile young company. The

results are in panel D of table 10. The first part of panel D shows that we can identify subsequent jobs or

activities for roughly half of the departing founders and non-founders. The second part of panel D indicates

that relatively few of these individuals subsequently found new companies. The highest percentage is 17%,

representing one founder who departed between the business plan and the IPO, and subsequently founded

another company. The third part of panel D reports the percentage of departing founders and non-founder




                                                      22
top executives who become top executives of other young companies. A larger fraction, roughly one-third,

of founder and non-founders go on to do so.

        These results in panel D, therefore, indicate that relatively few of the departing founders and

executives found new companies while a greater (but minority) percentage repeat their experience in

working for young companies and, potentially providing early critical resources. We report these findings

with the caveat that they may understate the true percentages because not enough time has elapsed for some

of the individuals to emerge in other companies.



        J. Ownership

        In the previous we described the evolution of human capital. In this section, we consider the rewards

and incentives of the providers of that human capital. Table 11 summarizes company ownership. Ownership

data at the business plan reflects 33 firms as we do not have ownership data at that time for 16 firms.

        Panel A shows the evolution of ownership by the founders (taken as a group) and the CEO at the

different company stages. We report ownership at the business plan immediately after the VC financing for

which we have data. We report ownership both immediately before and immediately after the IPO.

        Founder ownership declines sharply from a median of 28.9% at the business plan to 12.4% just

before the IPO to 8.8% immediately following the IPO. Because founders typically are not allowed to sell

any shares until six months after the IPO, this suggests that founders give up a substantial fraction of their

ownership stakes in order to attract VC financing and / or outside management talent. Founder ownership

continues to decline over the company’s public life, to a median 5.3% at the annual report. This decline

reflects founder stock sales as well as issuance of additional stock.

        CEO ownership also declines as the firm ages: the median CEO owns 15.9% of the company at the

business plan, 6.7% pre-IPO, 5.4% post-IPO, and 3.6% at the annual report. CEO ownership declines by a

median 38% from the business plan to the pre-IPO.




                                                       23
        The six CEOs who are not founders own a median of 5.5% of the company at the time of the

business plan. The twenty-one non-founder CEOs at the time of the IPO own a median of 4.2% of the

company just before the IPO. One can interpret these results as indicating that VC-financed companies

allocate roughly 5% of the company’s equity to attract and provide incentives to an outside CEO.

        Panel A also breaks out the companies by biotech and non-biotech firms. Biotech and non-biotech

founders own roughly the same percentage of the companies at the business plan. At the time of the IPO,

however, biotech founders own less of the firms than non-biotech founders. Biotech CEOs own less of the

firms than non-biotech CEOs both at the business plan and at the IPO. These results suggest that specific

human capital is less important in biotech companies. There are at least two possible explanations. First, it

may be easier to patent or assign the intellectual property of these companies. Second, these companies may

require more financial capital.

        The CEOs in our sample own an average of 9.8% of the pre-IPO (7.5% of the post-IPO) equity of the

sample firms. This is less than the 19.1% pre-IPO (14.0% post-IPO) reported in Baker and Gompers (1999)

for 433 VC-backed firms that went public between 1978 and 1987. Part of the reason for the difference is

that our sample includes relatively more biotech firms which have relatively fewer founder CEOs. However,

even for non-biotech firms, the CEO only owns 10.6% pre-IPO (8.2% post-IPO). Surprisingly, this suggests

that human capital may have become less important rather than more important over time.

        Panel B of table 11 reports how the ownership of the firm is divided immediately before the IPO.

VCs, in exchange for financial capital and, potentially, their own human capital, own a median of 52.6% of

the median company at the IPO. Founders retain a median 12.4%. When non-founders, CEOs own a median

4.2%; non-founder managers other than the CEO collectively own a median 2.2%. Business partners, such

as original parent companies and strategic alliance partners, own none of the median firm and 3.8% of the

average firm. Others, which include non-VC investors and non-founder employees, collectively, own a

median of 22.7%. Panel B also indicates that the founders and management team have smaller equity

positions in biotech firms than in non-biotech firms.




                                                        24
        The last column of panel B calculates the dollar value of the founders’ equity stakes using the first

trading day’s closing price, finding a median value of $17.5 million and an average of $103.3 million. The

dollar value of non-biotech founders’ holdings is substantially higher than those of biotech founders.

        Using the ownership stakes just before the IPO in panel B, we can obtain three estimates of the

percentage of value that founders retain that is not related to ongoing incentives. The first is the founders’

average ownership percentage of 14.6% (median 12.4%). This is an upper bound, because some of this

ownership is present for incentive purposes and would be given to non-founding managers. It is also an

upper bound because the founders may have contributed non-human capital.

        The second estimate begins with the ownership of founders and the top five managers that equals an

average of 20.3% (median 16.3%). In the six cases in which there are no founders among the top five

managers, their average ownership is 6.0% (median of 6.2%). The 6.0% stake provides an estimate of how

much equity is required to attract a new management team to replace the existing one. The 14.3% difference

provides another upper bound estimate of the value of the specific human capital that the founders provided.

        A third measure calculates the equity needed for ongoing incentives by adding the average

ownership of non-founder CEOs, 5.0%, to that of other non-founder, non-CEO top managers, 3.5%, to get a

total of 8.5%. Subtracting this 8.5% from the ownership of founders and top five managers of 20.3% yields

an estimate of 11.8% as the value of the specific human capital provided by the founders.

        In an unreported regression, we regress pre-IPO founder ownership on a constant and a dummy

variable equal to one if the founder is the CEO at the IPO. The coefficient on the dummy variable provides

an estimate of the ownership needed for incentive purposes for the CEO. The coefficient is likely to be

biased upward, however, because if the founder is still CEO, the CEO’s value may be unusually high and the

ownership may include some compensation for specific human capital. The constant term, therefore, can be

considered a lower bound on compensation for the idea or specific human capital. In this regression, the

constant term is 10.8%.

        Overall, the estimates in panel B suggest that founders retain 10.8% to 14.6% of the value of the pre-

IPO equity for their human capital assets specific to the company.



                                                       25
        In estimating the value accruing to specific human capital, we have used the total market value of the

firm’s equity. This overstates the value created by the firm because it ignores the financial capital invested in

the company, particularly by the VCs. Panel C of table 11 presents an analysis similar to that in panel B for

pre-IPO ownership, except that it measures the founders’ share of total value created before the IPO. We

measure the total value created before the IPO as the value of the pre-IPO shares outstanding at the post-IPO

stock price less the amount of outside financing raised by the firm before the IPO. The analysis assumes that

the founders did not invest any money to obtain their shares and do not need to invest any money to exercise

any options they may have. As a result, the analysis in panel C overstates the fraction of value accruing to

founders (while panel B understates the fraction). One firm did not create any value – pre-IPO outside

capital exceeded the value of the pre-IPO shares at the IPO price. We exclude this firm from the analysis.

        Panel C indicates that the founders receive an average of 19.1% (median of 14.4%) of the value

created. Again, this is an upper bound because some of this ownership is present for incentive purposes.

The other two methods of calculating the value founders retain for non-incentive purposes generate estimates

of 17% and 15.5%.

        The estimates and calculations in panels B and C indicate a range of 10.8% to 19.1% as the value

that founders retain of the firm for their idea or initial contributions that is not related to ongoing incentives.



        K.       Boards of directors

        Table 12 documents the size, composition, and turnover of the boards of directors of our companies.

The median board size is 5 seats at the business plan, 7 seats at the IPO, and 7 at the annual report. Insiders,

defined as founders and current or past company managers, hold a constant median of 2 seats at each of the

business plan, IPO, and annual report. VCs hold a median of 2 seats at the business plan, 3 at the IPO, and 1

at the annual report. This pattern reflects additional VC investment between the business plan and IPO, and

profit-taking once the company has issued shares to the public. Meanwhile, the board presence of non-VC

outsiders, who are generally either industry experts and / or experienced executives of other firms, increases

from a median of 1 seat at the business plan to 2 at the IPO to 3 at the annual report.



                                                         26
        Director turnover also increases after the company goes public. While 71% of directors at the

business plan are still directors at the IPO, only 57% of the directors at the IPO are directors at the annual

report. Only 40% of the directors at the business plan remain at the annual report.



III.    Cross-sectional Analysis

        In this section, we present the results of two cross-sectional analyses.

        First, we consider the relation of human capital turnover to the nature of a firm’s assets. One can

(loosely) interpret the theories of the firm considered above as predicting that founders and specific human

capital will be less important or critical when a firm has built up its non-human capital. In table 13, we try to

test this by estimating the likelihood of a founder remaining CEO after the business plan. In panel A, the

dependent variable equals one if one of the founders is CEO at the IPO; in panel B, the dependent variable

equals one if one of the founders is CEO at the annual report. (We obtain qualitatively similar results if we

use CEO turnover, regardless of whether the CEO was the founder.) As independent variables, we use the

results in table 5 and create three dummy variables that equal one if, respectively, alienable assets, physical

assets, or patents, are cited as significant assets at the business plan. We also create a dummy variable equal

to one if the firm has no patents and non-patentable intellectual property (IP) is significant.

        The regressions show a clear pattern. Firms with more alienable assets at the time of the business

plan have substantially more founder turnover over time. All of the relevant coefficients are negative; the

majority, statistically significant. Again, this suggests that specific human capital is more critical before

alienable assets have formed, consistent with both the critical resource and the Hart-Moore-Holmström

theories. The strong cross-sectional relation also corroborates our interpretation of the descriptive data.

        The presence of non-patentable IP at the business plan is also negatively related to the likelihood that

the founder will be remain as CEO later on. One interpretation of this result is that even unpatented know-

how may be part of alienable organizational capital rather than tied to a specific founder.




                                                        27
         The regressions also include a number of controls whose signs are more difficult to interpret. The

age of the firm at the business plan is positively related to the likelihood of retaining the founder as CEO,

while expansion of the firm’s business line is negatively related. The last regression also includes the

founder ownership stake at the business plan, which is strongly positively related to retaining the founder as

CEO. Although this is an endogenous variable, it can be thought of as a proxy for the bargaining power of

the founder, which in turn should be correlated with the value of the founder’s specific human capital.5

         Our second cross-sectional analysis considers the determinants of pre-IPO founder ownership. The

theories of the firm imply that founders’ bargaining power should decrease in the alienability of a firm’s

assets. To the extent that founder ownership is a measure of bargaining power and rents, founder ownership

should decrease in alienability (tangibility and patents). We present this analysis in table 14. The dependent

variable is pre-IPO founder ownership. The independent variables are the asset dummies used in table 13,

and the age of the firm at the business plan. Unlike the results in table 13, none of the asset dummy variables

is significant in the regressions. While it may reflect a paucity of observations or that there are many other

determinants of founder ownership, the results in table 14 do not provide support for the hold-up theories.

The lack of a result for hold-up also suggests that the measurement issues stressed in Holmstrom (1999) may

be more important than hold-up in these companies.



IV.      Summary and Discussion

         In this paper, we have studied the evolution of firm characteristics from early business plan to initial

public offering to public company for 49 VC financed companies. This exercise had two goals: to provide a

systematic description of the early life and evolution of an important sample of firms; and to interpret our

findings in relation to existing theories of the firm and what new theories might try to explain.

         The typical company in our sample experiences dramatic growth. While the companies grow

dramatically, their core businesses remain remarkably stable. Within core businesses, firm activities tend to



5
 Alternatively, it could be a proxy for the control rights that the founder retains in the venture. However, in regressions
using a more direct measure of control, the fraction of founder board seats, the variable is not significant.

                                                            28
stay the same or broaden over time. The firms also sell to similar customers and compete against similar

competitors in the three stages of the life cycle we examine.

         Almost uniformly, firms claim that they are differentiated by a unique product, technology or service

at all three stages. The points of differentiation also tend to be stable over time. Firms stress the importance

of proprietary intellectual property (IP), patents, and physical assets in all three stages. Alienable assets –

patents and physical assets – become increasingly important over time. At the business plan, roughly half of

the firms also stress the importance of expertise (which one might interpret as human capital). The stated

importance of expertise, however, declines to less than 15% by the IPO and third annual reports.

         While points of differentiation, alienable assets, customers, and competitors remain relatively

constant, the human capital of the sample firms changes substantially. At the time of the annual report, one-

half of the CEOs at the business plan remain; only one-quarter of the next four top executives remain.

         We believe that these results provide support for and help interpret prominent theories of the firm.

Consistent with the Hart-Moore-Holmström view that a firm must be organized around non-human capital

assets, non-human capital assets form very early in a firm’s life. Identifiable lines of business and important

physical, patent, and IP assets are created in these firms by the time of the early business plan, are relatively

stable, and do not change or disappear as specific human capital assets turn over. These arguably constitute

the “glue” that holds firms together.

         These findings also have implications for the critical resource theories. The early emergence and

stability of non-human assets are consistent with those assets being critical resources. The instability of the

human assets suggests that to the extent that the initial critical resource is a specific person or founder, the

“web of specific investments built around the founder(s)” itself becomes the critical resource relatively early

in a firm’s life.

         Our cross-sectional analysis provides further support to our interpretations of the Hart-Moore-

Holmström and critical resource theories. Firms with more alienable assets at the time of the business plan

have substantially more human capital turnover over time. Again, this suggests that specific human capital is

more critical before alienable assets have formed.



                                                        29
        Our analysis also sheds light on the argument in Zingales (2000) and Rajan and Zingales (2001a)

that today’s “new firms” differ from the old, traditional firms of the (early) 20th century in that alienable

assets – assets that can be assigned or pledged to other firms – have become less important relative to human

capital and non-alienable assets (for example, business processes or knowledge). This argument implies that

human capital should retain a larger fraction of the value of these “new firms.” The ownership results in our

sample do not support this implication. Founders retain a smaller fraction of their firms at the IPO than the

founders in IPOs of the 1980s studied in Baker and Gompers (1999).

        From a practitioner perspective, we believe that the greater stability of lines of business and non-

human assets in our sample relative to the stability of management teams favors the business / market / horse

view of VC investing over the best available management team / jockey view except, perhaps, at the birth of

a company. The results suggest that VCs are regularly able to find management replacements or

improvements for good businesses. At least in our sample, we do not find cases in which VCs invest in good

managers who find business replacements. An initial strong management team, therefore, is neither

necessary nor sufficient. An initial strong business may not be sufficient, but appears necessary.

        Some practitioners have suggested that business plans do not matter much – if a VC puts in a great

management team in a mediocre business, the team will figure out what to do. Our results suggest that the

business plan – whether or not it is written down – is very important.

        Finally, we end with an important caveat. We have studied a special sample of firms – those VCs

choose to fund. It is possible, if not likely that VCs fund companies in which specific human capital

becomes less important relatively quickly. It also is possible that VCs do not allow managers to change the

business. Nevertheless, our results apply to a large fraction of firms that go public – at least 39%. A logical

avenue for future research is to consider whether these results hold for non-VC backed firms. Whether or not

the results generalize, however, we view the results in this paper as an early empirical look at important

questions that clearly merit further research.




                                                        30
                                                     References

Aghion, Philippe, and Patrick Bolton, 1992, An incomplete contracts approach to financial contracting, Review of
        Economic Studies, 77: 338-401.

Aghion, Philippe, Mathias Dewatripont, and Jeremy Stein, 2005, Academic Freedom, Private-Sector Focus, and
        the Process of Innovation, working paper, Harvard University.

Baker, Malcom, and Paul Gompers, 1999, Executive Ownership and Control in Newly Public Firms: The Role of Venture
        Capitalists, working paper, Harvard Business School.

Baron, James N., Michael T. Hannan, 2002, Organizational Blueprints for Success in High-Tech Start-Ups: Lessons from
         the Stanford Project on Emerging Companies, California Management Review, Vol. 44, No. 3 (Spring).

Baron, James N., Michael T. Hannan, and M. Diane Burton. 1999. Building the Iron Cage: Determinants of Managerial
         Intensity in the Early Years of Organizations. American Sociological Review 64:527–47.

––––––. 2001. Labor Pains: Organizational Change and Employee Turnover in Young, High-Tech Firms” American
        Journal of Sociology 105.

Bertrand, Marianne and Antoinette Schoar, 2003. Managing with Style: The Effect of Managers on Firm Policies,
        Quarterly Journal of Economics 118, 1169-1208.

Bhide, Amar, 2000, The Origin and the Evolution of New Businesses (New York, NY: Oxford University Press).

Chandler, Alfred, 1977, The Visible Hand (Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press).

Chandler, Alfred, 1990, Scale and Scope (Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press).

Coase, Ronald, 1937, The Nature of the Firm, Economica 4, 386-405.

Fama, Eugene, and Kenneth French, 2003, New Lists: Fundamentals and Survival Rates, working paper, University of
        Chicago.

Franks, Julian, Colin Mayer, and Stefano Rossi, 2005, Ownership: Evolution and Regulation, Working paper, London
         Business School.

Gibbons, Robert, forthcoming, Four Formal(izable) Theories of the Firm? Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization.

Gompers, Paul and Josh Lerner, 1999, The Venture Capital Cycle (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press).

Gompers, Paul, Josh Lerner, and David Scharfstein, 2005, Entrepreneurial Spawning: Public Corporations and the Genesis
       of New Ventures, 1986 to 1999, Journal of Finance.

Hannan, Michael, James N. Baron, Greta Hsu, and Ozgecan Kocak. 2000. Staying the Course: Early Organization
        Building and the Success of High-Technology Firms, Working paper, Stanford University.

Hart, Oliver, 1995, Firms, Contacts, and Financial Structure (Oxford: Clarendon Press.)

Hart, Oliver, and John Moore, 1994, A Theory of Debt Based on the Inalienability of Human Capital, Quarterly
         Journal of Economics 109, 841-879.

Hellman, Thomas and Manju Puri, 2000, The interaction between product market and financial strategy:
        The role of venture capital, Review of Financial Studies 13, 959-984.



                                                         31
Hellman, Thomas and Manju Puri, 2002, Venture capital and the professionalization of start-up firms: Empirical
        evidence, Journal of Finance.

Holmström, Bengt, 1999, “The Firm as a Subeconomy,” Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization 15, 74-102.

Holmström, Bengt and John Roberts, 1998, “Boundaries of the firm revisited,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 12
        73-94.

Jensen, Michael and William Meckling, 1976, The Theory of the Firm: Managerial Behavior, Agency
        Costs, And Ownership Structure, Journal of Financial Economics, III, 305-360.

Kaplan, Steven and Per Strömberg. 2003, Financial Contracting Theory Meets the Real World: An Empirical Analysis
        of Venture Capital Contracts, Review of Economic Studies 70, 281-316.

Kaplan, Steven and Per Strömberg, 2004, Characteristics, Contracts, and Actions: Evidence From Venture
        Capitalist Analyses, Journal of Finance 59, 2177-2210

Milgrom, Paul and Michael Roberts, 1992, Economics, Organization and Management.

Quindlen, Ruthann, 2000, Confessions of a Venture Capitalist (New York, NY: Warner Books).

Rajan, Raghuram, and Zingales, Luigi, 1998, Power in a theory of the firm, Quarterly Journal of Economics 108,
        387-432.

Rajan, Raghuram, and Zingales, Luigi 2001a, The Influence of the Financial Revolution on the Nature of Firms,
        American Economic Review 91, 206-212.

Rajan, Raghuram, and Zingales, Luigi. 2001b, The firm as a dedicated hierarchy: A theory of the origins and growth of
        firms, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 805-850.

Sahlman, William, 1990, The Structure and Governance of Venture Capital Organizations, Journal of Financial
       Economics 27, 473-521.

Santos, Filipe and Kathleen Eisenhardt, 2004, Constructing Markets and Organizing Boundaries: Entrepreneurial Action
         in Nascent Fields, working paper, Insead.

Wernerfelt, Birger, 1984, A Resource Based View of the Firm, Strategic Management Journal 5, 171-180.

Zingales, Luigi, 2000, In Search of New Foundations, Journal of Finance 55, 1623- 1653.




                                                         32
                                             Table 1 – Sample Summary
Median, average, and standard deviation of (i) the age of the firm in months as of the date of the business plan (BP),
(ii) the time elapsed in months between the business plan and the IPO, (iii) the time elapsed in months between the
IPO and the annual report (AR), and (iv) the time elapsed in months between business plan and the annual report for
49 VC-financed companies that subsequently went public. The table also reports frequency distributions of the
number of founders, the dates sample firms were founded, the dates of their business plans, IPOs, and annual
reports, the industries in which they operate, and their status as of August 2004.

                                  Months between Months between                   Months between
                  Age (months) at Business Plan  IPO and                          Business Plan
                  Business Plan   and IPO        Annual Report                    and Annual Report

Median                     24                34                33                          63
Average                    40                38                32                          68
St. dev.                   51                23                8                           23
Num. Obs.                  49                49                39                          39

Number of companies with Business Plan dated prior to or concurrent with first VC financing: 19

Number of companies with one founder:                          21
Number of companies with two co-founders:                      16
Number of companies with three or more co-founders:            11

                           Number firms
                           founded                    Number BPs        Number IPOs        Number ARs
1975-1980                  3
1980-1984                  2
1985-1989                  5                          4                 1
1990                       1                          1
1991                       4                                                               1
1992                       3                                            2
1993                       2                          3
1994                       7                          1                                    1
1995                       9                          8                 3                  1
1996                       5                          11                3
1997                       2                          9                 3                  2
1998                       6                          9                 5                  3
1999                                                  2                 14                 1
2000                                                                    12                 9
2001                                                  1                                    5
2002                                                                    1                  9
2003                                                                    1                  6
2004                                                                    4                  1

                                                Industry breakdown:
       Biotechnology       Software/IT       Telecom          Healthcare          Retail   Other
#firms 17                  15                3                5                   5        4


                                               Status as of 7/31/2005:
                  Active            Acquired / Merged           Bankrupt
#firms             27                 15                          7
                                                                              Table 2
                                                                     Financials and Employees

Median, average, and standard deviation of revenue, assets, earnings before interest and taxes (EBIT), net income, market capitalization, EBIT to revenue ratio,
market capitalization to book assets ratio, number of employees, and revenue per employee at the business plan (BP), IPO, and annual report (AR) for 49 VC
financed companies that subsequently went public. Revenue, net income, and assets are reported as of the end of the prior fiscal year. Panel A reports statistics
broken out by all sample firms, biotechnology firms, and non-biotechnology firms. Panel B reports some statistics for non-retail firms.

                                                                               Panel A

                  All firms                                        Biotechnology firms                           Non-biotechnology firms
Revenue ($M)
                  BP           IPO           AR                    BP            IPO           AR                    BP            IPO          AR
Median            0            7.2           35.1                  0             2.9           20.7                  0.6           12.7         97.5
Average           5.54         40.5          179.0                 0.7           4.9           30.1                  8.3           59.5         241.4
St. dev.          13.6         154.5         332.7                 1.6           5.3           14.8                  16.5          189.4        376.0
Num. Obs.         47           49            39                    17            17            11                    30            32           28

Revenue percentage change
                BP to IPO      IPO to AR     BP to AR              BP to IPO     IPO to AR     BP to AR              BP to IPO     IPO to AR    BP to AR
Median          390            408           2,591                 140           419           209                   607           397          2,094
Average         2,954          3,569,242     63,255                131           18,249        821                   3,378         5,131,678    74,273
St. dev.        7,593          21,400,000    234,524               224           56,443        1,229                 8,081         25,700,000   253,878
Num. Obs.       23             36            20                    3             11            3                     20            25           17

Number of employees
                BP             IPO           AR                    BP            IPO           AR                    BP            IPO          AR
Median          22             124            378                  10            71            134                   31            209          561
Average         92             340           1,267                 17            87            195                   138           475          1,688
St. dev.        202            659           2,320                 13            67            141                   246           785          2,630
Num. Obs.       42             49            39                    16            17            11                    26            32           28

Number of employees percentage change
                BP to IPO IPO to AR          BP to AR              BP to IPO     IPO to AR     BP to AR              BP to IPO     IPO to AR    BP to AR
Median          515         100              1,519                 528           62            1,170                 500           125          2,023
Average         720         277              3,848                 579           128           1,803                 806           336          4,700
St. dev.        808         492              7,617                 544           183           1,970                 935           562          8,896
Num. Obs.       42          39               34                    16            11            10                    26            28           24
                                                         Table 2 (continued)
                All firms                           Biotechnology firms                   Non-biotechnology firms
Revenue per employee ($thousand)
                BP           IPO         AR         BP          IPO            AR             BP          IPO         AR
Median          0            50.5        124.6      0           48.9           87.7           9.9         53.5        136.3
Average         29.5         63.3        139.4      5.8         45.9           97.7           44.0        72.5        155.8
St. dev.        58.5         64.5        98.7       16.4        40.0           66.9           69.8        73.3        105.2
Num. Obs.       42           49          39         16          17             11             26          32          28

Revenue per employee percentage change
                BP to IPO IPO to AR      BP to AR   BP to IPO   IPO to AR      BP to AR       BP to IPO   IPO to AR   BP to AR
Median          51           116         374        -17         111            163            63          120         453
Average         269          217,486     1497       -17         6,685          163            304         310,239     1,687
St. dev.        518          1,290,494   3815       113         20,714         237            539         1,548,924   4,059
Num. Obs.       18           36          16         2           11             2              16          25          14

Assets ($M)
                BP           IPO         AR         BP          IPO            AR             BP          IPO         AR
Median          2.6          19.6        96.7       1.8         18.5           91.7           2.9         20.8        108.9
Average         5.9          44.3        274.9      3.3         23.7           96.7           6.7         55.4        345.0
St. dev.        10.8         69.6        663.0      3.9         18.3           64.5           12.3        83.5        773.9
Num. Obs.       35           49          39         9           17             11             26          32          28

Assets percentage change
                 BP to IPO   IPO to AR   BP to AR   BP to IPO   IPO to AR      BP to AR       BP to IPO   IPO to AR   BP to AR
Median           430         287         2,498      689         361            1,077          396         274         3,253
Average          2,570       913         52,605     1,231       646            3,505          3,057       1,018       65,526
St. dev.         6,137       1,812       158,013    1,557       994            5,877          7,090       2,053       176,211
Num. Obs.        30          39          24         8           11             5              22          28          19

EBIT ($M)
                BP           IPO         AR         BP          IPO            AR             BP          IPO         AR
Median          -0.8         -6.7        -25.6      -1.4        -10.3          -32.8          -0.8        -5.4        -22.4
Average         -1.6         -7.7        -48.6      -1.9        -11.7          -30.4          -1.5        -5.6        -55.8
St. dev.        2.5          13.5        93.3       2.0         7.5            18.1           2.6         15.5        109.2
Num. Obs.       36           49          39         8           17             11             26          32          28

% positive      17%          18%         15%        13%         6%             0%             18%         25%         21%
                                                                 Table 2 (continued)
EBIT percentage change
                BP to IPO       IPO to AR   BP to AR      BP to IPO     IPO to AR      BP to AR   BP to IPO   IPO to AR   BP to AR
Median          159             156         996           538           239            755        120         154         1,046
Average         1,149           -2,129      9,818         969           182            2,938      1,199       -3,037      11,694
St. dev.        2,978           15,320      43,675        1,554         212            6,157      3,292       18,091      49,258
Num. Obs.       32              39          28            7             11             6          25          28          22

Market capitalization ($M)
                 BP             IPO         AR            BP            IPO            AR         BP          IPO         AR
Median           17.9           232.4       176.9         14.1          254.9          265.8      18.7        218.8       163.5
Average          29.0           697.7       470.8         16.2          388.3          257.6      33.3        862.0       557.7
St. dev.         32.9           1920.3      1378.6        11.9          368.2          216.2      36.5        2357.8      1630.9
Num. Obs.        40             49          38            10            17             11         30          32          27

Market capitalization percentage change
                 BP to IPO IPO to AR        BP to AR      BP to IPO     IPO to AR      BP to AR   BP to IPO   IPO to AR   BP to AR
Median           1,586        -55           496           2,064         -53            2,370      1,409       -57         417
Average          7,778        98            10,492        7,101         14             2,830      8,005       132         13,250
St. dev.         108865       362           37,055        16,631        139            3,146      19,813      418         43,066
Num. Obs.        40           38            34            10            11             9          30          27          25

Market capitalization to assets ratio
                 BP             IPO         AR            BP            IPO            AR         BP          IPO         AR
Median           5.4            13.9        1.8           2.3           13.6           2.2        7.1         15.6        1.6
Average          8.9            23.6        2.3           5.1           22.1           2.8        9.9         24.5        2.0
St. dev.         10.1           25.2        2.1           5.6           21.1           2.5        10.8        27.4        1.9
Num. Obs.        25             49          38            5             17             11         20          32          27

Market capitalization to assets ratio percentage change
                 BP to IPO IPO to AR BP to AR             BP to IPO     IPO to AR      BP to AR   BP to IPO   IPO to AR   BP to AR
Median           80             -89          -61          110           -91            -38        62          -89         -74
Average          328            -65          -23          694           -79            120        237         -60         -57
St. dev.         588            73           162          1015          25             354        420         85          52
Num. Obs.        25             38           21           5             11             4          20          27          17
                                                Table 2 (continued)
                                           Panel B – Excluding retail firms
                                                     Percentage Change
                BP      IPO        AR                 BP to IPO          IPO to AR   BP to AR

Number of employees
Median          18      102        256                523              96            1,519
Average         56      179        582                726              258           3,958
St. dev.        115     216        991                821              493           8,056
Num. Obs.       38      44         34                 38               34            30

Revenue per employee ($thousand)
Median          0        43.6      121.7              51               164           409
Average         23.2     55.3      135.0              309              252,558       1,908
St. dev.        54.3     53.8      96.5               580              1,390,606     4,369
Num. Obs.       38       44        34                 14               31            12
                                                                           Table 3
                                                                       Lines of Business

Stated business at the business plan, IPO, and annual report, as well as the percentage of companies whose stated lines of business broaden, narrow, or stay the
same over those periods for 49 VC financed companies that subsequently went public. Panel B categorizes the origin of each company’s business idea,
according to the business plan, as an existing business, academic research, a previous employer of the founder(s), or unknown. Panel B also categorizes business
strategies as of the business plan according to the Baron, Hannan, and Burton (1999) classification system.

                                                                          Panel A
                                                Companies whose line of business stays about the same over time
Company          Business Plan                              IPO                                          Annual Report
1                ●Development of analgesics                   ●Development of analgesics                   ●Development of analgesics
2                ●Chemical analysis instrumentation           ● Contract research and development          ●Contract research and development
                  and research services                         services                                     services
3                ●Specialty supermarkets                      ● Specialty supermarkets                     ● Specialty supermarkets
4                ●Customer information                        ●Enterprise relationship                     ●Enterprise customer relationship
                  management software                           management software                          management software
5                ●Category-dominant specialty retailer        ●Specialty retailer                          ● Specialty retailer
6                ●Sustained-release drug delivery systems     ●Sustained-release drug delivery systems     ●Sustained-release drug delivery systems
7                ●Non-invasive cardiac surgery                ●Non-invasive cardiac surgery                ●Non-invasive cardiac surgery
8                ●Production of nanocrystalline materials     ●Development and marketing of                ●Engineering and manufacturing of
                                                                nanocrystalline materials                    nanocrystalline materials
9                ●Telecom service provider                    ●Telecom service provider                    ●Telecom service provider
10               ● Superstore specialty retailer              ● Full-line specialty retailer               ● Full-line specialty retailer
11               ●Office supply stores                        ●Office supply stores                        ● Office supply stores
12               ●Digital prepress equipment                  ●Digital prepress equipment
13               ●Maps and mapping-related                    ●Mapping products and services
                   products, services, and technology
14               ● Therapeutic products for cancer and        ● Therapeutic products for cancer and
                   infectious diseases                          infectious diseases
15               ● Small business equipment leasing           ● Small business equipment leasing
                                                                        Table 3 (cont.)

     Companies whose line of business broadens/narrows (B/N) between the business plan and IPO but not between the IPO and the annual report
Company      Business Plan                             IPO                                                Annual Report
16              ●Wireless data communications                (N) Wireless communication and                               ●Wireless health information
                                                               information systems for health information                  communication systems
17              ●Web-based enterprise application software   (N) Live business collaboration software and services        ●Application software and services for real-
                                                                                                                           time enterprise collaboration
18              ●Experimentation platform for a wide range   (N) Tools for large-scale analysis of genetic variation      ●Tools for large-scale analysis of genetic
                 of biological analyses                       and function                                                 variation and function
19              ●Combinatorial chemistry                     (N) Computational drug discovery
20              ●Software and services to industries         (N) Software products and services to accelerate drug
                 transformed by human genome research         discovery and development
21              ●Implantable hearing devices                 (B) Implantable and semi-implantable hearing devices         ●Implantable and semi-implantable hearing
                                                                                                                            devices
22              ●Drug screening and discovery                (B) Drug candidate development                               ●Drug candidate development
23              ●Drug target discovery                       (B) Drug target discovery and small                          ●Small molecule drug discovery and
                                                               molecule drug development                                   development
24              ●Products for the treatment of abnormal      (B) Surgical systems for the diagnosis and                   ●Surgical systems for the diagnosis and
                 uterine bleeding                             treatment of gynecological disorders                          treatment of gynecological disorders
25              ●Products and services to accelerate drug    (B) Creating drug candidates through innovations             ● Creating small molecule drugs through the
                 discovery                                     in chemistry                                                  integration of chemistry, biology and
                                                                                                                             informatics
26              ●Internet-based micropayments system         (B) Internet-based direct marketing and advertising
                 and incentive currency                        services combined with programs that reward
                                                               consumers with cash
27              ●Treatment for psychotic major depression    (B) Drug development for severe psychiatric and
                                                               neurological diseases
28              ●Discovery and development of drugs for      (B) Development of drugs for a broad range of central
                 memory-related disorders                      nervous system disorders
29              ●Development of treatments for pulmonary     (B) Discovery and development of treatments for allergies,
                 inflammatory diseases                         infectious diseases, and chronic inflammatory diseases
                                                                       Table 3 (cont.)

          Companies whose line of business broadens/narrows (B/N) between IPO and annual report but not between business plan and IPO
Company      Business Plan                             IPO                                               Annual Report
30            ●Diagnostic imaging and treatment of cancer   ●Diagostic imaging and treatment of cancer,            (N) New drugs to treat cancer and
               and cardiovascular disease                   artherosclerosis, and other diseases                     artheroscelerosis
31            ●Internet data delivery software              ●Internet data delivery software                       (B) E-business infrastructure software and
                                                                                                                     services
32            ●Sales and marketing automation software      ●Sales, marketing, and customer support                (B) Customer relationship management
                                                             automation software                                     software
33            ●Microfluidics                                ●Microfluidics                                         (B) Novel assay chemistry solutions for drug
                                                                                                                     discovery and development
34            ●Upscale, casual ethnic                       ●Upscale, casual ethnic                                (B) Upscale, casual ethnic
               restaurants                                   restaurants                                             restaurants and casual ethnic diners

          Companies whose line of business broadens/narrows (B/N) between both the business plan and IPO and the IPO and annual report
Company      Business Plan                             IPO                                               Annual Report
35            ●E-commerce solutions                         (N) E-commerce and direct marketing services           (B) Technology infrastructure and services
36            ●Disease prevention                           (N) Live-virus vaccines                                (B) Disease prevention through vaccine
                                                                                                                       technology
37            ●Novel antimicrobial compounds                (B) New antibacterial and antifungal drugs             (N) Prevention of ventilator-associated
                                                                                                                        pneumonia
38            ●Internet marketing software                  (B) Internet marketing and data aggregation software   (B) E-business products and services
39            ●Internet communication services              (B) Internet system and network management             (B) Internet infrastructure outsourcing
40            ●Website production software                  (B) Web content management software                    (B) Enterprise content management software
41            ●Hotel reservation and                        (B) Transaction processing services for the            (B) Hotel reservation and representation
               commission collection system                   worldwide hotel industry                                 services for the global hotel industry
42            ●Market research                              (B) Market research and polling                        (B) Market research and consulting
43            ●Semiconductor laser diodes and related       (B) Semiconductor optoelectronic integrated            (B) Semiconductor circuits and lasers; fiber-
               systems and subsystems                            circuits and high power semiconductor lasers           optic systems
44            ●Local switched telecommunications            (B) Competitive local exchange carrier                 (B) National communications provider
               services
45            ●Basic local telephone services               (B) Facilities-based competitive local                 (B) Facilities-based operator of a
                                                              exchange carrier                                         fiber optic communications infrastructure
46            ●Customer interaction software                (B) E-business infrastructure software                 (B) Enterprise software vendor
47            ●Sterilization systems for medical            (B) Sterile processing and infection prevention        (B) Infection prevention, contamination
               instruments                                    systems                                                control, microbial reduction, and critical
                                                                                                                     care support products and services
48            ●Disease gene discovery                       (B) Gene and drug target discovery, database, and      (B) Population genetics company developing
                                                              information technology products and services           drugs and DNA-based diagnostics

                   Companies whose line of business changes (C) between both the business plan and IPO and the IPO and annual report
Company       Business Plan                            IPO                                               Annual Report
49            ●New computing platform                       (C) Computer operating system                          (C) Software solutions for Internet appliances
                                              Table 3 (cont.)

All Firms                                       BP to IPO       IPO to AR         BP/IM to AR
Percent whose business model changes                 2              3                     3

Number observations                                   49            39                     39

All Firms
Percent whose line of business                  BP to IPO       IPO to AR         BP/IM to AR
Stays about the same                                 42            42                     37
Broadens                                             46            50                     50
Narrows                                              13             8                     13

Number observations                                   48            38                     38

Biotechnology Firms
Percent whose line of business                  BP to IPO       IPO to AR         BP/IM to AR
Stays about the same                                 29            55                     18
Broadens                                             47            27                     45
Narrows                                              24            18                     36

Number observations                                   17            11                     11

Non-biotechnology Firms
Percent whose line of business                  BP to IPO       IPO to AR         BP/IM to AR
Stays about the same                                 49            37                     45
Broadens                                             45            59                     52
Narrows                                                6            4                      3

Number observations                                   31            27                     27


                                                 Panel B
                                         Origin of Business Idea:

                 Existing          Previous           Academic           Out of the blue
                 business          employer           research           or unknown

All firms        5                 15                 14                 15
Biotech          1                 2                  10                 4
Non-Biotech      4                 13                 4                  11


                        Baron et al. (1999) classification of business plan strategy:

                 Innovator         Enhancer           Marketing          Tech/marketing hybrid   Cost

All firms        24                11                 5                  6                       3
Biotech          12                4                  0                  1                       0
Non-Biotech      12                7                  5                  5                       3
                                                                            Table 4
                                                                    Point of differentiation

Percent of companies that explicitly mention the following characteristics as those that distinguish the company: unique product, service, or technology;
comprehensive product offerings; strong customer service; alliances, partnerships, and other business relationships; management and/or employee expertise;
strength of scientific advisors; and reputation for 49 VC-financed companies that subsequently went public. We also report the percentages of companies who
do or do not change what they consider their distinguishing characteristics over time (e.g. The “yes to no” column under “BP to IPO” reflects the percentage of
companies who report a given item as a distinguishing characteristic in the business plan but not at the IPO).

                                            BP        IPO     AR                   BP IPO         AR                  BP IPO        AR
                                            All firms                              Biotechnology firms                Non-biotechnology firms
Unique product/technology                   100       98      92                   100 100        91                  100 97        93
Comprehensive products                      6         12      13                   6     6        0                   6     16      18
Customer service                            8         16      26                   0     6        9                   13    22      32
Alliances/partnerships                      12        12      8                    0     12       0                   19    13      11
Expertise                                   45        14      13                   47    12       18                  44    16      11
Scientific advisors                         4         2       5                    6     0        0                   3     3       7
Reputation                                  6         8       8                    0     6        9                   9     9       7

Number of observations                      49       49       39                   17    17       11                  32     32       28

                                            BP to IPO                              IPO to AR                          BP to AR

                                            Yes      Yes      No     No            Yes   Yes      No     No           Yes    Yes      No       No
                                            to       to       to     to            to    to       to     to           to     to       to       to
                                            yes      no       yes    no            yes   no       yes    no           yes    no       yes      no

Unique product/technology                   98       2        0      0             92    5        0      3            92     8        0        0
Comprehensive products                      4        2        8      86            8     3        5      85           3      5        10       82
Customer service                            8        0        8      84            15    5        10     69           8      3        18       72
Alliances/partnerships                      8        4        4      84            3     10       5      82           5      8        0        85
Expertise                                   8        37       6      49            8     5        5      82           8      36       5        51
Scientific advisors                         2        2        0      96            3     0        3      95           3      3        3        92
Reputation                                  4        2        4      90            8     3        0      90           3      5        5        87

Number of observations                      49       49       49     49            39    39       39     39           39     39       39       39
                                                                               Table 5
                                                                       Assets and Technology

Percent of companies that have patented technology, physical assets, alienable assets (either physical assets or patents), and proprietary intellectual property for
49 VC-financed companies that subsequently went public. We also report the percentages of companies for which these are or are not constant over time (e.g.
The “yes to no” column under “BP to IPO” reflects the percentage of companies who report a given item as part of their assets in the business plan but not at the
IPO).

                           BP        IPO   AR          BP      IPO AR             BP      IPO AR          BP        IPO          AR          BP      IPO      AR
                           All firms                   Biotechnology firms        Non-biotechnology firms Retail firms                       Non-biotechnology/
                                                                                                                                             Non-retail firms
Patents                    29       49     62          53       76     91         16       34     50          0        0         0           32      55       71
Physical assets            18       27     38          6        6      9          25       38     50          100      100       100         9       18       29
Alienable assets           43       67     82          59       76     91         34       63     79          100      100       100         36      64       79
Proprietary IP             84       86     82          94       100    100        78       78     75          0        0         0           93      95       94

Number of observations     49       49     39          17       17     11         32       32     28          5        5         5           44        44   34

                                             All firms                            Biotechnology firms                  Non-biotechnology firms
                                             BP to IPO                              IPO to AR                           BP to AR

                                             Yes       Yes    No      No             Yes   Yes    No     No                Yes       Yes   No     No
                                             to        to     to      to             to    to     to     to                to        to    to     to
                                             yes       no     yes     no             yes   no     yes    no                yes       no    yes    no

Patents                                      29        0      20      51             46    0      15     39                26        0     36     38
Physical assets                              18        0      8       73             31    0      8      62                21        0     18     62
Alienable assets                             43        0      24      33             69    0      13     18                44        0     38     18
Proprietary IP                               84        0      2       14             82    0      0      18                79        0     3      18

Number of observations                       49        49     49      49             39    39     39     39                39        39    39     39
                                                                           Table 6
                                                                        Growth Strategy

Percent of companies that explicitly report the following as elements of their growth strategy for 49 VC-financed companies that subsequently went public:
increase market penetration or establish market or technology leadership, develop new products or upgrade existing products, develop new strategic alliances or
other business partnerships, expand geographically, acquire other companies. We also report the percentages of companies who do or do not change the
elements of their strategies over time (e.g. The “yes to no” column under “BP to IPO” reflects the percentage of companies who report a given item as part of
their growth strategy in the business plan but not at the IPO).

                                            BP        IPO     AR              BP IPO         AR                  BP        IPO      AR
                                            All firms                         Biotechnology firms                Non-biotechnology firms
Market penetration/leadership               49        71      56              24    47       55                  63        84       57
New/upgraded products                       59        82      72              94    100      91                  41        72       64
Expand geographically                       20        43      21              0     6        0                   31        63       29
New alliances/partnerships                  29        59      51              47    71       64                  19        53       46
Acquisitions                                2         22      28              0     29       27                  3         19       29

Number of observations                      49       49       39              17    17       11                  32          32         28

                                            BP to IPO                         IPO to AR                          BP to AR

                                            Yes    Yes      No     No         Yes   Yes    No       No           Yes      Yes     No     No
                                            to     to       to     to         to    to     to       to           to       to      to     to
                                            yes    no       yes    no         yes   no     yes      no           yes      no      yes    no
Market penetration/leadership               47     2        24     27         49    21     8        23           36       15      21     28
New/upgraded products                       53     6        29     12         64    15     8        13           51       5       21     23
Expand geographically                       14     6        29     51         21    26     0        54           13       13      8      67
New alliances/partnerships                  24     4        35     37         51    8      0        41           23       2       28     46
Acquisitions                                2      0        20     78         10    10     18       62           3        0       26     72

Number of observations                      49     49       49     49         39    39     39       39           39       39      39     39
                                                                            Table 7
                                                                           Customers

Percent of companies that have customers at the business plan, IPO, and annual report for 49 VC-financed companies that subsequently went public. We also
report whether the customer base is primarily businesses or consumers, and whether the customer base broadens, narrows, or stays about the same over time.

                          BP IPO       AR            BP IPO AR                     BP IPO AR               BP IPO AR               BP IPO AR
                          All firms                  Biotechnology firms           Non-biotechnology firms Retail firms            Non-biotechnology,
                                                                                                                                   Non-retail firms
Has customers (%)        47     90     95            12    83     82               66   94    100        100   100    100          59    93      100
Primarily businesses (%) 86     86     85            94    94     91               81   81    82         20    20     20           93    93      96
Primarily consumers (%) 14      14     15            6     6      9                19   19    18         80    80     80           7     7       4

Number of observations    49    49     39            17    17     11               32   32    28         5     5      5            27     27    23

                                BP to IPO     IPO to AR    BP to AR           BP to IPO IPO to AR      BP to AR       BP to IPO IPO to AR       BP to AR
                                All firms                                     Biotechnology firms                     Non-biotechnology firms
Customer base similar (%)       73            77           62                 88          100          82             66          68            54
Customer base broader (%)       24            15           33                 6           0            9              34          21            43
Customer base narrower (%)      2             8            5                  5           0            9              0           11            4
Number of observations          49            39           39                 17          11           11             32          28            28

                                                                            Table 8
                                                                           Competitors

Percent of companies who have competitors at the business plan for 49 VC-financed companies that subsequently went public. We also report the percent of
companies whose competitor base broadens, narrows, or stays about the same over time.

Number of observations: 49         Lists competitors as of business plan (%): 84

                                BP to IPO     IPO to AR    BP to AR           BP to IPO IPO to AR      BP to AR       BP to IPO IPO to AR       BP to AR
                                All firms                                     Biotechnology firms                     Non-biotechnology firms
Competitor base similar (%)     63            79           56                 47          82           36             72          79            64
Competitor base broader (%)     35            21           41                 53          18           64             25          21            32
Competitor base narrower (%)    2             0            3                  0           0            0              3           0             4
Number of observations          49            39           39                 17          11           11             32          28            28
                                                  Table 9
                            Strategic alliances and other business partnerships

Percent of companies that explicitly mention strategic alliances or other business partnerships as elements
of their business for 49 VC-financed companies that subsequently went public. For those that do report
alliances, we report the median, average, and standard deviation of the number of reported alliances or
partnerships; the number and percent of alliances or partnerships that remain over time; and the number of
new alliances or partnerships over time.

                        BP IPO          AR            BP IPO AR                  BP IPO AR
                        All firms                     Biotechnology firms        Non-biotechnology firms
Alliances mentioned (%) 35     67       69            18    82    82             44    59    64

Num. Obs.                   49     49   39            17     17    11            32     32      28

Number reported alliances
                            All firms                 Biotechnology firms        Non-biotechnology firms
Median                      2.0 3.0     4.0           2.0 3.0 4.0                2.0 3.0 6.5
Average                     2.2 3.3     5.4           2.0 3.1 4.0                2.3 3.5 7.1
Standard deviation          1.3 2.1     4.6           1.0 1.7 2.6                1.5 2.5 6.1

Num. Obs.                   11     26   18            3      13    10            8      13      8


                                                      BP to IPO         IPO to AR         BP to AR
Number alliances still existing
Median                                                1.0               1.0               1.0
Average                                               1.0               1.6               0.7
Standard deviation                                    0.7               1.4               0.8

Num. Obs.                                             9                 14                7

Percent alliances still existing
Median                                                67                42                20
Average                                               60                46                39
Standard deviation                                    44                38                46
Num = 100%                                            4                 3                 2
Num. = 0%                                             2                 3                 3

Num. Obs.                                             9                 14                7

Number new alliances
Median                                                2.0               3.0               4.0
Average                                               2.5               4.0               5.5
Standard deviation                                    2.2               3.8               4.6

Num. Obs.                                             20                15                13
                                                                           Table 10
                                                                          Management

Percent of companies whose top 5 managers include a chief executive officer (CEO), a chief technologist, scientist or similar (CTO), a chief financial officer
(CFO) or similar, and a marketing or sales director or similar (CMO) for 49 VC-financed companies that subsequently went public. The table also reports
whether a founder is the CEO or, if not, a director; the extent of executive turnover; and the backgrounds of the business plan management team.

Panel A:
                                  All firms                        Biotechnology firms                               Non-biotechnology firms
                                  BP IPO         AR                BP          IPO             AR                    BP          IPO         AR
Has a CEO(%)                      88     100     100               71          100             100                   97          100         100
Num. Obs.                         49     49      39                17          17              11                    32          32          28

CEO is a founder (%)              77    57       46                75            53            36                    77            59           50
Num. Obs.                         43    49       39                12            17            11                    31            32           28

A founder is a director if none
is the CEO (%)                    92    71       48                83            75            71                    100           69           36
Num. Obs.                         12    21       21                6             8             7                     6             13           14

A founder is a top 5 manager
or a director                     100   92       72                100           94            82                    100           94           68
Num. Obs.                         47    49       39                16            17            11                    31            32           28

Has a CFO or similar (%)          42    80       85                35            71            100                   45            84           79
Num. Obs.                         48    49       39                17            17            11                    31            32           28

Has a CMO or similar (%)          38    37       41                12            12            9                     45            50           54
Num. Obs.                         48    49       39                17            17            11                    31            32           28

Has a CTO or similar
  (non-retail) (%)                77    77       47                76            82            55                    77            74           43
Num. Obs.                         43    44       34                17            17            11                    26            27           23
                                                                  Table 10 (continued)

Panel B:
                                                                           All firms
                               General mgmt          Technical mgmt      Technical Marketing     Finance
Top 5 business plan
executives’ background (%)     42                    25                  16                 9         8
Num. Obs.                      47                    47                  47                 47        47

                                                                      Biotechnology firms

                               General mgmt          Technical mgmt      Technical   Marketing   Finance
Top 5 business plan
executives’ background (%)     26                    42                  27                 1         4
Num. Obs.                      16                    16                  16                 16        16

                                                                 Non-biotechnology firms

                               General mgmt          Technical mgmt      Technical   Marketing   Finance
Top 5 business plan
executives’ background (%)     50                    16                  10          13          11
Num. Obs.                      31                    31                  31          31          31


Panel C:
                                    All firms                                 Biotechnology firms                Non-biotechnology firms
                                    BP to IPO   IPO to AR   BP to AR          BP to IPO IPO to AR     BP to AR   BP to IPO IPO to AR BP to AR

CEO remains the same (%)            84          59          50                92            64        56         81        57        48
Num. Obs.                           43          39          36                12            11        9          31        28        27

Next 4 top execs remaining (%)      55          36          25                41            36        22         63        36        27
Num. Obs.                           49          39          39                17            11        11         32        28        28

Former CEO still at co. (%)         29          19          11                0             25        25         33        17        7
Num. Obs.                           7           16          18                1             4         4          6         12        14

Former next 4 execs still at co. (%) 25         6           6                 29            18        2          24        1         7
Num. Obs.                            41         38          42                14            11        14         27        27        28
Panel D: Departing founders/executives

                                  All firms: departed between   Biotechnology firms: departed between   Non-biotech firms: departed between

                                  BP and IPO       IPO and AR   BP and IPO        IPO and AR            BP and IPO    IPO and AR

Identified next job (%):

Founders                          50               45             50              50                    50            43
Num. Obs.                         6                15             2               4                     4             11

Non-founder CEOs                  0                60                             100                   0             50
Num. Obs.                         1                5                              1                     1             4

Non-founder other top 5           41               42             33              53                    46            39
Num. Obs.                         32               33             12              8                     20            25

Founded new company (%):

Founders                          17               10             50              0                     0             14
Num. Obs.                         6                15             2               4                     4             11

Non-founder CEOs                  0                0                              0                     0             0
Num. Obs.                         1                5                              1                     1             4

Non-founder other top 5           11               4              4               4                     15            4
Num. Obs.                         32               33             12              8                     20            25

Top executive of startup company (%):

Founders                          33               27             50              0                     25            36
Num. Obs.                         6                15             2               4                     4             11

Non-founder CEOs                  0                40                             0                     0             50
Num. Obs.                         1                5                              1                     1             4

Non-founder other top 5           36               36             20.8            40                    45            35
Num. Obs.                         32               33             12              8                     20            25
                                                                            Table 11
                                                                           Ownership

Panel A reports common stock ownership of company founders (taken as a group), CEOs, and non-founder CEOs at the business plan, immediately before the
(pre-) IPO, immediately after the (post-)IPO, and at the annual report, as well as percentage changes in these variables. Percentage changes are from business
plan to pre-IPO. Ownership at the business plan is after the financing round. Panel B summarizes the division of firm ownership pre-IPO. Panel C summarizes
the shares of net value, defined as pre-IPO value minus total consideration paid by all existing investors, owned by founders and executives of the firm, assumed
that none of them paid consideration to the company.

Panel A – Beneficial ownership of common stock
                All firms                                          Biotechnology firms                              Non-biotechnology firms
Founder(s) (%)
                         Pre-    Post-                                      Pre-      Post-                                  Pre-      Post-
                BP       IPO     IPO AR                            BP       IPO       IPO      AR                   BP       IPO       IPO      AR
Median          28.9     12.4    8.8 5.3                           28.9     4.3       3.5      5.1                  31.7     13.1      10.3     5.3
Average         36.0     14.6    11.2 7.2                          34.4     11.4      8.6      8.0                  36.7     16.4      12.6     6.8
St. dev.        25.4     12.4    9.7 7.5                           30.8     12.7      9.5      9.2                  23.6     12.1      9.7      7.0
Num. Obs.       31       49      49    37                          9        17        17       10                   22       32        32       27

Founder(s) percentage change
                BP to IPO IPO to AR           BP to AR             BP to IPO       IPO to AR   BP to AR             BP to IPO       IPO to AR   BP to AR
Median          -45          -51              -77                  -51             -49         -63.8                -38             -53         -86
Average         -39          -54              -72                  -42             -52         -64.1                -37             -55         -75
St. dev.        40           40               27                   46              20          26.1                 38              45          27
Num. Obs.       31           36               25                   9               10          7                    22              26          18

CEO (%)
                          Pre-    Post-                                     Pre-      Post-                                  Pre-      Post-
                 BP       IPO     IPO        AR                    BP       IPO       IPO      AR                   BP       IPO       IPO      AR
Median           15.9     6.7     5.4        3.6                   6.8      4.3       3.1      3.2                  17.4     8.0       6.4      3.8
Average          20.1     9.8     7.5        5.7                   15.5     8.2       6.2      6.1                  22.0     10.6      8.2      5.6
St. dev.         15.8     9.0     7.0        6.6                   14       9.9       7.1      8.7                  16.5     8.6       6.9      5.9
Num. Obs.        27       49      49         38                    8        17        17       10                   19       32        32       28

CEO percentage change
               BP to IPO         IPO to AR    BP to AR             BP to IPO       IPO to AR   BP to AR             BP to IPO       IPO to AR   BP to AR
Median         -38               -50          -78                  -19             -36         -72.2                -38             -55         -79
Average        -31               -40          -69                  -15             -48         -62.9                -38             -37         -71
St. dev.       37                70           26                   45              27          32.8                 32              80          23
Num. Obs.      27                38           23                   8               10          7                    19              28          16
                                                                Table 11 (continued)
               All firms                                      Biotechnology firms                                 Non-biotechnology firms
Non-founder CEO (%)
                        Pre-    Post-                                      Pre-      Post-                                Pre-      Post-
               BP       IPO     IPO     AR                    BP           IPO       IPO        AR                BP      IPO       IPO      AR
Median         5.5      4.2     3.0     1.7                   4.2          3.6       2.8        1.2               6.5     6.6       5.0      2.0
Average        5.1      5.0     4.0     1.9                   4.2          3.5       2.7        1.6               5.5     6.0       4.8      2.1
St. dev.       2.0      3.1     2.6     1.4                   0.7          1.2       0.9        1.3               2.4     3.5       2.9      1.4
Num. Obs.      6        21      21      20                    2            8         8          6                 4       13        13       14

Non-founder CEO percentage change
               BP to IPO IPO to AR       BP to AR             BP to IPO           IPO to AR     BP to AR          BP to IPO      IPO to AR   BP to AR
Median         -30          -48          -72                  -20                 -33           -86               -30            -56         -70
Average        -23          -56          -80                  -20                 -45           -86               -24            -60         -76
St. dev.       27           28           19                   50                  37            20                20             24          21
Num. Obs.      6            14           5                    2                   4             2                 4              10          3

Panel B – Division of ownership pre-IPO (%)
                                 Non-    Non-founder                                 All executive                        Founder not
                                 founder other top                                   officers and          Founders +     a mgr:             Founder $
                 Founders        CEO     5 managers    VCs           Partners Others directors             top 5 mgrs     top 5 mgrs         pre-IPO ($M)

                                                                           All firms
Median          12.4            4.2      2.2           52.6          0.0        22.7     52.0              16.3           6.2                17.5
Average         14.6            5.0      3.5           53.0          3.8        23.1     55                20.3           6.0                103.3
St. dev.        12.4            3.1      4.4           17.1          8.2        13.0     21.9              13.1           3.4                398.5
Num. Obs.       49              21       49            49            49         49       49                49             6                  49

                                                                    Biotechnology firms
Median          4.3             3.6      1.6           52.6          0.0     28.0     48.3                 8.0            6.1                11.7
Average         11.4            3.5      2.2           51.4          4.7     28.8     49.7                 15.2           6.1                29.7
St. dev.        12.7            1.2      1.7           16.4          7.8     12.7     17.2                 12.5           3.6                39.2
Num. Obs.       17              8        17            17            17      17       17                   17             2                  17

                                                              Non-biotechnology firms
Median          13.1            6.6      2.8           54.1      0.0      20.5     56.0                    18.9           6.2                21.3
Average         16.4            6.0      4.2           53.9      3.3      20.1     57.9                    23.0           6.0                142.4
St. dev.        12.1            3.5      5.2           17.6      8.5      12.3     23.8                    12.7           3.9                490.4
Num. Obs.       32              13       32            32        32       32       32                      32             4                  32
Panel C – Founder and executive shares of pre-IPO net value (%)

                                Non-    Non-founder                    Founder not
                                founder other top         Founders +   a mgr:
                Founders        CEO     5 managers        top 5 mgrs   top 5 mgrs

                                All firms
Median          14.4            5.3      3.1              20.6         9.8
Average         19.1            6.6      4.4              26.5         9.5
St. dev.        18.1            3.9      5.0              19.4         4.5
Num. Obs.       48              21       48               48           6

                                Biotechnology firms
Median          8.7             4.8     2.9               15.5         11.7
Average         14.6            5.3     3.2               20.4         11.7
St. dev.        14.6            2.3     2.4               13.8         3.4
Num. Obs.       16              8       16                16           2

                                Non-biotechnology firms

Median          16.7            7.8     3.5               21.2         8.4
Average         21.4            7.5     5.1               29.5         8.3
St. dev.        19.5            4.5     5.9               21.2         4.9
Num. Obs.       32              13      32                32           4
                                                     Table 12
                                                 Board of Directors

Summary statistics on the size, composition, and turnover of the boards of directors at the business plan (BP), IPO,
and annual report (AR) for 49 VC-financed companies that subsequently went public.


                  BP       IPO      AR
Board Size

Median            5.0      7.0      7.0
Average           5.0      6.9      6.8
St. dev.          1.3      1.4      1.5

Num. Obs.         29       49       39

Number Insiders

Median            2.0      2.0      2.0
Average           2.2      1.9      1.8
St. dev.          1.0      0.8      0.8

Num. Obs.         28       48       39

Number VCs

Median            2.0      3.0      1.0
Average           1.6      2.8      1.7
St. dev.          1.2      1.2      1.6

Num. Obs.         28       48       39

Number non-VC outsiders

Median            1.0      2.0      3.0
Average           1.3      2.2      3.2
St. dev.          1.3      1.4      1.1

Num. Obs.         28       48       39


                                                      BP to IPO         IPO to AR         BP to AR
Percent directors remaining                           71                57                40

Num. Obs.                                             29                39                21
                                                   Table 13
                     Determinants of Founder remaining CEO at the IPO or first Annual Report

   Probit regressions of the likelihood of the founder remaining CEO of the company either at IPO or at the first annual
   report after going public. Independent variables are: ‘Alienable assets at BP’ is a dummy variable taking the value
   of one if the firm has either significant physical assets or patents at the time of the business plan (BP). ‘Physical
   assets at BP’ is a dummy variable taking the value of one if the firm has significant physical assets at the time of the
   BP. ‘Patents at BP’ is a dummy variable taking the value of one if the firm has patents at the time of the BP. ‘Non-
   pat. IP at BP’ is a dummy variable taking the value of one if the firm has no patents but has proprietary intellectual
   property at the time of BP. ‘Age (months) at BP’ is the age of the firm at the time of the BP in months. ‘Fdr
   ownership at BP’ is the founder’s ownership stake in percent at the time of the BP. Reported coefficients are
   marginal effects of independent variables. . Heteroskedasticity-robust standard standard errors in parentheses.
   */**/*** indicate that the coefficients are statistically significantly different from zero at the 10% / 5% / 1% level.



   Panel A: Founder remains CEO at the IPO.

                             Coeff.     (STDE)     Coeff.    (STDE)       Coeff.    (STDE)         Coeff.     (STDE)
Alienable assets at BP       -0.148     (0.150)
Physical assets at BP                              -0.443    (0.198)**    -0.700    (0.164)***     -0.971     (0.048)***
Patents at BP                                      -0.069    (0.169)      -0.529    (0.235)**      -0.814     (0.194)***
Non-pat. IP at BP                                                         -0.504    (0.194)***     -0.698     (0.167)***
Age (months) at BP            0.002     (0.002)    0.005     (0.003)*      0.007    (0.003)**       0.008     (0.003)**
Fdr ownership at BP                                                                                 0.014     (0.005)**
Constant                      0.118     (0.270)    0.009     (0.273)       1.165    (0.567)**       0.711     (0.839)

Number of obs.            49                       49                     49                      30
Pseudo R-squared          0.03                     0.07                   0.12                    0.38


   Panel B: Founder remains CEO at the first Annual Report.

                          Coeff.      (STDE)        Coeff.    (STDE)       Coeff.    (STDE)          Coeff.     (STDE)
Tangible assets at BP     -0.518      (0.195)***
Physical assets at BP                               -0.506    (0.252)**    -0.642    (0.232)***      -0.835     (0.165)***
Patents at BP                                       -0.359    (0.195)*     -0.599    (0.235)**       -0.599     (0.262)**
Non-pat. IP at BP                                                          -0.355    (0.247)         -0.568     (0.245)**
Age (months) at BP         0.014      (0.004)**      0.012    (0.005)**     0.014    (0.006)**        0.014     (0.005)***
Fdr ownership at BP                                                                                   0.010     (0.005)**
Constant                  -0.543      (0.326)*      -0.665    (0.348)*     -0.012    (0.605)         -0.445     (0.843)

Number of obs.            39                       39                      39                      26
Pseudo R-squared          0.27                     0.25                    0.28                    0.40
                                                   Table 14
                                  Determinants of Founder ownership pre- IPO

OLS regressions of the determinants of founder pre-IPO ownership percentage. Independent variables are ‘Tangible
assets at BP’ is a dummy variable taking the value of one if the firm has either significant physical assets or patents
at the time of the business plan (BP). ‘Physical assets at BP’ is a dummy variable taking the value of one if the firm
has significant physical assets at the time of the BP. ‘Patents at BP’ is a dummy variable taking the value of one if
the firm has patents at the time of the BP. ‘Non-pat. IP at BP’ is a dummy variable taking the value of one if the
firm has no patents but has proprietary intellectual property at the time of BP. ‘Age (months) at BP’ is the age of the
firm at the time of the BP in months. ‘Fdr ownership at BP’ is the founder’s ownership stake in percent at the time
of the BP. Probit coefficients are reported, with heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors in parentheses. */**/***
indicate that the coefficients are statistically significantly different from zero at the 10% / 5% / 1% level.




                                  Coeff.   (STDE)         Coeff.   (STDE)         Coeff.   (STDE)
        Tangible assets at
        BP                        -0.210   (3.650)
        Physical assets at
        BP                                                 5.771   (5.541)        3.288    (6.555)
        Patents at BP                                     -5.561   (3.591)       -8.997    (5.036)*
        Non-pat. IP at BP                                                        -4.218    (5.301)
        Age (months) at BP        0.049    (0.039)        0.031    (0.033)        0.040    (0.038)
        Constant                 12.738    (2.479)***    13.913    (2.384)***    17.317    (4.341)***

        Number of obs.          49                       49                      49
        R-squared               0.04                     0.12                    0.13
