                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       RAIDS AND IMITATION




                        Edward P. Lazear




                     Working Paper No. 1158




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                   1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge MA 02138

                           June 1983




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Labor Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the author
and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                     NBER Working Paper #1158
                                                     June 1983



                               Raids and Imitation




                                     Abstract


                                                                       A
    Many job changes occur without intervening spells of unemployment.
model is constructed in an attempt to understand this phenomenon. It implies

that the best workers are hired away first because, with imperfect informa-

tion, prices do not fully adjust for quality. Thus, there develops stigma

associated with failing to receive outside offers. The force of the stigma,

which affects wages, depends upon the likelihood of discovering a worker's

ability, the size of the market, and the speed of diffusion of information.

In some occupations, it implies that there quickly develop pronounced differ-

ences in the treatment of raided and unraided workers. A consequence is a

theory of occupational wage dispersion. The Peter Principle——that workers are

promoted to a level of incompetence——is a direct implication.     The model can

be applied to product markets as well to explain the relationship between

price and time on the shelf.



                                                      Edward P. Lazear
                                                      Graduate School of Business
                                                      University of Chicago
                                                      1101 East 58th Street
                                                      Chicago, IL 60637

                                                      312—962—7464
     Job changes often occur without spells of unemployment. Highly educated

workers, for example, rarely suffer unemployment. A large proportion of their

job switches occur only after the new job is secured. These workers, whose

skills and ability levels are less homogeneous, differ from less skilled,

perhaps more homogeneous workers who are more likely to experience

unemployment in the process of changing jobs. Most research has focused on

job changes that imply spells of unemployment. Indeed, the primary rationale

behind the earliest papers on search theory was to explain unemployment.1 But

if there exists what some refer to as a "dual labor market,"2 these theories

may be most applicable to the secondary workers. This paper attempts to

formulate a theory of turnover and wage dynamics that may better describe the

primary labor force, defined as those who change jobs without unemployment.3

In the process, a number of previously unexamined phenomena are explored.

     The first task is to understand the relationship between worker quality

and turnover. Do markets clear more quickly for the most able workers? Why

is it that there is a tendency to try to hire the most able individual, even

though his wage rate is higher? It appears that prices do not adjust fully

for differences in quality. Buyers constantly seek that diamond in the rough.

This also yields the Peter Principle: The best workers are stolen away so

those who remain appear incompetent relative to their peers.

     The process that is examined makes "stigma" an important feature of labor

markets. Because of the information that is produced when workers succeed or

fail to receive outside offers, workers who are undesired by outsiders are
                                     —2—



treated very differently from those who enjoy an active outside market. Thus,

stigma, which can be thought of as the consequences of a worker's history of

offers and/or employment, is modeled and treated explicitly.

     This results in an understanding of the dynamics of worker turnover and

wage evolution. Sometimes the patterns may be unusual ones. For example,

there may be little action for the first few years of an academic economist's

career. Then one job offer triggers others. There is a flurry of activity,

wages change rapidly and a job change may or may not occur. After this, a

stable period follows, with few offers coming his way again. (Such dynamics

are often said to characterize the market for firms where takeover attempts

are the equivalent of outside offers.)

     The patterns of turnover and wage change can be related in a very simple

way to the size of the market, the difficulty associated with learning a

worker's ability, and the speed of diffusion of information. For example,

when information is difficult to acquire, wages have little dispersion within

an occupation, age—earnings profiles are flat, and stigma is unimportant.

Further, there is only a very weak relation between ability and tenure. Other

relation are easily traced.

     A number of implications are derived. Among the more interesting are:

     (1) The best workers are raided first. Everyone goes after high quality,

highly—priced ones rather than lower quality, lower—priced ones.

     (2) wages differ substantially between workers who receive outside offers

and those who do not. This provides implications for wage differentials

across occupations and for intra—occupational wage variation.

     (3) A corollary is that the importance of stigma depends upon the proba-

bility that an outsider recognizes the ability of a given firm's workers and

upon the number of buyers. Stigma is not likely to be as pronounced for
                                     —3—



assembly line workers as it is for research academicians. As a result, wages

are less closely related to ability and age—earnings profiles are flatter for

assembly line workers than they are for academicians.

     (4) The oldest workers on a given job are the least productive. This

paraphrases the Peter Principle4 and results because the most able of the young

workers are bid away.

     (5) Workers maximize their expected wealth by working for the firm that

is most likely to know their true ability levels. This applies even to low

ability workers.

     (6) Txrnover may exhibit an inverted U—shaped relation to experience for

any one worker, even though the aggregate relation is exponentially declining

in experience.

     Before any implications are derived, it is necessary to construct a

simple model and to outline a few basic relations. That is done in the next

section.




I A MODEL

     To focus on competition among firms for workers, we begin with a simple

model that captures the key features of the effects of informational differ-

ences and informed trading. This enables us to examine phenomena such as

raids, offer matching and imitation in the labor market.

     Suppose that there are two firms,   j and k. Firm j hires the worker

initially so that given any tie in offers from j and k, the worker remains

at j.5 Firm k initiates a raid by offering wk > w. The worker's product

at firm j is M, a random variable that, for simplicity, is distributed

uniformly between zero and one. It is easy to allow for specific capital but

this is ignored throughout.
                                        —4—



       Information takes the following form: With probability P, j learns

the true value of M before raiding occurs and with probability               (1 -
                                                                                    P)
knows only the ex ante distribution of M at that time.            If    j   learns the

truth, then j becomes an "informed" trader. Similarly, with probability k

(not necessarily equal to P) k learns the true value of M before the

raiding offer must be made arid with probability (1 -      k'          k only knows the

ex ante distribution of M.



Public Information;

     Raids are selective because the raider is susceptible to "winner's

curse."6 Firm k knows that on average, j lets the worker go when j's

assessment of the worker's output falls below wk This implies that under

many circumstances, any raiding strategy that can succeed results in losses to

the raider. Everything depends upon the nature of market information.7

     To see this, suppose that j always knows what k knows, either because

k's strategy is different in all cases so that j can infer what k knows,

or because k's information is public. This is characterized by the informa-

tion in Table 1:

                                      Table 1

                      Events and Unconditional Probabilities

                                                j


                           Informed                    Uninformed

         Informed
                      jk                                    0

   k
         Uninformed                                 (1 —          —
                          P(1 —                            P)(1
                                                —5—



      The proposition that k can never raid successfully follows trivially

 from the fact that j has all of k's information, and more.                           Any strategy
 that is profitable to k is immediately matched by j.                       Any unprofitable move

 is ignored by j so that k steals the workers only when doing so is

 unprofitable.

      Winner's curse occurs whenever k is uninformed. The expected product

of the worker is 1/2. But any attempt by k to raid at wk > 0 fails or

results in losses.

      If k is uninformed and 3 is uninformed (the bottom right cell of

Table 1), then 3 will match any offer up to E(M) =                       1/2.     A raid at any

Wk > 1/2 is ex ante unprofitable. If j is informed and k is not, then 3
matches offers when M > Wk so k gets nothing if M > wk. But 3 declines

to match when wk > M. So k only succeeds in stealing the worker when Wk >

M, and this is a losing strategy. In fact, given that k is uninformed,

k's expected gain is

                                          Wk
(1)                                   P. f   (M —
                                                  wk)f(M)dN

                                          = P• f       (M    —                  (since M
                                                                 wk)dM                     U[O, 1])
                                              JO
                                                   2
                                          =                 < 0
                                              3(—?)
for Wk < 1/2. (For Wk > 1/2, the expected gain is even less at


           + (1 —
                    Pi)(wk
                             -   1/2).)   The expected gain is negative when k is

uninformed so no raid occurs when k is uninformed. Further, by assumption,

when k is informed, so is j. All raids are unsuccessful. The conclusion is

that no raids occur in the absence of private information and firm—specific

capital.
                                          —6—




Successful   Raids:

      In order for k to ever attempt a raid on j, at least one of two

assumptions must be relaxed: Either there must be specific capital, so that

the worker is worth more to k than to j, or k's information must be

private. Relaxation of either assumption is sufficient to guarantee that

raids sometimes occur. We focus on informational differences.

      It is important to consider not only whether a firm is informed about the

worker's product, M, but also whether it is informed about the rival's state

of knowledge. Both affect the optimal wage strategy. What is essential is

that there be some situations when the current employer does not know that his

rival is informed. There are a number of justifications for this possibility.

First, the worker's claim of an outside offer is not credible. He always has

an incentive to claim this if wages rise as a result. Second, k has no

incentive to convince j      that   the offer is genuine because doing so

frustrates all raid attempts. On the contrary, k should conceal its attack.

Third, the "outside offer" may reflect the worker's value of leisure, which

has no bearing on M.8

      For simplicity, assume that an informed firm is also aware of its rivals'

state of knowledge, but that no uninformed firm knows what its rivals know.

This allows all the relevant possibilities and saves on tedious and un-

enlightening discussion. The more general case is described in the appendix.

      Under this situation, raids occur only if k is informed. If. k is

uninformed then it is never profitable to raid. This is easily seen: An

uninformed   raider encounters either an    informed or uninformed firm j. If   j


is   informed,   which happens with probability P, then no profitable raid can

succeed: K only succeeds in stealing those workers for whom M < wk

(otherwise j will match). This results in an expected loss to K of
                                                           —7—



                                            w                              2
                                             k
                                                   (M -           =
                                                          wk)4
         If    j    is also uninformed, which occurs with probability (1 —                                   only
raids at Wk > w. are successful. Now, in competition,                                       w is the maximum

wage consistent with zero profits. (This is derived more formally below.)

Therefore, if k is uninformed, there is no possibility that an offer of

     > w to a randomly chosen worker can result in profits since K has no

informational         advantage over j                at both firms. But
                                                    and M is the same

         w does not result in a successful raid. So, k's profit from raiding
     =

when     uninformed is zero if j is uninformed, but negative if j is informed.

Therefore,          k does not raid when uninformed.

         Raids do occur, however, when k is informed. Recall that k's move is

non—informative. Since w is the wage that j offers to a worker about

whom j is uninformed, k raids workers at                              w +            about whom it knows that

M > w. If j is also informed and j knows that the outside offer is

genuine, then the raid fails, because j matches the offer. But with

probability (1 —                  j       is uninformed so that the raiding offer attracts

the worker. The expected return to k given that k is informed is

                           (1 -   P.)      J       (M -   w)dN
                                      3     w.                            \\
                                               3
                                                                                 2
                                            = (1     —
                                                          P,){-
                                                           j 2
                                                                  - w, + i] > o
                                                                      j   2—
                                                                                        2

(It is positive because the minimum value of                                   — w. + —.j occurs at w =      1   where

—   — w,     + —- = 0   and since w. < 1.) So when k is informed that M > w,                                     a
2        j      2                           3—                                                           J

raid occurs.

         It might seem that an informed j would behave differently with respect

to high—ability workers than with respect to low—ability ones. This is not

correct. The informed j could make w a function of M. But nothing is
                                      —8—



gained for workers with M > w3. No w(M) <M acts as a deterrent to an

informed k. No w(M) > M is profitable if k is informed and no

uninformed k raids. Nothing is gained by conditioning w on M, even

when j has the information to do so.

    Further, risk—neutral workers who do not know their abilities will not

sign with any firm that retains the right to reduce wages after observing M.

This would result in an expected wage for unraided workers that is less than

w and   since w to unraided workers guarantees zero profit, a fixed w to

all unraided workers dominates.10

     The results of this section can be summarized: In the absence of any

firm—specific capital, raids only occur if raiders have private information

and if the raider is informed. For a raid to be profitable, the raider must

know the realization of a worker's output and not merely the distribution.

     Additionally, raids only occur on workers from the upper part- of the

ability distribution. Raiders only make profits on those workers, because the

current firm pays all workers on which it is uninformed some given wage, Wj.

The market has a bias toward underpaying high quality workers.



The Optimal Wage Strategy and Equilibrium:

     Now let us derive more formally j's optimal wage strategy and describe

the market equilibrium. If both j and k are informed, then j matches

any offer by k and w = M,     the worker is paid his marginal product. Firm

j earns zero profit on this worker.

     If j is uninformed, but k is informed, k raids. But since j             does

not believe worker claims of outside offers, k succeeds in stealing the

worker at w + C. Again ys profits are zero.                  -




        -J
                                                          —9—



      Firm j retains the worker at wage                         w whenever k does not raid.

Firm k does not raid either because k is uninformed, or because k is

informed that M < w,
                             3

      Firm j offers w to unraided workers. The goal is to derive w.

Recall that k only raids when k is informed that M > w so j is not be

left with a representative sample of workers. Even though j may not be able

to verify any one worker's claim of an outside offer (and consequently does

not react to it),           j knows that workers who actually do leave the firm come

from the part of the ability distribution where M exceeds                                   w. Again, there
are two reasons why a worker remains with firm j: Either the worker has M >

w., but k does not know it, or the worker has M < w1——the worker is an

undiscovered star or an already overpaid performer. The probability that

M > w and k is uninformed is (1 -                                   —          since M is distributed
                                                          wi)(l
uniformly between 0 and 1. The expected value of M if this is true is (1 +

         The probability that M < w is w1 (k's information being
w1)/2.
irrelevant here). The expected value of M if this is true is w/2. The

expected value of a worker who is not stolen away, ustng the relevant

conditional probabilities, is


           (1-w.)(1—P)
                     k                     1+w.                            w
(2)
         (1 —   w.)(1   —        + W            2              (1 —     wj(l   +
                                                                                   'k   +       [w/21



      Now, in equilibrium the competitive firm must earn zero profit. Zero

profit is already guaranteed for workers who are raided (successfully or

unsuccessfully). So in equilibrium, w must be set so that zero profits are

earned on those workers who are not raided. Thus, from (2),

                (1 — w.)(1       - P   )            1 +   w.                       w.
      W=
            (1 -   w.)(1 -       k>        Wi
                                                {
                                                      2
                                                                +
                                                                    (1 -   w)(1—            +   w   [w/2)
                                              —10—



Equation (2) simply says that j must set w so that expected profit on

unraided workers is zero, given that only workers with M > w are stolen

away. Any w less than that amount results in positive profits so that

another firm   can   attract all workers.         Every w greater        than that amount

results in negative profit.

      Solving equation (3) for w yields two roots, but one is always

negative. The       other   root is always between 0 and 1/2 and it is given by1


                                           I1/(1_Pk) —     1
(4)                                w. =              —
                                            l/(lPk)        1



      The equilibrium can be sunimarized: Workers come to firm i and are told

that all unraided workers are paid


                                          {17(1 —      —       1
                                     =
                                           17(1                1



If a worker receives an outside offer that j                   learns is genuine and if j is

informed that M > w1, i matches the offer and the worker's wage is driven

up to M. (Only workers with M > w. receive outside offers.) If the worker

receives an outside offer and j cannot verify that M > w, j allows the

worker to leave. Zero expected profit is guaranteed.

      That w < 1/2 implies that unraided workers are underpaid relative to

the population mean. This is because all firms try to steal undiscovered

workers whose values exceed their wage. The search for pearls leaves mostly

oysters behind so that the output of remaining workers falls short of the

population mean.



Raiders' Profits and Costly Information:

      As   things   stand, raiders earn profits. Although raided firms earn zero
                                                        —11—




expected    profit, raiders are able to earn profits on those workers whom they

succeed     in acquiring.
        The expected profit on each raided worker is

                                                1
                                          1-w.3             (M-w)dM
                                                                3
                                                       W.
                                                        J
(since
               1

            1 — w,
                       =
                           1 —
                                 1

                                 F(w) •     It      seems that all firms would prefer to be
                   3               3
raiders only. In fact, the more raids attempted, the more profitable the

firm.

        The reason for this result is that k is an exogenous "gift" to out-

siders in the current setup. A raider is endowed with a specialized factor——

information__Pk of the time and the endowment costs the firm nothing. Firms

endowed with such a gift earn rents on the scarce factor.

        More realistic, perhaps, is the situation where potential raiders are

forced to buy information at some cost. Suppose, for example, that only if a

firm bears cost A does it learn a worker's ability with probability k

otherwise it learns the worker's ability with probability zero. (Think of A

as time spent reading a worker's resume, which results in useful information

      of   the time.) The expected return on the investment in information is

                                            k fwM -            w.)dM

                                                                                  1
and   the cost is A. The investment is made so long as A < k fM — w)dM.

But this still leaves the raider with positive profits, which induces entry

into the raiding business. Entry of other raiders reduces the likelihood that

any one informed raider acquires the worker. In fact, equilibrium occurs when

there are N raiders such that


                                          A =   —f         (M —   w.)dM
                                                      wj
                                             —12—



This not only ensures zero profits for raiders, but also determines the

equilibrium       number of raiding firms.
        Any   one firm may act   as both raider and employer of new workers, but

there    is nothing that necessitates tying the        two   activities   together. The

determination       of whether a firm engages in both types of hiring or just one
type is    analogous to the determination of the product mix of a multiproduct

firm.




Ex Ante Differences in Information:
        This   section considers what happens when firms       have different probabili-
ties of becoming informed. This èan arise because firms learn more about
their    own workers    than about others or because some firms        are   better screeners
than    others.

        What is essential in this model is that there is a difference between ex

ante and ex post        information. Think   of becoming informed about a worker as

occurring when reading one of his articles in the AER. If the potential buyer

only reads one out of 20 papers per month then P =              .05.   While it is likely

that the current employer reads more of his own workers' papers than others'

so that Pj >       k'    it is still possible that an outsider may        read   one that the

current employer overlooks.

        Suppose that before the worker is hired, the two firms have different

amounts of information so that           >
                                             P.     With which firm should the worker

sign? Since the wage at the current firm depends upon getting outside offers,

should the worker sign with the firm with poorest information? Does this

depend upon whether the worker is high or low ability?

       These questions are easily answered using eq. (4). If the worker signs

with j, then he gets
                                                 —13—




                                         =
                                                         —

                                                         —
                                                           'k   -
                                                                —1
                                             1/(1

if he is unraided, which occurs with probability (1 —                                       If   he   is raided

and j knows his ability he receives M. This happens with probability

       If he is raided and j does not know his ability, then he goes, to k

at wage w +   epsilon.         This happens with probability k1 —                            P).       So


expected wage is (ignoring epsilon)

                                                                    -          -   1

                                             —                                         +
(5)        E(w) = ((1      -        +
                                                 P)]          1/(1 —           —   1       PjPkM

If he signs with          then he has an expected wage of


                                                             /11(1 - P ) —         1

(6)       E(w)k =   ((1   —
                               P)
                                    ÷ P(1 —
                                              k1 1/(1               —   P)     —   1'
                                                                                        +
                                                                                            PjPkM

      When is (w) > E(w)k?              The answer is always. It always pays to sign

with the firm with the best cx ante information, independent of ability even

if the worker knows his own ability.

      The proof is straightforward: Assume the opposite. Then Pj >                                          and

       < E(w) so from (5) and (6)


                              ""'k1     97(1—P)—1 I  <
                               1/(1 — —    1/Cl —1                   P.)   —


C
which implies Pj < k• This results in a contradiction.

      The intuition follows: First, that ability level is irrelevant is

obvious. The worker only gets M when both                            and k are informed so the

identity of j and k is irrelevant. Second,                           j knows that the better

informed is k, the more likely is j to get stuck with the lowest quality

workers. As such, the equilibrium wage that j offers falls with k• Since
                                      —14—



j   experiences less adverse selection, j can (and in equilibrium will) offer

a higher wage to unraided workers. Since a worker who is raided is raided

at w + C (unless     j   is also informed), the worker always benefits from

increases in w. Thus, he always signs with the firm least susceptible to

adverse selection or with the best informed firm, independent of his ability.

     The current employer does not pay higher—ability workers higher wages

unless an outsXder forces him to do          Even low quality workers benefit from

working for the most informed employer. That employer is least likely to be

affected by winner's curse and offers the highest equilibrium wage to unraided

workers, a wage that is independent of ability levels. It requires two

informed buyers to drive the worker's price to M, and their identity

relative to the current employer is irrelevant.



Imitation

     Most of the interesting phenomena can be analyzed only in a ntultiperiod,

multifirm context. The desire here is to analyze the way that one firm

Imitates another and to trace the evolution of   wages and turnover as it varies
with worker ability level.

     Think of there being N +   1   ex ante identical firms, each of which has a

probability P of being informed (for simplicity of notation, assume that P

is identical for all N traders). The worker is at one of the N +       1   firms,

and, as above, call it j. An innovation in this section is that there are

two ways to obtain information about a worker: First, one can discover the

worker's productivity by oneself--discovery-—and this happens with proba-

bility P each round. Second, one can infer the worker's productivity——

inference——by observing the actions of others.'3 Thus, a raid during the

previous round tips off others that the worker's productivity exceeded his
                                         —15—



previous wage. This often leads to an inverted U—shaped path of raids over

the worker's lifetime. Few raids take place initially. Then there is a

flurry   of   activity that dies away rapidly. The shape of the time path of

raids depends in interesting ways upon the average levels of information in

the market, and upon the number of potential buyers. Additionally, the

complete time path of wages for movers and stayers is derived.14

      The difference between the two types of information is characterized in

the following way: Information that the firm obtains by itself with probabil-

ity P per round can be used in that round. In order to use inferential

information, it is necessary to wait one round.15 The informed trader gets a

head start and moves immediately. Those who learn the worker's product by

inference, only do so after the informed trader has made his move because it

is that move that tips off others.16

      To derive the complete dynamics, it is useful to consider first the time

path of raids on a worker with M > w1 where w1 is defined as the wage that

the current employer pays to unraided workers in round 1. Since, as will be

shown below, wT > w1, those workers remain susceptible to raids

throughout.

      In the first round, there is only one way that a raid can occur: One of

the N firms must make a discovery. The probability that this occurs is P

for each of the N firms so the expected number of raiding offers in round 1

is


(7)                              R(1)           = NP
                                        M>w1
      In round 2, things are more complicated. In round 1, there were three

relevant possibilities: there were no raids, there was exactly one raid, or

there was more than one raid.
                                           —16—



      Define p    1 —   p.    with probability      there were no raids in round 1

because no outsider was informed. In that case, round 2 is identical to round

1 and there are NP expected raids.

      If there was more than one informed firm in round 1, then the equilibrium

was that the worker's wage was driven up to M in competition. Consequently,

no subsequent raids occur.

      The most interesting case is when there was exactly one raid in round 1

and when the current firm, j, was also uninformed. This happens with

probability


                                         NPPN


      To allow for further generality, allow for a diffusion parameter that may

be less than 1: If one raid occurs in round 1 then N firms are informed via

inference at the beginning of round 2.17 The eN informed firms raid with

certainty, whereas the (1 — O)N        firms can still learn by discovery with

probability P. The expected number of raids on the high quality worker in

round 2 is


(8)                R(2)             = NNP + NPPN(ON + (1 — 0)Np]
                             M>w1
                                    = PNNP[l + N(P + 9(1 -   P))]

      Bound 3 is similar, but slightly different. If there were any raids in

round 1, then the wage rate for the worker was driven up to M by the end of

round 2 at the latest. Inference and imitation by others ensures this.8

      If there were no raids in either round 1 or 2, then round 3 is just like

round 1 so the expected number of raids is NP. This occurs with probability

2N
                                                      —17—



        Again the interesting case is when there was exactly one raid in round 2

(and therefore no raids in round 1). That occurs with probability

PNNPPN =    2N        and     yields      expected raids


                                                8N + (1    —   8)Np


Thus,    the total number of expected raids in round 3 is


                          R(3)                 = P2NNPt1   + N(P + 8(1 — P))]
                                     M> 2

In general,



         R(T)             =   ;(T—1)N(1          + N(P +       M   — P)))           for T > 2
                M > w1
(9)

                          =NP                                                       for t=1.


        Using (9), it is clear             that

(10) R(T)l
                M>w
                      —   R(r    —
                                     1)j M>w
                                                  =   [(t1         —   ;(t2JNp(1   + N(P + 8(1     —



                                                  for t3

The value of R(t) — R(T               —   1)     for T > 3         is always negative because P < 1.

This implies that beyond round 2, the expected number of raids declines as

time progresses.

        For R(2) — R(1),             the story is different:


(11)       R(2)               — R(1)                = NP((PN(l + N(P + 8(1 —       P)))   —
                                                                                              1]

                  M>w1                    M>w1
This is positive iff P1(l +                    N(P + 0(1   —   P))     > 1.

        Figure 1 simulates some raiding patterns for different values of N

and P.
                                       —18—



     When P = 1,    all learning occurs immediately and no raids occur beyond

round 1 (see panel 1). For high values of P, the pattern is exponential

(see panel 4). But for smaller values of P, an inverted U—shaped pattern

results (see panel 3). The reason is that in the first round, the only way

that a raid can occur is through independent discovery. But in round 2, raids

can occur either by discovery or by inference. Further, all subsequent rounds

have a lower expected number of raids because the likelihood of no earlier

discovery falls as the number of previous rounds increases.

     Also obvious is that an increase in N makes the number of raids in

later periods drop off more quickly (compare panel 5 to panel 3). This is

like introducing more information into the market.

     For very small values of P, raids are unlikely to occur so that hf e—

cycle variation in wages is likely to be smaller——age—earnings profiles are

flatter——in occupations where learning about worker ability is very difficult.

Stated alternatively, age—earnings profiles for "visible" jobs should be

steeper and display more variance across workers than those for less visible

jobs at equivalent skill levels. (Competition implies, however, that the

expected values of the profiles across the two occupations are the same for

similar workers.)

     Inverted U—shaped patterns of raids are possible for high quality

workers. The likelihood of the inverted U—shape increases with learning by

inference relative to discovery: 0, the parameter of diffusion has a clearly

positive effect on R(2)M        —               .   Also, sufficiently high P
                           >
                                    R(1)M   >

eliminates any possibility of inference because all firms learn through

discovery and react immediately (compare panel 6 to panel 5).
                                                     —19—



Stigma

       The previous discussion relates only to the high—abi)ity workers. But

what of the others in the firm? Related, what can the current firm infer from

the failure of some of its workers to receive outside offers and what is the

appropriate response in the multiperiod setting? Finally, what is the

aggregate pattern of raids and turnover for the entire labor force? These

issues are addressed in this section.

       First, it is necessary to determine the wage that the current firm offers

to all (uriraided) workers in round 1. If we allow the spot wage to prevail

during each round, then an equation analogous to (3) must hold. The only

difference is in the conditional probabilities. The probability that a worker

was not raided and that M > w1 is (1 —                                 where w, is the wage
                                                            w1)(PN),
that the current employer pays all unraided workers in round 1. The probabil-

ity that he was not raided and M < w1 is simply w1. So, in equilibrium,

                                             i
                     (1 _w1)PN                               ___________
(12)        w1 =             -N          {
                                                 2
                                                        +
                                                                               (wi/2]
                   (1 —           + w1                       (1 —          +
                          w1)P                                      w1)P
Solving (12) for w1 yields

                                                            -   1
(13)                                 w1 =           -N
                                                 (1/P ) — 1

Zero expected profits are earned in round 1.

       Similar relationships hold for later rounds. In any round t, workers

who remain with the firm at the end of the round fall into one of of two cate-

gories: The worker may have H < w so that no profitable raid is possible.

This happens with probability w. Alternatively, the worker has M >

but no outside firm has discovered this fact in the t periods. This happens

with probability (1 - wT)PNT. Again, in equilibrium, w must be chosen so

that w. equals the expected output of workers who are unraided through I
                                                       —20—




 periods. Thus, the analogue of equilibrium condition (12) in round t                            is
                                       -Nt
                           (1-w)p
                               t
                                                     1+wTi                  wT             w
 (14)              wI =                          r
                                                               1+                          r I
                               -NT                     2                     -NT
                          (1—w)p
                             I     +w I                                (1—w)p
                                                                           T
                                                                                 ÷wI        2


 The solution to (14) for             w is
                                                                   -   1
 (15)                                    WT =
                                                     (1/NT)        —   1



         Eq. (15) gives the evolution of wages for individuals who do not receive

 any alternative offers through t                periods.              Since w1 equals the expected
 output of a worker who is not raided through I rounds, it is also true that


 (16)                                                                                 —1
                       E(Munraided through I rounds) =
                                                                           (1/P   )
                                                                                      —1

        Eq. (16) is easily interpreted: It is easily shown that

                                             /       -NT
                                      1i1/p                1=1/2
                                             (1/pN1) —     1


If      P=   0    (so that P =   1),     the failure of a worker to be raided is

uninformative. No outsider could have any information so remaining unraided

carries no stigma. Thus, the expected level of M is 1/2, the same as the

unconditional expectation of M for the entire population.

        Conversely,

                                             /  -Nt
                                             11/p   —1             =0.
                                                 -
                                       p+1 (1/P 1) —           1


If P =       1   (so that P =   0),    then outsiders are always informed. Given any

choice of WT by the current firm, all workers with M > w1 are stolen away.

This implies that the remaining workers have M < w1. Under these circum-

stances the only w1 that does not result in losses for the current firm is

WI =    0.   Winner's curse operates at full force and the original firm takes

that into account in setting the initial wage. All workers are raided and
                                    —21—



each worker receives a wage equal to his marginal product. As P goes to 1,

the message and stigma associated with the failure to be raided grows

stronger.

     A number of implications follow immediately. First, and somewhat

trivially, the relation between observed wage and actual marginal product

becomes tighter, the higher is P. The more information that is had by

outsiders, the more often the current firm is forced to pay a worker his

marginal product. In the two extreme cases, when P = 0,      all workers were

paid wt = 1/2   so the distribution of ability has infinite variance relative

to the distribution of wages. When P = 1,   each worker is paid M so the

distribution of wages replicates the distribution of ability.

     Second, the expected value of output for unraided workers is lower in

later rounds than in early ones. Differentiating (16) with respect to T,

one obtains that19


                 at —                t
                   t — 3E(M unraided through r rounds)
                                                         <




The longer the duration during which the worker fails to receive an offer, the

lower is his expected value. Recall that there are two reasons that a worker

remains unraided: Rivals are uninformed or M < Wt. For any given w, the

proportion of workers who are unraided because of rivals' ignorance falls with

time since rivals are more likely to be informed as time progresses. Thus,

the conditional expectation of unraided workers' output falls over time so

must decline with t.

     This leads to an important implication: The quality of raided workers

falls over time. Initially, only the most able workers get outside offers.

Everyone seems to be going after the best workers. Uncertainty over ability,

makes them the bargains in the labor market. As w1 falls with T, i.e., as
                                        —22—



the firm updates its evaluation of the worker's worth, successively lower

ability workers become susceptible to raid. (Recently, firms who made job

offers to Harvard MBAS tied the salary offer inversely to the length of time

before acceptance. One interpretation is that the firms recognized that only

lower quality workers remain in the job market as time progresses and lower

the wage accordingly.)

     The claim that the best workers are raided first is a statement that is

made conditional upon observables. It does not imply, for example, that more

highly educated workers are raided first. It implies only that among those

with a given level of education, the best in the group are raided. This also

implies that not conditioning upon anything, the higher ability workers are

raided first across the entire population. The reason is that if ability is

given by y, then the estimate of y based on observable x's must have the

property that x's and the estimated residuals are uncorrelated. Since raids

are based upon residuals (all observed information having already affected the

initial wage offer), there is no correlation between raids and the observed

x's. High residual workers are raided and they are, on average, of higher

ability than the unraided ones.

     This result is another manifestation of the Peter Principle. The best

workers are stolen away or promoted out of the job. Those who remain are of

lower average quality so they appear "incompetent" relative to the entire

population of workers doing that job.

     The way that stigma operates depends upon the probability of an outside

offer. As already pointed out, if P is close to zero, then the failure to

receive an outside offer carries little informational content so the wages of

assembly line workers are likely to be less variable across workers than those

of research academicians. Since researchers publish their thoughts, P, the
                                           —23—



probability that an outsider learns of a worker's productivity is quite

high. But it is very unlikely that a star assembly line worker at GM is like-

 ly to be discovered by Ford. From (8), the expectation of M given no raid

in round 1 is likely to be closer to the unconditional expectation for

assembly line workers than for research economists. This is a step toward a

theory of occupation wage differentials,2° but more toward a theory of wage

dispersion within an occupation.

       Another wage differential is of interest. It is useful to examine how

the difference between wages of raided workers and those of unraided workers

varies with the likelihood of discovery, the number of potential employers,

and experience (P, N and 1). To do this, it is necessary to derive the

expected value for M for workers who are raided in round t.

       Workers who were raided in round t and not before fall into one of two

categories. Either they were susceptible to raid before period r, but were

undiscovered. This occurs with probability              _1(l — wT_l).        Or they have

just become susceptible to raid in round          I   because w1_1 > M >               This

occurs with probability (w11 - w1).          Thus, the expected output of workers

who are raided in round I is

(17)
                           ('r—l)N
                                                                           V +w t
                                                                           r t—1
    —  ( raided in
 EI =E(M
                                       1_1M+"1_1),2] + (w1— w)L                    2
           round I                     (T—1)N (1 —
                                                                                              fort>2
                                                                                                  —
                                     P
                                                      w11) + (w1 —   w1)

                  = (1                                                                 for 1= 1
                         +w1)/2

       Raided workers receive their marginal products (at the latest by the fol-

lowing round) so their average wage is also given by the R.H.S. of (17).

       It is difficult to characterize analytically the behavior of (17).

However, a series of simulations is informative and illustrates the importance

of stigma that results when one is unwanted by others. Table 2 presents the

results.
                                       -24—




    The first panel of table 2 sets P = .001    and N = 3.   This can be

thought of as the extreme asebiy_line_worker_ifl_a_big_threeaut0maker

case. (Actually, the number of firms is 4 = N + 1.)   Note that even after 15

rounds, the conditional expectation and wage of M for unraided workers is

only trivially different from the unconditional expectation of .5. The

failure of an assembly—line worker to be raided by another firm is not

informative because the probability that a high—quality worker will be

discovered by a rival firm is small.

    At the other extreme, in the last panel, is the case where P = 1.      Here,

number of firms is irrelevant because each outsider always has perfect if or—

mation. There is no equilibrium wage offer greater than zero that does not

result in losses to the current employer. Thus, w(T) = 0     and the entire

population is raided.21

     The research academician might fit somewhere in the middle. If the

number of rival firms equals 10 and P = .2    (panel 6), then by the beginning

of the third round, the expectation of unraided workers' output has fallen to

the lowest 3.4% of the ability distribution. If this characterizes the true

situation, it implies that outside offers are an extremely important signal.

Those who do not receive them are treated very differently from those who

do. E.g., the average wage of workers who are raided in round 1 is .62 as

compared with .034 for those unraided at the end of three rounds. (Of course,

the length of a round, although conceptually well defined, is difficult to

calibrate empirically. A round is that period during which information

remains private. whether that is a month or a year is an open question.)

     There is no monotonic relation that is independent of P between date of

turnover and the wage change that occurs with the job switch.   This can be

seen by comparing the "Difference" columns of table 2 when   P = .001, to that

column when P = .2   for a given N.22
                                          —25—



       It is now possible to put everything together so as to derive turnover

behavior. First, the total number of raids in any period T consists of the

si.n of raids of all groups subject to raid. For example, in round 1, the only

group that can be raided are those whose M > w1. The expected number of

raids on a worker in round 1 is


            R(1) = [Prob(M > w1)) [Expected number of raidsiM > w1)

                  =
                      (1-w1)NP.

       In round 2, two   groups are   subject to raids: those with M > w1            and

those with w2 < M < w1.

       Eq. (7) already provides the general formula for R(t)IM>w. It is

tedious to derive a similar formula for the group with               < M <           so it

is derived in the appendix and presented in (18):


(18)               < M < w1
           R(T)

                      =0                                             for t<t

                         (1_Pt)N                                     for t=t

                      = NPNt[P + (1_Pt)N(P + 0(1—?))]                for t = t+1


                      = NPP    1'tl + NC? + 0(1—P))]                 for r > t+1.


       Given (1) the total number of expected raids in any period T is the

probability weighted sum of raids on each of the groups. Thus:


         Total Expected Raids          ____      t
(19)     on workers of unknown
         quality in period T
                                       R(r) =
                                                t=1
                                                      (wi   —
                                                                w)R(r)   t
                                                                             < M <
                                                                                     t—1



where w0      1. The heaviest weight goes to the group with M > w1. All other
                                            —26—




 groups have decreasingly important probability weights in (19). This implies

 that the pattern observed for the labor market as a whole will closely

 resemble that of figure 1. But again, some simulations are instructive.

       First, it is interesting to compare the pattern of raids that workers in

 different categories experience. Figure 2 shows the pattern of raids on

workers with             < M < w_1 as t varies: the values of the parameters are
P =   .1,   N =   5,   e = 1.


      There are two patterns that stand out. First and most obvious, is that

for higher values of t, that is, for the group, say, with w5 < M < w4 as

opposed to w1 < M <.1 (panel 4 vs. panel 1), the raids start later. For

the group with w5 < M < w4, raids do not begin until the fifth round whereas

they begin in the first round for the group with         w1 < M < 1. Lower-quality

workers tend to be raided later in their careers.

      Second, the pattern changes as t increases. There is a tendency to get

more raids in the initial raiding period because information accumulates

before it becomes profitable to make a move. For example, consider an

individual with w10 < M < w9 (panel 5). It takes ten periods before the

wage that unraided workers receive drops low enough to make a raid attempt

successful. But during those ten periods, information accumulates on the

worker so that when the tenth period arrives, many are able to make a move.

      Of course, the effect of these spikes is likely to be extremely small in

the aggregate for two reasons: First, the number of workers in any given cell,

w < N < w,_1 is very small (except for t =         1).   Second, most workers are in

situations where P, the probability of being discovered, is also likely to

be low. So for example, in figure 2, panel 7, if P = .00 1, N =       io,   8   1


and t = 10,        the size of the spike is small——only .1 raids occur in period

10. With such a low P, inference is more important than discovery and the
                                     —27—



period during which most raids occur is period 11. But even there less than

one expected raid occurs. When we take into account that only w9 — w10 of

the workers are in this category, the observed effect is trivial.

     The entire picture is put together in figure 3. Figure 3 simulates equa-

tion (19) for different values of P, N, and 0. It represents the expected

pattern of raids on a worker of unknown quality over time. As such, it is the

stntt of raids on each group w < M < w_1 as t varies weighted by the

probability that the worker falls into that group. Since the probability that

a worker has M such that w, < M < 1, is largest among groups, the pictures

tend to be dominated by the pattern of raids on workers of that groups.

     Different patterns of raids are possible. The inverted U—shape is most

likely when 6 is close to 1 (so that inference is important), when P is

small (so discovery is unlikely), and when N is small (so that discovery is

unlikely). The exponentially declining pattern is most likely to occur when

0 is close to zero (cf. panel 8 to 7, 2 to 1, 4 to 3, and 6 to 5) so that

inference is unimportant, when P is large (cf. panels 3 to 5) so that

discovery is important, and when N is large (cf. panel 3 to 7 to 1) so that

discovery is important.

     This provides some simple implications. High turnover occupations are

those most likely to have high values of N and P. Both imply a tendency

toward exponentially declining raiding and turnover with time. In low

turnover occupations with few firms and little visibility (low N, low P),

the pattern of raiding and turnover is likely to be inverted U—shaped. (This

assumes that variations in 0 are small across occupations.)

     Stated alternatively, the pattern of raids allows the empiricist to

identify p, 0 and the length of the round. Of course, assumptions about the

shape of the distribution of M are crucial for identification.
                                               —28—



       The probability of turnover is similar, but not identical to the

probability of a raid. A raid is successful if and only if the current

employer is uninformed. The probability of turnover in round T on a worker

with Wt < M < wt_i is derived in the appendix and given by


(20) Prob. Turnover (t)              < M <
                                 t           t-1

               =0                                                                   for T<t

                   -t
                   P(1 —P )
                           -Nt
                                                                                    for T=t
                                   -N -t    -N(t—1)      -(r—1)
                   P-N(t—1) (1   — P )P + {NP       (1 — P      )(1 —       0)]
               =                                                                  for t>t+1.
                                 (1 —
                                               N         N
                                        (1 — 0) + (1 — 0) (1 —      pN )]
Then the probability of turnover for any randomly drawn worker is derived from

(20), weighted by the probability that w < M <


(21)     Prob. Turnover(t) =             (wt—1 — wt )(Prob. Turnover(T)     w < M <      )




II. Extensions and Further Implications


Wages and   Tenure:
       The relation of wages to tenure is not straightforward. Since it is the

best workers who are stolen away most rapidly, those young workers who remain

in their jobs are likely to be of lower quality. So, tenure and wages can be

negatively related. But in a sample of older workers, those who most recently

changed jobs are likely to have been raided later in life. They are the lower

quality workers so that tenure should be positively related to wages among

older workers. which effect dominates in a sample of the entire population is

ambiguous, but one implication is clear: The relation of tenure to wages

becomes more positive with age. I know of no evidence on this point.23
                                      —29—




Stigma and Unemployment:

      "Stigma" is often used to refer to workers who suffer spells of unemploy-

ment and find that subsequent demand for their services is adversely affected.

Indeed, there is a significant literature that attempts to analyze these

spells and to determine whether they are the result of inherent worker

heterogeneity or of the signalling effect of unemployment.24

      This paper focuses primarily on job changes without unemployment. How-

ever, if the current firm, j, is reinterpreted as the state of unemployment

and      is defined as the reservation wage, then the model applies to unem-

ployed workers as well. The interpretation of T is the length (or number)

of spells of unemployment. As the worker is "unraided" out of unemployment

for a longer period of time, wj falls and so does the average wage of raided

workers. Thus, individuals who leave the state of unemployment quickly (are

raided during initial rounds) have the highest expected wages (see table 2).

Those who are unemployed for longer periods have lower expected wages because

they are, on average, lower ability workers and their reservation wages are

lower on average.

      Lower values of P and N reduce the bite of stigma. Lower N is

interpreted as fewer potential buyers. Individuals who are unemployed during

a recession should not experience as large a wage depression following a given

spell of unemployment as those who are unemployed during an expansion. This is

illustrated in table 2 by comparing the path of wages for raided workers

(those who eventually become employed in this context) when P =   .01,   N = 3

to that when P = .01, N = 100.    The intuition is clear: When there are few

buyers in the market, little can be inferred from the failure of a particular

worker to be discovered by one.
                                       —30—



     Similarly, low values of P imply that unemployment should have small

effects on subsequent wages. Here P can be thought of as the probability

that a given buyer discovers a given worker. The value of P is low when

workers are not making themselves known to potential firms. Consequently, the

effect of being out of work, but in school or even on vacation, should be less

detrimental to future wages than that of being unemployed for the same period

of time while actively searching. Active searchers have higher P's so more

can be inferred about those who do not find jobs. Table 2 illustrates this

point as well. Compare the path of average wages of raided workers when

P = .001, N   3 to that when P =   .2,   N = 3.   Wages fall much more quickly

with unemployment in the latter case.



Shelf Life, Product Quality,
Product Prices, and Clearance Sales:

     The same model can be used to analyze the dynamics of product prices as

they relate to shelf life. Consider the problem facing the used—car salesman.

On average, he probably has better information than his customers about the

cars he sells. But on any given car, a buyer may actually know more about

that one car than the seller (P >      k'     but k ).   0).   Those cars that are

purchased most quickly tend to be the ones that are underpriced relative to

their value. The ones that remain on the lot are those that are overpriced

relative to their value.

     In the same way that firms infer that their unraided workers are lower

quality than the estimate at the beginning of a round, 80 the car dealer

learns that the cars that remain on the lot are lower quality than estimated.

At the beginning of each day, he sets the price of the car, w(t),          based upon

his evaluation of the observables: w(T) is the price below which he is

willing to keep the car. But w(t) falls with time on the lot. This is what
                                     —31—



clearance sales are about. Goods that remain on the shelf for a long period

of time are reduced in price to reflect the lower quality that consumers

attach to the less desirable color or style, which was not captured by initial

prices.

     Additionally, the comparative statics with respect to P, N and e are

appropriate in the product case as well. If P is high so that buyers are

well informed, price falls more rapidly with shelf life. In the wholesale

market where buyers are the retailers and are themselves well informed, prices

on goods that remain on the warehouse shelf should fall quickly with time,

relative to those that remain on the retailer's shelf. Additionally, when

N is low, price remains more invariant to shelf time. For example, the price

of unusual houses for which the number of buyers is few should not fall as

steeply with time on the market as more homogeneous houses.



III. Summary and Conclusions

     The focus of this paper is on turnover that occurs without unemployment.

Job turnover and the evolutIon of wages can be related to the size of the

market, the probability that a worker's ability level is discovered, and the

speed with which information travels through the market. The dispersion of

wages, slopes of age—earnings profiles, and the force of stigma are all

affected by these variables. A large number of buyers and easily identifiable

ability imply that stigma operates quickly and that the best workers are

raided first so that workers who do not receive outside offers find themselves

treated very differently from those who do.

     The Peter Principle, that workers are promoted to their level of incompe-

tence, is an implication. Since the best workers are stolen or promoted out

of the job early, the older ones who remain and do not move further up the job
                                     —32—



ladder are low ability relative to the population of workers doing that job.

    As a consequence of selective raiding, firms are left with lower than

average quality workers. This insures that workers always choose to be

employed by the best informed firm because that firm can offer the highest

wage. This is true, independent of worker ability. Even low ability workers

prefer to work at firms with the best information about worker ability. Thus,

initial employers may appear to screen for the rest of the market.

    Although unemployment is not the primary focus, a reinterpretation of the

model provides implications for unemployed workers as well. Specifically,

those who are unemployed during recession and those who do not actively seek

jobs are likely to experience less adverse effects from the unemployment.

     Finally, the model can be extended to examine product marketing prac-

tices. In particular, clearance sales and the general relationship between

shelf life and product price can be understood. The prices of wholesale goods

should fall more rapidly with time on the shelf than prices of retail goods.

Similarly, the prices of heterogeneous goods in these markets should be more

rigid with respect to time on the shelf.
                                             —33—




                                           APPENDIX

                  MATRIX OF GENERALIZED STRATEGIES AND RESULTS



    The following matrix characterizes all possibilities when firms can be
informed of the workers' ability, but also of other firms' beliefs. Define

"cognizant" to mean that the firm knows whether or not the rival firm is

informed. In each box is j or k, which tells where the worker ends up,

and at what wage w. The number os a code for the discussion that follows.




    ——                     INFORMED                                   UNINFORMED
                                      NOT                                           NOT
    I             COG                 COG                    COG                    COG
    N Cl                       2                    9                      10
    F 0            j                   k                      j                      k
    O G
    R            w=M               w=w.+€                   w=M                 ww.+C
    M
    E NOT3                     4                      11                   12
    DC             j                   k                      j                      k
        0
k       G       w=w. + e           w=w.J    +   c          w=w. +               =w.j      +
        —   5
                       ,




                               6                      13
                                                                  D

                                                                           14
    U              j                   j                      j                      j
    N C
    I 0         w=w.                  w=w.                  w=w.                   w=w.
    N G
    F       7                  8                      15                   16
    ONOT           j                   j                      j                      j
    R C
    M 0         w=w.                  w=w.                  w=w.                   w=w.)
    E C
    D
                                          —34—



Discussion:

 1: Both j and k know everything.             j matches every offer from k so w

      is driven to   M and the worker stays at j.

 2: k knows that j        is not cognizant.      j    can either try to deter any

      potential raids, but to do so requires          w =       M.    It is better for j to

      stick to w =        since     < 1   and         = M        results in zero quasi—
                     Wi
      rents. Thus,    k   picks off the worker at                + C.
                                                           Wi
 3: k is informed, but does not know that j                is.       aids    at w + C. Since
      j   is cognizant,    j recognizes this as a true               offer   and matches,

      retaining the worker.

 4: k raids at w +        C, but   j does not know if threat is serious.

      Optimal response is to maintain w =              Worker goes to k.
                                                 w.
 5. k is uninformed and realizes that j is informed. j maintains w
                                                                                            w
      since this provides k with no information, retains worker. No raid by

      k at w > w is profitable.

 6: No raid by k at w > w is profitable.

 7: Same as 6.

 8: Same as 6.

 9: Although j is uninformed, he knows that k is informed. He infers M

      from k so worker stays at M at          w =     M.        (No bluffing strategy is

      more profitable for k since M is the same at both firms.)

10; k is informed, but does not know that                  is. So k's optimal strategy

      is to bid w +   C. Since     j is cognizant, this is matched and worker

      stays at j.

11:   j's optimal strategy is to ignore the worker's claim of an outside

      offer, so k gets worker at w1 +       .
12:   Same as 11.
                                                   —35—



 13: Not profitable to raid at w > w so worker stays at j.

 14:    Same as 13.

 15: Same as 13.

 16: Same as 13.



        With the assumption that all informed firms are cognizant and no

uninformed firms are cognizant, the matrix collapses to boxes 1, 7, 10, 16.




                                  THE DERIVATION OF EQUATIONS



Equation 18

        Consider the group with M such that w < M < w_1. No successful raid

can occur in rounds 1 through t —              1   because an uninformed current employer

pays w1 > w > M for T             < t.. Thus,


                           R(T)
                                  w< M < w1        =0 for t<t

During the t    <t     rounds, however, firms are acquiring information on the

worker. Thus in round t, the probability that a given firm will have become

informed by then is (1 —          pt)•      Since there are N firms, there are

N(1 —   pt)   raids in round t via discovery. Thus,



                    R(T)
                           w<M<
                            t
                                wt—1          = N(1 —     pt)   for   T   =   t

       Now, in period T =         t+   1,   either one raid occurred in period t, no

raids   occurred,   or more than one raid occurred. If no raids occurred, then
                                            —36—




t + 1 is like t. The probability of no raid in t is Nt• This branch

yields NP raids in t + 1. The probability that there was exactly one raid

in t is N(1 — pt)pNt because there are N ways to have one firm informed
and the N others uninformed. If that occurs, then ON firms learn by

inference and (1 — 0)         still may learn by discovery. So on this branch,

there are

                                     N[P + 8(1     —
                                                       P)j

                                                                    /
expected raids. Thus,



   R(T) w< M <            = NPNtEP + (1 —    Pt)N(P + 8(1 — P))]              for     ¶ =   t + 1.

For periods t > t + 2, a raid can only occur if there was no or one raid in

T —   1. The probability that there is no raid in T —                   1   is n1)• This
gives rise to NP expected raids in T. If there was exactly one raid in

¶ — 1,   which happens with probability NPPtl), then this gives rise to

ON + (1 — 8)NP       raids. Thus,



      R(t)                =      (T1)N[1 +   N(P + 8(1       —   P)))       for       > t + 2
                                                                                    T —
             wt<M < w_1


So equation (18) is derived.




Equation 20

       If ¶ > t such that Wt < M < w_1, then the probability of turnover is

zero since no raids occur.

       If T =   t,    then a turnover occurs if f the current employer is uninformed

and at least one outsider is informed. This occurs with probability
                                                        —37—



                                            pt(1 - pNt)


        If t > t + 1, then turnover can occur because no turnover occurred

through I — 1,        at least one outsider becomes informed in I and the current

employer remains uninformed. This occurs with probability

                                          -N(T—1)               -N -T
                                       P            (1—P)P

Plternatively, exactly one raid could have occurred in T —                           1    and that firm

could have "forgotten" M which occurs with probability (1 — 0)                               while

another firm learns it either by inference or discovery. That probability is




        NPN('nl)(l —       (T—1))(,   —    0)[(1    — (1 — 0)N) + (1 —                   — N))
         exactly one raid         raider someone else                     no one infers but
             in I —    1        forgets             infers                someone else discovers



Thus,


(20) Prob. Turnover(T) < M <                            =   0                                    for r < t
                                                    1

                                                              -Nt
                                                         -t
                                                        =P(1-P  )                                for T=t
        =   N(T—1)(1 —      N)T   + [N(T1)(1 — (r—1))(1                    —
                                                                               0)]
                                                                                            for r >— t+1.
                   [1 — (1 — 0)N + (1 — $)N(1 —                     N)]
                                      —38—



                                   Footnotes



     *Helpful comments were provided by Dennis Canton, David Card, Richard

Freeman, Merton Miller, Melvin Reder, John Riley, Sherwin Rosen, and Robert

Topel. Work on this paper was supported in part by the National Science

Foundation.

     See Phelps (1970), for a collection of these early papers.

     2See Doeringer and Piore (1981), Thurow (1972),

     3The most notable model of wage determination is Becker (1975). Others

include Lazear (1979), Lazear and Rosen (1981), and Harris and Holrnstrorn

(198—). The model that most effectively deals with job turnover in the

absence of unemployment is Jovanovic (1979). Although the theory of specific

human capital attempts to integrate wage dynamics with labor turnover, too

much indeterminacy remains to have a very informative set of predictions.

This is rectified somewhat by the work of Kuratani (1973), Hashimoto (1979),

Hashimoto and Yu (1980) and Hall and Lazear (1982).

     4See Peter (1969).

     5All that this requires is a small moving cost.

     6See, for example, Wilson (1977), Milgrom and Weber (1982), and Riley and

Samuelson (1981) for a more complete discussion.

     7mis ignores any firm—specific aspects of the problem.

     8See Harris and Townsend [1981] for a discussion of incentive

compatibility and invertibility.

     9This is a direct result of the discrete nature of information. In a

more continuous setup, it is possible that w(M) with w > 0 might serve a

deterrence role. But this complicates the problem greatly without any obvious

changes in implications.
                                             —39—



       0A fixed w is also least susceptible to moral hazard problems where

the firm tries to deceive the worker into believing that M is low. Also, it

best masks j's knowledge from k.

       That w >      0    is obvious since       1 -    <   I     so both 1/(1 —      and

111(1 —         exceed 1. It is also true that w < 1/2. To see this, define

x E   1/(1 —       and assume the opposite: Then


                                     —    1)/(x   — 1) >
                                                            1/2

or

                                         > l/2x + 1/2

This implies

                                   o >       — 2x + 1


But x2 — 2x + 1     has a mm. at x =         1    where the value of x2 — 2x + 1 =      0.
Thus, a contradiction is obtained, so w < 1/2

               ignores the kind of bargaining problem between worker and firm

that t'brtensen (1978) discusses. Rubinstein (1982) solves that problem when

the value of the good is known to both parties, but the essence of the problem

is that even if the worker knows M, and the seller knows that the worker

knows M, there is uncertainty as to whether the firm knows M. Recall that

the firm is only informed          of the time so (1 —                 the time only knows
                                                                  P)
the distribution and w is the optimum under these circumstances. This

means that 1             of the time, a worker who demands w > w will be let go.

For most reasonable values of             (likely to be small), it is optimal for the

worker merely to accept Wj. There are two caveats: First, if the worker

costlessly and immediately can obtain another job that pays                    then all

workers with M > w try to bargain. Second, if the demand by the worker

conveys the appropriate information to the firm about M, it may pay to
                                                                         4
                                            —40—




bargain even if the firm is uninformed (see the discussion by Fudenberg and

Tirole (1983) on the effects of adding a period to a game). Note also that

the higher is M, the more the worker has to gain so the more likely is the

worker to demand w > w.

       3See Grossman (1976), Grossman and Stiglitz (1976, 1980), Canton

(1982), and Gould and Verrecchia (1983) for examples of drawing inferences

from observable market variables.

       14The same kind of udel can be used to explain "runs." One individual

makes a discovery, and the rest imitate his behavior. Similarly, the ideas

here are closely related to the literature on technological innovation and its

diffusion across firms.

       5The length of the round is defined to be that period over which

information remains private.

       16The same mechanism is at work in the market for firms, where takeover

attempts tip off other potential buyers of the firm. As such, this framework

can be used to explain takeover bid behavior as well (see Bradley, Desai, and

Kim (1982), and Jarrell (1983)).

       17This is similar to technology diffusion as analyzed by Spence (1982).

Griliches (1982) discusses recent work on the issue. Telser (1982), who

analyzes innovation, constructs an alternative model of technical change where

diffusion of information plays a secondary role.

       Assume 6 sufficiently large so that the probability that no firm

learns by inference is close to zero.

       9Proof   that   -   <   0. Define x(t)           (1/P ).   Then


                                       —
                                           w(T)    •   ax(r)
                                  at       x(T)

Now,
                                             —41—



                                   =   P(n              P)(-N) > 0


so the sign of        is the same as that of                             .   Also,

                             1 —             1/2    —       1/7    1/2
                                    1/2
                        ax                              2
                                        (x—1)
To see this, define Y E x          Then the numerator is positive if f


                                       2 >   y     +    l/y
which is a contradiction for any y > 0.

     20See the pioneering work by Reder (1955) for an early attempt to explain

differences in wages across occupations.

             is the limiting case. If P = 1,                      then it is impossible for the

current employer to be uninformed.

     22There are a number of papers that examine empirically what happens to

wages when a job change is made. The general finding seems to be that wage

change on a job switch is greater for younger workers and often negative for

older ones. See, for example, Borjas and Rosen (1980), Bartel (1980), Bartel

and Bor-ias (1981).

     23A complication is that tenure is also related to unemployment, with

which the model only deals as an afterthought. For example, workers who

suffer frequent spells of unemployment may have the lowest levels of tenure

among all workers and they are likely to be the least able group.

     24See, for example, Ellwood (1982); also Clark and Summers (1982) and

Flinn and Hecknian (1983).
                                      —42—



                                  References



Bartel, Ann P. "Earnings Growth on the Job and Between Jobs," Economic

        Inquiry 18 (January 1980): 123—37.

Bartel, Ann P., and Borjas, George 3. "Wage Growth and Job Turnover: An

        Empirical Analysis," in S. Rosen, ed., Studies in Labor Markets.

        Chicago: University of Chicago Press for National Bureau of Economic

        Research, 1981.

Becker, Gary S. Human Capital: A Theoretical and Empirical Analysis, with

        Special Reference to Education, 2d ed., New York: Columbia University

        Press for National Bureau of Economic Research, 1975.

Borjas, George, and Rosen, Sherwin. "Income Prospects and Job Mobility of

        Young Men," in R. Ehreriberg, ed., Research in Labor Economics, vol. 3.

        Connecticut: JAI Press, 1980, pp. 159—83.

Bradley, Michael A., and Desai, E. Han KJ.nn.   "The Rationale Behind Interfirm

        Tender Offers: Information or Synergy?" Unpublished manuscript,

        University of Michigan, 1982.

Canton, Dennis W. "Planning and Market Structure," in John J. McCall, ed.,

        The Economics of Information and Uncertainty. Chicago: University of

        Chicago Press, 1982.

Clark, Kim, and Summers, Larry. "The Dynamics of Youth Unemployment," in

        Richard Freeman and David Wise, eds., The Youth Labor Market Problem:

        Its Nature, Causes, and Consequences. Chicago: University of chicago

        for, National Bureau of Economic Research, 1982.

Doeringer, p., and Piore, M. Internal Labor Markets and Manpower Analysis.

        Lexington, MA: Heath, 1981.
                                     —43—



Eliwood, David T. "Teenage Unemployment: Permanent Scars or Temporary

        Blemishes?" in Richard Freeman and David Wise, eds., The Youth Labor

        Market Problem: It Nature, Causes, and Consequences. Chicago:

        University of Chicago for National Bureau of Economic Research, 1982.

Flinn, Christopher, and Heckman, James. "Are Unemployment and Out of the

        Labor Force Behaviorally Distinct Labor Force States?" Journal of

       Labor Economics 1 (January 1983): 28—49.

Fudenberg, Drew, and Tirole, Jean. "Sequential Bargaining with Incomplete

        Information," R. E. Stud. L(2), 161 (April 1983): 221—47.

Gould, John P., and Verrecchia, Robert E. "The Specialist as Economic Agent,"

       unpublished manuscript, University of Chicago, 1983.

Griliches, Z. "Patents, R & D, and the Private Value of Knowledge: Explora-

        tions in the Economics of Technical change," Final Report to National

        Science Foundation, 1982.

Grossman, Sanford. "On the Efficiency of Competitive Stock Markets Where

       Traders Have Diverse Information," Journal of Finance 31 (1976): 573—

        85.

Grossman, Sanford, and Stiglitz, Joseph. "Information and Competitive Price

        Systems," American Economic Review 66 (1976): 246—53.

__________    "On the Impossibility of Informationally Efficient Markets,"

        American Economic Review 70 (1980): 393—408.

Harris, Milton, and Holmstrom, Bengt. "Ability, Performance, and Wage

       Dynamics," Review of Economic Studies, forthcoming?

Harris, MiLton, and Townsend, Robert. "Resource Allocation under Asymmetric

        Information," Econometrica 49 (January 1981): 33—64.

Hashimoto, Masanori. "Bonus Payments, On-the—Job Training, and Lifetime

       Employment in Japan," Journal of Political Economy 87 (October 1979):

        1086—1104.
                                      —44—




Hashimoto, Masanori, and Yu, Ben. "Specific Capital, Employment Contracts,

        and Wage Rigidity," Bell Journal of Economics (Autumn 1980): 536—49.

Jarrell, G. "Do Acquirees Benefit from Corporate Acquisitions?" Unpublished

       manuscript, University of chicago, March 1983.

Jovanovic, Boyan. "Job Matching and the Theory of Turnover," Journal of

        Political Economy 87 (October 1979): 972—90.

Kuratani, Masatoshi. "The Theory of Training, Earnings, and Employment: An

        Application to Japan." Unpublished Ph.D. Dissertation, Columbia

        University, 1973.

Lazear, Edward P. "Why Is There Mandatory Retirement?" Journal of Political

        Economy 87 (December 1979): 1261—64.

Lazear, Edward P., and Posen, Sherwin. "Rank—Order Tournaments as Optimum

        Labor contracts,"   Journal of Political Economy 89 (1981): 841—64.

Milgrom, Paul R., and Weber, Robert 3. "A Theory of Auctions and Competitive

        Bidding," Econometrica 50 (September 1982): 1089—1122.

Mortensen, D. "Specific Capital and Labor Turnover," Bell Journal of

        Economics 9 (1978): 572—86.

Peter, Lawrence. The Peter Principle. New York: William rrow and Co.,

        1968.

Phelps, B., et al. Microeconomic Foundations of Employment and       Inflation
        Theory. New York: Norton, 1970.

Reder, Melvin W. "Theory of Occupational Wage Differentials," merican

        Economic Review45 (December 1955): 833—52.

Riley, JOhn., and Samuelson, W. "Optimal     Auctions,"   American Economic Review

        71 (1981): 381—92.

Rithinstein, A. "Perfect Equilibrium in a Bargaining Model," Econometrica 50

        (Year): 97—110.
                                       —45—




Spence, A. Michael. "Cost Reduction, Competition and Industry Performance,"

          unpublished manuscript, Harvard University, 1982.

Telser, Lester G. "A Theory of Innovation and Its Effects," Bell Journal of

          Economics 13 (spring 1982): 69—92.

Thurow, Lester. "Education and Economic Equality," The   Public   Interest 28

          (Summer 1972): 68—81.

Wilson,   1bert. "A Bidding ?bdel of Perfect competition," Research in
          Economic Studies 4 (1977): 511—18.
                                 TABLE 2
                                    Average Wage of
                                    Worker Raided in
Round                     W(t)          Round CT)      Difference

P     .001, N = 3
             1           .4996             .7498         .2502
            2            .4992             .7496         .2504
             3           .4989             .7494         .2506
            4            .4985             .7492         .2508
            5            .4981             .7491         .2509
            6            .4978             .7489         .2511
             7           .4974             .7487         .2513
            8            .4970             .7485         .2515
             9           .4966             .7483         .2517
            10           .4962             .7481         .2519
            11           .4959             .7479         .2521
            12           .4955             .7477         .2522
            13           .4951             .7476         .2524
            14           .4947             .7474         .2526
            15           .4944             .7472         .2528

P =   .01,       N = 3
             1           .4962             .7481         .2519
             2           .4925             .7462         .2537
             3           .4887             .7442         .2555
             4           .4849             .7423         .2574
             5           .4812             .7403         .2592
             6           .4774             .7384         .2610
             7           .4736             .7365         .2628
             8           .4699             .7345         .2646
             9           .4661             .7326         .2664
            10           .4624             .7306         .2682
            11           .4586             .7287         .2700
            12           .4549             .7267         .2718
            13           .4512             .7248         .2736
            14           .4474             .7228         .2754
            15           .4437             .7209         .2772

P =   .2,    N      3
             1           .4171             .7085         .2915
             2           .3386             .6397         .3011
             3           .2681             .5635         .2954
             4           .2077             .4832         .2755
             5           .1579             .4028         .2449
             6           .1183             .3268         .2084
             7           .0876             .2585         .1709
             8           .0643             .2000         .1357
             9           .0469             .1519         .1051
            10           .0340             .1137         .0798
            11           .0246             .0842         .0596
            12           .0177             .0617         .0440
            13           .0127             .0450         .0322
            14           .0091             .0326         .0235
            15           .0066             .0235         .0170
                                  Average Wage of
                                  Worker Raided in
Round                      W(t)     Round (T)        Difference

P = .001, N = 100
          1            .4875           .7437              .2563
          2            .4750           .7369              .2619
          3            .4625           .7299              .2674
          4            .4501           .7230              .2728
          5            .4378           .7160              .2782
          6            .4255           .7089              .2834
          7            .4133           .7018              .2885
          8            .4013           .6947              .2935
          9            .3893           .6876              .2983
         10            .3775           .6805              .3030
         11            .3658           .6733              .3075
         12            .3543           .6662              .3119
         13            .3429           .6590              .3161
         14            .3317           .6518              .3201
         15            .3207           .6446              .3239

P =   .01, N =   100
          1            .3769           .6885              .3115
          2            .2680           .5701              .3022
          3            .1813           .4420              .2607
          4            .1182           .3211              .2029
          5            .0750           .2207              .1457
          6            .0467           .1453              .0985
          7            .0288           .0928              .0640
          8            .0176           .0581              .0405
          9            .0107           .0359              .0252
         10            .0065           .0220              .0155
         11            .0040           .0134              .0095
         12            .0024           .0082              .0058
         13            .0015           .0050              .0035
         14            .0009           .0030              .0021
         15            .0005           .0018              .0013

P =   2, N > 1
          1            0               .5                 .5
          2            0               .5                 .5
          3            0               .5                 .5
          4            0               .5                 .5
          5            0               .5                 .5
          6            0               .5                 .5
          7            0               .5                 .5
          8            0               .5                 .5
          9            0               .5                 .5
         10            0               .5                 .5
         11            0               .5                 .5
         12            0               .5                 .5
         13            0               .5                 .5
         14            0               .5                 .5
         15            0               .5                 .5
                             Average Wage of
                             Worker Raided in
Round                 W(t)     Round (t)        Difference

P     .001, N = 10
          1          .4987        .7494              .2506
          2          .4975        .7487              .2512
          3          .4962        .7481              .2519
          4          .4950        .7475              .2525
          5          .4937        .7468              .2531
          6          .4925        .7462              .2537
          7          .4912        .7456             ..2543
          8          .4900        .7450              .2550
          9          .4887        .7443             .2556
         10          .4875        .7437             .2562
         11          .4862        .7431             .2568
         12          .4850        .7424             .2574
         13          .4837        .7418             .2580
         14          .4825        .7412             .2587
         15          .4812        .7405             .2593

P =   .01, N   10
          1          .4874        .7437             .2563
          2          .4749        .7368             .2619
          3          .4624        .7298             .2675
          4          .4499        .7228             .2729
          5          .4375        .7158             .2783
          6          4252         .7087             .2835
          7          .4130        .7016             .2886
          8          .4008        .6945             .2936
          9          .3889        .6873             .2985
         10          .3769        .6801             .3032
         11          .3652        .6730             .3077
         12          .3537       .6657              .3121
         13          .3423       .6585              .3163
         14          .3310       .6513              .3203
         15          .3200       .6411              .3241

P     .2, N = 10
          1          .2468       .6234              .3766
         2           .0970       .3302              .2332
          3          .0340       .1340              .1000
         4           .0114       .0475              .0361
         5           .0038       .0160              .0122
         6           .0012       .0053              .0041
         7           .0004       .0017              .0013
         8           .0001       .0006              .0004
         9           .0000       .0002              .0001
        10           .0000       .0001              .0000
        11           .0000       .0000              .0000
        12           .0000       .0000              .0000
        13           .0000       .0000              .0000
        14           .0000       .0000              .0000
        15           .0000       .0000              .0000
                                                             Figure   1
                  Panel 1                                                                      Panel 4
P=i          N= 5   t= 1  theta— 1
r.,und=      1  rajds 5.000                                               P—   .5       N— 3   t— I    theta—        1
rcur,d= 2 raids— 0.000                                                    round     1     rjd— 1.500
ro..ird= 3 raids— 0.000                                                   round— 2        raids— 0.750
r.'ur,d' 4 raids= 0.000                                                   round— 3        raids— 0.094          *4
r''und 5              raids— 0.000                                        round-    4     raids— 0.012          *
round— £              raids= 0.000                                        round— 5 raids- 0.001                 *
round 7               raids- 0.000                                        round— 6 raids— 0.000                 *
 o.irti      fl       raids= 0.000                                        round— 7 raids— 0.000                 *
rc'und= 9             raIds— 0.000                                        round— 8 raids— 0.000                 *
rour,d= 10            raids 0.000                                         round 9 raids— 0.000                 *
  c'ur,&i1 I          raids— 0.000                                        round—jO raIds— 0.000                *
r:_r,d=12             raIds- 0.000                                        round—li raids— 0.000                *
round=13              raids— 0.000                                        round—j2        raid=
                                                                                          0.000                *
rour.ci= 14           raids 0.000                                         round=13 raids— 0.000                *
rourd15 ralds                  0.000                                      round=14 ralds= 0.000                *
                           Panel 2                                        round-iS raids— 0.000                *
     .001             N—   3   t=   1     theta
                                                                                               Panel   5
,:,und       I        raids— 0.003          *                             P—.1          N—20 t—1           theta
ro'.rd 2              raids 0.012           *                             round— 1        raids— 2.000
rc.und= 3             raids 0.012           *                                                                  *44*4*
                                                                          round— 2        raIds— 5. 106
rour,d= 4             raids— 0.012          *                             round— 3
round— S              raids— 0.012          *                                             ridç= 0.621          4*
tound= 6              raid= 0.012           *
                                                                          round— 4       rjds 0.075            4
rour,d— 7             raids— 0.012          *
                                                                          round- S       rajd= 0.009           *
rour,d= 0             raids— 0.012          *                             round— 6 rajd— 0.001                 *
r,:ur,d—     9        raids— 0.012          ft
                                                                          round— 7 raids— 0.000
                                                                          round 8 raids- 0.000
                                                                                                               *
rc.und10                                                                                                       ft
                      raids— 0.012          *                             round— 9 raids— 0.000                *
r':.ncj— Ii           raids— 0.012                                        round—lO rald— 0.000
                      raids— 0.012          *                                                                  *
rc.'tnd= 13           raid= 0.012           *                             roundj1 raids— 0.000                 *
                                                                          rour,d=j2 raids— 0.000               N
rcir,d— 14            raids— 0.012          *                             round—j3 raids— 0.000               *
rund=15 raid= 0.012                         *                             round—14 raids 0.000                *
                           Panel    3
                                                                          round—iS raids— 0.000               *
P=   .   1       N—    3     t= 1       theta—   1
                                                                                               Panel 6
round—       I        raids    0. 300       *4*4*4                        P—.1          N=20     t—i       theta         I
rcund 2 raids= 0.875                        ************.*                round— 1       raids— 2.000          *44*4*
                                                                                                                     .
ro.ind 3 raIds— 0.638                       ***********                   round— 2       raids— 1. 167         *4*
round— 4              r*id— 0.465           4*4*4*4*                      round— 3 raIds— 0. 142               *
round=       S        raids 0.339           ******                        round— 4 raids— 0.017                *
rourd 6               raids 0. 247          *****                         round— S raids= 0.002                *
rour.d 7              raids 0. 180          ****                          round— 6 raids- 0.000                *
p'ound= 8
round
rnund10
        9
                      raids—   0. 131
                      raids— 0.096
                      raids    0.070
                                            *
                                            4*4
                                            **
                                                                          round— 7 raids— 0.000
                                                                          round— B raIds— 0.000
                                                                          round- 9 raids— 0.000
                                                                                                               *
                                                                                                               *
                                                                                                               4
roundji               raids    0.051        *                             round—jO raids— 0.000               *
rour,d=12             raids    0.037        *                             roundlj raids— 0.000                *
roundrj3              raids—   0.027        4                             round—12 raids 0.000                *
rotr,d—j4             raids    0.020        *                             round—13 ralds= 0.000               *
rc.ur,d15             ralds    0.014        *                             rcund—14 raids— 0.000               *
                                                                          round—IS raids— 0.000               *
                                                                                                                     Figure        2
                       Panel         1                                                                    Panel      4                                                 Panel        7
13=   . 1       N= 5        t=    1   theta 1                                          N   1
                                                                                           .  N 5   t 5     theta                  1                         P. .001       N.: 10   t   10   thata
                                                                                       round 1 raids= 0.000                                                 round— 1                                      1
rouncfr     I       raids        0.500     ft**ft*ft
                                                                                       round 2 raids 0.000
                                                                                                                                                                           raids.: 0.000
round       2       raids        1.771      ftftftftftft*ftftftftftft*ft*ftft                                                                               round— 2       raids— 0.000
round       3       raids        1.046      *ft**ftftft*ftftft                         round 3 raids 0.000                                                  round— 3       raids— 0.000
            4       raids        0.610      ***ft***                                   round 4 raids 0.000                                                   round.: 4 raids— 0.000
round
rouncl      5       raids        8.365      ****                                       round— 5 raids 2.048                   **************s******          round— 5 raids— 0.000
            6       raidc        0.215      ft**                                       round= 6 raids 0.771                   **s****ft                     round.: 6 raids.: 0.000
rc.und
                    raids=       0.127                                                 round= 7 raids 0.127                   **                            rottnd 7 raids.: 0.000
rc.uncl
rourid 8
            7
                    raids        0.075      *                                          round 8 raidr 0.075                    *                             round.: 8 raids.: 0.000
rounr1' 9           raids        0.044      ft                                         round 9 raids  0.044                   ft                            round.: 9 raids— 0.000
roundlO             raids        0.026       ft                                        round.:10 raids—
                                                                                                      0.026                                                 round.:10 raids.: 0.100
rounclll            raids        0.015       ft                                        roundll raids              0.013       *                             round.:!! raids= 0.910
                                                                                                                                                                                             ft
                                                                                                                                                                                             ftftftftft
                    raids        0.009                                                 round12 raids              0.009                                     round.:12 raids.: 0.099
ro'jndlE                                                                                                                      *
                                             ft
                                                                                                                                                                                             ft
,'onndl3            raids        0.005       ft                                        round.13 raids.:           0.005                                     round.:13 raids.: 0.098          ft
r.:und14            raids        0.003       ft                                        roundlk raids              0.003                                     round=14 raids— 0.097            ft
touncllS            raids=       0.002       ft                                        roundis raids.: 0.002                  *                             round=j5 raids.: 0096            ft
                       Panel          2                                                                   Panel 5
 1'=.l            N=5 t=2 thetal                                                       N.!
                                                                                       round=   1
                                                                                                    N5       t 10
                                                                                                        raids 0.000
                                                                                                                    theta
 round             ralds= 0.000
                                ftftft *ft*ft ftft ft
                1
                                                                                       round    2       raids 0.000
 rcund      2      raids 0.950
 rotinci 3 raide                  1.831      ftftft ftftftftftftftftftftftftft ft*ft   round    3       raids 0.000
 round          4   raids'       0.618        *ftftftftftft                            round 4          raids 0.000
 rc'und 5 raids 0.365                         *ftftft                                  round    S raids           0.000
 rn'ind 6 raids' 0.215                        ftft*                                    round    6 raids           0.000
 rcund 7 raids 0. 127                         ftft                                     round= 7   raids=          0.000
 rottnd 8 raids 0.075                         *                                        round S    raids—          0.000
                                                                                       round 9 raids 0.000
 round 9 raids 0.044
 roundlO ralds 0.026                          **                                       roundlO raids 3.257
                                                                                       roundll raidwe 0.086                   *
 rounct"ll raids 0.015                        *
                                                                                       roundl2 raidr 0.009                    *
 roundl2 raids 0.009                          *
                                                                                       roundl3 raids 0.005                    *
 rcundl3 raids 0.005                          *
                                                                                       roundlk raids 0.003                    *
 rcur.d14 raids 0.003                         *
                                                                                       roundls raids 0.002                    *
    and15 raid 0.002                          *
              Panel 3                                                                                        Panel   6
  N  .1          N= 5    t= 3    theta                                                     .1       N    5       t= 14    theta=       i
  rnund         I raids 0.000                                                          round= 1         raids— 0.000
 rc.und= 2         ralds   0.000                                                       rourid= 2        raids=.   0.000
  rounri        3    ralds=r 1.355                ftftftftftftftftftftftftftft         round— 3         rat ds    0.000
  round= 4           raids   1.498                ftftftft*ftftftftftftftftftft        round=   4       raids= 0.000
  rouncJ 5           ralds        0.365           *ftftft                              round 5          raids.. 0.000
  rcuncl 6           raids        0.215           ft *ft                               round= 6         raids— 0.000
  ro'ind 7           raids        0. 127          **                                   round= 7         raids= 0.000
  round 8            raids        0.075           *                                    round.: 8        raids— 0.000
  ,'niipicj= 9       raids  0.044                 *                                    round.: 9 raids.: 0.000
  rc'undlO           raids= 0.026                 *                                    rour,d.:IO raids= 0.000
  rc'undll           raids= 0.015                 *                                    round=11 raids= 0.000
  rcurid=12          raids  0.009                 *                                    round.:12 raids— 0.000
  roundrl3           raids  0.005                 *                                    rouncj=13 raids— 0.000
  round=14           raids= 0.003                 *                                    round=14 raIds.: 3.856
  round=15 rajds            0.002                 *                                    round—iS raids— 0.012                  *ft*ftftftft*ftftft*ftftft*JJftft5ftftftj1
                                                                                                      Figure        3
                         Panel 1                                                     Panel   4                                         Panel         7
8= .1          N= 10         thrta=    1
roind      1        raids-   0.62'3            *55*
                                                                  P .1    N- JQIO th*ta
                                                                  round- 1 raids— 9.949
                                                                                                       .1
                                                                                                                               P .I
round= 2 ruds                2.626             **5*5*5****5**                                                                          N 30 th*ta—               I
                                                                  round— 2 raids— 0.102                        *               round— 1 raids— 2.488
rc.und 3 raids               1.353             *5*5*5*            round— 3 raids— 0.001                                       round— 2 raids— 4.011                       *5*5*
round 4 raids                 0.665            5*5*                                                            *
round 5 raids                 8.337            **                 round— 4 rajds= 0.000
                                                                 round— 5 rajds
                                                                                                               *
                                                                                                               *
                                                                                                                              round— 3 raids 0.4401
                                                                                                                              round— 4 raids— 0.078                   *
round= 6 raids                0. 183           *                                  0.0001                                                                              *
rc.ur,d    7         raid     0. 185           a
                                               *
                                                                 round— 6 raids— 0.000
                                                                 round— 7 raids— 0.000
                                                                                                               a
                                                                                                               *
                                                                                                                              round- 5 raids— 0.016
                                                                                                                              round— 6 raids 0.004                    a
                                                                                                                                                                      *
rcund 8 raids                 0.063                                                                                                          raidq
rourd 9 raids                 0.039            *                 round— 8 raids— 0.0100
                                                                 round= 9 raids— 0.000
                                                                                                               ft             round— 7         0.001
                                                                                                                              round— 8 ra1d= 0.000                    *
roundl@ rards                 0.024            *                 round—jO rads— 0.000
                                                                                                               a
                                                                                                                              round- 9       rajds= 0.000
                                                                                                                                                                      ft
rund12
        raids
rc.ur,d11
                    rid
                    raid
                              0.015
                             0.009
                                               *
                                               *                 round—li raids— 0.0100
                                                                 round=i2 raids- 0.000
                                                                                                                              rc.uv,cj—jO
                                                                                                                              round—li
                                                                                                                                             raids— 0.000
                                                                                                                                                                      U
                                                                                                                                                                      *
                                                                                                                                                                      *
roundl3
rrd=14
rcur,d'lS
                    rid
                    rid
                             0.006
                             0.003
                             0082
                                               *
                                               *
                                               *
                                                                 round—13 raids— 0.0100
                                                                 round—14
                                                                 roiind—15
                                                                                     raids— 0.000
                                                                                     raids— 0.01010

                                                                                                                                             raids— 0.000
                                                                                                                              rounij—12 raids— 0.000
                                                                                                                              roitnd=13 ra1ds 0.000
                                                                                                                              rour,dj4 raids— 0.000
                                                                                                                                                                      *
                                                                                                                                                                      *
                                                                                                                                                                      *
                                                                                                                              round—iS raids— 0.000                   *
         Panel 2                                                                 Panel       5                                     Panel         8
    .1 N 10         .1                                           P—   .01       N— 100   theta—                               P   .1
round I raids 0.629    *U*U                                      round— 1        raids— 0.623
                                                                                                       1                                    N—   30      thqta.' .1
rc.ur,d    2  0.250  rid
                       *5*5*                                     round— 2        raids—23.251                  *******,****
                                                                                                                               round— I raids—
                                                                                                                               round 2 raids— 2.488                   *****
round   raids 0.523
           3           5*5                                       round— 3        raids—11.609              *5*5*5                              1.448                  sas
roird' 4 rnids 0.328                           5*                round— 4        raids— 5.141                                 round— 3 raids— 0.299                   a
round S raid 0.212                                               round— S        raids— 2.144
                                                                                                           *** •
                                                                                                           **                 round— 4 raids— 0.072                   a
rc.urd 6 raids 0.138                           U                 round— 6        raids— 0.890              *                  round— 5 raids— 0.018
                                                                                                                              round— 6 raids— 0.004
                                                                                                                                                                      *
rcund-' 7 raids' 0.090                         *                round— 7         raids— 0.386              *                                                          a
rc.urd B raids 0.058                                            round— 8         raids— 0.182                                  round— 7 raids— 0.001                  a
                                               U                                                           a                  round— B raids— 0.000
round 9 raids= 0.037
round=10 raids 0.023
                                               *                round— 9
                                                                round—lO
                                                                                 raids— 0.094              *                  round— 9 raids— 01.000
                                                                                                                                                                      a
                                                                                                                                                                      a
                                                                                 raids— 0.053              a                  roundj01 raids— 0.000
rouncj1j  raids 0.014                          U                round—il         raids— 0.031              *                                                          a
roundl2 rsid 0.009                                              round—12                                   a
                                                                                                                              round—il  raids— 0.000                  *
                     rid 0.005                                                   raids— 0.019
                                                                                                                                                                      *
rnuncfrl3
round14
rundi5 raIdn 0.002
                     rd                        U

                                                                round=13
                                                                round—14
                                                                round—15
                                                                                 raids— 0.012
                                                                                 raIds— 0.008
                                                                                 raids— 0.005
                                                                                                           a
                                                                                                           a
                                                                                                           a

                                                                                                                              roufldi2
                                                                                                                              round—13
                                                                                                                              reund—14
                                                                                                                                             raids— 0.000
                                                                                                                                             raids 0.000
                                                                                                                                             raIds— 0.000
                                                                                                                                                                      a
                                                                                                                                                                      a
                                                                                                                              round—iS       raids— 0.000             a
                         Panel   3                                               Panel       6
 8=
 round
      .1
               1
                   19=
round 2 raids 0. 124
                      raid
                       100 theta—
                           9.949
                                           1
                                               5*55*
                                               *                round—
                                                                      .01
                                                                            I
                                                                                N—    1001
                                                                                raids— 0.623
                                                                                             theta     .01
                                                                                                         a
                                                                round— 2        raids— 0.899
r,und= 3 raid 0.001                            *                round— 3
                                                                                                         *
                                                                                                           *
rc'ur,d 4      0.000
r.,und 5 rnidn 0.000
                      raid                     a
                                               *
                                                                rour,d— 4
                                                                                raids— 0.579
                                                                                raids— 0.386               a
                                                                round= 5        raids— 0.266
rurd 6 raids 0.000                             *                round— 6
                                                                                                           *
r'und= 7       0.080
rour,d 8 raidn 0.000
                      raid                     *
                                               *                round= 1
                                                                                raids— 0. 166
                                                                                raids— 0. 129
                                                                                                           *
                                                                                                           a
                                                                round= 8        raids— 0.069               a
round 9 rnids 0.080                            *                round— 9        raids— 0.061               *
roundi0 raids 0.000                                             round=10        raids— 0.041            *
rr,undli raidc 0.000                                            round=11
rourd=i2 ride 0.000                                                             raids— 0.027            ft
                                                                round=12 raids— 0.018                   *
r,'undl3 raide 0.000
roundt4        0.008
roundl5 raids 0.000
                      rid                                       round=j3 raidç— 0.012
                                                                round=14 raids— 0.008
                                                                round-iS        raids— 0.005
                                                                                                        *
                                                                                                        *
                                                                                                        a
