                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         COMMITMENT, RISK, AND CONSUMPTION:
                       DO BIRDS OF A FEATHER HAVE BIGGER NESTS?

                                             Stephen H. Shore
                                                Todd Sinai

                                          Working Paper 11588
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w11588


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 2005




An earlier version of this paper circulated under the title, "Household Risk and the Demand for Housing
Commitments." We thank Andrew Au, Misha Dworsky, Alex Janovsky, and Daniel Simundza for
outstanding research assistance. We received helpful comments from Raphael Bostic, Christopher Carroll,
Tom Davidoff, Joe Gyourko, Brigitte Madrian, Albert Saiz, Nick Souleles, Joel Waldfogel, Matt White,
Justin Wolfers, and seminar participants at Columbia Business School, Harvard University, UC Berkeley,
UC Davis, University of Illinois, University of Washington, and Wharton. Special thanks to Joel Waldfogel
for suggesting the second half of the title. Shore gratefully acknowledges financial support from the National
Institutes of Health - National Institute on Aging, Grant number P30 AG12836, and the Boettner Center for
Pensions and Retirement Security at the University of Pennsylvania as well as the Zell/Lurie Real Estate
Center at The Wharton School. Sinai received support from the Research Scholars Program at the Zell/Lurie
Real Estate Center. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by Stephen H. Shore and Todd Sinai. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Commitment, Risk, and Consumption: Do Birds of a Feather Have Bigger Nests?
Stephen H. Shore and Todd Sinai
NBER Working Paper No. 11588
August 2005
JEL No. E21, R21, D8

                                           ABSTRACT




We show that incorporating consumption commitments into a standard model of precautionary
saving can complicate the usual relationship between risk and consumption. In particular, we present
a model where the presence of plausible adjustment costs can cause a mean-preserving increase in
unemployment risk to lead to increased consumption. The predictions of this model are consistent
with empirical evidence from dual-earning couples. Couples who share an occupation face increased
risk as their unemployment shocks are more highly correlated. Such couples spend more on
owner-occupied housing than other couples, spend no more on rent, and are more likely to rent than
own. This pattern is strongest when the household faces higher moving costs, or when
unemployment insurance provides a less generous safety net.


Stephen H. Shore
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
3620 Locust Walk, 3012 SH-DH
Philadelphia, PA 19104
sshore@wharton.upenn.edu

Todd Sinai
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
3620 Locust Walk, 3012 SH-DH
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
sinai@wharton.upenn.edu
1        Introduction

Standard precautionary saving intuition, developed over the last 40 years, suggests that in
the presence of increased income risk households should consume less and save more (Leland
(1968), Sandmo (1970), Drèze and Modigliani (1972), Kimball (1990)).                    The models that
generate this prediction assume that households can costlessly adjust their level and mix of
consumption. However, this simpli…cation is often at odds with reality. For example, to
adjust housing consumption, homeowners must incur the costs of selling a house, buying a
new one, and moving. These costs are large even when the change in housing consumption
is small, as it would be if a household moved to a similar house across the street. Other
goods, such as automobiles and cellular telephone plans, also have this commitment feature
–namely that adjusting the type or quantity of consumption is costly. Warren and Tyagi
(2003) argue that a typical American family earmarks 75 percent of their income for these
“…xed expenses,”items like a mortgage, car payments, child care, and health insurance.
        This paper shows that incorporating commitments into a model of precautionary saving
can complicate the usual relationship between risk and consumption.                   In the presence of
commitment goods, a mean-preserving increase in income risk can lead to greater consump-
tion and reduced saving, the opposite of what would be predicted by a model that does
not include commitments. Prior research …nds that exogenous consumption commitments
impact people’s attitude towards risk (Fratantoni (1998, 2001), Chetty (2004), Chetty and
Szeidl (2004), Postlewaite et al. (2004)). We argue that the converse is also true: the risks
people face a¤ect their willingness to undertake consumption commitments.1
        The intuition for our argument can be explained in the context of a dual-income household
that consumes housing, which is costly to adjust, and food, which is not. The household faces
    1
    Other work has considered the possibility of endogenous consumption commitments. Flavin (2001)
endogenizes the size of a housing commitment in an adjustment cost model, and looks at the e¤ect in a
theoretical context on the intertemporal elasticity of substitution of nondurable goods and on asset prices.
Postlewaite et al. (2004) refer to the endogeneity of consumption commitments to income risk, but does
not model it. Chetty and Szeidl (2004) implicitly acknowledge the endogeneity of the size of consumption
commitments in their empirical work by instrumenting for the price of the house.




                                                     1
the risk that one or both spouses could become unemployed. If exactly one spouse becomes
unemployed, the household must weigh the cost of moving against the bene…t of choosing a
level of housing consumption more appropriate to their new circumstances. In the face of
this drop in permanent income, the household may decide to maintain their existing level of
housing consumption and to reduce food consumption instead. In this case, the marginal
utility of food would exceed that of housing.      In hindsight, the household would have
preferred a smaller initial housing commitment, not only to smooth total consumption over
time but also to bring the marginal utility of current food and housing consumption closer
together. By contrast, if both spouses become unemployed, they may …nd it worthwhile to
pay the cost of moving in order to rebalance housing and food consumption. In that case,
spending less on housing initially does not help to reallocate consumption across goods after
unemployment, as moving already serves this function.
   Understanding these possibilities, the household must choose an initial level of housing
given the likelihood that one or both spouses will become unemployed. As the correlation
between the couple’s unemployment events increases, the probability that neither or both
spouses will become unemployed goes up, while the probability that exactly one spouse will
become unemployed falls. This is a mean-preserving increase in risk. In the one-unemployed
state, the household is stuck in a house which is too big and lifetime utility would have been
higher had it spent less on housing in the …rst place. Since the mean-preserving increase
in risk reduces the probability of this state, it raises the optimal initial consumption of
housing.   The couple should also be more apt to choose renting over owning a home if
it faces a high probability of dual unemployment. Since moving is particularly costly for
homeowners, a household that is more likely to move should tend to rent in order to save
on future transaction costs. Of course, these predictions apply only when moving costs are
high enough to deter moving in all but the worst state.
   We support these hypotheses with empirical evidence on the relationship between un-
employment risk for dual-earning couples and their housing consumption.         Although the


                                              2
intuition in our model applies to any consumption commitment, housing comprises a large
fraction of household spending and requires a considerable commitment, and is therefore an
obvious …rst place to look for evidence. Also, by restricting our attention to married cou-
ples who both work full-time, we can control for unobservable tastes for risk and di¤erences
in expected income.   We proxy for the mean-preserving spread in a couple’s income risk
with whether spouses share the same occupation. Empirically, couples with both spouses
in the same occupation have higher unemployment correlations than do couples in di¤erent
occupations.
   Using household-level data from the Integrated Public Use Microdata Series (IPUMS)
of the U.S. Census, we …nd that same-occupation homeowners spend at least 2.1 percent
more on their houses than do di¤erent-occupation couples, even after controlling for income,
each spouse’s occupation, and a host of other characteristics. By contrast, same-occupation
renters, who face considerably lower moving costs than homeowners, spend no more on
their rent than do di¤erent-occupation renters.   In addition, same-occupation households
are less likely to be homeowners than otherwise identical di¤erent-occupation households.
Taken in concert, these three empirical facts are consistent with our model and inconsistent
with alternative hypotheses, such as same-occupation couples having a larger precautionary
savings motive or a stronger unobservable taste for housing.
   As further evidence, we …nd that when moving costs are greater, the di¤erences between
same- and di¤erent-occupation couples in housing spending and probability of home owner-
ship increase. Our proxy for high moving costs is whether the couple is unlikely to move
anyway for exogenous demographic reasons. In addition, we do not observe this pattern for
renters, for whom the costs of moving are already low.
   Finally, we exploit variation across states in unemployment insurance programs. When
unemployment insurance is more generous, households are less likely to move when both
spouses become unemployed. Consistent with a theory of consumption commitments, we
…nd that the di¤erence in housing spending between same- and di¤erent-occupation home-


                                             3
owners is greater when the replacement rate of unemployment insurance is lower.
      The remainder of this paper is arranged as follows: Section 2 sets up a simple model
of consumption commitments which predicts that a mean-preserving increase in risk can
increase a household’s willingness to undertake consumption commitments; we describe the
data and test this model in Section 3; and Section 4 concludes.


2      A Model of Income Risk and Consumption Commitments

In this section, we develop a simple model to show how consumption commitments can a¤ect
the relationship between income risk and consumption. We treat household labor income
risk as exogenous and endogenize consumption.           As in Chetty (2004), the model has two
periods, t = 1; 2, and two goods, h (housing) and f (food).            The units of h and f are
normalized so that the price of each is 1; there is no goods price risk. For simplicity, we
assume that household utility in a given period is the following separable function:


                                   u (hi ; fi ) = g (hi ) + g (fi )                            (1)


where      is a parameter which indicates the relative importance of goods h and f to the
household.     g is a di¤erentiable, concave function.        We will consider g (x) = ln (x) and
              1
g (x) = x     2
                  x2 as two possible functional forms for g. For algebraic simplicity, we will
set     = 1 so that the two goods are equally important to the household, though loosening
this assumption does not a¤ect the substance of any of the results we obtain. Also, while
separability is not strictly necessary, it is important that the marginal utility of food increases
relative to the marginal utility of housing when food consumption falls. The family’s lifetime
expected utility is just a weighted average of the expected utility from the two periods:


                                 U = u (h1 ; f1 ) + E [u (h2 ; f2 )]                           (2)




                                                  4
For further algebraic simplicity, we set           = 1, though again this assumption has no impact
on the substance of our results. In the …rst period, the household receives an income Y1 and
decides how much of each good, h1 and f1 , to consume. Remaining wealth, Y1                            h1    f1 ,
is saved. Because we abstract from the investment problems examined in other work, we
make the simplifying assumptions that there are no risky assets and that the riskless interest
rate is zero.2 We also assume that the household cannot save in the housing asset.3 In our
model, home ownership is like a two-period rental contract with a penalty for early exit.4
In the second period of the model, the household receives an income Y~2 , which is not known
at t = 1. At that time, the household must allocate its wealth, Y1 + Y~2                    h1    f1 , between
the two goods.       If a household adjusts its consumption of good h, the transaction cost is
k (h1 ). It is this transaction cost, which is generally thought to be higher for homeowners
than for renters, which gives h its commitment feature.5                  While the case of proportional
transaction costs, k = ch1 , is probably the most empirically relevant, …xed transaction costs
provide greater analytic tractability. Both types of transaction costs generate the results
   2
     If there is housing cost risk, home owning may hedge future housing costs as in Sinai and Souleles (2005).
A correlation between housing costs and income risk, as in Davido¤ (2005) and Campbell and Cocco (2003),
may provide a further boost to housing demand.
   3
     Transforming the price of a housing asset into the ‡ow cost of the consumption of housing services,
the homeowner’s equivalent of rent, is a well-documented procedure that underlies our h notation. For
an exposition of the user cost of owner-occupied housing, see Hendershott and Slemrod (1983) or Poterba
(1984). The consensus of the literature (Henderson and Ioannides (1983), Goetzmann (1993), Brueckner
(1997), and Flavin and Yamashita (2002)) is that people are forced to over-invest in housing to satisfy their
consumption needs, hence the demand for housing for consumption is binding, while the desire for housing
as investment is not. Consequently, the dual nature of housing as an asset and consumption good does not
preclude its use as an indicator of consumption. Although showing the conditions under which households
might save precautionarily in housing is beyond the scope of this model, we will come back to this issue later
to make sure a savings motive is not driving our empirical results.
   4
     Equivalently, home owning can be a purchase and resale of a housing asset that neither appreciates nor
depreciates.
   5
     While it is di¢ cult to ascertain the total utility cost of moving, the cost for owners is typically assumed
to be large. In addition to a realtor’s fee of 6 percent, a moving homeowner must pay transfer taxes,
…nancing costs for a new home, movers, and must incur a host of nonpecuniary costs. These costs include
the search for a new home, the time cost of selling the original home, and the psychic costs of uprooting.
Renters face much lower moving costs. They have smaller or no realtor’s fees, taxes, or upfront …nancing
costs and do not have to sell their prior apartment. Also, search costs for rental housing are lower, since
the market is thicker and more commoditized.




                                                       5
discussed. Therefore, a household’s inter-temporal budget constraint can be written as:


                          Y1 + Y~2 = 2h1 + f1 + f2 if h1 = h2                                                  (3)

                          Y1 + Y~2 = h1 + k (h1 ) + h2 + f1 + f2 if h1 6= h2 :


   To determine the optimal consumption in the …rst period, we determine optimal con-
sumption and indirect utility in the second period and then work backwards. In the second
period, the household maximizes


                                     u (h2 ; f2 ) = g (h2 ) + g (f2 )                                          (4)


subject to constraint (3). Therefore, optimal consumption is

                               1
                     h2 = f2 =   Y1 + Y~2 h1 f1 k (h1 )    if h2 6= h1                                         (5)
                               2
                           n                             o
                       and h2 = h1 ; f2 = Y1 + Y~2 2h1 f1 if h2 = h1


and indirect utility is


       v Y1 + Y~2    h1      f1 ; h1 = g (h1 ) + g Y1 + Y~2      2h1         f1     if h2 = h1                 (6)
                                               1
       v Y1 + Y~2    h1      f1 ; h1 = 2 g       Y1 + Y~2       h1      f1        k (h1 )     if h2 6= h1
                                               2

where h2 = h1 if and only if

                1
         2 g      Y1 + Y~2      h1    f1    k (h1 )        g (h1 ) + g Y1 + Y~2             2h1   f1 :         (7)
                2

   The household will not adjust housing consumption, h, unless the shock to wealth is large
enough that the bene…ts of rebalancing consumption exceed the costs of moving.                              In the
presence of small shocks, when the desired level of housing consumption is not very di¤erent



                                                      6
from the commitment level, the household will prefer to maintain the commitment level of
housing consumption.6 The bene…ts of adjusting housing consumption are swamped by the
costs of moving. If it experiences a large shock, the household is willing to pay a cost to
adjust housing consumption.7         As described by Chetty (2004), this leads to a non-convex
indirect utility function, shown in Figure 2.1. At the kink point in the …gure, the household
is indi¤erent between moving and not moving. The …gure shows that the marginal utility
of wealth is much higher when the household is just rich enough that it does not have to
reduce housing consumption (to the right of the kink) than when it is just poor enough that
it does have to (to the left).
       Once we have solved for the optimal consumption rule in the second period, we can solve
for optimal consumption in the …rst period.              The household’s lifetime utility function (2)
can be rewritten as:
                                        2      8                                               93
                                               >
                                               <                                               >
                                                                                               =
                                        6            g (h1 ) + g Y1 + Y~2      2h1    f1 ;      7
   U (h1 ; f1 ) = g (h1 ) + g (f1 ) + E 4max                                                    5:      (8)
                                               >
                                               :2 g        1
                                                               Y1 + Y~2   h1   f1    k (h1 )   >
                                                                                               ;
                                                           2



To better understand the optimal consumption rule in the …rst period, we must add structure
by making assumptions about the distribution of Y~2 . In this paper, we explore an empirically
relevant type of income risk –unemployment risk.8 We assume that the household has two
wage earners, a husband and wife, and that uncertainty comes from the possibility that one
   6
     Another way households could respond is by reducing the maintenance expenditures on their houses. In
that case, it would be more di¢ cult for us to …nd an e¤ect empirically since housing consumption would
be adjustable within a small range. Gyourko and Tracy (2003) show that households defer maintenance
to smooth consumption over transitory shocks to income. Davido¤ (2004) presents evidence that older
households spend less on housing maintenance and experience lower house price appreciation.
   7
     This result contrasts with Browning and Crossley (2004) who show that households respond to small
shocks by reducing expenditure on new durables such as pillows and socks but respond to larger shocks by
reducing consumption of non-durables as well. The di¤erence in these results stems from Browning and
Crossley’s focus on the impact of liquidity constraints and transitory or small shocks on consumption.
   8
     The negative skewness of unemployment risks will be important in generating our results, since house-
holds that move will move only into smaller houses. While the intuition would still apply, the direction
of the model’s predictions will be quite di¤erent for other types of risks. For example, if households face
increasing lottery risk (increasing the probability of winning a lottery large enough to induce moving while
decreasing the probability of winning a lottery too small to induce a move), it should lead to even greater
reductions in housing consumption than would be predicted by a model of precautionary saving without
consumption commitments.


                                                     7
or both may become unemployed in the second period. To reduce the number of states to
consider, we make the simplifying assumption that income for either husband or wife is Y2E
if employed and Y2U if unemployed. The husband’s probability of unemployment is p while
the wife’s is q.    There is a correlation         between the employment status of the husband
and wife. Therefore, the distribution of household income in the second period, Y~2 , can be
written as:


                             Y~2 = 2Y2E with probability 1        p   q+

                             Y~2 = Y2E + Y2U with probability p + q           2                          (9)

                             Y~2 = 2Y2U with probability , where
                                         p
                                   pq +    pq (1 p) (1 q).


The three states correspond to both spouses being employed, exactly one being unemployed,
and both being unemployed. Increasing the correlation of the couple’s unemployment events,
 , while holding p and q …xed is equivalent to adding a mean-preserving spread in the
distribution of household labor income, increasing the probability of the best and worst
outcomes (neither or both unemployed) while decreasing the probability of the medium
outcome (exactly one unemployed). However, the expected household income,

                                 h i
                                E Y~2 = 2Y2E        (p + q) Y2E       Y2U ;                             (10)


is independent of      and depends on the rates of unemployment, p and q, additively.9

2.1     Risk and Consumption With and Without Commitment

A standard model of precautionary saving is a special case of the model described above in
which k = 0. If there are no costs to moving, then the household is always weakly better
   9
    Other parameters besides could be modi…ed to induce a mean-preserving increase in risk. For example,
a mean-preserving spread could be created by decreasing Y2U while increasing Y2E . We focus on variation in
  both because of its novel implications and also because it can be identi…ed in the data relatively cleanly.


                                                     8
o¤ by changing the level of housing consumption. In this case, the expected utility function
is just
                                                                   1
               U (h1 ; f1 ) = g (h1 ) + g (f1 ) + E 2 g              Y1 + Y~2      h1       f1        :         (11)
                                                                   2

Taking …rst order conditions for h1 and f1 and equating them reveals that at an optimum,
h1 = f1 . Therefore, the utility function can be rewritten as:

                                                             1
                               U (h1 ) = g (h1 ) + E g         Y1 + Y~2    2h1          :                       (12)
                                                             2

Then, the …rst order condition can be rewritten as:
                           2                                                                     3
                               0                               0   1
                       6 g (h1 ) + (1 p q + ) g         Y1 +       2
                                                                          2Y2E      2h1          7
                       6                                                                         7
                     0=6                      0 1
                       6 + (p + q 2 ) g 2 Y1 + Y2 + Y2
                                                        E    U
                                                                                 2h1             7:
                                                                                                 7              (13)
                       4                                                                         5
                                     +  g 0 12 Y1 + 2Y2U 2h1

                                                                          dh1                             dh1
Lemma 1 Let h1 be the solution to (13). If g 000 > 0, then                 d
                                                                                < 0; if g 000 = 0, then    d
                                                                                                                = 0;
                     dh1
if g 000 < 0, then    d
                           > 0:
    Proof. See Appendix A.1.


    The result is a simple illustration of precautionary saving and follows Kimball (1990).
  is a measure of household risk which is independent of expected household wealth. For
utility functions with positive third derivatives (such as power, log, and exponential), as the
amount of household risk increases, optimal consumption, h1 (which is also equal to f1 ),
falls and saving, Y1           h1   f1 , increases. Most economists take the g 000 > 0 to be a realistic
description of people’s preferences, and therefore predict a negative relationship between risk
and consumption. For quadratic utility functions (g 000 = 0), increasing risk has no impact
on consumption or saving.
    This precautionary saving result can be reversed if there is a cost of adjusting housing
consumption, so k > 0 and is in a range where it is optimal to move only when both spouses


                                                         9
become unemployed. Even when g 000          0, increasing risk may actually increase consumption.
Since this is di¢ cult to show analytically for most utility functions and costs of adjustment,
we prove this result for the simple case of quadratic utility and …xed adjustment costs. The
subsequent sections will relax these assumptions and show that the same results can be
obtained numerically under more realistic assumptions about utility and adjustment costs.
   In the quadratic utility case with …xed adjustment costs, the household’s objective func-
tion is:

                    1 2            1 2
   U (h1 ; f1 ) = h1   h1 + f1       f                                                             (14)
                    2              2 1
                  2    82                                                                    3 93
                       >
                       >                                      1                                  >
                                                                                                 >
                  6    >
                       > 6                               h1       h21                        7 > >7
                  6    >
                       <4
                                                              2
                                                                                           2 5 ; >
                                                                                                 =7
                  6        + Y1 + Y~2 2h1                f1   1
                                                                        Y1 + Y~2    2h1 f1        7
               +E 6max                                        2                                   7:
                  6    >
                       >                                                                         >7
                  4    >                                                                     2 > >5
                       >
                       >                                                                         >
                                                                                                 >
                       : Y1 + Y~2 h1 k                   f1   4
                                                                   Y1 + Y~2        h1 k f1       ;


Lemma 2 Let fh1 ; f1 g maximize (14). If model parameters make it strictly optimal to set
                                            dh1
h2 6= h1 if and only if Y~2 = 2Y2U , then    d
                                                  > 0.
   Proof. See Appendix A.2.


   When it is optimal to adjust housing consumption only when both spouses become un-
employed, increasing risk ( ) a¤ects consumption through three distinct channels.                 First,
standard precautionary saving implies that increased risk leads to reduced consumption when
the third derivative of utility is positive. Since we assumed quadratic utility for Lemma 2,
this channel is absent in this case. Second, increasing risk e¤ectively reduces wealth. As
goes up, the probability of both spouses becoming unemployed increases. This increases the
probability of adjusting housing consumption and therefore increases expected moving costs.
This makes the household poorer and reduces consumption. Third, increasing risk reduces
the probability that exactly one spouse will become unemployed. In the one-unemployed
state, the household chooses to reduce food consumption and to maintain housing consump-
tion. Therefore, the marginal utility of food consumption exceeds the marginal utility of

                                                    10
housing consumption.        Reducing housing consumption in the …rst period lowers housing
consumption and increases food consumption in the second period.                This rebalancing of
consumption increases utility in the one-unemployed state, when moving costs deter the
household from moving to a smaller house to increase food consumption.                 Therefore, an
increase in risk that reduces the likelihood of this state increases optimal …rst-period hous-
ing consumption. Lemma 2 shows that the third channel dominates the …rst two, so that
increased risk leads to increased initial housing consumption.

2.2       Graphical Illustration of Household Risk and Commitment

The proof in the last subsection assumed that preferences were quadratic and adjustment
costs were …xed. While these assumptions are necessary to obtain an analytically tractable
solution, they are not necessary to obtain the same qualitative results. To develop intuition
behind these results and to show that they are not con…ned to a special case, we begin
by showing the e¤ect graphically.        We use the two-period model described in Section 2
in which uncertainty comes from the possibility that one or both spouses could become
unemployed.10        Utility is assumed to be of the log form, g ( ) = ln ( ), and we consider
proportional moving costs, k = ch1 . We vary household risk by changing , the correlation
of spouses’unemployment.
       In a standard model without moving costs, k = 0, precautionary saving is obtained
because the marginal utility of wealth goes up more than twice as much when both husband
and wife become unemployed than when only one becomes unemployed. Therefore, a mean-
preserving increase in risk increases the expected marginal utility of wealth. As a result,
increasing risk reduces the optimal level of consumption whenever the cost of adjusting
consumption is small.
       This is illustrated by Figure 2.2, which shows the marginal lifetime utility of …rst-period
housing consumption, dU (h1 ; f1 (h1 )) =dh1 , for di¤erent levels of housing consumption in
  10
    We assume that Y2U = 0:5 Y2E . Furthermore, we assume Y1 = 2 Y2E , so that household income stays
constant if both partners remain employed. Without loss of generality, we normalize by setting Y2E = 1.



                                                  11
di¤erent states of the world.       In other words, holding wealth …xed, how does a marginal
increase in …rst-period housing consumption impact lifetime utility if both spouses (or one
or none) are employed in the second period? These lines represent the …rst-order condition
for …rst-period housing in various states if the second-period realization were known. The
optimal level of housing if the second-period realization were known is simply the point where
a given line crosses the y-axis.11 If both husband and wife are unemployed, the “4” plot,
then the marginal utility of …rst-period housing consumption is strongly negative; the family
could have increased lifetime utility had it bought a smaller house initially. By contrast, if
both spouses are employed, the “ ” plot, then the marginal utility of …rst-period housing
is positive; the family could have increased lifetime utility had it bought a bigger house
initially. The “o” plot, representing the marginal utility when exactly one spouse becomes
unemployed, is in between.
       Plot “+”in this …gure is merely an average of the “4”, “o”, and “ ”plots, weighted by
the respective probabilities of these three outcomes. Since the …rst-order condition for h1 is


                                    E [dU (h1 ; f1 (h1 )) =dh1 ] = 0;                               (15)


the optimal level of consumption is simply the point where the expected marginal utility
plot, “+”, crosses the y-axis. A mean-preserving spread increases the weight on the neither
employed and both employed states (“4”and “ ”plots) by reducing the weight on the one
employed state (“o”plot). Since the “4”plot (neither employed) is substantially lower than
the “o”plot (one employed) and the “ ”plot (both employed), a mean preserving spread will
move the expected marginal utility (the “+” plot) down and therefore reduce the optimal
level of initial housing consumption.        This is a graphical representation of precautionary
saving.
       Figure 2.3 depicts the same problem as Figure 2.2, but with a 10 percent proportional
  11
    These plots assume that the level of food consumption in the …rst period is chosen optimally given
…rst-period housing but that the second-period employment realization is not known in the …rst period. We
use the following parameters: Y1 = 2; Y2E = 1; Y2U = :5; p = q = :1; = 0:2.


                                                   12
cost of adjusting housing consumption, c = 0:1.      Throughout the range of interest, it is
optimal to adjust housing consumption only if both spouses become unemployed.             The
noteworthy feature of this …gure is the extremely low marginal utility of …rst-period housing
consumption when exactly one spouse becomes unemployed. The marginal utility of …rst-
period housing is highly negative for households with exactly one unemployed spouse because
these households have to reduce food consumption dramatically in order to maintain their
housing consumption.
   When exactly one spouse becomes unemployed, reducing …rst-period housing consump-
tion by $1 increases lifetime utility because it allows the household to increase second-period
food consumption –which has a relatively high marginal utility –by $2 (and decrease second-
period housing consumption –which has a relatively low marginal utility –by $1). In this
context, inducing a mean-preserving spread has a very di¤erent e¤ect than if moving costs
were absent. An increase in risk reduces the probability of the state in which exactly one
spouse is unemployed, when the marginal utility of …rst-period housing is highly negative.
Since the “one employed” line is substantially below the midpoint of the “both employed”
and “neither employed” lines, the mean-preserving spread actually increases expected mar-
ginal utility and therefore increases the optimal level of initial housing consumption.
   These graphs represent the fundamental idea of this paper, that moving costs complicate
the relationship between risk and consumption. Unlike a traditional model of precautionary
saving, increasing risk can actually increase the optimal level of consumption in a setting
with consumption commitments. This result is generated because increasing risk reduces
the probability of exactly one person becoming unemployed. Since this is the state in which
the household is stuck with a house that is much too big and wish they had bought a smaller
house initially, optimal housing consumption increases.




                                              13
2.3       Calibrating the Impact of Household Risk on Consumption

          Commitments

Section 2:2 developed the intuition for the result that increasing risk may increase consump-
tion. This section performs a calibration to examine the potential size of this e¤ect. The
calibration assumes log utility and proportional moving costs, and presents the numerical
solutions to (8) given income shocks (9) for various parameter values.
      Given sensible parameters, this setup implies a substantial positive relationship between
income correlation and housing consumption. For example, if the income for the unemployed
is half that of the employed, there is no earnings growth for the employed, the probability of
becoming unemployed is 10 percent, and the cost of moving is 10 percent,12 it is optimal to
adjust housing only if both spouses become unemployed. Figure 2.4 plots consumption for
various levels of income correlation in this case. Increasing the correlation of unemployment
from no correlation to perfect correlation increases optimal spending on housing by 2.9
percent (and decreases optimal non-housing consumption by 1.0 percent). The saving rate
falls from 3.8 percent to 2.9 percent when the correlation of income increases.
      These results for housing consumption and saving are exactly the reverse of what would
be predicted by a precautionary saving model without moving costs.                With an otherwise
identical setup without moving costs, the same increase in income correlation leads to a
1.2 percent reduction in both housing and non-housing consumption and an increase in
the saving rate from 3.3 percent to 4.4 percent.               Since this is a two-period model with
stylized assumptions about time discounting, rates of return on saving, risk aversion, the
relative importance of housing and food consumption, and the income shares of couples,
these numbers should be taken with a grain of salt.              Given di¤erent parameters or more
realistic assumptions about risk aversion and time, the e¤ect could vary.             However, this
calibration provides the intuition that in the presence of moving costs, increasing risk can
lead to a substantial increase in housing consumption and a substantial reduction in saving.
 12
      Y1 = 2; Y2E = 1; Y2U = 0:5; p = q = 0:1; k = 0:1:


                                                          14
This e¤ect is similar in size to –but of the opposite sign from –what would be predicted by
a standard model of precautionary saving.
       Table A.1 presents a summary of the results for a variety of parameters. For the reasons
discussed in Section 2.2, increasing the correlation of unemployment, , increases optimal
housing consumption whenever it is optimal to move only when both spouses are unemployed.
Unsurprisingly, there are many sets of parameter values for which it is not optimal to move
only in this state. Reducing the cost of moving makes moving optimal in states where only
one or even neither spouse is unemployed. Similarly, adjusting the income earned by the
unemployed also impacts when it is optimal to move. When the income of the unemployed
is low enough, it is optimal to move even when only one spouse is unemployed; when the
income of the unemployed is high enough, it is not optimal to move even when both spouses
are unemployed. For parameters that make it optimal to move when one or both spouses
are unemployed, the impact of household risk on housing consumption varies but is weaker
than when it is optimal to move only in the worst state.13

2.4       Risk and the Willingness to Undertake Commitments

The previous subsections have shown that in the presence of substantial moving costs, in-
creasing risk could lead homeowners to spend more on housing. But increasing risk increases
the probability that both spouses will be unemployed, and therefore the probability of need-
ing to move and to pay a moving fee.             While households need to consume housing, they
need not take on such large expected moving costs. Renting a home has a variety of disad-
vantages (e.g. moral hazard costs, rent is not tax-deductible), but it has substantially lower
adjustment costs. If households have exogenous heterogeneity in their preference for home
ownership, then on average they should be more likely to rent as risk increases, since the
odds of moving, and therefore the e¤ective cost of owning a home, goes up.
  13
    On one hand, a mean-preserving increase in risk creates a precautionary saving motive to reduce total
consumption. On the other hand, this increase in risk lowers the probability of moving and therefore expected
moving costs, reducing the e¤ective price of housing, and leading to increased housing consumption. Which
of these e¤ects dominates depends on the parameters chosen.



                                                     15
    To demonstrate this, we make the stylized assumption that renting a home involves almost
no moving costs, so that the household can always adjust housing consumption. By contrast,
owning a home involves a substantial moving cost (10 percent of housing consumption), so
that given the other parameter assumptions it will be optimal to move only when both
spouses are unemployed. In this setting, we compute the income premium that a household
must be o¤ered to make it willing to accept the higher moving costs of home ownership.
Figure 2.5 plots household utility with and without moving costs for various levels of spousal
income correlation, . While consumption falls as risk increases when there are substantial
moving costs, utility falls as risk increases regardless of moving cost. However, utility falls
faster when moving costs are higher.
    This …gure also plots the premium that households demand to make them willing to
choose the high transaction cost option, owning (the “4”plot). This premium is increasing
in household risk, .     For example, when a couple’s income risks are uncorrelated, the
household must be o¤ered 1.4 percent higher lifetime income to make it willing to buy a
home instead of rent. However, when a couple’s income risks are perfectly correlated, they
must be o¤ered 2.1 percent higher income to make them willing to buy a home.


3    Empirical Evidence

In this section, we look for evidence consistent with the theory developed in Section 2.
First, we must identify an increase in household unemployment risk in the data.           Our
proxy for unemployment correlation, , is whether the couple shares the same occupation.
We document that same-occupation couples are substantially more likely to be either both
employed or both unemployed, and less likely to have just one spouse unemployed. In this
sense, these couples face higher unemployment correlations than couples who do not share an
occupation. Next, we show that for homeowners, adjustment costs are high enough to deter
moving in all but the worst states of the world. Home-owning couples who both become
unemployed are much more likely to move than couples in which one or both spouses remain


                                              16
employed.
   In this setting, we examine the testable predictions of our model.    First, do couples
with higher income correlations (e.g. same-occupation couples) spend more on consumption
commitments (e.g. housing)? Second, is this relationship limited to those with relatively
high adjustment costs (e.g. homeowners and not renters, or those who were unlikely to
move for other reasons)? Third, do couples with higher income correlations choose housing
consumption with lower adjustment costs (e.g. renting)? Fourth, is the relationship between
income correlation and housing consumption strongest when dual unemployment is most
likely to induce moving (e.g. when unemployment insurance is less generous)?
   Our theory can be di¤erentiated from reasonable alternatives by these predictions. For
example, if same-occupation couples had a high unobservable taste for housing or home
ownership, then relative to di¤erent-occupation couples they should be more likely to own
their homes and should spend more on rent. We would also not expect to see any di¤erence
between same- and di¤erent-occupation couples in the link between moving costs and housing
consumption. Alternatively, if same-occupation couples responded to their additional risk
by saving more and investing this wealth in owner-occupied housing, they should be more
likely to own their homes. Also, there would be no reason to believe that same-occupation
couples should spend relatively less on housing when they are more likely to move soon. All
of these predictions di¤er from those of our model.

3.1    Data and Variable Construction

To estimate these empirical relationships, we need a source of household-level data that
contains information about housing consumption, moving, changes in employment status,
income, and the occupations of both husbands and wives. No one data set contains infor-
mation about all of these variables for a large number of households. For data on changes
in employment status, occupation, and the probability of moving, we use the April 1996
panel of the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP), which follows a panel of



                                            17
households for 48 months between April 1996 and March 2000. When we examine the e¤ect
of sharing an occupation on housing consumption and home ownership, we use a pooled
cross-section of households from the 1980, 1990, and 2000 Integrated Public Use Microdata
Series (IPUMS) of the U.S. Census. These data are a 1 percent random sample of responses
to the U.S. Decennial Census and contain self-reported house values, incomes, and occupa-
tions, as well as employment status, a limited moving history, and a number of demographic
variables and geographic identi…ers.14
       The SIPP initially contains 3,897,211 person          month observations, and the three waves
of the IPUMS together initially contain 2,778,194 household-level observations.15                    We im-
pose several restrictions on our samples which, taken together, reduce the number of usable
observations to 270,136 household          month observations for the SIPP and 302,342 household
observations for the IPUMS. (These restrictions are detailed in Appendix Table A.2.) In
both the SIPP and IPUMS, we limit our attention to married couples in which both spouses
are currently employed. In the IPUMS, we also impose the restrictions that both spouses
work full-time and live in Metropolitan Statistical Areas (MSAs). We consider only married
households so we can distinguish empirically between occupational choice and unobserved
taste for risk. In the IPUMS, we discard households containing part-time or unemployed
spouses because it is di¢ cult to accurately measure their occupation, as well as their po-
tential earnings capacity.16 We restrict our attention to MSAs so we can control for local
housing costs. MSAs are geographical areas de…ned by the Bureau of the Census intended
to correspond to labor market areas and thus match up well to local housing markets.
  14
      Owners typically overestimate the value of their houses by 6 percent on average, but their errors do not
appear to be systematically related to any observable variables (Goodman and Ittner (1992)). Since house
value and income are recorded as ranges, we assign the midpoint of the range or 1.5 times the top code. All
dollar values are converted to real (2000) using the CPI.
   15
      We pool the three decades together for greater statistical power, especially for when we examine various
subsamples of the data. We will also report results from some of the key regressions when estimated on each
decade separately.
   16
      In particular, one spouse might keep their labor supply in reserve as a bu¤er in case the other spouse
becomes unemployed (Cullen and Gruber (2000)). Since the relevant metric for a partially-employed couple
is potential income and since it is hard to measure potential income for part-time workers, we restrict our
attention to those families who appear to be working at their potential.



                                                     18
   We make extensive use of occupation data in both data sets. The IPUMS reports one
occupation variable with 227 categories that is consistently de…ned over all three waves,
based on occupation de…nitions from 1950. As detailed in Table 3.1.A, the average rate of
same-occupation couples across all occupations in the sample is 9.6 percent. In the SIPP
data summarized in Table 3.1.B, the prevalence of same-occupation couples is somewhat
lower, at 3.2 percent, since occupation de…nitions in the SIPP are more granular, with
463 three-digit codes.   Table 3.2 lists the 20 occupations in the IPUMS with the highest
fraction of same-occupation couples. The fraction of same-occupation couples varies widely
by occupation –it ranges from 15 percent for physicians to zero for many occupations not
listed in the table. That range cannot be fully explained by random matching. Column
3 reports the fraction of same-occupation couples that would arise if couples were paired at
random. While random matching might account for some of the same-occupation couples
in a few common occupations (managers, sales workers, clerical workers), it does not explain
the high rate of same-occupation couples among doctors or lawyers. Nor does the frequency
of same-occupation pairings appear to be income-related.
   Consistent with the framework developed in Section 2, our proxy for income risk will be
unemployment; the risk of exactly one spouse becoming unemployed is considered a “small”
risk and the risk of both spouses becoming unemployed is considered a “big” risk. In the
SIPP, we de…ne a person as employed when they have a job all month or have a job part of
the month but spend no time as laid o¤ or searching for a job; we de…ne them as unemployed
when they spend all month unemployed or have a job only part of the month and spend
some of the month as laid o¤ or searching for a job.    In the IPUMS, we de…ne a person
as unemployed when their stated usual hours of work in that year are zero. While we will
restrict our sample to dual-employed couples, we will want to control for the probability
of unemployment.    We impute that probability for a husband (wife) as the average rate
of unemployment for husbands (wives) in the same occupation and year, excluding the
husband’s (wife’s) own observation.    We compute this measure separately for husbands


                                            19
and wives, imposing the sample restrictions described in Table A.2 (except for the full-time
worker restriction).17 Table 3.1 shows that the annual unemployment rate for home-owning
husbands (p) in the IPUMS averages 6.5 percent and the unemployment rate for wives (q)
averages 13.5 percent. The higher unemployment rates in the SIPP, 8.6 and 25.1 percent,
respectively, are consistent with the more stringent de…nition of employment in these data.
       For some of our empirical work, we will need an exogenous proxy for the likelihood
of moving.      We impute the likelihood of moving as the rate of recent moving by similar
families.    The IPUMS reports whether the family moved into their house within the last
year. We construct the average rate of having moved in the previous year by husband’s
age       husband’s education     presence of children cells. We de…ne the bins using 10-year
age brackets, nine education categories, and an indicator for whether the family has any
children, and take the average for all of the households in that bin excluding the household
in question. In the SIPP, where we need to know if the household actually moved after an
unemployment event, we identify households that move by whether they change addresses
between two consecutive monthly interviews.

3.2       Sharing an Occupation, Unemployment Correlation, and the

          Probability of Moving

For our empirical setup to be an appropriate test of the theory in Section 2, sharing an
occupation must represent an increase in risk: same-occupation couples must have higher
unemployment correlations.        Also, households must be much more likely to move when
both spouses become unemployed.          We use the SIPP data to examine whether these two
conditions apply.
       In our data, same-occupation couples indeed have a higher unemployment correlation
than di¤erent-occupation couples. This fact is documented in Table 3.3, which reports the
  17
    Since people who are unemployed may state that they have no occupation –even when they have worked
and plan to work in a given occupation –this procedure likely underestimates the true unemployment rate
by occupation.



                                                  20
probability of one or both spouses becoming unemployed at some point over the next six
months, conditional on both being employed in the current month, broken out for same-
and di¤erent-occupation couples. While the overall rate of becoming unemployed is roughly
similar for same- and di¤erent-occupation couples (4.0 percent vs. 4.4 percent for husbands,
and 7.1 vs. 8.0 percent for wives), same-occupation couples have higher rates of both becom-
ing unemployed (1.5 percent vs. 0.7 percent) and both remaining employed (90.4 percent
vs. 88.3 percent), and lower rates of just one spouse becoming unemployed (8.2 percent vs.
11.1 percent). These rates of single- and dual-unemployment imply a correlation of unem-
ployment events of 5.7 percent for di¤erent-occupation couples but of roughly 23.7 percent
for same-occupation couples.18
       We also …nd that dual-unemployment substantially increases the likelihood of moving.
Table 3.4 reports the fraction of home-owning households that move within six months of one
or both spouses becoming unemployed. Conditioning on both spouses being employed in
the previous month, we measure the change in employment status as the number of spouses
(zero, one, or two) who are unemployed in the current month.                 Over the subsequent six
months, the rate of moving is just over 2 percent if both spouses had remained employed.
If just one of the spouses had become unemployed, the probability of moving during the
subsequent 6 months increases by nearly 2 percentage points, to almost 4 percent.                    But
if both spouses had become unemployed, the likelihood of a move skyrockets by almost 6
percentage points more, to nearly 10 percent. In results not presented in the tables, we have
found a similar acceleration in moving rates at one-month and 12-month horizons.19                    We
  18
     We use unemployment here, even though some of the unemployment spells are probably voluntary,
because the concept appears to be relatively well-measured in the SIPP. If we instead use the SIPP’s
layo¤ variable, the correlations are nearly the same. For same-occupation households, the correlation of
being laid o¤ over the next six months conditional on being employed this month is 25.1 percent, while for
di¤erent-occupation households it is about 1.4 percent. Splitting the sample by “same industry” rather
than “same occupation” yields essentially the same results.
  19
     The results in Table 3.4 suggest there is a relationship between joint unemployment and moving.
However, since the dual-unemployment observations in this table do not map one-for-one to the dual-
unemployment state described in the model, this table does not identify a model parameter. The de…nition
of joint unemployment in Table 3.4 is that both spouses transition from employment to unemployment in
the same month. This misidenti…es couples with somewhat staggered but still severe unemployment spells
as not having received a “bad shock.” It also characterizes all simultaneous unemployment spells as “bad


                                                   21
have also found that this pattern is not present for households who rent their homes. Those
couples move at relatively high rates that are insensitive to unemployment shocks.

3.3     The Relationship Between Income Risk and House Value for

        Homeowners

Given that our empirical setting matches the assumptions of the model, we turn to comparing
the housing consumption and tenure choices of same- and di¤erent-occupation couples. Our
primary approach will be to regress a measure of housing consumption (log house value for
homeowners, log rent for renters, and an indicator variable for owning a house for the tenure
choice) on a same-occupation indicator variable, 1 .                               Since the same-occupation variable
proxies for the mean-preserving increase in risk, as measured by the correlation, , a positive
coe¢ cient indicates that more risk leads to increased consumption. We include controls for
the probability of the husband and wife becoming unemployed (p and q, respectively) and
the probability that both would be unemployed if the risks were independent (pq), since p
and q contain information not just about risk, but also expected income. We include the
squared unemployment rates for the husband and wife, p2 and q 2 , in case the relationship
between the risk of unemployment and housing demand is nonlinear in a way that is not
re‡ected in the model. We control for family income, Y , the share of the income earned by
the husband, s, and year e¤ects,              t.   Some speci…cations will include dummies for the MSA
of residence (k) interacted with year,                  k;t ,   as well as other covariates, Z, such as dummies
for the number of people in the household, the number of children, the education of the
husband and the wife, the age brackets for the husband and wife, and the husband’s and
wife’s occupations. We estimate regressions of the form:
                           2                                                                                              3
                                                                                              2            2
                           6   1 1 ;i;t   +    2 pi;t   +       3 qi;t   +   4 pqi;t   +   5 pi;t   +   6 qi;t   +   7 si;t 7
           ln P H   i;t
                          =4                                                                                              5     (16)
                                                   + ln (Y )i;t + 'Zi;t +                  k;t + "i;t


shocks,” regardless of their severity. The short time period in which a household is observed in the SIPP
makes a more precise measure of the severity and timing of dual unemployment di¢ cult to obtain.


                                                                  22
on a sample of homeowners from the IPUMS for household i in year t.20
       Estimating equation (16), we …nd that couples who share an occupation spend more on
owner-occupied housing. The …rst column of Table 3.5 reports the results when the only ad-
ditional covariates are the unemployment rate controls, log of family income, and the income
share of the husband.        Husbands and wives with the same occupation spend 4.3 percent
more on housing (with a 0.4 percent standard error) than couples with di¤erent occupations.
Non-mean preserving increases in risk, such as a higher risk of unemployment for either the
husband, the wife, or both, reduce spending on housing, presumably because they lower
expected future income. Current income is a good predictor of housing consumption, with
an estimated elasticity of 0.625 (with a standard error of 0.003). The income share of the
husband is insigni…cant in this speci…cation.
       The positive relationship between “same occupation”, 1 , and housing spending, ln P H ,
is consistent with our theory and is not what would be expected from a precautionary saving
model without commitment. However, it might merely re‡ect unobserved factors that are
correlated with both 1 and ln P H . To address this concern, we begin by controlling for
MSA of residence in each year and a host of demographic characteristics.                    For example,
by including MSA          year dummies and thus comparing housing spending for same- and
di¤erent-occupation homeowners within a metro area in a given year, we control for the
possibility that same-occupation couples may tend to locate in areas with high housing
prices. The resulting estimates can be found in the second column of Table 3.5. Even with
these controls – which allow us to rule out the e¤ect of some unobservable factors at the
expense of some of our identifying variation –same-occupation couples buy houses that are
on average 2.7 percent more expensive than other couples’.                The estimated coe¢ cient on
  20
    This regression is similar in spirit to those in Carroll and Samwick (1997, 1998). Those papers quantify
precautionary saving by regressing measures of permanent and transitory income risk, as well as a variety
of controls, on various measures of household wealth. Other papers take a similar approach in the housing
context. Those empirical studies …nd a negative relationship between income risk and home ownership (Diaz-
Serrano (2005), Haurin (1991), Robst et al. (1999)). Prior evidence on housing spending is ambiguous.
Haurin and Gill (1987) …nd that military husbands’ incomes positively a¤ect their housing spending but
their wives’incomes (which they argue are more uncertain) do not. Haurin (1991) examines the e¤ect of
income risk on house spending, and fails to …nd a statistically signi…cant e¤ect.


                                                    23
the husband’s income share becomes positive with the additional controls, indicating that
more inequity in the couple’s earnings is correlated with higher housing spending.21                    The
estimated coe¢ cient on family income falls because the added demographic characteristics
proxy for the household’s permanent income.
    Next, to control for the possibility that same-occupation couples are more prevalent in
occupations that have a strong unobservable preference for housing, we include dummy vari-
ables for each spouse’s occupation. Once we remove the e¤ect of either spouse’s occupation
on housing consumption, does sharing an occupation further increase that consumption? In
other words, do a dual-doctor and a dual-lawyer couple together spend more on owned hous-
ing than two doctor/lawyer couples? This regression implicitly assumes that the household’s
occupation-based taste for housing is simply the sum of each spouse’s individual preference,
as estimated from the sample of di¤erent-occupation couples.
    These results are reported in the third column of Table 3.5. The new coe¢ cient on “same
occupation”implies that, controlling for each spouse’s occupation, MSA                   year e¤ects, and
a variety of demographics, same-occupation couples spend 2.1 percent (0.4 percent standard
error) more on their houses than do di¤erent-occupation couples. Table 3.3 notes that same-
occupation couples have an 18 percentage point higher correlation in unemployment risk, so
simple extrapolation gives an elasticity of house spending with respect to the unemployment
correlation of 0.12 (0.021/0.18).        A 10 percentage point rise in a couple’s unemployment
correlation would yield a 1.2 percent increase in spending on owner-occupied housing. The
unemployment rate and income controls decline in magnitude and signi…cance with the
addition of the occupation dummies, which is not surprising since much of the variation in
unemployment rates is across occupation (with the remainder being within occupation over
time), and income is correlated with occupation.
  21
     This result is economically quite large; increasing the head’s income share by one standard deviation
(0.17) leads a household to spend almost 2 percent more on housing. While income share might be a
measure of risk, it might also merely re‡ect the possibility that people who like to spend money pair up with
spouses who make a lot of it. Therefore, we use the income share variable as a control and focus on the
same-occupation variable as a much better identi…ed measure of risk.



                                                     24
    These results are robust to using “same industry” as our proxy for couples’unemploy-
ment correlation. We have replicated the analysis using the IPUMS 1950 constant industry
de…nitions, and imputing unemployment rates based on the husband’s and wife’s indus-
tries.   As an example, we report one set of these replications in column 4.     This column
corresponds to the speci…cation in column 3, replacing occupation variables with industry
ones. All else equal, home-owning couples that share the same industry spend 5.6 percent
more on housing.     Since the di¤erence in unemployment correlation between same- and
di¤erent-industry households is also 0.18, the elasticity of house spending with respect to
unemployment correlation is 0.31 (0.056/0.18).
    One potential concern is that sharing the same occupation is a proxy for similarity in
general, and the kind of people who choose similar spouses have a certain preference for
housing. However, similarity per se does not seem to account for our …ndings. In regressions
that we do not report, we have controlled for other dimensions on which spouses can be the
same, namely age (in ranges) and education. While these variables occasionally have a
statistically signi…cant e¤ect on housing spending, the sign of this impact is not uniform.
Furthermore, including these variables has almost no e¤ect on the estimated same-occupation
coe¢ cient.
    Indeed, this baseline result is remarkably robust in a number of dimensions. In Table 3.6,
we examine the relationship between “same occupation”and housing spending for di¤erent
subsamples.     We do this both to show that the result is generally applicable across the
population, but also to ascertain that “same occupation” is not spuriously correlated with
an observable characteristic. The reported coe¢ cients are the estimated “same occupation”
e¤ects from regressions analogous to the one reported in the third column of Table 3.5.
    In the …rst row of Table 3.6, we split the sample by decade, running separate regressions
for 1980, 1990, and 2000. Our …nding is not restricted to any particular time period. Same-
occupation homeowners spend from 1.7 to 2.3 percent more on housing than do di¤erent-
occupation households within the same MSA when controlling for income, occupation, and


                                              25
demographic characteristics.
   The “same occupation” e¤ect also is not limited to any particular age or education
group. However, the magnitude of the e¤ect of a higher correlation in unemployment risk
on housing spending for homeowners is signi…cantly bigger for same-occupation households
where the husband is under age 45 or where neither of the spouses have had any post-
secondary schooling. Both of these groups are likely to be more sensitive to unemployment
shocks: the young because more of their wealth is in human capital; the less-educated because
they have fewer resources to maintain their permanent income after an unemployment spell
or because their job mobility is lower.   In addition, households whose incomes are above
the sample median have a smaller, and statistically insigni…cant, “same occupation” e¤ect.
Instead, relatively low-income families are much more sensitive to unemployment risk.
   Finally, we split the sample based on the division of labor income between husband and
wife. If one spouse receives little wage income, their unemployment risk potentially is not
very relevant for the economic well-being of the household, and the unemployment risk of
the primary wage-earner similarly is more important.      By the same logic, the correlation
in unemployment risk between spouses when one of them does not make very much money
should be less of a factor in the housing decision. We test this relationship by comparing the
estimated “same occupation”e¤ect for households where the husband earns between 40 and
80 percent of the total labor income to those with more unequal division of earnings. The
40/80 cuto¤s are approximately one standard deviation above and below the mean husband’s
share of income.   Consistent with our expectations, we …nd sharing the same occupation
has a larger e¤ect on housing spending when the distribution of income between spouses is
more equal.
   The theory developed in Section 2 suggests that a positive relationship between risk and
housing consumption should be present only when moving costs are high.          This allows a
more re…ned test of our hypothesis, where we test whether the interaction of adjustment
costs and same-occupation status is positive while controlling separately for the direct ef-


                                             26
fects of adjustment costs and sharing the same occupation. That is, does the di¤erence in
housing consumption between same- and di¤erent-occupation homeowners grow as transac-
tion costs rise? This re…nement can be used to rule out the possibility that same-occupation
couples spend more on housing because they have an unobservable taste for housing, as long
as that taste is not con…ned only to high adjustment cost households. Similarly, if the in-
creased housing spending by same-occupation couples re‡ects precautionary saving invested
in owner-occupied housing, there is no reason to believe that precautionary saving in housing
should be largest for households who are less likely to move.
   One source of variation in adjustment costs comes from the probability of moving. House-
holds that are likely to move soon for exogenous demographic reasons have a lower e¤ective
cost of a forced move than households who planned never to move.        For households who
were planning to move, a bad income shock merely accelerates the timing of a move that was
going to happen soon anyway. While there is some cost to changing the timing of a move, it
is presumably much smaller than the transaction cost of the move itself. In the extreme, a
household that was about to move anyway does not face any additional housing transaction
cost from unemployment. Conversely, the transaction cost is largest for a household that
planned never to move; in that case, a forced move is a net new transaction cost. As a re-
sult, the e¤ective transaction cost is declining in the likelihood of a move. The tendency of
same-occupation couples to spend more on housing (relative to di¤erent-occupation couples)
should be stronger when the exogenous probability of moving is lower.
   In our consumption commitments framework, we would expect a positive coe¢ cient on
1 and a negative coe¢ cient on P (move)    1 . To test this hypothesis, we use an exogenous
measure of the likelihood of moving based on the average rate of moving among couples
of similar age, education, and presence of children.   The construction of this measure is
detailed in Section 3.1. We re-estimate equation (16), adding the interaction of our imputed
probability of moving with “same occupation,” P (move)       1 , as well as P (move) by itself
as a control. The identifying assumption underlying this regression is that any di¤erence


                                             27
between same- and di¤erent-occupation couples in the unobservable preference for housing is
uncorrelated with the moving rate of similar households, after controlling separately for each
of the household attributes we use to impute the probability of moving, and other household
characteristics.
       The second column of Table 3.7 reports the results of this regression. (The …rst column
of this table merely repeats the results of the fully saturated regression from the third column
of Table 3.5.) The estimated coe¢ cient on 1 in the second column corresponds to the case
where the household expects never to move and thus faces the largest possible transaction
costs.     Consistent with our theory, this coe¢ cient is positive and higher than in the …rst
column, rising from 0.021 to 0.034 (0.007). The interaction between same-occupation and
the probability of moving is negative and signi…cant, at -0.088 (0.039). Thus, increasing risk
does not increase housing spending when the probability of moving is high (and therefore the
e¤ective transaction cost is low). The standard deviation in the probability of moving for
owners is 0.32, so the precautionary motive dominates (the coe¢ cient on “same occupation”
becomes negative) for moving rates that are 0.86 standard deviations above the mean.22
Consistent with our theory, the empirical results show that when e¤ective moving costs are
low, households behave as would be predicted by a precautionary saving model without
commitment, in that a mean-preserving spread in risk reduces housing spending. But when
e¤ective moving costs are high, housing spending rises with risk.

3.4       The Relationship Between Income Risk and Rent for Renters

A more obvious source of variation in moving costs stems from the tenure choice, as home
renters face much lower moving costs than homeowners. As a result we should observe a
weaker relationship between risk and housing consumption for home renters than for home-
owners. Indeed, if renters’moving costs are low enough, greater risk should lead to lower
  22
    The “same occupation” e¤ect turns negative (0:034 P (move) 0:088 < 0) when P (move) > 0:39.
That is 0:86 standard deviations above the mean ((0:39 0:11)=0:32). To get a sense of the scaling, at the
mean, a home-owning household expects to move every nine years (1.0/0.11). At a probability of moving
0.86 standard deviations above the mean, the expected length-of-stay is two years (1=(0:11 + 0:39)).



                                                   28
spending on rent. Also, variation in transactions costs stemming from the exogenous prob-
ability of moving should make little di¤erence for renters, since they face low moving costs
whether or not they plan to move.
       We …nd that for renters, a mean-preserving increase in risk has no e¤ect on the demand for
rental housing. This result is reported in the third column of Table 3.7, which replicates the
regression in the …rst column for a sample of renters, replacing log(house value) with log(rent)
as the explanatory variable. The estimated coe¢ cient on the same-occupation variable is
basically zero, at -0.002, and not statistically signi…cant. By contrast, note from the …rst
column that same-occupation couples spend signi…cantly more on owner-occupied housing
than di¤erent-occupation couples.         The di¤erence between the same-occupation e¤ect for
owners and renters is 0.023, and is statistically signi…cant at the 95 percent con…dence level.23
Finding di¤erent e¤ects for owners and renters suggests that consumption commitments
rather than unobserved attributes explain the tendency of same-occupation couples to spend
more on housing. If sharing an occupation were merely a signal of an unobservable preference
for housing, renters who share an occupation should rent more expensive homes than renters
who do not and the di¤erence between the estimated coe¢ cients on “same occupation” for
owners and renters should be small.
       The fourth column of Table 3.7 presents a regression which adds both P (move) and a
P (move)       1 interaction to the regression predicting log(rent) in the third column. This
regression speci…cation is identical to the one shown in the second column, with log(rent)
replacing log(house value) as the explanatory variable. The impact of “same occupation”
alone is negative but insigni…cant.       The interaction variable has a positive coe¢ cient but
is also statistically insigni…cant. However, both of these coe¢ cients are statistically signi…-
cantly di¤erent from their analogs for owners in column 2. Since renters face low transaction
costs regardless of whether or not they plan to move, we would not expect the relationship
  23
    We tested the null that the same-occupation coe¢ cient was the same for renters and owners by stacking
the observations and fully interacting all variables with a renter dummy. The null was whether “same
occupation” renter was equal to zero.



                                                   29
between risk and consumption to be a¤ected by the probability of moving.

3.5       The Relationship Between Income Risk and Home Ownership

Another implication of the model is that renting becomes relatively more appealing as the
correlation between spouses’unemployment events increases. Knowing that simultaneous
unemployment – and therefore moving – is more likely for them, same-occupation couples
may adapt by renting, rather than owning, in order to save on the costs of future moves.
The …fth column of Table 3.7 con…rms that same-occupation couples are less likely to own
their homes. This column repeats the regressions in the …rst and third columns, replacing
the explanatory variables with an indicator that takes the value of one if the household owns
their home. The increased sample size re‡ects the fact that this regression includes both
homeowners and renters.           For this linear probability model, the estimated coe¢ cient on
“same occupation”is -0.014 (0.003), so same-occupation couples have a 1.4 percentage point
lower rate of home ownership relative to di¤erent-occupation households, ceteris paribus.
Since those same-occupation couples have an 18 percentage point higher unemployment
correlation, the elasticity of home ownership with respect to the correlation in risk is -0.078
(-0.014/0.18).
       This result also helps to con…rm that the relationship between risk and housing spending
represents housing consumption and not precautionary saving invested in a housing asset.
If precautionary wealth were invested in housing, increasing risk would make households
more likely to buy and less likely to rent their homes.24                By contrast, our model implies
that increasing risk would make households more likely to rent and less likely to own their
homes.25
  24
      Buying a larger house is an ine¢ cient way to save. The return on housing is comprised of the capital
gain plus the rental value of living in the house (the dividend). Homeowners are constrained to consume
their entire dividend, so buying a bigger house as a form of saving forces the household into overconsuming
housing in the …rst period, leaving a net-of-the-consumption-value return on the owner-occupied house that
is lower than an alternative investment (such as rental housing).
   25
      This own/rent result also rejects other alternatives that induce households with greater risk to invest in
housing. One such story is that the housing asset is protected in bankruptcy, so if a same-occupation couple
is more likely to …le for bankruptcy, they should purchase more housing. If that hypothesis explained the
results, riskier households should be more likely to own their homes and not rent, which is contrary to the


                                                      30
    As we noted earlier, our model predicts that same-occupation households will have a
relatively stronger preference for renting only in the presence of signi…cant moving costs. We
test this re…nement in the sixth column of Table 3.7 by adding as covariates the interaction
of the imputed probability of moving and the same-occupation indicator, P (move)          1 , as
well as the imputed probability of moving alone, P (move). This column merely repeats the
regressions shown in columns two and four, with the home ownership indicator variable as
the explanatory variable.
    Since e¤ective moving costs are highest for households that are unlikely to move for
exogenous demographic reasons, we would expect the di¤erence between same- and di¤erent-
occupation couples in the propensity to own should be most negative for these households.
As the probability of moving rises, the di¤erence between same- and di¤erent-occupation
couples should become less negative, so P (move)          1 should have a positive coe¢ cient.
This prediction stands in contrast to the expected e¤ect of P (move) on tenure choice. Since
frequent movers, whether or not spouses share an occupation, pay higher expected moving
costs, they should be more likely to rent.         Therefore, P (move) should have a negative
coe¢ cient.
    The sixth column of Table 3.7 presents results that match the predictions of the model. In
the …rst row, the estimated coe¢ cient on “same occupation”corresponds to households that
implicitly expect never to move. The point estimate of -0.027 (0.005) is nearly twice as large
as the average e¤ect across all households, which is the coe¢ cient reported in the …fth column.
Unsurprisingly, frequent movers tend to rent as indicated by the negative and signi…cant
coe¢ cient in the second row.          In the third row, the interaction term shows a positive
and signi…cant coe¢ cient.        As the probability of moving increases, the di¤erence in the
propensity for home ownership between same- and di¤erent-occupation households becomes
less negative. Simple extrapolation from the point estimate of 0.084 (0.026) shows that the
gap between same- and di¤erent-occupation couples is eliminated when the probability of
evidence in the …fth column of Table 3.7.



                                                 31
moving is roughly 32 percent, equivalent to a three-year expected stay.
   It is useful to consider whether the overall pattern of results we observe in Tables 3.5
and 3.7 could be generated by an unobserved taste for housing by same-occupation cou-
ples, combined with endogenous self-selection into home ownership. First, suppose same-
occupation couples had a higher mean unobserved taste for housing than di¤erent-occupation
couples, so their preference distribution were shifted to the right. That form of heterogene-
ity would cause same-occupation homeowners to spend more on their homes. But it would
also suggest, counterfactually, that same-occupation renters would spend more on rent. If
same-occupation couples merely had a preference for home ownership, it could explain why
same-occupation couples have higher spending on owner-occupied housing but not rental
housing. But that model would predict that same-occupation couples would be more likely
to own their houses, which is contradicted by the data.
   However, if same-occupation couples had the same mean but higher variance in the
unobserved preference for housing than di¤erent-occupation couples, it could explain more
of the empirical regularities we …nd. Since same-occupation households would have thicker
preference tails –they either love housing or they hate it –same-occupation households who
loved housing would own and also spend more than the more neutral di¤erent-occupation
households. Those same-occupation households who disliked housing would rent and not
spend much on rent relative to di¤erent-occupation households. In addition, depending on
the clearing price of owned housing, it is possible that more di¤erent-occupation than same-
occupation households prefer owning. In that case, same-occupation households would have
a lower rate of home ownership.     If this explanation is true, it implies a straightforward
and testable prediction.   The residuals for the same-occupation, home-owning couples in
the housing demand regression should be more right-skewed than those for the di¤erent-
occupation couples. Similarly, the residuals for the same-occupation renting couples in the
rent regression should be more left-skewed. In our data, there is no distinguishable di¤erence
in skewness in residuals between same- and di¤erent-occupation couples, so variation in the


                                             32
second moment of unobserved taste for housing cannot explain our results. Furthermore,
it seems unlikely that any di¤erence between same- and di¤erent-occupation couples in the
taste for housing is present only for households with a low exogenous probability of moving.
This would have to be true to explain the pattern of coe¢ cients on the interaction between
“same occupation”and the imputed probability of moving.

3.6       Consumption Commitments and Unemployment Insurance

Our …nal empirical test examines how the generosity of unemployment insurance (UI) a¤ects
the relationship between “same occupation” and housing spending. More generous UI ef-
fectively reduces the size of shocks to permanent income since it a¤ords the unemployed the
ability to set a higher reservation wage in their job search (Feldstein and Poterba (1984)).
A theory incorporating consumption commitments predicts a positive relationship between
“same occupation” and housing spending only when the household experiences a loss large
enough to induce moving. Therefore, the di¤erence in housing spending between same- and
di¤erent-occupation couples should decrease (become less positive) when unemployment in-
surance becomes more generous.           By contrast, a model of precautionary saving without
commitment would predict that increasing risk reduces spending less when UI is more gen-
erous; the di¤erence in housing spending between same- and di¤erent-occupation couples
should increase (become less negative) as UI becomes more generous.26
       There are several sources of variation in the generosity of UI. While state UI programs
typically compensate the unemployed for up to 50 percent of lost wages up to a cap, the level
of the cap and the replacement rate schedule vary across states, over time, and according to
the number of dependent children. In addition, the generosity of UI is a nonlinear function
of income: the replacement rate remains constant until income reaches the cap, at which
point it declines with income.27       Lastly, this nonlinearity in the replacement rate implies
  26
    e.g., Engen and Gruber (2001).
  27
    Once income exceeds the cap, the absolute bene…t amount remains level at 50 percent of the cap amount
but is declining as a percentage of income.




                                                   33
that the share of income earned by each spouse in‡uences the couple’s total replacement rate
in the event that both spouses lose their jobs. For example, if both spouses earn exactly the
cap amount and both become unemployed, they collectively will receive 50 percent of their
former wages. But if one spouse earns twice the cap amount and the other earns almost
nothing –total family income is the same but its allocation is not –the family can at best
replace 25 percent of their former income.
      To implement this test, we calculate UI replacement rates for each spouse using the
unemployment insurance calculator developed by Cullen and Gruber (2000) and extended
by Chetty (2004).28         Since the calculator contains information about UI since 1984, we
restrict our sample to 1990 and 2000.             We calculate the household’s replacement rate as
the average replacement rate for each spouse, weighted by their respective income shares.
Then we interact this measure of the household’s replacement rate with the same-occupation,
unemployment rate, income share and other control variables from equation (16), and test
whether the coe¢ cient on the “same occupation”               replacement rate interaction is negative.
Assuming that the variation in UI generosity is uncorrelated with di¤erences between same-
and di¤erent-occupation couples in the unobservable demand for housing or home ownership,
then this interaction term provides a clean test of the consumption commitments theory.
      We make one further re…nement to the empirical speci…cation. Although the model in
Section 2 assumed that husbands and wives earned the same amount, in practice one member
of the household might have signi…cantly greater income than the other. In that case, the
possibility of unemployment for the low-income spouse poses a smaller risk to the household
than would be implied by their unemployment rates.                   To correct this mismeasurement,
we weight the unemployment and same-occupation variables by the husband’s and wife’s
shares of family income. In Table 3.1, on average husbands earn 62.1 percent of household
income when both spouses are working full-time. Labelling the husband’s share of income
s and the wife’s share (1          s), the husband’s unemployment risk controls become ps and
 28
      We are grateful to Raj Chetty for letting us use his UI calculator and bene…t data.



                                                      34
p2 s2 ; the wife’s, q(1      s) and q 2 (1             s)2 ; and, for both, pqs(1                         s). The same-occupation
indicator variable, 1 , also based on the interaction of both spouses’attributes, is multiplied
by both income shares, 1 s(1                 s). We also control for the husband’s income share and the
husband’s          wife’s income shares independently. While including these interaction terms
in the earlier regressions also would have been justi…ed, in practice doing so makes little
di¤erence in the estimated coe¢ cients and their statistical signi…cance, so we opted for a
more easily interpretable speci…cation. However, the UI replacement rate is also a function
of s, so omitting it in this context would lead to a biased estimate of the interaction of “same
occupation”with UI generosity.
    We estimate the following regression on the sample of homeowners, where R denotes the
replacement rate and g (pi;t ; qi;t ; si;t ) = psi;t + q(1                     s)i;t + pqs(1              s)i;t + (ps)2i;t + (qs)2i;t :


                     2                                                                                                            3
                    6                        [     1 1 ;i;t   +   2 (1 ;i;t       Ri;t )]s(1        s)i;t                       7
                    6                                                                                                           7
                    6                   +                                                                                       7
                    6                       3g   (pi;t ; qi;t ; si;t ) +   4 (g   (pi;t ; qi;t ; si;t )     Ri;t )              7
    ln P H         =6                                                                                                           7        (17)
             i;t    6+                                                                                                   Ri;t ) 7
                    6      5 si;t   +   6 (si;t       Ri;t ) +     7 si;t (1       si;t ) +     8 (si;t (1      si;t )          7
                    4                                                                                                           5
                           +    1   ln (Y )i;t +        2 (ln (Y )i;t         Ri;t + 'Zi;t +          k;t   + & s;t + "i;t


This regression interacts the same occupation dummy from equation (16), as well as the
unemployment rate, family income, and income share controls, with the household’s re-
placement rate.          Since this speci…cation includes MSA                                   year dummies (               k;t ),   state
year dummies (& s;t ), and income share controls, we are examining how same- and di¤erent-
occupation households respond di¤erently to variation across states in their UI programs,
while controlling for any state-level generosity that a¤ects same- and di¤erent-occupation
households equally.
    We …nd that increasing the correlation in unemployment risk raises housing spending
more for homeowners with lower UI replacement rates. Since the e¤ect of the UI replacement
rate may not be linear, we report three functional forms for the replacement rate, R: an


                                                                   35
indicator for being in the bottom decile of the replacement rate by decade, an indicator
for the bottom quartile, and a linear function of the replacement rate. We compute robust
standard errors, clustered on state, year, and replacement rate segment.29 In the …rst column
of the top panel of Table 3.8, which includes the entire set of covariates except the husbands’
and wives’occupation dummies, the estimated same-occupation e¤ect for the top 90 percent
of households by replacement rate (the excluded group) is 0.077 (0.019). In order to evaluate
the same-occupation e¤ect at the mean, we need to multiply it by the average income shares
of the husband and wife. Those averages are approximately 2/3 and 1/3, respectively, so
multiplying the estimated coe¢ cient by 2/9 yields an estimate comparable to those in the
previous tables. Here, the average same-occupation couple with a UI replacement rate in the
top 90 percent spends an additional 1.7 percent more on housing than do di¤erent-occupation
couples with similar replacement rates. Consistent with our predictions, the di¤erence in
spending on housing between same- and di¤erent- occupation couples is biggest in the lowest
replacement rate decile. The second row of the …rst column reports how the di¤erence in
housing spending between same- and di¤erent occupation couples changes in the bottom
replacement rate decile.        Bottom-decile, same-occupation couples spend an additional 6.0
percent (1.8 percent standard error) more on housing relative to di¤erent-occupation couples
in the same decile, net of any same/di¤erent occupation di¤erences in spending for the top
90 percent.30 While we do not report the estimated coe¢ cients on the interactions of the
husband’s and wife’s unemployment rates with the replacement rate, in all cases higher risks
of unemployment reduce housing spending more when UI replacement rates are very low.
  29
      For the bottom-decile speci…cation, the replacement rate segments are simply the bottom 10/top 90
percent ranges. Similarly, for the bottom-quartile speci…cation, the segments are the bottom 25/top 75
percent ranges. In the linear speci…cation, the segments are the linear portions of the UI replacement
schedule. Each spouse can be on one of three sections: the spouse is ineligible (R=0); the spouse’s income
is below or at the bene…ts maximum (typically this means R=0.5, although the cap varies over time, across
states, and by family structure); or the spouse’s income is above the bene…ts maximum (typically, 0<R<0.5,
depending on the state’s cap). Of the six possible spousal combinations, …ve are populated with households
in our data, and we cluster on those combinations interacted with year. The empty segment is both spouses
having incomes above the bene…ts maximum.
   30
      6.0 percent is calculated as the product of the estimated coe¢ cient (0.267) and the product of the average
husband’s and wife’s income shares (2/3 1/3=2/9). The standard error is similarly adjusted.



                                                       36
    In column 2, a similar pattern is seen when we divide households into the top three
quartiles and bottom quartile by replacement rate.        The same-occupation couples in the
top 75 percent spend 1.7 percent more on housing than do comparable di¤erent-occupation
couples. Same-occupation couples in the bottom quartile spend an additional 3.3 percent
more on housing than do bottom-quartile di¤erent-occupation households, all relative to
the di¤erence in spending between same- and di¤erent-occupation couples in the top three
quartiles.
    In the third column, the replacement rate enters linearly. Unlike in the previous columns,
here a higher value for R implies more generous UI, so we expect a negative coe¢ cient. The
…rst row corresponds to same-occupation couples with a zero replacement rate. They spend
4.5 percent (0.203     2/9, 1.4 percent standard error) more on housing than comparable
di¤erent-occupation couples. As the replacement rate increases, the di¤erence in housing
spending between same- and di¤erent-occupation couples falls. For each 10 percentage point
increase in the replacement rate, the gap shrinks by 0.72 percentage points. In a sign that
the replacement rate relationship is nonlinear, this interaction term is statistically signi…cant
only at the 91 percent con…dence level.
    The bottom panel repeats the estimation, but adds occupation dummies.            In the …rst
two columns, the estimated “same occupation”e¤ect is about one-third smaller, but remains
statistically signi…cant. The estimated coe¢ cients on the interaction terms, however, are
only one-fourth their prior magnitude and no longer are statistically signi…cant.          Both
coe¢ cients of interest in the linear speci…cation (column 3) are indistinguishable from zero.


4    Conclusion

This paper shows the surprising e¤ect that consumption commitments can have on the
role of risk in households’consumption decisions: households may increase consumption in
response to increased risk. We illustrated this idea in the context of a dual-career household
that faces unemployment risk and consumes housing.           Suppose the household faces the


                                               37
risk of an income shock large enough that moving would be worthwhile.          This household
may purchase a house of roughly the size that it would want in the absence of the shock,
since buying a smaller house initially would not spare it from moving in the event of the
shock.   By contrast, if a household faces the risk of an income shock that would not be
large enough to induce moving, they must buy a house small enough to ensure su¢ cient
non-housing consumption after they have paid for their committed housing consumption.
In this context, a mean-preserving increase in risk that makes large shocks more likely and
small shocks less so will increase housing consumption. This striking result is the opposite
of what would be predicted by a precautionary saving model without commitment.
   This result requires adjustment costs to be high enough to deter moving in all but the
worst states. Therefore, it should not apply when moving costs are low, as they are for renters
or those who expect to move soon.      Furthermore, households with higher unemployment
correlations –who are more likely to face shocks large enough to induce moving –should be
more likely to consume housing with lower adjustment costs; they should rent rather than
own their homes.
   When we proxy for a mean-preserving increase in risk by whether a married couple shares
the same occupation, which is a proxy for a higher correlation in unemployment risk, we …nd
that this behavior is pervasive in the data.    Controlling for each spouse’s characteristics,
including their individual occupations and probabilities of unemployment, we …nd that same-
occupation households spend relatively more on housing. As expected, this result is con…ned
to homeowners, and is strongest for those owners who face e¤ectively higher moving costs
due to a lower exogenous probability of moving.      Furthermore, same-occupation couples,
compared to other couples, are relatively more likely to rent their homes, with this di¤erence
con…ned to households that are less likely to move for demographic reasons. Finally, same-
occupation couples spend relatively more on housing consumption compared to di¤erent-
career couples when unemployment insurance is less generous.        All of these patterns are
consistent with households increasing housing consumption in the face of increased risk in


                                               38
the presence of moving costs.
   Of course, our …nding that commitments a¤ect the relationship between risk and con-
sumption does not deny the importance of prudence in generating precautionary saving.
Rather, these o¤setting motives operate in concert. Even so, the net positive e¤ect of risk
on consumption can be quite signi…cant for many households.       Simple calibrations sug-
gest that the size of this net positive e¤ect should be of roughly the same magnitude as
the negative e¤ect in a precautionary saving model without commitment. Empirically, for
households with the highest moving costs, we estimate that an 18 percentage point increase
in the unemployment risk correlation between spouses raises housing spending by 3.4 per-
cent for households that never plan to move (from Table 3.7, column 2). That change in
correlation corresponds to more than doubling the likelihood of joint unemployment (from
0.67 to 1.47 percent). Extrapolating, a one percentage point increase in the risk of dual
unemployment would raise housing spending by 4.25 percent.
   These …ndings are important, in part, because they illustrate that households do not
necessarily behave in the manner predicted by the usual precautionary saving intuition.
However, we have chosen to limit the scope of our analysis to a context that can be cleanly
isolated in the data. The intuition in this paper extends beyond dual-career couples, unem-
ployment risk, and housing consumption. It remains for future empirical work to show that
greater risk in the face of consumption commitments can sometimes lead to lower saving or
wealth, and for all types of households and consumption commitments.




                                            39
A     Appendix A: Proofs
A.1        Proof of Lemma 1
The …rst order condition can be written as:
                   2 0                                                                 3
                     g (h1 ) + (1 p q + ) g 0 21 Y1 + 2Y2E 2h1
               0 = 4 + (p + q 2 ) g 0 21 Y1 + Y2E + Y2U 2h1                            5:               (18)
                                 +   g 0 12 Y1 + 2Y2U 2h1

Implicit di¤erentiation of (18) yields:

             1
dh1   g0     2
                  Y1 + 2Y2U    2h1       2g 0 12 Y1 + Y2E + Y2U 2h1 + g 0 21 Y1 + 2Y2E 2h1
    =
d                          g 00 (h1 ) + (1 p q + ) g 00 12 Y1 + 2Y2E 2h1
             + (p + q     2 ) g 00 12 Y1 + Y2E + Y2U 2h1        + g 00 12 Y1 + 2Y2U 2h1

The denominator of this expression is negative since g 00 < 0: (g is assumed to be concave.)
The numerator will be positive if g 000 < 0. Therefore, dh        d
                                                                    1
                                                                      > 0 if g 000 < 0. Similarly, the
numerator will be zero if g 0 is linear, or equivalently if g 000 = 0. Therefore, dh    d
                                                                                          1
                                                                                            = 0 if g 000 = 0.
Finally, the numerator will be negative if g 000 > 0. Therefore, dh     d
                                                                          1
                                                                            < 0 if g 000 > 0.

A.2        Proof of Lemma 2
If it is optimal to move only in the worst state of the world, then the problem can be described
with the following …rst order conditions:
             2                                                                  3
               (1     f1 ) + (1 p q + )         1 + Y1 + 2Y2E 2h1 f1
          0=4       + (p + q 2 )         1 + Y1 + Y2E + Y2U 2h1 f1              5;
                                                  U
                              +    1 + 2 Y1 + 2Y2       h1 k f1
             2                                                                        3
               (1     h1 ) (2    ) + (1 p q + ) 2 + 2 Y1 + 2Y2E 2h1 f1
          0=4          + (p + q 2 ) 2 + 2 Y1 + Y2E + Y2U 2h1 f1                       5:
                                                      U
                                +      1 + 2 Y1 + 2Y2     h1 k f1

These …rst order conditions can be simpli…ed:

              1                                                 1              1             3
0 = Y1 1            + Y2E [2    p    q] + Y2U [(p + q      )]     k + f1    2+     + h1   2+
              2                                                 2              2             2
              3                                                    1             3             9
0 = Y1 2            + 2Y2E [2    p    q] + Y2U [2p + 2q     3 ]      k + f1   2+     + h1   6+                  :
              2                                                    2             2             2

The optimal levels of consumption can be found by solving this system of equations to yield:
        1
    f1 =  Y1 + 2Y2E + (p + q) Y2U Y2E  k
        4
        1                                                       [2    p   q] Y2E     Y2U + k (1        )
    h1 = Y1 + Y2E (2 p q) + Y2U (p + q) k                   +                                              :
        4                                                                     [4     3 ]


                                                     40
Note that there is, depending upon the de…nition, either precautionary saving or no pre-
cautionary saving in food consumption. Food consumption in the …rst period falls with ,
the measure of the mean-preserving increase in risk. In this sense, there is precautionary
saving. However, food consumption is exactly equal to one quarter of expected net income
when expected moving costs are included in the measure of income.
   Di¤erentiating the expression for optimal consumption with respect to gives:
                                                                1          1          9         27     2
                        dh1   18 Y2E         Y2U       1        2
                                                                  p        2
                                                                             q        2
                                                                                           k+   16
                                                                                                           k
                            =                                               2                                  :
                        d                                  6          9
                                                                      2

            dh1
Note that   d
                  > 0 if and only if

                                   2 [2          p    q] Y2E              Y2U
                                                                                    > k:
                                                     1 38

Since
                                                                                3
                                       [2        p    q] >            1
                                                                                8
the condition will be satis…ed whenever

                                             2 Y2E         Y2U > k:

This can be shown most simply by noting that the decision in the dual unemployment state to
move necessarily means having a lower level of housing consumption relative to not moving.
To be optimal, moving must allow for a higher level of food consumption than not moving:
                   1
                     Y1 + 2Y2U     k        f1       h1 > Y1 + 2Y2U                   f1    2h1
                   2
                                                          1          1                          1              3
                                                       0 > Y1 + Y2U + k                           f1             h1 .   (19)
                                                          2          2                          2              2
Note that initial food and housing consumption when it is optimal to move only in the worst
state, ff1 ; h1 g, will be greater than the level of initial housing or food consumption, c1 , that
                                                                                          ¯
would be chosen if the dual-unemployment state obtained with certainty and if the household
were required to move in the dual-unemployment state. Therefore,
                                                       1
                                 f1 ; h1 > c1            Y1 + 2Y2U                    k :
                                           ¯           4
Note that the inequality (19) is satis…ed with equality if f1 = h1 =c1 and is satis…ed strictly
                                                                    ¯
for all greater values. Therefore,
                                           dh1
                                               > 0:
                                           d




                                                           41
References
 [1] Brueckner, Jan. “Consumption and Investment Motives and the Portfolio Choices of
     Homeowners,” Journal of Real Estate Finance and Economics, September 1997, 15,
     159-180.
 [2] Browning, Martin; Crossley, Thomas F. “Shocks, Stocks and Socks: Smoothing Con-
     sumption Over a Temporary Income Loss,”CAM Working Paper, March 2004.
 [3] Campbell John Y.; Cocco, Joao F. “Household Risk Management and Optimal Mortgage
     Choice,”Quarterly Journal of Economics, November 2003, 118(4), 1449-1494.
 [4] Carroll, Christopher D.; Samwick, Andrew A. “The Nature of Precautionary Wealth,”
     Journal of Monetary Economics, September 1997, 40(1), 41-71.
 [5] Carroll, Christopher D.; Samwick, Andrew A. “How Important Is Precautionary Sav-
     ing?”Review of Economics and Statistics, August 1998, 80(3), 410-419.
 [6] Chetty, Raj. “Consumption Commitments, Unemployment Durations, and Local Risk
     Aversion,”NBER Working Paper #10211, January 2004.
 [7] Chetty, Raj; Szeidl, Adam. “Consumption Commitments and Asset Prices,” Harvard
     University Working Paper, February 2004.
 [8] Cullen, Julie B.; Gruber, Jonathan. “Does Unemployment Insurance Crowd Out Spousal
     Labor Supply?”Journal of Labor Economics, 2000, 18(3), 546-572.
 [9] Davido¤, Thomas. “Maintenance and the Home Equity of the Elderly,” UC Berkeley
     Working Paper, February 2004.
[10] Davido¤, Thomas. “Labor Income, Housing Prices and Homeownership,” Journal of
     Urban Economics, forthcoming, 2005.
[11] Diaz-Serrano, Luis. “Labor Income Uncertainty, Skewness and Homeownership: A Panel
     Data Study for Germany and Spain.” Journal of Urban Economics, July 2005, 58(1),
     156-176.
[12] Drèze, Jacques H.; Modigliani, Franco. “Consumption Decisions Under Uncertainty,”
     Journal of Economic Theory, December 1972, 5(3), 308-335
[13] Engen, Eric M.; Gruber, Jonathan. “Unemployment Insurance and Precautionary Sav-
     ing,”Journal of Monetary Economics, June 2001, 47(3), 545-579.
[14] Feldstein, Martin; Poterba, James. “Unemployment Insurance and Reservation Wages.”
     Journal of Public Economics, February-March 1984, 23(1-2), 141-167.
[15] Flavin, Marjorie. “Owner-Occupied Housing in the Presence of Adjustment Costs: Im-
     plications for Asset Pricing and Nondurable Consumption,” UCSD Working Paper,
     October 2001.
[16] Flavin, Marjorie; Yamashita, Takashi. “Owner-Occupied Housing and the Composition
     of the Household Portfolio,”American Economic Review, March 2002, 91(1), 345-362.
[17] Fratantoni, Michael C. “Homeownership and Investment in Risky Assets,” Journal of
     Urban Economics, July 1998, 44(1), 27–42.
[18] Fratantoni, Michael C. “Homeownership, Committed Expenditure Risk, and the Stock-
     holding Puzzle,”Oxford Economic Papers, April 2001, 53(2), 241–259.
[19] Goetzmann, William. “The Single Family Home in the Investment Portfolio,” Journal
     of Real Estate Finance and Economics, May 1993, 6(3), 201-222.
[20] Goodman, John; Ittner, John. “The Accuracy of Home-Owners’ Estimates of House
     Value,”Journal of Housing Economics, December 1992, 2(4), 339-357.


                                          42
[21] Gyourko, Joseph; Tracy, Joseph. “Using Home Maintenance and Repairs to Smooth
     Variable Earnings,”Wharton Real Estate Center Working Paper #411, March 2003.
[22] Haurin, Donald R. “Income Variability, Homeownership, and Housing Demand,”Jour-
     nal of Housing Economics, 1991, 1(1), 60-74.
[23] Haurin, Donald R.; Gill, H. Leroy. “E¤ects of Income Variability on the Demand for
     Owner-Occupied Housing,” Journal of Urban Economics, September 1987, 22(2), 136-
     151.
[24] Henderson, J. Vernon.; Ioannides, Yannis. M. “A Model of Housing Tenure Choice,”
     American Economic Review, March 1983, 73(1), 98-113.
[25] Hendershott, Patric; Slemrod, Joel. “Taxes and the User Cost of Capital for Owner-
     Occupied Housing,”AREUEA Journal, Winter 1983, 10(4), 375-393.
[26] Kimball, Miles S. “Precautionary Saving in the Small and in the Large,”Econometrica,
     1990, 58(1), 53-73.
[27] Leland, Hayne E. “Saving and Uncertainty: The Precautionary Demand for Saving,”
     Quarterly Journal of Economics, August 1968, 82(3), 465-473
[28] Postlewaite, Andrew; Samuelson, Larry; Silverman, Dan. “Consumption Commitments
     and Preferences for Risk,”University of Michigan Working Paper, April 2004.
[29] Poterba, James. “Tax Subsidies to Owner-Occupied Housing: An Asset Market Ap-
     proach,”Quarterly Journal of Economics, November 1984, 99(4), 729-752.
[30] Robst, John; Deitz, Richard; McGoldrick, KimMarie. “Income Variability, Uncertainty,
     and Housing Tenure Choice,” Regional Science and Urban Economics, March 1999,
     29(2), 219-229.
[31] Sandmo, Agmar. “The E¤ect of Uncertainty on Saving Decisions,”Review of Economic
     Studies, July 1970, 37(3), 353-360.
[32] Sinai, Todd; Souleles, Nicholas. “Owner Occupied Housing as a Hedge Against Rent
     Risk,”Quarterly Journal of Economics, May 2005, 120(2), 763-789.
[33] Warren, Elizabeth; Tyagi, Amelia Warren. The Two-Income Trap, New York: Basic
     Books, 2003.




                                           43
                                                Figure 2.1:

                       Indirect Utility of Wealth in the Second Period
                      Given Housing Consumption in the First Period
  Indirect Utility




                                                     Wealth

Notes: This figure plots the indirect utility in the second period, assuming that wealth is optimally allocated
between food and housing. Not to scale.




                                                      44
                                                           Figure 2.2:
                                      Impact of increasing h1 on lifetime expected utility,
                                                       no moving costs

                         0.5



                                                                                  du/dh1, both employed

                                                                                  du/dh1, one employed
                           0
    du(h1,f1*(h1))/dh1




                                                                                  du/dh1, neither employed

                                                                                  E[du/dh1], ρ = 0.2


                         -0.5




                          -1
                                0.8      0.85       0.9      0.95        1
                                                   h1

Notes: This figure plots the marginal lifetime utility of first-period housing consumption against first-
period housing consumption. There are no moving costs, so k=0. First-period income, Y1=2; second
period income for a given spouse is either Y2E=1 with probability 1-p=1-q=0.9 or Y2U =0.5 with probability
p=q=0.1. As a result, total household second-period income is 2, 1.5, or 1. The correlation of the
household’s unemployment shocks is ρ=0.2. Lifetime utility is given as the sum of log food and log
housing consumption in periods 1 and 2.




                                                               45
                                                           Figure 2.3:

                                      Impact of increasing h1 on lifetime expected utility,
                                                    with 10% moving cost

                           1



                         0.5
    du(h1,f1*(h1))/dh1




                           0                                                        du/dh1, both employed
                                                                                    du/dh1, one employed
                                                                                    du/dh1, neither employed
                         -0.5
                                                                                    E[du/dh1], ρ = 0.2


                          -1



                         -1.5
                                0.8     0.85       0.9       0.95        1
                                                   h1

Notes: This figure plots the marginal lifetime utility of first-period housing consumption against first-
period housing consumption, h1. The cost of adjusting housing consumption is 10% of h1. First-period
income, Y1=2; second period income for a given spouse is either Y2E=1 with probability 1-p=1-q=0.9 or
Y2U =0.5 with probability p=q=0.1. The correlation of the household’s unemployment shocks is ρ=0.2. As
a result, total household second-period income is 2, 1.5, or 1. Lifetime utility is given as the sum of log
food and log housing consumption in periods 1 and 2. Given these parameters, it is optimal to adjust
housing consumption in the second period only if both spouses become unemployed within the range of
values for h1 shown.




                                                               46
                                               Figure 2.4:

                           Consumption vs. Income Correlation

                     1
                   0.99
 Units Purchased




                   0.98
                   0.97
                   0.96
                   0.95
                   0.94
                   0.93
                      .1

                             0

                                   1

                                         2

                                               3

                                                       4

                                                               5

                                                                      6

                                                                              7

                                                                                      8

                                                                                             9

                                                                                                     0
                           0.

                                 0.

                                       0.

                                             0.

                                                     0.

                                                             0.

                                                                    0.

                                                                            0.

                                                                                    0.

                                                                                           0.

                                                                                                   1.
                    -0




                                               Income Correlation


                             Housing, t=1        Food, t=1           (food+housing)/2, t=1
Notes: This figure plots the optimal quantity of consumption against the correlation of spouses’
unemployment events, ρ. The cost of adjusting housing consumption is 10% of h1. First-period income,
Y1=2; second period income for a given spouse is either Y2E=1 with probability 1-p=1-q=0.9 or Y2U =0.5
with probability p=q=0.1. As a result, total household second-period income is 2, 1.5, or 1. Lifetime utility
is given as the sum of log food and log housing consumption in periods 1 and 2. Given these parameters, it
is optimal to adjust housing consumption in the second period only if both spouses become unemployed.
First-period housing consumption, h1, is increasing in ρ, while first-period food consumption, f1, is
decreasing in ρ. Total consumption, h1+f1, is increasing in ρ.




                                                     47
                                                    Figure 2.5


                           Premium Demanded to Make Household Willing to
                                 Own Their Home Instead of Renting
                    2.5%                                                                          -0.1
 Premium Demanded




                    2.0%                                                                          -0.125



                    1.5%                                                                          -0.15



                    1.0%                                                                          -0.175
                       .1

                              0

                                    1

                                          2

                                                3

                                                      4

                                                            5

                                                                   6

                                                                         7

                                                                               8

                                                                                     9

                                                                                           0
                            0.

                                  0.

                                        0.

                                              0.

                                                    0.

                                                          0.

                                                                 0.

                                                                       0.

                                                                             0.

                                                                                   0.

                                                                                         1.
                     -0




                                                 Income
                                    Owning Premium         Correlation
                                                        (left scale)
                                    Utility of Renting, k=0.1% (right scale)
                                    Utility When Owning, k=10% (right scale)

Notes: The cost of adjusting housing consumption is 10% of h1. First-period income, Y1=2; second period
income for a given spouse is either Y2E=1 with probability 1-p=1-q=0.9 or Y2U =0.5 with probability
p=q=0.1. As a result, total household second-period income is 2, 1.5, or 1. Lifetime utility is given as the
sum of log food and log housing consumption in periods 1 and 2. Given these parameters, it is optimal to
adjust housing consumption in the second period only if both spouses become unemployed. The “x” and
“□” lines plot the relationship between the correlation of household labor income, ρ, and the utility. These
lines differ in the cost of adjusting housing consumption, so that the higher moving cost corresponds to the
lower utility. The higher moving cost is meant to represent as the case of a homeowner; the lower moving
cost represents the case of a renter. The “∆” line represents the demanded ownership premium, the percent
by which wages in all periods and states would have to be increased to induce the agent to accept the higher
moving cost over the lower moving cost. A higher premium suggests that a household is less willing to
own a home and requires greater compensation for doing so.




                                                       48
                             Table 3.1.A: IPUMS Summary statistics

                                                      Owners Only                   Renters Only

Variable                                           Mean        Std. Dev.         Mean         Std. Dev.
Husband and wife report same
                                                     0.096          0.294           0.096            0.295
occupation (1950 definitions)
Husband and wife report same
                                                     0.141          0.348           0.127            0.333
industry (1950 definitions)
House value; monthly rent                         175,893        129,027              666             332

Family income                                      91,252          59,064         61,777          39,942
Husband’s imputed unemployment
                                                     0.065          0.022           0.071            0.025
rate (p)
Wife’s imputed unemployment rate (q)                 0.135          0.038           0.147            0.041

Husband’s share of income                            0.621          0.170           0.598            0.181

Imputed probability of moving                        0.148          0.083           0.196            0.093

Sample average probability of moving                 0.112          0.315           0.338            0.473

Number of observations                                   231,598                        48,464
Notes: Data are from the 1980, 1990, and 2000 IPUMS. Sample construction is detailed in Table A2.
Dollar amounts are in real (2000) dollars. The number of observations for the “same industry” row is
240,680 for owners, and 59,987 for renters. The sample size differs because a larger fraction of the IPUMS
sample reports their industry than do their occupation.



                              Table 3.1.B: SIPP Summary statistics

            Variable                                                 Mean        Std. Dev.

            Husband and wife report same occupation                    0.032          0.155

            Husband and wife report same industry                      0.094          0.292

            Family income                                            69,570          54,164

            Husband’s unemployment rate                                0.086          0.280

            Wife’s unemployment rate                                   0.251          0.434
Notes: Data are from the April 1996 panel of the Survey of Income and Program Participation, which
covers 48 months between April 1996 and March 2000. Sample construction is detailed in Table A2.




                                                   49
      Table 3.2: Top 20 Occupations by Percent of Couples Who Share the Same Occupation

                                                                    (1)               (2)               (3)
                                                                                                    Rate of
                                                                                                   Same Occ.
                                                              Same Occ.                              With
                                                              Share of the       Occ. Share         Random
                   Occupation, 1950 basis                        Occ.            of Sample          Sorting
1       Physicians and Surgeons                                     15.05%              0.51%             0.25%
2       Teachers                                                    11.91%              5.24%             2.16%
3       Operative and Kindred Workers                               11.87%              6.55%             3.61%
4       Managers, Officials, and Proprietors                        11.27%            11.49%              6.14%
5       Lawyers and Judges                                          10.17%              0.81%             0.37%
6       Professors (subject matter unspecified)                      7.62%              0.58%             0.29%
7       Managers & Superintendents, building                         7.60%              0.37%             0.19%
8       Professional, technical & kindred workers                    7.28%              3.15%             1.63%
9       Real estate agents and brokers                               6.82%              0.83%             0.42%
10      Members of the armed services                                5.90%              0.64%             0.13%
11      Salesmen and sales clerks                                    5.52%              4.25%             2.10%
12      Clerical and kindred workers                                 4.97%              8.68%             3.29%
13      Janitors and sextons                                         4.81%              1.46%             0.60%
14      Editors and reporters                                        4.47%              0.39%             0.19%
15      Cooks, except private household                              4.28%              0.97%             0.47%
16      Policemen and detectives                                     3.72%              0.78%             0.17%
17      Mail carriers                                                3.60%              0.34%             0.12%
18      Insurance agents and brokers                                 3.31%              1.10%             0.54%
19      Stock and bond salesmen                                      3.30%              0.28%             0.13%
20      Service workers, except private household                    3.00%              0.56%             0.23%

     Notes: Only occupations comprising at least 0.25 percent of the sample are shown in this table. Column (1)
     presents the ratio of the number of same occupation couples in an occupation to the number of couples
     where either (or both) spouse has that occupation. Column (2) is the ratio of the number of couples where
     either (or both) spouse has that occupation to the total number of couples. Column (3) is the fraction of
     couples with one or both spouses in an occupation who would share an occupation if pairings were done at
     random (i.e. without regard to occupation). Data are from the 1980-2000 IPUMS.




                                                        50
              Table 3.3: Probability of one or both spouses becoming unemployed at some point during a six-month window
                            conditional on both initially employed, by whether the couple shares an occupation


                                           Probability          Probability          Probability
                       Probability         at most one         both spouses            husband           Probability
                        no spouses            spouse           unemployed              becomes          wife becomes
                       unemployed          unemployed          at some point         unemployed         unemployed
                          during              during               during               during             during             Unemploy-
                       subsequent          subsequent           subsequent           subsequent          subsequent              ment                # of
                        six months          six months          six months            six months         six months           correlation        observations
 Different
                           88.25               11.08                0.67                 4.42                8.00                0.057              261,494
 Occupation
 Same
                           90.38                8.15                1.47                 3.96                7.13                0.237                8,642
 Occupation

 Difference                 2.13                -2.93               0.80                -0.47                -0.87               0.179


Notes: The unit of observation is a couple × month. The sample consists of married couples who both report being employed in one month and who either
identify as having the same or different three-digit occupation codes. The table reports the fraction of households in each category where neither, one, or both
spouses report having a unemployment spell during the subsequent six months. Data are from the April 1996 panel of the Survey of Income and Program
Participation.




                                                                                51
                 Table 3.4: Probability of moving over the next six months if
                  neither, one, or both spouses become newly unemployed,
                                    for current homeowners

                                             No one                One newly             Two newly
                                           unemployed             unemployed             unemployed
  P(moving)                                    2.18%                  3.96%                 9.73%
  Marginal P(moving)                                                  1.78%                 5.77%
  Number of observations                      219,968                 4,119                   113

Notes: The unit of observation is a couple × month. The sample consists of married couples who both
report being employed in one month and then report themselves as neither unemployed, one unemployed,
or both unemployed in the next month. The table reports the fraction of households in each category who
move to a new home, and the number of people in each category. The probability of moving measures
whether there will be at least one change of address during subsequent six months. Data are from the April
1996 panel of the Survey of Income and Program Participation.




                                                   52
   Table 3.5: The effect of higher correlation in unemployment risk on log house value,
                                      for homeowners

LHS variable:
                                         (1)                (2)                (3)               (4)
log(house value)
Proxy for income                                                                               Same
                                                   Same Occupation
correlation                                                                                   Industry
Same Occupation [1ρ]                   0.043              0.027              0.021             0.056
(Same Industry)                       (0.004)            (0.003)            (0.004)           (0.003)
Husband’s unemployment                -6.026             -2.290              1.516             1.120
rate [p]                              (0.271)            (0.227)            (0.375)           (0.502)
Husband’s unemployment                23.872              6.804             -8.089            -4.430
rate2 [p2]                            (1.580)            (1.304)            (2.086)           (2.927)
Wife’s unemployment                   -0.098              0.455              0.213            -1.225
rate [q]                              (0.205)            (0.172)            (0.293)           (0.282)
Wife’s unemployment                   -1.234             -1.922              0.460             4.636
rate2 [q2]                            (0.707)            (0.586)            (1.027)           (0.910)
Husband’s unemployment                -11.313            -6.554             -2.644            -2.738
rate × Wife’s rate [p×q]              (1.496)            (1.239)            (1.282)           (1.700)
Income share of husband               -0.006              0.107              0.092             0.110
[s]                                   (0.007)            (0.006)            (0.006)           (0.006)
                                       0.625              0.390              0.357             0.397
Log(family income)
                                      (0.003)            (0.002)            (0.002)           (0.002)

Demographic controls?                    No                Yes                Yes               Yes

MSA × year dummies?                      No                Yes                Yes               Yes
Husband and Wife
occupation (industry)                    No                 No                Yes               Yes
dummies?
Adjusted R2                            0.2976             0.3180             0.3370            0.3313

Number of observations:               231,598            231,598            231,598           240,680

Notes: Left-hand-side variable is log(house value). All specifications include year dummies. Sample
consists of married homeowner households where both spouses work full-time. More details are in Table
A2. Demographic controls in columns (2) – (4) include dummies for: the number of persons in the
household, the number of kids in the household, the educations of the husband and wife, and age brackets
for the head and spouse. Data are from the 1980-2000 IPUMS.




                                                   53
                  Table 3.6: The effect of same occupation on log house value,
                 estimated separately for various sample splits, for homeowners

Splits by:
Decade:                                    1980                       1990                        2000
                                           0.017                      0.023                       0.017
  Same occupation
                                          (0.007)                    (0.006)                     (0.007)
  N                                       61,085                     94,879                      75,634

Husband’s Age                                     ≤ 45                                     46-64
                                                  0.022                                    0.017
  Same occupation
                                                 (0.005)                                  (0.006)
  N                                             124,351                                  102,847

Education                           Some college for ≥1 spouse               No college for either spouse
                                              0.016                                     0.034
  Same occupation
                                             (0.004)                                   (0.009)
  N                                             166,915                                   64,683

Family Income                               Above median                             Below median
                                               0.005                                     0.033
  Same occupation
                                              (0.004)                                   (0.007)
  N                                             130,018                                  101,580

Husband’s income share                  Between 0.4 and 0.8                    Not between 0.4 and 0.8
                                              0.024                                     0.017
  Same occupation
                                             (0.004)                                   (0.009)
  N                                             177,629                                   53,969

Notes: This table reports the estimated coefficient and standard error on the “Same Occupation” dummy
variable from a regression of log house value on the “same occupation” dummy, plus controls. The
regression is run separately (e.g.: all variables are fully interacted) for each of the samples in the splits. The
samples are drawn from the 1980-2000 IPUMS. These regressions use the same specification as in column
3 of table 3.5, including unemployment risk controls, husband’s income share, log family income,
demographic dummies, occupation dummies for both husband and wife, and MSA × year dummies (MSA
dummies alone in the single-decade regressions). Median income is calculated by year. The medians are
(in real $2000): 1980 – 68,325; 1990 – 72,831; 2000 – 80,000. “Some college” means at least one of the
two spouses have had at least one year of post-high school education. The “income share” cutoffs of 0.4
and 0.8 are approximately one standard deviation above and below the mean of 0.61. The number of
observations in each row adds up to 231,598, except for the “Husband’s Age” specification, which
excludes the “65+” category (4,400 observations).



                                                       54
                          Table 3.7: The effect of same occupation on the demand for housing and homeownership,
                                                   and the impact of effective moving costs

                                                (1)                 (2)                  (3)                 (4)                 (5)                 (6)

 LHS variable:                                   Log(House Value)                              Log(Rent)                                Own = 1

 Sample:                                              Homeowners                                Renters                      Renters and Homeowners

                                               0.021               0.034              -0.002              -0.050              -0.014              -0.027
 Same Occupation
                                              (0.004)             (0.007)             (0.017)             (0.034)             (0.003)             (0.005)
                                                                  -0.933                                   0.718                                  -0.624
 Imputed P(moving)
                                                                  (0.069)                                 (0.265)                                 (0.045)
 Same occupation × Imputed                                        -0.088                                   0.248                                   0.084
 P(moving)                                                        (0.039)                                 (0.156)                                 (0.026)
                                               0.357               0.358               0.201               0.200               0.177               0.178
 Log(family income)
                                              (0.002)             (0.002)             (0.009)             (0.009)             (0.002)             (0.002)
 Demographic controls?                          Yes                 Yes                 Yes                 Yes                 Yes                  Yes
 MSA × year dummies?                            Yes                 Yes                 Yes                 Yes                 Yes                  Yes
 Occ. dummies for each spouse                   Yes                 Yes                 Yes                 Yes                 Yes                  Yes
 Adjusted R2                                  0.3370              0.3366              0.1310              0.1312               0.1414              0.1423
 Number of Observations                      231,598             231,598              58,464              58,464              290,062             290,062
Notes: Sample is the 1980-2000 IPUMS. These regressions use the same set of controls as in column 3 of table 3.5, including unemployment risk controls,
husband’s income share, log family income, demographic dummies, occupation dummies for both husband and wife, and MSA × year dummies. The probability
of moving, in even numbered columns, is imputed as the fraction of households in an age × marital status × presence of kids cell (excluding the household that
the moving rate is being imputed to) that moved over the prior year. The reported coefficients for owners in columns (1) and (2) and their analogs for renters in
(3) and (4) are statistically significantly different from each other. Columns (5) and (6) report the results from a linear probability model.




                                                                               55
                        Table 3.8: The effect of unemployment insurance on
            the relationship between same occupation and house value, for homeowners

 LHS variable:
                                                                   (1)                (2)                (3)
 log(house value)
                                                                                 Dummy for
 Functional form of                                            Dummy for
                                                                                  bottom               Linear
 UI replacement rate (RR)                                     bottom decile
                                                                                  quartile
 Same Occupation × Husband’s income share ×                       0.077            0.076                0.203
 Wife’s share [1ρ×s×(1-s)]                                       (0.019)          (0.020)              (0.065)
 Same Occupation × Husband’s income share ×                       0.267              0.148              -0.323
 Wife’s share × RR                                               (0.079)            (0.056)            (0.190)
 Adjusted R2                                                     0.5539             0.5550             0.5568

 Occupation dummies?                                               No                 No                 No


 Same Occupation × Husband’s income share ×                       0.049              0.057              0.036
 Wife’s share [1ρ×s×(1-s)]                                       (0.022)            (0.023)            (0.063)
 Same Occupation × Husband’s income share ×                       0.084              0.027              0.056
 Wife’s share × RR                                               (0.072)            (0.050)            (0.190)
 Adjusted R2                                                     0.5662             0.5670             0.5682

 Occupation dummies?                                              Yes                 Yes                Yes
Notes: Robust standard errors, corrected for correlation by state x year x segment on the UI schedule, are in
parentheses. Across the columns, UI segments are bottom decile/top 90 percent; bottom quartile/top 75 percent; and
in the linear specification, the segments are the linear portions of the UI replacement schedule. Each spouse can be
on one of three sections: the spouse is ineligible, the spouse's income is below or at the state benefits maximum; or
the spouse's income is above the benefits maximum. Collectively, there are six possible combinations and five are
populated with households in our data. The empty segment is both spouses having incomes above the benefits
maximum. In addition to the variables reported above, all columns include controls for log family income, s, s×(1-
s), p×s, q×(1-s), p2×s, q2×(1-s), (where s is the husband’s share of household wage income and p and q are the
husband’s and wife’s imputed unemployment rates, respectively) as well as each of the preceding variables
interacted with the replacement rate measure. Each column also includes MSA × year dummies, state × year
dummies, and controls for the number of persons in the household, number of children, educational attainment of
the husband and wife, and age of the husband and wife. The bottom panel also includes occupation dummies for the
husband and wife. Data are from the 1990 and 2000 IPUMS, with the UI replacement rate imputed based off of
state of residence, year, and income of the husband and wife. RR is the income-weighted average of the husband’s
and wife’s individual UI replacement rates. The sample average husband’s share of income is 0.62. The number of
observations is 156,285.




                                                         56
                                                  Appendix Table A.1: Model Calibration for Various Parameters




                                                                Move if neither
                                                                 move if both
                                                                 unemployed

                                                                 unemployed

                                                                 unemployed
                    moving cost




                                                                 move if one




                                                                                                                                                                     d(f1+h1)/dφ
                                                                                                               dU/dh1_uu


                                                                                                                           dU/dh1_eu
                                                                  dU/df1_uu




                                                                                                                                       dU/dh1_ee
                                                                                       dU/df1_eu


                                                                                                   dU/df1_ee
                                        Y2u/Y2e




                                                                                                                                                   dh1/dφ

                                                                                                                                                            df1/dφ
                                                   h1*
                                  p,q




                                                         f1*
                       .1% 10% 50% 0.964 0.965 Yes Yes Yes -0.83 -0.24 0.07 -0.83 -0.24 0.07                                    -     -   -
                        1% 10% 50% 0.997 0.964 Yes Yes No -0.91 -0.27 0.08 -0.96 -0.32 0.09 +                                         -   -
                        5% 10% 50% 0.994 0.963 Yes Yes No -0.98 -0.30 0.09 -1.11 -0.40 0.11 +                                         -   -
                      10% 10% 50% 0.968 0.958 Yes No No -1.00 -0.61 0.14 -1.22 -1.24 0.26 +                                           -   +
                      20%      10%    50%   0.967    0.957    Yes    No    No      -1.22  -0.59   0.14   -1.68   -1.21  0.27   +      -   +
                      50% 10% 50% 0.939 0.939 No No No -4.42 -0.40 0.22 -8.83 -0.80 0.44                                        -     -   -
                       10% .01% 50% 1.000 1.000 Yes No No -1.22 -1.00 0.00 -1.44 -2.00 0.00 +                                         -   +
                       10%      5% 50% 0.982 0.977 Yes No No -1.10 -0.77 0.08 -1.32 -1.55 0.15 +                                      -   +
                       10% 10% 50% 0.968 0.958 Yes No No -1.00 -0.61 0.14 -1.22 -1.24 0.26 +                                          -   +
                       10% 15% 50% 0.957 0.940 Yes No No -0.92 -0.48 0.19 -1.14 -1.00 0.35 +                                          -   +
                       10% 20% 50% 0.946 0.925 Yes No No -0.85 -0.38 0.24 -1.07 -0.81 0.42 +                                          -   +
                       10% 30% 50% 0.927 0.895 Yes No No -0.73 -0.22 0.32 -0.95 -0.51 0.56                                     +      -   +
                       10% 10% 20% 0.979 0.908 Yes Yes No -3.71 -0.54 0.22 -4.27 -0.79 0.28                                     -     -   -
                       10% 10% 30% 0.984 0.932 Yes Yes No -2.34 -0.48 0.16 -2.74 -0.70 0.21                                     -     -   -
                       10% 10% 40% 0.958 0.943 Yes No No -1.43 -0.79 0.18 -1.69 -1.60 0.34 +                                          -   +
                       10% 10% 50% 0.968 0.958 Yes No No -1.00 -0.61 0.14 -1.22 -1.24 0.26 +                                          -   +
                       10% 10% 60% 0.977 0.970 Yes No No -0.70 -0.45 0.10 -0.88 -0.91 0.19 +                                          -   +
                       10% 10% 70% 0.977 0.977 No No No -1.12 -0.28 0.09 -2.23 -0.56 0.17                                       -     -   -
Notes: This table presents a summary of calibration results for various parameter values. All rows assume Y1=2,Y2E=1. Lifetime utility is given as the sum of
log food and log housing consumption in periods 1 and 2. The first three rows show k, p and q, and Y2U, respectively. Given these parameter values, the optimal
levels of initial housing and food consumption are given in the fourth and fifth rows. The sixth, seventh, and eighth rows show under what circumstances it will
be optimal to move. The ninth through fourteenth rows show the impact of changes in initial food or housing consumption on utility in various states of the
world. The final three columns show how increasing the correlation of unemployment (introducing a mean-preserving spread in risk) impacts consumption. A
“+” indicates increased consumption in the face of increased risk. A “-” in the final column indicates an aggregate precautionary saving motive.




                                                                              57
                          Appendix Table A.2: Sample Construction

Restriction                                                    Number lost      Total remaining
Data source: IPUMS
  Original sample                                                                    2,778,194
  Live in an MSA                                                    1,016,455        1,761,767
  Married                                                            779,536           982,231
  Husband and wife both age 25 or over                                63,992           918,239
  Listed occupations                                                  20,499           897,740
  Husband and wife both work full-time                               572,470           325,270
  8 or fewer people in household                                       1,513           323,757
  Not a farm household                                                 2,318           321,439
  Family income above zero and not missing                               113           321,326
  Both husband and wife have income ≥ 0                                1,160           320,166
  Occupation not rare (contains > 200 persons/year)                   17,806           302,360
  Cell size for imputing probability of moving ≥ 30                      185           302,175
  House value or rent non-missing and > 0                             12,113           290,062

Data source: SIPP
  Original sample (person × month)                                                   3,897,211
  Married couple households × month                                 3,117,752          779,459
  Drop extended families                                             160,775           618,684
  Reported occupation                                                127,711           490,973
  Can follow employment status for six months                         90,404           400,569
  Employed in current month                                          130,433           270,136

Sources: 1980, 1990, and 2000 IPUMS; April 1996 panel of the SIPP




                                                58
