                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             SMOOTH LANDING OR CRASH?
                             MODEL-BASED SCENARIOS OF
                        GLOBAL CURRENT ACCOUNT REBALANCING

                                             Hamid Faruqee
                                             Douglas Laxton
                                               Dirk Muir
                                              Paolo Pesenti

                                         Working Paper 11583
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w11583


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 2005




Revised draft of the paper prepared for the NBER Conference on G7 Current Account Imbalances:
Sustainability and Adjustment, Newport RI, June 2005. We thank Susana Mursula for invaluable assistance
and Nathalie Carcenac for data support. We also thank Nicoletta Batini, Tamim Bayoumi, Rich Clarida,
Giancarlo Corsetti, Robert Flood, Thomas Helbling, Michael Kumhof, Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti, Papa
N.Diaye, Alessandro Rebucci, David Robinson, Lars Svensson, and Cedric Tille for comments and
suggestions. The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and should not be attributed to the
International Monetary Fund, its Executive Board or its management, the Norges Bank, the Bank of Canada,
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, the Federal Reserve System, or any other institution with which the
authors are affiliated. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by Hamid Faruqee, Douglas Laxton, Dirk Muir and Paolo Pesenti. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Smooth Landing or Crash? Model-Based Scenarios of Global Current Account Rebalancing
Hamid Faruqee, Douglas Laxton, Dirk Muir and Paolo Pesenti
NBER Working Paper No. 11583
August 2005
JEL No. E66, F32, F47

                                            ABSTRACT




This paper re-examines the implications, risks, and attendant policies surrounding global rebalancing
of current accounts through the lens of a dynamic, multi-region model of the global economy. In the
baseline scenario, world macroeconomic imbalances of the early 2000s can be attributed to a
combination of six related but distinct tendencies: (i)expansionary U.S. fiscal policy, (ii) declining
rate of U.S. private savings, (iii) increased foreign demand for U.S. assets, particularly in Asia, (iv)
strong productivity growth in emerging Asia, (v) lagging productivity growth in Japan and the euro
area, and (vi) gaining export competitiveness in emerging Asia. The baseline projects stabilizing
U.S. public and foreign debt (albeit at higher levels) and a gradual depreciation of the dollar,
allowing the U.S. external deficit to gradually move to a sustainable level. An alternative scenario,
involving a sudden portfolio reshuffling in the rest of the world, would result in higher U.S. real
interest rates, a significantly weaker dollar, with harmful effects on U.S. (and possibly global)
growth. More flexible exchange rates in emerging Asia can help reduce variability in both regional
output and inflation. Other simulations consider the effects of U.S. fiscal adjustment, as well as
growth-enhancing structural reforms in Europe and Japan.


Hamid Faruqee                                          Dirk Muir
International Monetary Fund                            Bank of Canada
Washington, DC 20431                                   234 Wellington Street
hfaruqee@imf.org                                       Ottawa, ON K1A 0G9
                                                       CANADA
Douglas Laxton                                         dmuir@bank-banque-canada.ca
International Monetary Fund
Washington, DC 20431                                   Paolo Pesenti
dlaxton@imf.org                                        Federal Reserve Bank of New York
                                                       33 Liberty Street
                                                       New York, NY 10045
                                                       and NBER
                                                       paolo.pesenti@ny.frb.org
1     Introduction
Widening external imbalances have been a de…ning feature of the global landscape in recent
years and, for many, constitute a key macroeconomic risk for the world economy. But the
debate is far from settled. Two issues are central. First, is the present global pattern of
current account imbalances sustainable and for how long? Second, if these positions require
unwinding, can an orderly rebalancing be achieved without substantial disruption to global
growth, international trade and capital ‡ows, and under what circumstances?
    At the center of concern is the massive U.S. current account de…cit and whether its
resolution foreshadows a hard landing for the dollar. For example, while the dollar has
steadily depreciated (in real e¤ective terms) since 2002, the U.S. de…cit and external sur-
pluses elsewhere (e.g., Japan and emerging Asia) have only widened further. How much
farther will the dollar need to fall? The cautionary tale of past external adjustments focuses
our attention on the wider rami…cations of large, unsustainable current account de…cits for
exchange rates, domestic demand, and growth.1 Moreover, the prospect of large, disorderly
swings in the value of the dollar — given its dominant role in the international monetary
system — presents an additional …nancial risk with potentially far-reaching consequences,
and where the regions that may be most deeply a¤ected lie well beyond U.S. shores.
    Leaving the possible fallout aside, how did we arrive at this point? A decade ago, the
current account de…cit of the United States stood around 100 billion dollars or 1 12 percent
of annual output. Over the ensuing ten years, that de…cit would balloon six-fold to over
600 billion dollars or 1 12 percent of world output, designating the world’s wealthiest nation
as its largest external borrower (by far). In terms of U.S. saving and investment, the initial
leg of burgeoning de…cits was led by brisk capital spending in the mid- to late-1990s, which
retreated after the equity bust began around the turn of the century. At that same time,
declining national saving — headlined by growing public de…cits and mounting debt —
assumed a lead role in the further expansion of the U.S. current account de…cit in the years
that followed up to the present day.
    In historical perspective, the large U.S. external de…cit is unprecedented. With reference
to Figure 1 (where is the sample average and the standard deviation of the current
account-to-GDP ratio), over the past half-century, U.S. current accounts have centered
around a small de…cit over the post-war period (1.12 percent of GDP). But the last decade
has borne witness to a remarkable extension of the left tail of this distribution. During the
1980s, an emergence of large U.S. external de…cits — also against the backdrop of budgetary
de…cits and dollar appreciation — were reminiscent of the current episode. However, unlike
the past when the counterparts to U.S. de…cits were largely con…ned to other G-7 industrial
countries, the current global constellation of external imbalances has expanded the roster
of players considerably.2
    The current episode thus clearly suggests that matters are best viewed from a wider,
multilateral perspective, including in terms of the uneven global pattern of growth and
demand. A sanguine view of these developments (and their ultimate resolution) typically
revolves around three related but distinct considerations: the Lawson doctrine, the ‘new

   1 The literature on current account reversals and their nexus with growth and other variables is extensive;

see for example Milesi-Ferretti and Razin (2000), Edwards (2004), and Freund (2000).
   2 China’s reserves increased by $117 billion in 2003, after subtracting $45 billion in reserves transferred

in the recent bank recapitalization. These funds apparently remain in USD assets. South Korea, Taiwan,
and Singapore increased reserves by $34 billion, $44 billion, and $14 billion, respectively.




                                                      1
Bretton Woods’system, and globalization.
    Under a generalized interpretation of the Lawson doctrine,3 external imbalances are
inconsequential, as they merely re‡ect the market’s (optimal) decisions regarding saving
and investment.4 But two quali…cations should be noted. First, this presumes that the
public sector’s balances remain in good standing. And second, private sector decisions are
not distorted by any major market imperfections or failures. Prima facie, the emergence of
large budgetary de…cits in the United States (at least since 2000) and the role of emerging
market economies in prevailing global imbalances raise important caveats to the doctrine’s
application in the current circumstance. Nevertheless, the view that the current account
de…cit per se is not a problem, but remains the natural outgrowth of a strong domestic
economy relative to persistent weakness in major partners — mainly Japan and Europe —
has not receded.
    Focusing on the important role of emerging markets in understanding global imbalances,
the ‘new Bretton Woods’hypothesis — advanced by Dooley, Folkerts-Landau and Garber
(2003) — posits that the constellation of external imbalances partly re‡ects the deliberate
actions (e.g., de facto pegs) of ‘periphery’countries seeking export-led growth as a strategy
for economic development. In practical terms, this involves pegging the currency to the
U.S. dollar to help domestic exporters safeguard their U.S. market shares and accumulate
dollar reserves resulting from any payment imbalances. So long as the periphery, with new
entrants waiting in the wings (e.g., India), willingly acquires dollar claims, this arrangement
of external imbalances can endure inde…nitely.5 For its part at the ‘center’, the United
States (i) resurrects its passive exchange rate role as the n-th currency, and (ii) provides
liquidity and intermediation to the rest of the world — bene…ting by borrowing short (e.g.,
foreign sales of U.S. treasuries) at favorable terms while lending long pro…tably (i.e., U.S.
FDI).6
    The third major aspect of the sanguine side of the debate is globalization. A quarter-
century after Feldstein and Horioka (1980), saving and investment no longer appear quite so
constrained to move in tandem, and the universe of current account imbalances has clearly
expanded.7 In other words, the mere fact that external imbalances, in many cases, have
grown to unprecedented levels can be viewed as a testament to the better functioning and
increasing integration of global capital markets. Indeed, the vast amounts of foreign saving
mobilized to …nance the ample shortfall of U.S. saving relative to investment have broken
new ground. With a new-found ability to borrow (and lend), countries belonging to an
increasingly integrated global economy can further engage in intertemporal trade to bu¤er
against local shocks, smooth consumption, and raise welfare. A by-product of globalization

   3 In the late 1980s, Nigel Lawson, then British Chancellor of the exchequer, argued that the large U.K.

current account de…cit was a matter of no consequence, given that the public sector balance was in surplus.
He also argued that this principle applied only to developed countries, where it was more reasonable to
assume that private agents behaved optimally.
   4 See   Corden (1994).
   5 Eichengreen (2004) criticizes this assessment, arguing that the ‘periphery’ is not a cohesive, uniform

group, and could quickly unravel when national interests come into con‡ict with collective ones. The
possibility of two viable international currencies — i.e., also the euro — further complicates the picture.
   6 Dooley, Folkerts-Landau, Garber (2004) elaborate on this maturity transformation under the present

global alignment. Eichengreen and Adalet (2005) criticizes this too; arguing that being an international
…nancial center and providing intermediation service does not necessitate a large (or any) de…cit on the part
of the United States.
   7 See   Faruqee and Lee (2005).



                                                     2
is that ‘valuation’e¤ects — operating on larger gross levels of foreign assets or liabilities —
can augment the traditional expenditure-switching e¤ects of exchange rate adjustment and
thereby facilitate a rebalancing scenario.8
    So have we entered into a ‘brave new world’ when thinking about global imbalances?
The mainstream view, as lucidly argued by Obstfeld and Rogo¤ (2000a), would …rmly reply
‘not yet.’ Countervailing arguments note that while the underlying trends toward a more
integrated global economy are undeniable, the limitations are also equally clear. Segmented
goods markets and pricing to market, incomplete pass-through and ‘disconnected’exchange
rates, home bias in goods and in assets, and signi…cant trade costs are all emblematic of an
international economy still some ways o¤ from an idealized single, global market.9 These
real-world features and frictions raise cautionary ‡ags about a more complacent view of
global imbalances and the large shocks — including uneven economic and …scal expansions
— that have accompanied them. The key question from the mainstream is not ‘if’ but
‘when’(and ‘how’) the inevitable adjustment will occur. The concern is that the exchange
rate changes needed to generate enough expenditure switching may be very large.10 The
hope is that broader adjustment — diversi…ed across countries and policy instruments —
may be able to help achieve a more orderly rebalancing and avoid a protectionist backlash.11
    In sum, as implied by the stylized facts and by the various interpretations of the present
episode, the evolution (and resolution) of global imbalances needs to be understood within a
coherent multilateral framework. This paper re-examines these multi-faceted issues through
the lens of a dynamic, multi-region model of the global economy. The model o¤ers suf-
…cient complexity and richness to furnish a rigorous macroeconomic framework to assess
the economic implications, related risks, and policy recommendations associated with the
prevailing constellation and the prospect of global rebalancing of current accounts.
    Informed by the multilateral analysis, our baseline view is that steady global rebalancing
with an orderly unwinding of …nancial positions and currency realignments — notably a
gradual depreciation in the U.S. dollar — can be achieved, although it is not assured. In
this instance, the burden of adjustment will largely fall on the United States and emerging
Asia in terms of reversing their past (net) national saving trends, requiring committed
U.S. …scal consolidation and aided by greater exchange rate ‡exibility in Asia that also
limited output and in‡ation variability. Although more uncertain, some ‘normalization’of
private consumption rates (in opposing directions) in the two regions would further facilitate
external adjustment.
    Europe and Japan, for their part, could meaningfully contribute to the multilateral
adjustment process through stronger pursuit of growth-enhancing structural reforms that
align with their own national interests. Led by competition-friendly reforms in product
markets and with structural adjustment supported by monetary policy, credible measures
tackling deep-seated structural impediments and distortions would boost their growth and
investment prospects, thereby contributing to external rebalancing.

   8 See Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2001, 2003, 2004), Tille (2003), WEO (2005). An extreme form of this

argument where valuation e¤ects supplant the requisite adjustment in the trade balance is exposited in
Gourinchas and Rey (2005).
  9 See, for example, Engel (1993), Engel and Rogers (1996), Rogo¤ (1996), Obstfeld and Rogo¤ (2000a,b),

Devereux and Engel (2002), Corsetti and Dedola (2002), and Choudhri, et al (2005).
  1 0 See Engel (2002), Obstfeld (2002) and Corsetti and Pesenti (2005a, b) for a modern view on expenditure

switching e¤ects.
  1 1 See   De Rato (2005).




                                                     3
    Far less benign adjustment scenarios are also quite conceivable. A more dangerous route,
in the absence of underlying, broad-based adjustment in macroeconomic and structural
policies, would rely more on the vagaries of global …nancial markets. If mounting concerns
over imbalances triggered sizeable international portfolio shifts, a sudden exit out of U.S.
dollar assets could e¤ect more dramatic changes to (interest and) exchange rates, including
a signi…cantly weaker U.S. dollar, with harmful knock-on e¤ects for global growth.
    A roadmap to the paper is as follows. Sections 2 and 3 outline the structure and cali-
bration of our multi-region model. Section 4 describes the individual key elements needed
to construct the central baseline scenario of global rebalancing. Section 5 considers key al-
ternative scenarios and assesses the likely macroeconomic and policy implications. Section
6 concludes.


2      The structure of the model
The simulation model we construct in this paper is rather detailed and complex. To simplify
the exposition, in this section we limit ourselves to a very synthetic and intuitive overview
of the model, highlighting a few formal features of particular relevance for the calibration
exercise. Technical details of the theoretical framework are extensively discussed in the
Appendix.
    The overall structure of the model is illustrated in Figure 2. The world economy consists
of four regional blocs (’countries’): US (United States),12 JE (Japan and euro area), AS
(Emerging Asia), and RC (Remaining Countries).13 There is a common stochastic trend for
the world economy (the variable T REN D), whose gross rate of growth between time t and
time is denoted gt; . All quantity variables in the model are expressed in detrended terms,
that is as ratios relative to T REN D. In each country, there are households, …rms, and
a government. Households consume a (non-tradable) …nal good and supply di¤erentiated
labor inputs to …rms. Firms produce …nal goods, (tradable) intermediate goods, and provide
intermediation services. The public sector consumes non-traded goods and services, …nanced
through taxation or borrowing, and manages short-term interest rates through monetary
policy. Each sector is described in turn below.
    In…nitely-lived households consume a non-tradable …nal good (C), and each is the mo-
nopolistic supplier of a di¤erentiated labor input (`) to all domestic …rms.14 There are two
types of households: forward-looking ones (with subscript F L) and liquidity-constrained
ones (with subscript LC). Liquidity-constrained agents represent a fraction sLC of national
households. These households do not have access to capital markets and …nance their con-
sumption exclusively through disposable labor incomes. The speci…cation of households’
preferences adopts the Greenwood, Hercowitz and Hu¤man (1988) (GHH) utility function,
adjusted for habit formation and preference shocks. Denoting Wt (j) as lifetime expected

  1 2 To avoid confusion, in the text we refer to “US” as the region of the model, and to the “U.S.” as the

real-world United States.
  1 3 The   choice of regional aggregation is dicussed in Section 3.1 below.
  1 4 Interpreting T REN D as labor-augmenting technical change at time t, ` in the model is time devoted
                          t                                                 t
to work, assumed to be bounded by endowment, while e¤ective labor is T REN Dt `t . It follows that the
nominal wage (the monetary remuneration for one unit of labor services `t ) can be trending both because
of nominal in‡ation and because of real (labor-augmenting) growth.




                                                         4
utility of household j, we have:
                                              1
                                              X
                                                           1
                              Wt (j)     Et          t;   gt;   u ( C (j); ` (j) )                                 (1)
                                               =t

where the instantaneous felicity is proportional to:

                                    Ct (j) bc Cj;t 1 =gt        1;t        ZV `t (j) b` `j;t           1 1+
      ut ( Ct (j); `t (j) ) / [                                               (                         )     ]1   (2)
                                          1 bc =gt 1;t                    1+        1 b`

    In the expressions above t; is the discount rate, possibly di¤erent across countries,
                                              1
between time t and time . The term gt;             in (1) implies that the disutility of labor
e¤ort moves with the common trend. As is customary, this feature can be interpreted as
technological progress associated with home production activities, here related to the global
trend. The parameter in (1) and (2) is the reciprocal of the elasticity of intertemporal
substitution. The parameter which a¤ects the curvature of labor disutility is the reciprocal
of the Frisch elasticity of labor supply. There is habit persistence in consumption with
coe¢ cient 0 < bc < 1. The term Cj;t 1 is past per-capita consumption of household j’s
peers, (i.e., either forward-looking or liquidity-constrained agents). Similarly, there is habit
persistence in leisure with coe¢ cient 0 < b` < 1. The term ZV is a constant.
    Forward-looking households own domestic …rms and the domestic capital stock (K),
which they rent to domestic …rms. The market for capital is competitive. Capital accumu-
lation is subject to adjustment costs, as are wage contracts (i.e., nominal wage rigidities).
Labor and capital are immobile internationally. Forward-looking households in each country
also own two short-term nominal bonds, one denominated in domestic currency and issued
by that country’s government, and another denominated in U.S. currency and issued in zero
net supply worldwide. There are intermediation costs for national households transacting
in the international bond market. No other asset is traded internationally.
    On the production side, perfectly competitive …rms produce two …nal goods — a con-
sumption good (A) and an investment good (E). The consumption good is consumed either
by domestic households or by the government (GC ). Similarly, demand for the investment
good is split between private agents (I) and the public sector (GI ). Final goods are pro-
duced by using all available intermediate goods as inputs. Intermediate goods are either
non-traded (N ) or traded internationally (T ). Domestic tradables used by domestic …rms
are denoted Q, imports are denoted M . For instance, a …rm x produces the consumption
good with the following nested constant-elasticity-of-substitution (CES) technology:
                              1                      1                 1
                         1                          "A           1
                At (x)       "A
                                  = 1        A;t         NA;t (x)     "A

                     1       1                1                       1              1        A          1
                    "A                   1                                       1                 1
                +   A;t [ A
                             A
                                  QA;t (x)    A     + (1        A)    A   MA;t (x)   A   ]   A 1        "A
                                                                                                                   (3)

The three intermediate inputs used in the production of the consumption good A are a
basket NA of nontradable goods, a basket QA of domestic tradable goods, and a basket
MA of imported goods. The elasticity of substitution between tradables and nontradables
is "A > 0, and the elasticity of substitution between domestic and imported tradables is
  A > 0. The weights of the three inputs in production are, respectively, 1  A , A A and
  A (1     A ).
    To handle the di¤erent goods produced in di¤erent countries, the variable MA denotes
a combination of di¤erent baskets of goods imported from the rest of the world. To model
realistic dynamics of import volumes — such as delayed and sluggish adjustment to changes


                                                           5
in relative prices — we assume that imports are subject to short-term adjustment costs
(discussed in detail in the Appendix). More precisely, referring to a generic country as CO,
and to the importing country as H, …rm xH ’s imports MAH (xH ) are a CES function of
baskets of goods imported from the other countries, or:
                    1   1        X                  1
                                                    H                                             1   1
                                                                                                      H
         H
             (xH )                      bH;CO            H;CO H                      H;CO H
                        H
        MA;t            A   =            A
                                                    A   MA;t (x ) ( 1                M A;t (x )
                                                                                                      A   (4)
                                CO6=H

In the expression above H A is the elasticity of import substitution across countries; a higher
value for H
          A  implies that it is easier for …rm xH to substitute imports from one country with
imports from another. The weights bH;CO A     (summing up to one) determine the composition
of the import basket across countries. MAH;CO (xH ) denotes imports from country CO by
…rm xH located in country H, and. H;CO           H
                                         M A (x ) denotes the associated adjustment costs.
    Intermediate goods are available in di¤erent varieties, each produced by a single …rm
under conditions of monopolistic competition worldwide. The prices of intermediate goods
are subject to adjustment costs (nominal price rigidities). These goods are produced with
domestic labor inputs and domestic capital. For instance, the nontradable variety n is
produced with the following CES technology:
                                                                                            N
                                                1               1       1              1   N 1
                                                            1                    1
                 Nt (n) = ZN;t (1         N)    N   `t (n)      N   +   N
                                                                        N   Kt (n)     N                  (5)

Firm n uses labor `(n) and capital K(n) to produce N (n) units of its variety. N > 0 is
the elasticity of input substitution, and ZN is a sectoral productivity shock common to all
producers of nontradables.15
    Finally, the government purchases the two national …nal goods, as well as nontradable
services GN . As treasury, the government …nances the excess of its expenditures over net
taxes by borrowing from the domestic private sector. As central bank, the government
manages the national short-term nominal interest rate. Monetary policy is speci…ed in
terms of a credible commitment to an interest rate rule that either targets in‡ation or the
exchange rate.


3     Model calibration
3.1     Initial considerations
In what follows we suggest a plausible calibration of the many parameters introduced in the
model and discuss in some detail the reasons underlying our choices. In general, we rely
on previous work done with the IMF’s Global Economy Model (GEM), as well as estimates
from the literature and our own empirical work.
   Given the importance of a multi-country setting, some thought has been given to the
composition of the regional blocs. As mentioned in Section 2, to conserve on complexity
we choose a four-region model — US (the United States), JE (Japan and the euro area
countries), AS (Emerging Asia: China, India, Hong Kong, Malaysia, Philippines, Singapore,
South Korea, Taiwan province of China and Thailand) and RC (the Remaining Countries
not considered elsewhere).

  1 5 Recall that a productivity shock is de…ned as a deviation from the common world trend. Variants of

the model allow for the possibility of shocks to labor productivity or capital productivity instead of total
factor productivity.



                                                        6
    The decision to combine Japan and the euro area into one region re‡ects, from the van-
tage point of our project, their overlap in key structural characteristics — low productivity
growth, very low in‡ation (or de‡ation), and structural rigidities, particularly in the labor
market. Needless to say, Japan and the euro area have exhibited very di¤erent behaviors in
the past regarding the accumulation of U.S. assets, foreign exchange intervention policy, and
so on. However, our prior is that their role in the global rebalancing process will become
comparatively less relevant in the years ahead and compared to Emerging Asia.
    This latter bloc groups Asian countries with strong growth and whose currencies ex-
hibit limited ‡exibility against the U.S. dollar. Moreover, their labor markets tend to be
rapidly growing and fairly ‡exible. In addition, the ongoing process of market liberaliza-
tion is expected to reduce entry barriers and enhance competition, including in the major
constituents such as India and China. The Remaining Countries bloc is dominated by the
other members of the European Union (particularly the United Kingdom) and the other
major OECD countries such as Canada, Australia, New Zealand and Mexico.
    Keeping the composition of the four regions in mind, in what follows we discuss the
calibration of the domestic economies. We then focus on the international elements of the
model and pursue a realistic description of the macroeconomic interdependencies between
regions, particularly their trade linkages and …scal spillovers.

3.2    Parameterization of the regional blocs
Tables 1 through 5 document the parameterization adopted for the four regional blocs.
Unless otherwise stated, similar behavioral parameter values apply to all regions.
    Table 1 presents the parameters that are key for the consumers’optimization problem.
Although consumers may di¤er with respect to their access to …nancing, the preferences
of the liquidity-constrained and forward-looking households are taken to be the same. We
assume that in US, JE and RC the share of liquidity-constrained consumers (sLC ) is 25
percent. The share is much higher in Emerging Asia at 50 percent, re‡ecting the nascent
or underdeveloped …nancial markets for domestic consumers — particularly, in the cases of
China, India, Indonesia and the Philippines.
    The rate of time preference (the annualized inverse of in eq. 1) in combination with
trend growth (g in eq. 1) of two percent per year is consistent with an annualized quarterly
real world interest rate of three percent. US, the most impatient region, has the highest
rate of time preference at 3.2 percent; AS, the most patient, has a rate of 2.6 percent. For
all regions, we assume a high degree of intertemporal substitution in consumption (1= )
of 5. This combined with a high value for habit persistence (bc = 0.91) generates sluggish
consumption behavior in the short run and hump-shaped dynamics in response to changes
in the real interest rate. Conversely for labor, we assume a low Frisch elasticity (1= ) in the
long run of 0.40, coupled with lower habit persistence (b` ) of 0.75. These choices are similar
to the assumptions found in Bayoumi, Laxton and Pesenti (2004), adjusted for our use of
the GHH utility function.
    For the …rms’optimization problem, we also refer the reader to Table 1. The elasticity
of substitution between labor and capital ( N and T in 5) is set at 0.75 in both the tradable
and nontradable sectors. This is slightly lower than the conventional (Cobb-Douglas) unitary
assumption, in order to help reduce the sensitivity of capital to changes in its relative price.
The bias towards the use of capital ( T and N ) is calibrated to achieve a relatively high
investment share of GDP in AS, and a low share in US, in line with their respective historical
averages (see Table 2). In all regions, the nontradable sector (e.g., services) is assumed to



                                               7
be less capital intensive than the tradable sector (e.g., manufacturing). The depreciation
rate is assumed to be two percent per quarter across all regions (eight percent per year).
    The dynamics of the model are governed by the nominal rigidities and real adjustment
costs described in Table 3. The standard parameter choice of 400 for quadratic adjustment
costs in prices is roughly equivalent to a four-quarter contract length under Calvo-style
pricing. Real rigidities in investment align with the parameterization in Juillard, Karam,
Laxton and Pesenti (2005) for a Bayesian-estimated, closed economy DSGE model of the
United States. For real rigidities in imports, a value of 0.95 approximates the typical sluggish
reaction by volumes to movements in the real exchange rate.
    There are separate markups on tradable and non-tradable goods (Table 4) since …rms
have some pricing power under monopolistic competition. We use estimates for the price
markups from Martins, Scarpetta and Pilat (1996) in the case of US, JE and RC. The
US bloc has the lowest price markups, indicating the greatest degree of competition, while
Japan and the euro area have the highest. For AS the markups are indicative of some (very)
preliminary estimates done in the Research Department of the IMF for certain member
countries of the AS bloc.
    Similarly, in the labor market agents have some pricing power, resulting in the wage
markups of Table 4. For US and JE the markups (16 percent and 30 percent respectively)
correspond to Bayoumi, Laxton and Pesenti (2004).16 We further assume that RC is some-
where in between US and JE, with a 20 percent wage markup, while we assume AS has a
labor market as competitive as US.
    Finally, to provide a nominal anchor for the domestic economy, monetary policy is pa-
rameterized as follows (Table 5). US, JE and RC are all committed to price stability, and
we assume they follow an in‡ation-forecast-based (IFB) rule.17 A representative calibration
of IFB rules is used, with a weight of 0.75 on the lagged short-term interest in order to
impart a high degree of smoothing in the setting of policy rates, and a weight of 2.00 on the
three-quarter ahead gap between in‡ation and its target. The year-on-year CPI in‡ation
target is assumed to be …xed at two percent for JE and RC, and somewhat higher at 2.5
percent for US. Emerging Asia is assumed to pursue a …xed exchange rate regime against
the U.S. dollar.18 In an alternative scenario presented below, Emerging Asia switches to
an in‡ation-based rule, but starts with a high value for its implicit in‡ation objective and
adopts a lower 2.5 percent target two years after the regime switch.

  1 6 Their
         determination of the wage markups is based, in turn, on Jean and Nicoletti (2002), who consider
the wage di¤erentials for a variety of industries in the United States and six member states of the Euro
Area.
  1 7 IFBrules have been used extensively in central-bank models with In‡ation-Targeting regimes in both
advanced and emerging-market economies — see, for example, Laxton, Rose and Tetlow (1993), Batini
and Haldane (1999), Hunt, Rose and Scott (2000), and Coats and others (2003). They have also been
used in empirical work to characterize monetary policy in other countries that do not have explicit In‡ation-
Targeting regimes, but have ‡exible exchange rates — see Orphanides (2003) and Julllard and others (2004).
It is important to note that IFB rules are ad hoc. Svensson (1999) and Svensson and Woodford (2005) have
proposed In‡ation-Forecast-Targeting (IFT) rules based on optimizing loss functions and it is only a question
of time before IFT rules are used extensively on linearized versions of models whose type and size are similar
to ours.
  1 8 This should be interpreted as a sensible approximation rather than in literal terms, given that China is

the largest member of AS, and the limited ‡exibility of its currency against the U.S. dollar is at the center of
the current policy debate. Similarly, other members such as Hong Kong, Malaysia, South Korea, Singapore,
Thailand, Philippines and Indonesia attempt to manage the volatility of their currencies vis-a-vis the U.S.
dollar.




                                                       8
3.3        The international dimensions
The main results of the model rely heavily upon the calibration of each region’s external
sector in Table 6. For given steady-state net foreign asset positions for each region, it is
straightforward to calculate the current account and trade balances consistent with long-
term stock-‡ow equilibrium. Using the IMF’s Direction of Trade Statistics on merchandise
trade, the national accounts data on the imports of goods and services, and the United
Nations’Commodity Trade Statistics (COMTRADE) data on each region’s imports of con-
sumer and capital goods, we derive a disaggregated steady-state matrix delineating the
pattern and composition of trade for all regions’exports and imports. A more aggregated
form is found in Figure 3. On the basis of this trade matrix, we derive all the weight coe¢ -
cients in the demand function for imports ( A and E in eq. 3) and the regional composition
of imports (bA and bE in eq. 4).
    For the corresponding trade elasticities, we assume that the elasticity of substitution
between domestically-produced and imported tradable consumption goods ( A in eq. 3)
and investment goods ( E ) is 2.5 as in Bayoumi, Laxton and Pesenti (2004). The elasticity
of substitution between goods from di¤erent regions for imported consumption goods ( A
in 4) and imported investment goods ( E ) is set at 1.5, consistent with existing estimates
of import elasticities.
    Lastly, we need to calibrate the behavior of net foreign assets, also in Table 6.19 For the
long-run behavior of net foreign assets our prior is that a permanent increase in government
debt by one percentage point of GDP is roughly associated with an increase in the net foreign
liability position of the region by 0.5 percentage points of GDP.20 As we discuss below,
overlapping generations models (particularly those which follow the Blanchard-Weil-Yaari
formulation) provide theoretical underpinnings to evaluate this non-Ricardian behavior.
Quantitative simulations using models with such characteristics — speci…cally, the IMF’s
Global Fiscal Model (GFM) described in Botman, Laxton, Muir and Romanov (2005) and
Multimod (Laxton et al (1998)) — are consistent with a value between roughly 0.40 and
0.80. Moreover, when the US expands its net foreign liabilities as a result of a permanent
change in its public debt, the absorption of new issuance by each region is calibrated (on the
basis of net foreign asset holdings in recent years) by assigning 24 percent of new issuance
by US to AS, and 38 percent to each of JE and RC. This calibration implies that for a
one percent NFL-to-GDP shock in US, the AS net-foreign-asset-to-GDP rises the most —
around 0.8 percent of GDP — while JE and RC see their ratios only rise by around 0.3 and
0.5 percent of GDP respectively.


4         A baseline scenario
4.1        The six component shocks
We now construct a baseline scenario for the global rebalancing of current accounts. This is
of interest not only per se — as a model-based quantitative assessment of macroeconomic
adjustment paths in the global economy — but also as a benchmark, against which one can
analyze and discuss alternative scenarios. The baseline is an attempt to identify the sources of

  1 9 With reference to the notation of the Appendix, the short-run speed of adjustment is governed by
                                                                                                       B1
and B2 , set at 0.05 and 0.10 respectively. This is consistent with most previous work based on GEM —
see Laxton and Pesenti (2003), Hunt and Rebucci (2005), and Bayoumi, Laxton and Pesenti (2004).
 2 0 In   terms of the notation adopted in the Appendix, this implies that        is equal to 1/2.
                                                                             F1




                                                       9
the current global disequilibrium, accounting for both the shocks emanating from the United
States and the respective role played by other regions. The purpose of the baseline is to
coherently guide our thinking on the central questions surrounding external developments:
What are the key macroeconomic factors underlying the recent dynamics of current account
imbalances and real exchange rates in the world economy? What assumptions about the
size and persistence of the key underlying shocks are needed to …t the facts? What is the
range of possible future trajectories for the relevant macroeconomic variables?
    We are less interested in explaining and rationalizing current account dynamics over the
past decade than in providing elements for an analysis of the present global outlook. Cor-
respondingly, the baseline scenario is formulated on the general premise that the prevailing
imbalances have mainly re‡ected savings behavior as of late, by both private and public
agents, rather than the investment dynamics fueled by the market exuberance observed in
the second half of the 1990s.21
    Speci…cally, our working hypotheses are that the central tendencies underlying the global
macroeconomic imbalances in the early 2000s can be attributed to a combination of six
related but distinct ‘shocks’. The …rst three shocks center around the U.S. economy:

   1. Higher U.S. government debt (with initial tax cuts followed by future tax hikes) cen-
      tered around the announced plans of the U.S. federal government

   2. A permanent decline in the private savings rate in the United States

   3. An increase in the demand for U.S. assets abroad, particularly in Emerging Asia

    The next two shocks re‡ect relative productivity trends in the rest of the world. In the
model, worldwide convergence of productivity growth rates is taken as the anchoring feature
of the economy in the long term. However, prolonged deviations from balanced growth can
play a key role in the unfolding of medium-term rebalancing scenarios, in line with the
asymmetric tendencies observed across regions in the past decade. The shocks are:

   4. Very persistent and rapid productivity growth in Emerging Asia with a central ten-
      dency starting at 5.5 percent per year

   5. Very persistent and lagging productivity growth in Japan and the euro area with a
      central tendency of 0.75 percent per year

    The …nal shock attempts to capture policy choices in Emerging Asia, including strategies
of export promotion in China. The speci…c way these competitiveness-friendly strategies
are introduced is through:

   6. A short-run and temporary positive shock to AS …scal policy to subsidize exports in
      order to increase rest of the world demand for AS exports by 5 percentage points of
      their imports

    We now consider each of these shocks in turn, by outlining their central tendencies and
discussing their e¤ects on the regional economies. The dynamics are reported for the …rst
80 quarters (i.e., a 20-year horizon) after each shock begins.22 Afterwards, we will discuss
the baseline scenario, which is simply an integrated presentation of these shocks.

  2 1 See   Hunt and Rebucci (2005) for a model-based analysis of current account imbalances over the 1990s.
  2 2 It is worth emphasizing that in several cases the variables reported in the charts keep increasing (or

falling) after the 20 year horizon to approach their steady-state levels.



                                                      10
   It should be understood, however, that the behavior of the national economies in the
baseline scenario is not a simple add-up of the six shocks. Each shock in fact can enhance,
amplify, or dampen the outcomes of the other shocks. For example, a very persistent
productivity shock in Emerging Asia results in AS increasing its share in the world economy
from 9.4 percent to 12.2 percent in the long run. In the case of the public debt shock in the
United States, there is a considerable reaction of the Asian current account to the increased
availability in the portfolio of US assets. The change in the current-account-to-GDP ratio is
smaller in the baseline scenario for the US public debt shock than in the presentation of the
US public debt shock in isolation. This is simply because AS is much larger in the baseline
(over 12.2 percent of the world instead of 9.4 percent) due to the productivity shock, and
has to devote fewer resources (as a share of GDP) in order to absorb its share of new US
government debt. To put it simply, the sum is greater (or, in this case, lesser) than its
parts. Where appropriate, in the remainder of this section we will try to highlight the most
important cross-e¤ects that occur in the baseline scenario.

4.1.1    Public debt in the US
For the public savings shock in the US, we couple a sustained increase in the government
de…cit for the next …ve years with a steady-state government debt shock of 11.5 percent of
GDP (Figures 4 and 5).23 The steady-state government de…cit of the US rises from 2.2 to
2.7 percent.24 We observe lower taxes today, but higher taxes in the future to meet the
interest payment obligations on the debt. The increased borrowing by the …scal authority
crowds out the trade balance, thereby worsening the current account de…cit relative to the
initial steady state. We also observe a real exchange rate appreciation in the short run, but
a depreciation in the long run.
    In the long run the increase in government debt increases US net foreign liabilities by
5.75 percent of GDP, which is …nanced by the rest of the world. Relative to each region’s
GDP, Emerging Asia sees the largest e¤ect, as its net foreign asset (NFA) position increases
by 4.40 percent of GDP in the long run, which means it must be …nanced by an increase in
the current account surplus of 0.5 percent of GDP in the medium term and 0.2 percent of
GDP in the long run. There are similar e¤ects in JE and RC, but they are smaller.

4.1.2    Private savings in the US
The reduction in US consumers’desire to save is represented by an increase in the rate of
time preference in the US relative to the rest of the world of 50 basis points, as well as a
risk premium shock of 30 basis points for 25 years (Figures 6 and 7).25 At the same time,

  2 3 We implement the government debt shock as follows. We increase the steady-state government-debt-

to-GDP ratio in the United States by 11.5 percentage points. We implement the shock in the short run
by letting the de…cit-to-GDP ratio for the US peak at 5 percent after two years, and then decline to the
steady-state value of 2.7 percent of GDP. This demonstrates the e¤ect of the US government de…cit shock
alone. In a framework with an endogenous link between government debt, net foreign assets and the world
real interest rate (as found in overlapping generations models of the Blanchard-Weil-Yaari type such as the
aforementioned GFM) there would also be a permanent increase in the US interest rate to account for the
crowding out e¤ects on investment.
  2 4 Figures 4 through 15 report variables as deviations from the initial steady state. For instance, for the

US government de…cit in Figure 4 the starting point corresponds to a de…cit of 2.2 percent and the endpoint
to a de…cit 0.5 percentage points above the initial level.
   2 5 The private savings shock has both a temporary and permanent component. The permanent component

is the rate of time preference shock. Relative to the initial world rate of time preference (1= 4 1) of 2.7




                                                     11
we assume AS is more patient than JE or RC — they have a lower rate of time preference
at 2.6 percent. So a negative private savings shock in the United States eventually results
in an increase in the real interest rate, and a reduction in domestic demand.
    In the short run there is a deterioration of the current account balance of 0.5 percent of
GDP in US. However, there is a long run depreciation, which means there is an improvement
in the steady-state trade balance. The spillover e¤ects are relatively minor, their magnitudes
depending entirely upon the extent of US trade linkages with AS, JE and RC.

4.1.3       Foreign demand for US assets
The third major component of the baseline scenario is an increase in the demand for US
assets in the rest of the world (Figures 8 and 9).26 The major foreign investor in US dollar
assets in this shock is AS (and to a lesser extent, JE, as Japan behaves much like the rest of
Asia in its demand for US assets). We see that AS saves more and increases its net foreign
asset holdings by 20.5 percentage points of GDP permanently, with lesser increases in JE
and RC (5.2 and 9.0 percentage points of GDP respectively). This results in an increase in
the US net–foreign-liability-to-GDP ratio by 20 percentage points.
   As a counterpart to its asset accumulation, AS runs a current account surplus that shows
up as a US current account de…cit of 3.7 percent in the short run and one percent in the
long run. In the short run, households in US consume more but in AS consume less. The
converse is true in the long run. Output growth in AS is also positive, once the sharp
negative e¤ects of the sudden real appreciation wears o¤. The short-run appreciation of
the AS real e¤ective exchange rate is the result of adjusted uncovered interest parity, since
higher real interest rate di¤erentials are necessary in the future to maintain its nominal
exchange rate peg vis-à-vis the U.S.

4.1.4       Productivity growth in JE (Japan and the euro area)
Japan and the euro area face a persistent negative shock of 0.75 percentage points to its
productivity growth rate that lasts for thirteen years (Figures 10 and 11).27 Relative to
the initial steady state, we see a notable decrease in output. Paired with a decrease in
the marginal product of capital, there is a sustained decrease in investment to achieve a
new lower capital-output ratio. Since the productivity shock is generalized across the entire
economy, we see a long-term real appreciation. The spillover e¤ects in the rest of the
world are mostly con…ned to RC and AS (which has strong links to Japan), but less in US,
re‡ecting their trading patterns with the rest of the world.
   In the baseline scenario this productivity shock serves to reduce the economic size of
Japan and the euro area relative to the other regions, reducing the international e¤ects of

percent, AS is more patient at 2.6 percent (a negative 10 basis point shock) while US is much more impatient
at 3.2 percent (a positive 50 basis point shock). For the temporary component, we increase the risk premium
ZB (see eq. A.42 in the Appendix) for all regional blocs by one percent for 25 years.
  2 6 For the technical implementation, we rely on the autonomous holdings (bF N EU T ) in the desired net
foreign asset position equation (A.43 in the Appendix). In order to …nance the increase in US net foreign
liabilities by 20 percentage points of GDP, AS increases its steady-state holdings of net foreign assets by
20.5 percentage points of GDP; JE increases its steady-state holdings of net foreign assets by 5.2 percentage
points of GDP; and RC increases its steady-state holdings of net foreign assets by nine percentage points of
GDP.
  2 7 To be more precise, we assume that productivity grows at 1.25 percent per year for 13 years in Japan

and the euro area for both the tradable and nontradable sectors, instead of at the world trend growth rate
of two percent.



                                                     12
other shocks. One exception is that the current account balance e¤ects of the US public
debt shock is higher as a share of GDP, since JE still has the same portion of US debt to
…nance through accumulation of NFA as in the isolated presentation of the US public debt
shock.

4.1.5     Productivity growth in AS (Emerging Asia)
This shock basically has the same e¤ects as the shock in Japan and the Euro Area, but
with all the signs of the responses reverted (Figures 12 and 13). AS has on average a higher
growth rate of productivity, starting around 5.5 percent per year before returning close to
the world trend growth rate of two percent after roughly 30 years.28 Relative to the initial
steady state, we see a large increase in output. Because of the increase in the marginal
product of capital, there is also a sustained increase in investment to achieve a new higher
capital-output ratio. Since the productivity shock is generalized across the entire economy,
we see a long-term real depreciation of around 4.5 percent.
    In the …rst two years there is a small increase in in‡ation by about 0.2 percent, followed
by a sustained 0.8 percent disin‡ation as the expansion of productive capacity continues.
The disin‡ation continues almost until 12 years after the shock begins. Given the higher
degree of ‡exibility in price setting for the labor and goods markets in AS, and the fact
that monetary policy is conducted to defend an exchange rate peg rather than pursue an
in‡ation target, the dynamics of the shock are less extreme than would occur in a regional
bloc such as JE.
    The spillover e¤ects from the shock in AS are not much larger than those spillovers from
the JE productivity shock, despite its much more sustained and larger extent. This results
from the fact that AS is merely 9.4% of world GDP in the initial equilibrium (whereas
JE is 34.6%) and the fact that AS has stronger linkages with US than JE does (relatively
speaking). Therefore, the productivity shock in AS also contributes to our formulation of the
baseline scenario in US, where we see a current account de…cit opening up in the medium-
to long-term.

4.1.6     Fiscal policy in AS
The role of AS in the baseline scenario is enhanced by a positive …scal policy shock in
Emerging Asia that is used to …nance exports to the rest of the world (Figures 14 and 15).29
By running a higher de…cit than the initial steady state conditions imply, the government
is able to subsidize the export of its goods and services abroad. In turn, this short-run
subsidization is associated with a permanent shift in the rest of the world’s preferences for
AS goods.30

  2 8 Technically,the productivity growth rate shocks di¤er between the tradable and nontradable sectors.
For the nontradable sector, productivity grows in AS at three percent per year for eight years. The shock
in the tradable sector is much larger, and much longer. Overall, the productivity growth rate in Emerging
Asia is close to 5.5 percent a year at the beginning of the shock, declining steadily to around 2.25 percent
after 30 years and returning to the trend two percent growth rate two years later.
  2 9 Export subsidies are not modeled as direct subsidies because they usually take the form of tax rebates,

accelerated depreciation allowances, and tax holidays.
  3 0 This shock is implemented as a positive increase in the AS …scal de…cit above 4 percent of GDP in

the …rst year, which declines to 1.0 percent of GDP by the end of the ninth year. Afterwards it reverts
to the de…cit consistent with the original long-run debt target of 24 percent of GDP. At the same time,
world preferences for Asian imports shift up by 5 percentage points of their total imports by moving the
bias parameters for imported consumption goods (bA in eq. 4) and investment goods (bE ) over roughly



                                                     13
    In the long run, demand for Emerging Asia’s goods is permanently higher by …ve percent
of imports in the three other regional blocs (JE, US and RC). However, since the increase in
the government de…cit is only temporary, there is no long run shift in the level of net foreign
liabilities in AS. Therefore, the long run trade balance is unchanged in AS and the higher
demand of AS goods abroad is o¤set by a permanent real appreciation of the exchange rate
of 23 percent, leading to a higher level of AS imports from abroad.
    This has implications for the other regions of the world. In the medium term the increase
in exports in the rest of the world roughly o¤sets the increase in demand for imports from
AS, meaning the US sees almost no change in its current account position, while JE and
RC see slight improvements. There are some signi…cant short-run increases in the current-
account-to-GDP ratios in JE (0.3 percent of GDP) and RC (0.7 percent of GDP). The main
e¤ect of this shock is a long-run realignment of real e¤ective exchange rates worldwide.
Also, the shift in world preferences toward AS imports means there is now a higher degree
of openness between AS and the rest of the world. So when all six shocks are combined to
form the baseline scenario, responses of trade movements to the various shocks are higher
vis-à-vis Asia (and they are, to varying degrees, less amongst the other regional blocs).

4.2     The integrated scenario
The six aforementioned shocks form the components for our integrated baseline scenario. As
alluded to, the shocks should be viewed as the central tendencies of the scenario, while the
latter is presented more broadly as a range of potential outcomes. Indeed, over time there
has been considerable uncertainty about the evolution and correction of the U.S. current
account imbalance, and there is no basis to assume that this will not be case in the future.
Figure 16 demonstrates this point by showing the evolution of the IMF’s forecasts in its
World Economic Outlook, from 1999 to the present. In later forecasts we see the same basic
story as the one we are proposing. Earlier forecasts put more weight on beliefs that the
U.S. current account de…cit was caused by high investment rates, rather than low private
savings and large public dissaving. We can also observe that consumption continues to trend
upwards over time, but in later forecasts there is a need for a notable correction toward the
end of the forecast horizon.
    In presenting the baseline scenario, we therefore consider a range of possibilities that
accounts for the degree of uncertainty around the central tendency of the six component
shocks already outlined. A high degree of uncertainty, in particular, surrounds the outcome
of shocks related to private savings in the United States, rest of world preferences for holdings
of US assets, and the positive productivity shock in Emerging Asia. For the outcome of
shocks related to the U.S. …scal policy and lagging productivity in Japan and the euro area,
the uncertainty bounds are more narrow.
    The baseline scenario begins in 2005q1. In order to achieve the state of disequilibrium
we believe exists in that period, we do not start reporting from the initial steady state of
the model, but rather from period 13 (i.e., the start of the fourth year) after the occurrence
of each of the shocks presented above. We believe that using this time frame for the combi-
nation of the six shocks (with minor modi…cations to smooth demand and monetary policy)

three years. For example, the bias of American consumers for imported goods from Emerging Asia (bU A
                                                                                                     S;AS
                                                                                                          )
                                                                                                  U S;RC
increases from 0.11 to 0.16, with a corresponding decrease in demand for imported goods from RC (bA       )
from 0.58 to 0.53. This implies that in the long run, for every additional one hundred units of imports in
JE, RW or US, …ve of those units now come from AS rather than from the other trading partners.




                                                    14
is the best strategy to represent our baseline view of the world economy at the beginning of
2005.
    Figure 17 presents the baseline scenario in the United States. The key features are a
gradual build up in government debt and decline in net foreign assets for US. The exchange
rate depreciates gradually to allow the net asset position to stabilize. This generates the
trade surplus required to …nance the interest obligations resulting from the increase in net
foreign liabilities. Consumption as a share of GDP is higher in the short run but is eventually
crowded out as US becomes more heavily indebted. In addition, investment is crowded out
by persistent budgetary de…cits. Overall, the dynamics in the United States are driven by
the current account de…cit moderating from more than 5 percent of GDP to a sustainable
level in 10 years’time.
    Emerging Asia’s most important role in the baseline is through its absorption of the
increased supply of US assets (Figure 18). Initially AS runs a large and growing current
account surplus. Eventually, the trade balance turns negative to support the large increase
in the net foreign asset position. To absorb the in‡ows from the interest payments on its net
foreign asset position, the AS real e¤ective exchange rate roughly appreciates between 10
and 20 percent over the next …ve years, achieved through higher in‡ation. Because of limited
exchange rate ‡exibility, there is an increase in the real interest rate necessary to defend
the stability of the currency. Overall, the economy cools in the short run, as higher interest
rates dampen investment and real appreciation a¤ects net exports. However, consumption
increases as a share of GDP in the medium term in anticipation of higher wealth (and lower
saving) in the long run.
    Japan and the euro area are relatively stable in terms of adjustment, experiencing few
e¤ects as Emerging Asia absorbs most of the increased US demand for goods and the
increased supply of US assets (Figure 19). The JE external account is broadly stable going
forward, with only a temporary and small current account improvement until it stabilizes
around 0.5 percent of GDP in about 10 years time.
    The Remaining Countries bloc is not a key part of either the baseline scenario, or the
alternative scenarios presented below. It behaves much like Emerging Asia since it has
strong links with the United States (mainly Canada and Mexico). But RC absorbs less
US debt as there is no large underlying positive shock to its preference for US assets.
Furthermore, it experiences relatively little in‡ation and has a smaller movement in its
real e¤ective exchange rate than Emerging Asia because it conducts its monetary policy by
targeting in‡ation rather than a nominal exchange rate peg.


5    Elements for alternative scenarios
This section has two objectives. First, we consider some scenarios that are designed to
highlight the potential risks of large current account imbalances. Second, we discuss some
possible solutions that may mitigate these risks. In summary, we argue that the short-run
output costs for the U.S. economy associated with …nancial market turbulence and a sudden
loss in appetite for U.S. assets are likely to be the same order of magnitude as a large, credible
…scal consolidation that would make a signi…cant contribution to reducing these imbalances
steadily over time and make both the U.S. and world economy less susceptible to shocks.
We also consider the e¤ects of competition-friendly structural policies aimed at reducing
long-standing structural rigidities and distortions in the product markets in Europe and
Japan. Our analysis suggests that such policies could play a meaningful role in reducing



                                               15
current account imbalances on a sustainable basis.

5.1     Sudden loss in appetite for U.S. assets
Among the major risks surrounding the large buildup of U.S. external liabilities, there has
been considerable discussion that a sudden loss in appetite for these assets by the rest of the
world could precipitate a large and abrupt depreciation in the U.S. dollar, adversely impact
interest rates, and cause signi…cant second-round negative e¤ects on other countries. We
attempt to evaluate these predictions.
    Initially, we consider the e¤ects of a sudden portfolio reshu- ing in the rest of the world
(Emerging Asia, Japan and the euro area, and the RC blocs) under the assumption that
Emerging Asia maintains a peg relative to the US currency. The e¤ects of this …rst scenario
are reported as solid lines in Figure 20. Next, we consider the same scenario, but in this case
central banks in Emerging Asia gradually adopt a ‡exible exchange rate regime (and in‡ation
targeting).31 The e¤ects of this second scenario are reported as dashed lines in Figure 20
and serve to illustrate how ‡exibility in the exchange rate can help reduce variability in
both output and in‡ation in Emerging Asia.
    If market sentiment soured on dollar assets, higher real interest rates in the United
States and a signi…cant depreciation in the US dollar in e¤ective terms would result. Dollar
depreciation would improve the US trade balance but have a contractionary e¤ect on US
GDP growth as higher real interest rates have a larger depressing e¤ect on domestic demand
than the e¤ect of the real exchange rate depreciation. Interestingly, this analysis suggests
a fairly benign scenario in partner countries where growth rises temporarily in response to
lower real interest rates.
    These scenarios seem consistent with a view that adjustment in relative prices and real
interest rates may not have enormous implications for the world economy as a whole, insofar
as the adjustment process was orderly and did not yield persistently higher real interest rates
in the rest of the world. It is important to note that these simulations assume relatively
high elasticities of substitution between domestically-produced tradables and importables.
Reducing these elasticities to one approximately doubles the real depreciation in the U.S.
dollar, but has much smaller e¤ects on the other results reported in Figure 20 as the exchange
rate simply has to do more work to re-equilibrate the economies to move U.S. dollar asset
holdings toward their new desired levels.32

5.1.1    Bene…ts of exchange rate ‡exibility in Emerging Asia
While the e¤ects appear somewhat benign for the world economy generally, they would be
anything but benign for the regional economies in Emerging Asia that exhibit symptoms of
overheating. In this scenario one can see the potential bene…ts of allowing greater exchange

 3 1 Technically, this is made operational by shifting the parameters in the reaction function for Emerging

Asia gradually over time to be consistent with the parameters in the other country blocs of the model.
  3 2 Our baseline elasticities are in line with the parameters used in standard open-economy models, but they

are signi…cantly higher than the mid-point of the range of macroeconometric estimates, which falls closer to
one. For example, Bergin (2004) …nds evidence for a unitary elasticity. See Corsetti and Pesenti (2001) for a
stylized model with a unit elasticity of substitution between home and foreign goods, complete pass-through,
and home bias in government spending. More complex simulation models such as Erceg, Guerrieri and Gust
(2005) and Bayoumi, Laxton and Pesenti (2004) employ estimates of 2:5 and 3:0, respectively, closer to
estimates of long-run elasticities based on disaggregated data. It is important to note that estimates around
2:5 combined with adjustment costs on imports results in dynamic reponses for imports that are consistent
with typical impulse response functions over 1-2 year horizons.




                                                     16
rate ‡exibility in Emerging Asia as a way to reduce variability in both output and in‡ation.
Indeed, a comparison of the solid lines and the dashed lines in Figure 20 shows intensifying
pressure on domestic in‡ation and output, associated with a reduction in demand for US
assets by AS central banks, if they (perhaps, paradoxically) kept trying to peg their exchange
rates to the US dollar.33
   In the …rst case, attempting to maintain the peg would generate signi…cant overheating
pressures and higher in‡ation, as accelerating prices would be the only method to appreciate
their real exchange rates toward values in line with underlying fundamentals. In the second
case, we allow the weight on the exchange rate in the Emerging Asia monetary policy
reaction function to fall gradually over time and at the same time the weight on (expected)
in‡ation to rise. Consequently, the real exchange rate depreciates by less in Emerging Asia,
and this results in less variability in output and in‡ation.34

5.1.2    Are these scenarios too benign?
Possibly. The ‘conundrum’of historically low interest rates, against the backdrop of histori-
cally strong global growth and U.S. monetary tightening, is far from being well understood.
And uncertainty lingers about the sustainability and vulnerability of prevailing relaxed …-
nancial conditions. Correspondingly, there is a clear and present risk that real rates may rise
universally if a sharp U.S. dollar depreciation were to precipitate a reassessment of global
risks, including for in‡ation. This could also trigger adjustments in the prices of other
assets (such as housing and equities) and bring into play con…dence e¤ects with further
reverberations throughout the economy.
    To elaborate on these risks, we consider a scenario (see Figure 21) where additional
rami…cations of a sharp decline in market sentiment toward abundant US dollar assets are
considered. In this case, global in‡ation fears and pressures emerge and interest rates tend
to rise signi…cantly across markets. AS attempts to contain the overheating pressures from
past low real exchange rates through revaluation and sharply higher interest rates. For other
countries, in‡ationary pressures are exacerbated as the competitive forces from cheap AS
exports recede. In this case, note that the adverse e¤ects on global growth are signi…cant.

5.2     Reducing budget de…cits in the United States
In a recent model-based analysis of current account imbalances, Erceg, Guerrieri and Gust
(2005) suggest that …scal de…cits do not have very signi…cant e¤ects on current account
de…cits.35 The implication is that a large reduction in the U.S. government de…cits would
not play a major role in correcting current account imbalances. But this analysis relies on

  3 3 Dooley, Folkerts-Landau and Garber (2004) argue that diversi…cation of foreign reserves by Asian central

banks, amounting to sterilized intervention to weaken the dollar, would be incompatible unless these central
banks changed their (…xed) exchange rate policies.
  3 4 We acknowledge that the di¤erence between the scenarios is not large. It would be much larger if we

assumed there was an immediate move to a ‡exible exchange rate regime. We show some results below for
a US …scal experiment that better contrasts the di¤erences between a pure exchange rate peg and a pure
‡exible exchange rate regime in the AS bloc.
   3 5 Erceg, Guerrieri, and Gust (2005) add rule-of-thumb consumers to a model based on the representative

agent paradigm and then use the model to study the e¤ects of recent U.S. …scal de…cits on the current
account de…cit. The e¤ects they …nd are much smaller than in models allowing for the possibility that
permanent increases in government debt can have permanent consequences on the stock of net foreign
liabilities. Faruqee and Laxton (2000) show that liquidity-constrained consumers by themselves do not
result in signi…cant long-term crowding-out e¤ects associated with permanent increases in government debt.




                                                     17
a single, narrow mechanism (i.e., liquidity constraints) through which …scal variables might
operate (beyond tax distortions), while other theoretical frameworks — and other models
— reach rather di¤erent conclusions. This is the case, for instance, with simulation results
based on the aforementioned Global Fiscal Model, a multi-country choice-theoretic model
— in the life-cycle, overlapping generations tradition — that has been developed speci…cally
to study the medium- and long-term consequences of alternative …scal policies that involve
permanent changes in government debt.36
    The theoretical framework adopted in this paper provides a synthesis between these
disparate modeling strategies, by considering the link between government debt and net
asset positions in relation to the technology of …nancial intermediation.37 When this link
is switched o¤, and no allowance is made for the possibility that permanent changes in
government debt can result in a permanent shift in the desired level of net foreign liabilities,
our simulation results show that the e¤ects of …scal de…cits on current account de…cits can
be very small. However, when the link is explicitly and realistically taken into account, our
results predict a rather di¤erent path for current account rebalancing.

5.2.1    E¤ects of a permanent reduction in government debt through tax hikes
Figure 22 reports the results for a US …scal consolidation scenario where the government-
debt-to-GDP ratio is reduced by 60 percentage points in the long run by increasing taxes
by three percent of GDP over …fteen years. The tax hike is assumed to fall entirely on labor
income, but after the …fteenth year of the simulation, the tax rate is allowed to fall in order
to stabilize the government debt ratio at a value that is 60 percentage points below baseline.
    The solid line in Figure 22 reports the results when the Emerging Asian currencies
are assumed to be pegged to the dollar, while the dashed lines refer to the case in which
they have a ‡exible exchange rate regime. In both cases output growth falls in the United
States and the current account balance improves signi…cantly. The contractionary e¤ects
on real GDP are moderated by a real depreciation in the US dollar. These simulations show
clearly that US …scal consolidation would not be achieved without some short-run costs
for output growth, but unlike the results by Erceg et al. (2005) they suggest that a large
and credible …scal consolidation could have large and durable bene…ts by reducing current
account imbalances.
    The dashed lines report the results when the AS countries no longer ‘import’an inappro-
priate monetary stance by pegging their exchange rates to the US dollar. In the case of a peg
their real exchange rate depreciates with the US dollar and real interest rates decline. This
results in a signi…cant expansion in demand in the short run and higher in‡ation. In the
case where they are assumed to follow a ‡exible exchange rate regime there is substantially
less variability in output and in‡ation as the real exchange rate is allowed to appreciate in
line with fundamentals. Note that the rest of the world (Japan, Europe and RC) bene…ts
from …scal consolidation in the United States as the rise in world savings results in lower
real interest rates and higher investment.
    The …scal scenarios reported above allow the desired level of net foreign liabilities to fall

  3 6 For an introduction to the structure and properties of the IMF’s GFM see Botman and others (2005)

and Kumhof, Laxton and Muir (2005). The model assumes that prices and wages are perfectly ‡exible, but
has a well-de…ned steady state where private and public sector preferences determine if countries are net
creditors or debtors.
  3 7 The section on the budget constraint for the Ricardian households in the Appendix explains more fully

the implementation of these linkages.




                                                    18
by 1/2 of the decline in government debt while in Erceg et al. (2005) this mechanism does
not exist. To see the importance of this assumption for our results we have constructed two
alternative scenarios, one that employs a lower estimate of 1/4 and another that employs
an estimate of 3/4 — see Figure 23. Not surprisingly, this parameter has a signi…cant e¤ect
on the path of the current account balance. In the limiting case when it is assumed to be
zero, the e¤ects on the current account balance over the medium term become insigni…cant.
Indeed, in the long run the e¤ects would be absolutely zero as the relationship between
current account de…cit and …scal de…cit, measured as ratios of nominal GDP, will be exactly
the same as the relationship between the stocks of net foreign liabilities and government
debt.

5.2.2   Alternative views about the link between government debt and net for-
        eign liabilities
As a check of the reliability of our simulations, it is worthwhile to investigate what assump-
tions may point to larger or smaller estimates in models where the relationship between
government debt and net foreign liabilities is modeled endogenously and falls directly out
of assumptions about behavior. The aforementioned GFM is based on an overlapping gen-
erations framework with …nite lives and potential myopia in consumer spending decisions
because the planning horizon can be set to be shorter than the expected lifetime of an
average consumer. An important consequence of these assumptions is that there will be a
strong link in the long run between government debt and the stock of net foreign liabilities.
    Figure 24 presents results for the same …scal consolidation experiment considered above.
We consider two cases. The …rst assumes a planning horizon of 10 years (solid lines) while the
second assumes a planning horizon of 20 years (dashed lines). Note that in both cases there
are signi…cant e¤ects on the current account balance from permanently reducing government
debt. In the …rst case the current account balance improves by about 2.0 percentage points,
while in the second case when the planning horizon is 20 years it improves by about 1.5
percentage points.
    It is important to emphasize that the improvements in the current account balance are
durable to the extent that there is a permanent reduction in net foreign liabilities of 40 and
30 percentage points, respectively. Kumhof, Laxton and Muir (2005) show that the long-run
elasticity between the stock of government debt and net foreign liabilities in GFM ranges
from a low of 0.50 to a high of 0.75 for plausible assumptions about structural parameters
such as: the planning horizon of agents; the type of …scal consolidation (labor taxes, cor-
porate income taxes, or government absorption); key elasticities (especially intertemporal
substitution).

5.2.3   Does the e¤ect on the current account depend on the type of …scal con-
        solidation?
Yes. The e¤ects on the current account balance will generally be larger if the …scal con-
solidation is a result of a cut in government absorption rather than an increase in taxes.
Figure 25 compares the same tax-induced …scal consolidation reported earlier (solid lines)
with an alternative …scal consolidation where government absorption is cut by three per-
centage points of GDP for 15 years (dashed lines). In the short run expenditure cuts are
associated with much stronger contractionary e¤ects on real GDP, as well as larger e¤ects
on the current account balance.




                                             19
5.3         How much would structural reforms in Japan and the euro area
            contribute?
Given the uneven pattern of global growth and demand and the sluggish economic perfor-
mance in Japan and the euro area, it has been suggested that one component solution to
help reduce global imbalances would be to raise the growth potential — hampered by deep-
seated structural rigidities — in these regions through further structural reforms. Namely,
policies aimed at lowering barriers to competition, enhancing ‡exibility in employment and
production practices, raising labor utilization, and reducing distortions in labor and product
markets could substantially improve growth prospects, boost domestic demand, and attract
foreign investors. Some have challenged the notion that structural reforms would do much
at all and may even exacerbate global imbalances, given that they may weigh on consumer
con…dence (and spending) over drawn-out transitions typical of structural change episodes.
    To evaluate these viewpoints, we study scenarios of reducing labor and product market
distortions (i.e. markups) in JE following Bayoumi, Laxton and Pesenti (2004). Labor mar-
ket reforms alone (not shown) can have minimal e¤ects on reducing high domestic net saving,
particularly if uncertainty over reforms further weighed on households. However, credible
product market reforms can o¤er strong complementary e¤ects enhancing the impact of la-
bor market reforms on growth and employment (and thereby con…dence).38 Moreover, the
direct output e¤ects from comparable product market reforms tend to be larger. Considering
these reforms, Figure 26 shows the e¤ects of reducing price markups in both the tradables
and nontradables sectors in Japan and the euro area gradually to US levels over a 10 year
period. Growth rises signi…cantly in Japan and the euro area with some small spillovers to
the rest of the world. Note that accommodative monetary policy in JE lends further support
to domestic demand during the structural adjustment toward higher economic activity.
    The simulations presented in Figure 26 include a permanent six percentage point reduc-
tion in the desired net foreign asset to GDP ratios — akin to the implications of higher
productivity — in Japan and the euro area, as well as an increase in desired NFA positions
in other countries. The solid lines are based on the shifts in the long-run desired NFA po-
sitions that obtain under the same simulation experiment in GFM, while the dashed lines
assumes that the United States alone would …nance the increase in investment in Japan and
the euro area through an increase in its desired NFA holdings. Obviously, if the e¤ects on
growth were more sustained and trend productivity growth were to increase there could be
even larger changes in the desired NFA positions.


6      Conclusion
Global imbalances are a complex, multi-faceted issue, with potentially far-reaching implica-
tions for the global economy that should not be ignored. Concern about potential scenarios
where the adjustment process could be costly to both the United States and the world econ-
omy has motivated several policymakers and analysts to demand credible and swift action
to help mitigate the risks by reducing the magnitude of these imbalances. While predicting
their future evolution cannot be done with any certitude, a better understanding of the
likely conditions, causes, and consequences surrounding these external developments can
guide key policies needed to help navigate economies toward a desirable resolution. Exam-
ining the implications, risks, and attendant policies attached to global rebalancing through

 3 8 See,   for example, IMF (2005) for evidence based on OECD countries.




                                                    20
the lens of a dynamic, multi-region model of the global economy, this analysis has yielded
some useful insights in this regard.
    Our baseline view is that steady global rebalancing with an orderly unwinding of …nancial
positions and currency realignments — notably a gradual depreciation in the U.S. dollar —
can be achieved. The challenge for policymakers at the national level is to help ensure this
outcome that is in the collective interest. In this instance, the burden of adjustment will
largely fall on the United States and Emerging Asia in terms of reversing their past (net)
national saving trends. This may require a committed U.S. …scal consolidation through
a combination of higher taxes and reining in government absorption. Supportive …scal
policies in Emerging Asia, aimed at easing export competitiveness strains, could facilitate
adjustment, aided by greater exchange rate ‡exibility that limited output and in‡ation
variability. Although more uncertain, some ‘normalization’of private consumption rates (in
opposing directions) in the two regions would further facilitate external adjustment.
    Europe and Japan, for their part, could meaningfully contribute to the multilateral ad-
justment process through stronger pursuit of growth-enhancing structural reforms that align
with their own national interests. Namely, policies aimed at addressing long-standing struc-
tural rigidities and distortions could substantially improve growth prospects, strengthen
consumption and investment spending, and increase the attractiveness to foreign investors.
Labor market reforms alone might not signi…cantly contribute to rebalancing, especially
if uncertainty about policy direction and resolve weighed on con…dence. However, com-
mitted product market initiatives could complement these reforms to enhance con…dence
and further raise growth and domestic demand. Led by these competition-friendly reforms
and with structural adjustment supported by monetary policy, credible growth-enhancing
measures tackling deep-seated structural impediments and distortions would boost domestic
consumption and investment prospects, attract foreign capital, and thereby contribute to
external rebalancing.
    Far less benign adjustment scenarios are also quite conceivable. A more dangerous route,
in the absence of underlying, broad-based adjustment in macroeconomic and structural
policies, would rely on global …nancial markets to take a lead role. If mounting concerns
over imbalances triggered sizeable international portfolio shifts, a sudden loss of appetite for
U.S. dollar assets could e¤ect more drastic changes in interest and exchange rates, including
a signi…cantly weaker U.S. dollar. This is particularly the case if relaxed …nancial conditions
were to give way, with harmful knock-on e¤ects for global growth.


References
 [1] Batini, N. and A. Haldane, 1999, “Forward-Looking Rules for Monetary Policy,” in J.
     B. Taylor (ed.), Monetary Policy Rules, Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.

 [2] Botman, D., D. Muir, D. Laxton and A. Romanov, 2005, “A New-Open-Economy-
     Macro Model for Fiscal Policy Evaluation,” unpublished manuscript, International
     Monetary Fund.

 [3] Bayoumi, T., D. Laxton and P. Pesenti, 2004, “Bene…ts and Spillovers of Greater
     Competition in Europe: A Macroeconomic Assessment,” NBER Working Paper No.
     10416, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.




                                              21
 [4] Bergin, P., 2004, “How Well Can the New Open Economy Macroeconomics Explain
     the Exchange Rate and Current Account?”NBER Working Paper No. 10356, National
     Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

 [5] Choudhri, E., H. Faruqee, and D. Hakura, 2005, “Explaining the Exchange Rate Pass-
     Through in Di¤erent Prices,”Journal of International Economics, Vol. 65, pp. 349-374.

 [6] Coats, W., D. Laxton and D. Rose, 2003, The Czech National Bank’s Forecasting and
     Policy Analysis System, Prague: Czech National Bank.

 [7] Corden, M., 1994, Economic Policy, Exchange Rates, and the International System,
     Oxford: Oxford University Press, and Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.

 [8] Corsetti, G. and L. Dedola, 2002, “Macroeconomics of International Price Discrimina-
     tion,” ECB Working Paper No. 176, Frankfurt: European Central Bank.

 [9] Corsetti, G. and P. Pesenti, 2001, “Welfare and Macroeconomic Interdependence,”The
     Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1, Vol. 116, no. 2, pp. 421-445(25), MIT Press.

[10] Corsetti, G. and P. Pesenti, 2005a, “International Dimensions of Optimal Monetary
     Policy,” Journal of Monetary Economics 52 (2), March, pp. 281-305.

[11] Corsetti, G. and P. Pesenti, 2005b, “The Simple Geometry of Transmission and Stabi-
     lization in Closed and Open Economy,”NBER Working Paper No. 11341, May, National
     Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

[12] De Rato, R., 2005, “Correcting Global Imbalances – Avoiding the Blame Game,” Re-
     marks by Managing Director, IMF at the Foreign Policy Association of Financial Ser-
     vices, March.

[13] Devereux, M., and C. Engel, 2002, “Exchange Rate Pass-Through, Exchange Rate
     Volatility, and Exchange Rate Disconnect,” Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 49,
     pp. 913-940.

[14] Dooley, M., D. Folkerts-Landau, and P. Garber, 2004, “Asian Reserve Diversi…cation:
     Does it Threaten the Pegs," Global Market Research, Deutsche Bank.

[15] Dooley, M., D. Folkerts-Landau, and P. Garber, 2005, “Direct Investment, Rising Real
     Wages and the Absorption of Excess Labor in the Periphery,” Paper prepared for an
     NBER Conference on G7 Current Account Imbalances: Sustainability and Adjustment,
     June 1-2, 2005, Newport, Rhode Island.

[16] Edwards, S., 2004, “Thirty Years of Current Account Imbalances, Current Account
     Reversals and Sudden Stops,” NBER Working Paper No. 10276, National Bureau of
     Economic Research, Inc.

[17] Eichengreen, B., 2004, “Global Imbalances and the Lessons of Bretton Woods,”NBER
     Working Papers 10497, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

[18] Eichengreen, B. and M. Adalet, 2005, “Current Account Reversals: Always a Prob-
     lem?” Paper prepared for an NBER Conference on G7 Current Account Imbalances:
     Sustainability and Adjustment, June 1-2, 2005, Newport, Rhode Island.




                                           22
[19] Engel, C., 1993, “Real exchange rates and relative prices : An empirical investigation,”
     Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 32, pp. 35-50.

[20] Engel, C., 2002, “Expenditure Switching and Exchange Rate Policy,” NBER Macro-
     economics Annual Report.

[21] Engel, C., and J. Rogers, 1996, “How Wide is the Border?”American Economic Review
     86, pp. 1112-1125.

[22] Erceg, C. J., L. Guerrieri, and C. Gust, 2005, “Expansionary Fiscal Shocks and the
     Trade De…cit,” FRB International Finance Discussion Paper No. 825.

[23] Faruqee, H. and J. Lee, 2005, “Global Dispersion of Current Accounts: Is the Universe
     Expanding?”, unpublished manuscript, International Monetary Fund.

[24] Faruqee, H. and D. Laxton, 2000, “Life-Cycles, Dynasties, Savings: Implications for
     Closed and Small, Open Economies,” IMF Working Paper No. 00/126.

[25] Freund, C., 2000, “Current Account Adjustment in Industrial Countries,” FRB Inter-
     national Finance Discussion Paper No. 692.

[26] Ghironi, F., I·. Talan, and A. Rebucci, 2005, “Net Foreign Asset Position and Consump-
     tion Dynamics in the International Economy” IMF Working Paper No. 05/82.

[27] Gourinchas, P. and H. Rey, 2005, “From World Banker to World Venture Capitalist:
     The U.S. External Adjustment and the Exorbitant Privilege,” Paper prepared for an
     NBER Conference on G7 Current Account Imbalances: Sustainability and Adjustment,
     June 1-2, 2005, Newport, Rhode Island.

[28] Hunt, B. and A. Rebucci, 2005, “The U.S. Dollar and the Trade De…cit: What accounts
     for the Late 1990s?” forthcoming in International Finance.

[29] Hunt, B., D. Rose and A. Scott, 2000, “The core model of the Reserve Bank of New
     Zealand’s Forecasting and Policy System,”Economic Modelling, Volume 17, Issue2, pp.
     247-274.

[30] International Monetary Fund, 2005, “The World Economic Outlook (WEO) Database,”
     IMF, Washington D.C.

[31] Juillard, M., P. Karam, D. Laxton, and P. Pesenti, 2004, “A Simple Welfare-Based
     Monetary Policy Rule in an Estimated DSGE Model of the U.S. Economy,” Paper
     prepared for the IMF Workshop on DSGE Modeling, April, 26-30, 2004, Washington
     D.C.

[32] Kumhof, M., D. Laxton and D. Muir, 2005, “The Consequences of U.S. Fiscal Con-
     solidation for the Current Account,” unpublished manuscript, International Monetary
     Fund.

[33] Lane, P. and G. Milesi-Ferretti, 2001, “Long-Term Capital Movements,”in B. Bernanke
     and K. Rogo¤ (eds.) NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2001, Cambridge: MIT Press.

[34] Lane, P. and G. Milesi-Ferretti, 2003, “International Financial Integration,”IMF Sta¤
     Papers.



                                             23
[35] Lane, P. and G. Milesi-Ferretti, 2004, “Financial Globalization and Exchange Rates,”
     CEPR Discussion Papers 4745.

[36] Laxton, D., and P. Pesenti, 2003, “Monetary Policy Rules for Small, Open, Emerging
     Economies,” Journal of Monetary Economics 50, July, pp. 1109-1146.

[37] Laxton, D., D. Rose and R. Tetlow, 1993, “Monetary Policy, Uncertainty, and the
     Presumption of Linearity,” Bank of Canada Technical Report No. 63.

[38] Milesi-Ferretti G. and A. Razin, 2000, “Current Account Reversals and Currency Crises:
     Empirical Regularities,”in P. Krugman (ed.), Currency Crises, Chicago: University of
     Chicago Press.

[39] Obstfeld, M. and K. Rogo¤, 2000a, “Perspectives on OECD Economic Integration:
     Implications for U.S. Current Account Adjustment,”presented at Federal Reserve Bank
     of Kansas City Symposium, Jackson Hole, 2000.

[40] Obstfeld, M. and K. Rogo¤, 2000b, “The Six Major Puzzles in International Macro-
     economics: Is there a Common Cause?” in B. Bernanke and K. Rogo¤ (eds.), NBER
     Macroeconomics Annual 2000, Cambridge: MIT Press.

[41] Obstfeld, M., 2002, “Exchange Rates and Adjustment: Perspectives from the New
     Open Economy Macroeconomics,” NBER Working Paper No. 9118, National Bureau
     of Economic Research, Inc.

[42] Orphanides, A., 2003, “Historical Monetary Policy Analysis and the Taylor Rule.”
     Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 50, pp. 983-1022.

[43] Rogo¤, K., 1996, “The Purchasing Power Parity Puzzle,” Journal of Economic Litera-
     ture 34, June 1996, 647-68.

[44] Jean, S. and G. Nicoletti, 2002, “Product market Regulation and Wage Premia in Eu-
     rope and North America,” OECD Economics Department Working Paper 318, OECD
     Economics Department.

[45] Svensson, L., 1999, “In‡ation Targeting as a Monetary Policy Rule,” Journal of Mon-
     etary Economics, 43, pp. 607-654.

[46] Svensson, L. and M. Woodford, 2005, “Implementing Optimal Policy through In‡ation-
     Forecast Targeting” in B. Bernanke and M. Woodford (eds.), The In‡ation Targeting
     Debate, Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.

[47] Tille, C., 2003, “The Impact of Exchange Rate Movements on U.S. Foreign Debt,”
     Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Current Issues in Economics and Finance, Vol. 9
     pp. 1–7.




                                            24
Appendix:                Theoretical framework
   Introduction
The structure of the model is introduced in Section 2 and illustrated in Figure 2. Needless
to say, the model is fairly complex even though it abstracts from a number of issues (such as
trade in oil, commodities and other ‘upstream’intermediate inputs, distribution costs,39 as
well as balance-sheet and ‘revaluation’e¤ects stemming from asymmetries in the currency
denomination of assets and liabilities across countries) of obvious relevance for the analysis
of the international transmission mechanism. In what follows we provide a brief but com-
prehensive overview of the model. In some sections we focus on country-speci…c equations
that are independent of foreign variables, thus qualitatively similar across countries. We
therefore drop country indexes for notational simplicity, with the understanding that all
four countries are analogously characterized. In the sections involving international trans-
actions, instead, we explicitly incorporate country indexes in our notation. As a general
convention throughout the model, when we state that variable X follows an autoregressive
process, we mean that:
                              Xt = (1     X ) X + X Xt 1 + eX;t                         (A.1)
where 0 <     X   < 1, X is the steady-state value of Xt , and eX;t is a noise term.

   Final goods
In each country there is a continuum of symmetric …rms producing the two …nal goods, A
(the consumption good) and E (the investment good) under perfect competition.
    Consider …rst the consumption sector. Each …rm is indexed by x 2 [0; s], where 0 <
s < 1 is the country size. Firm x’s output at time (quarter) t is denoted At (x). The
consumption good is produced with the following nested constant elasticity of substitution
(CES) technology:
                                 1                     1               1
                            1                         "A          1
                   At (x)       "A
                                     = 1        A;t        NA;t (x)   "A

                        1       1                1                    1              1        A         1
                       "A                   1                                    1                 1
                   +   A;t [
                                A
                                A    QA;t (x)    A    + (1       A)   A   MA;t (x)   A   ]   A 1       "A
                                                                                                            (A.2)

Three intermediate inputs are used in the production of the consumption good A: a basket
NA of nontradable goods, a basket QA of domestic tradable goods, and a basket MA of
imported goods. The elasticity of substitution between tradables and nontradables is "A > 0,
and the elasticity of substitution between domestic and imported tradables is A > 0. The
weights of the three inputs are, respectively, 1 A , A A and A (1       A ) with 0 < A ; A <
1.
    Firm x takes as given the prices of the three inputs and minimizes its costs subject to the
technological constraint (A.2). As a convention throughout the model, A is the numeraire
of the economy and all national prices are expressed in terms of domestic consumption units,
that is relative to the Consumer Price Index (CPI).40 Cost minimization implies that …rm

  3 9 The reader interested in these two features is referred to the variant of the model considered in Laxton

and Pesenti (2003).
  4 0 The transformation of all prices in relative terms and all quantities in detrended terms is motivated by

the desire to avoid dealing with unit roots, either nominal or real, in quantitative simulations of the model
with stochastic in‡ation and growth rates.




                                                             i
x’s demands for intermediate inputs are:
                                                                        "A
                         NA;t (x)      =       1             A;t      pN;t At (x)                             (A.3)
                                                              A "A
                         QA;t (x)      =       A;t A pQ;t pXA;t At (x)
                                                         A
                                                                                                              (A.4)
                                                                      A "A
                         MA;t (x)      =       A;t (1    A ) pM A;t pXA;t At (x)
                                                                A
                                                                                                              (A.5)

where pN , pQ and pM A are the relative prices of the inputs in terms of consumption baskets
and pXA is the price of the composite basket of domestic and foreign tradables, or:
                                 h                               i1 1
                                       1                              A
                         pXA;t      A pQ;t
                                           A
                                             + (1     A ) pM A;t
                                                             A
                                                                                       (A.6)

    The technologies of production of consumption and investment goods can be quantita-
tively di¤erent but their formal characterizations are similar, with self-explanatory changes
in notation. For instance, a …rm e 2 [0; s], that produces the investment good, demands
nontradable goods according to:
                                                                                       "E
                             NE;t (e) = 1                    E;t      (pN;t =pE;t )         Et                (A.7)

Note that pM A and pM E are sector-speci…c as they re‡ect the di¤erent composition of
imports in the two sectors, while pN and pQ are identical across sectors.

   Demand for domestic intermediate goods
Consider now the composition of the baskets of intermediate goods. Intermediate inputs
come in di¤erent varieties (brands) and are produced under conditions of monopolistic
competition. In each country there are two kinds of intermediate goods, tradables and
nontradables. Each kind is de…ned over a continuum of mass s. Without loss of generality,
we assume that each nontradable good is produced by a single domestic …rm indexed by
n 2 [0; s], and each tradable good is produced by a …rm h 2 [0; s].
   Focusing …rst on the basket NA , this is a CES index of all domestic varieties of nontrad-
ables. Denoting as NA (n; x) the demand by …rm x of an intermediate good produced by
…rm n, the basket NA (x) is:
                                   "           1     Z                                           #    N;t
                                                             s                                       N;t 1
                                       1       N;t                               1    1
                      NA;t (x) =                                 NA;t (n; x)          N;t   dn                (A.8)
                                       s                 0

where N;t > 1 denotes the elasticity of substitution among intermediate non-tradables.
   Firm x takes as given the prices of the nontradable goods p(n). Cost minimization
implies:
                                                      N;t
                                        1 pt (n)
                         NA;t (n; x) =                    NA;t (x)                  (A.9)
                                        s pN;t
where pN is the price of one unit of the non-tradable basket, or:
                                                   Z     s
                                                                                            1
                                           1                           1   N;t
                                                                                       1     N;t
                             pN;t =                          pt (n)              dn                          (A.10)
                                           s         0

    The basket NE is similarly characterized. Aggregating across …rms,41 and accounting
for public demand of nontradables — here assumed to have the same composition as private

  4 1 The convention throughout the model is that variables which are not explicitly indexed (to …rms or
                                                                                R
households) are expressed in per-capita (average) terms. For instance, At (1=s) 0s At (x)dx.



                                                                 ii
demand — we obtain the total demand for good n as:
 Z    s                         Z   s                                                       N;t
                                                                              pt (n)
          NA;t (n; x)dx+                NE;t (n; e)de+GN;t (n) =                                  (NA;t + NE;t + GN;t ) (A.11)
  0                             0                                             pN;t

Following the same steps we can derive the domestic demand schedules for the intermediate
goods h:
              Z    s                        Z     s                                       T ;t
                                                                             pt (h)
                       QA;t (h; x)dx +                QE;t (h; e)de =                            (QA;t + QE;t ) :         (A.12)
               0                              0                              pQ;t

     Demand for imports
The derivation of the foreign demand schedule for good h is analytically more complex but,
as we show in (A.19) at the end of this section, it shares the same functional form as (A.11)
and (A.12) above and can be written as a function of the relative price of good h (with
elasticity T;t ) and total foreign demand for imports.
    Let’s focus …rst on import demand in the consumption good sector. Since we deal with
goods produced in di¤erent countries, we need to introduce explicit country indexes in our
notation. Thus, we will refer to a generic country as CO, to the importing country as H, and
to the representative …rm in the consumption sector as xH 2 [0; sH ]. Its imports MAH (xH )
are a CES function of baskets of goods imported from the other countries, or:

                        1   1           X                     1
                                                              H                                                 1   1
                                                                                                                    H
       H
           (xH )                                 bH;CO             H;CO H                          H;CO H
                            H
      MA;t                  A   =                 A
                                                              A   MA;t (x ) ( 1                    M A;t (x )
                                                                                                                    A     (A.13)
                                    CO6=H

where:                                                                       X
                                             0         bH;CO      0;               bH;CO = 1                              (A.14)
                                                                         CO6=H

In (A.13) above H    A is the elasticity of import substitution across countries: the higher is
  H
  A , the easier it is for …rm xH to substitute imports from one country with imports from
another. The parameters bH;CO  A      determine the composition of the import basket across
countries. MAH;CO (xH ) denotes imports of country H’s …rm xH from country CO.
     The response of imports to changes in fundamentals and their price elasticities are typ-
ically observed to be smaller in the short term than in the long run. To model realistic
dynamics of imports volumes (such as delayed and sluggish adjustment to changes in rela-
tive prices) we assume that imports are subject to adjustment costs H;CO M A . These costs are
speci…ed in terms of import shares relative to …rm xH ’s output and can be di¤erent across
exporters. They are zero in steady state. Speci…cally, we adopt the parameterization:
                                                                   h                                                                i2
                                                                       H;CO H                H;CO
         H;CO H     H;CO                                 H;CO        MA;t   (x )=AH                  H
                                                                                   t (x) = MA;t 1 =At 1                         1
 H;CO MA;t   (x ) MA;t  1                                MA
 M A;t [   H
                 =  H
                          ]                       =                  h                                                                  i2
         At (x)    At 1                                   2              H;CO H                H;CO
                                                                  1 + MA;t    (x )=AH                  H
                                                                                     t (x) = MA;t 1 =At 1                           1
                                                                                                                          (A.15)
                   H;CO                    H;CO               H;CO                    H;CO            H;CO          H;CO   42
such that          M A [1]      = 0,       M A [1]       =    M A =2,        and      M A [0]     =   M A [2]   =   M A =4.

  4 2 Relative to the quadratic speci…cation adopted e.g. in Laxton and Pesenti (2003), this parameterization

of import adjustment costs allows the non-linear model to deal with potentially large shocks.




                                                                       iii
   Denoting pH;COM     the price in country H of a basket of intermediate inputs imported from
CO, cost minimization implies:
              H;CO H              H;CO H                                             ! H
           MA;t      (x ) 1       M A;t (x )                              pH:CO
                                                                                         A
                                                                H;CO       M;t               H
                                                        H =   b A        H       H)
                                                                                           MA;t (xH )
          H;CO H                                        A              p       (x
   1      M A;t (x )     M H;CO (xH ) 0H;CO      H
                                        M A;t (x )
                                                                         M A;t

                                                                                                  (A.16)
where 0H;CO
        MA      (xH
                    ) is the …rst  derivative  of   H;CO H
                                                    MA     (x   ) with respect    to M H;CO H
                                                                                       A    (x   ). The
import price in the consumption sector, pH     MA  , is  de…ned   as:
                   2                                                                   !1 H   31 1H
                                                            H;CO
                      X                                    pM;t
                                                                                            A       A

  pH       H
   M A;t (x ) =
                   4       bH;CO                                                              5
                                           H;CO H
                    CO6=H
                                     1     M A;t (x )      M H;CO (xH ) 0H;CO
                                                                           M A;t (x )
                                                                                     H

                                                                                        (A.17)
In principle, the cost-minimizing import price pH
                                                MA (xH
                                                       ) is …rm-speci…c, as it depends on …rm
xH ’s import share. To the extent that all …rms xH are symmetric within the consumption
                                                            43
sector, however, there will be a unique import price pHM A.
                                     H;CO H
    Let’s now consider the basket MA      (x ) in some detail. In analogy with (A.8) above,
it is a CES index of all varieties of tradable intermediate goods produced by …rms hCO
operating in country CO and exported to country H. Denoting as MAH;CO hCO ; xH the
demand by …rm xH of an intermediate good produced by …rm hCO , the basket MAH;CO xH
is:
                                                                                                                     CO
                           "              1     Z                                                               #    T ;t
                                                        sCO                                     1                   CO 1
           H;CO H               1        CO
                                                                 H;CO
                                                                                          1    CO                   T ;t
                                                                      hCO ; xH                        dhCO
                                         T ;t
          MA;t (x ) =                                           MA;t                           T ;t                               (A.18)
                               sCO                  0

where CO T   > 1 is the elasticity of substitution among intermediate tradables, the same
elasticity entering (A.12) in country CO.
    The cost-minimizing …rm xH takes as given the prices of the imported goods pH (hCO )
and determines its demand of good hCO according to:
                                                          ! CO
                                                            T ;t
                     H;CO CO      H      1    pHt (h
                                                     CO
                                                        )         H;CO H
                   MA;t (h ; x ) = CO                            MA;t (x )          (A.19)
                                       s        pH;CO
                                                  M;t
       H;CO H
where MA;t (x ) has been de…ned in (A.16) and pH;CO
                                               M    is:
                                     "                  Z                                           #       1
                                                             sCO                                        1    CO
                                           1                                CO 1
                                                                                   CO                        T ;t
                         pH;CO
                          M;t    =                                 pH
                                                                    t   h          T ;t
                                                                                          dh   CO
                                                                                                                                  (A.20)
                                         sCO             0

    The import demand schedules in the investment good sector can be derived in perfect
analogy with the analysis above. As a last step, we can derive country CO’s demand schedule
for country H’s intermediate good hH , that is, the analog of (A.12). Aggregating across
…rms (and paying attention to the order of the country indexes) we obtain:
               Z sCO                             Z sCO
                        CO;H   H   CO      CO             CO;H
                     MA;t (h ; x )dx           +       ME;t     (hH ; eCO )deCO
                     0                                                  0
                                                !        H
                                                         T ;t
                         sCO     pCO  H
                                  t (h )                          CO;H    CO;H
                    =                                            MA;t  + ME;t                                                     (A.21)
                          sH       pCO;H
                                    M;t

                                   P                                                                                        0H;CO
 4 3 It   follows that pH    H
                        M A MA =     CO6=H      pH;CO
                                                 M    M H;CO (1               H;CO
                                                                              M A )=(1
                                                                                                H;CO
                                                                                                MA
                                                                                                                H;CO
                                                                                                               MM A         MA    )



                                                                   iv
   Supply of intermediate goods
The nontradable n is produced with the following CES technology:
                                                                                                                              N
                                                  1                         1                 1                          1   N 1
                                                                       1                                             1
                 Nt (n) = ZN;t (1            N)   N    `t (n)               N   +        N
                                                                                              N
                                                                                                     Kt (n)              N               (A.22)

Firm n uses labor `(n) and capital K(n) to produce N (n) units of its variety. N > 0 is the
elasticity of input substitution, and ZN is a productivity shock common to all producers of
nontradables.44
    De…ning as wt and rt the prices of labor and capital, the marginal cost in nontradables
production is:45
                                   n                           o1 1
                                               1 N         1        N
                                    (1    N ) wt   + N rt N
                        mct (n) =                                                    (A.23)
                                                  ZN;t
and the capital-labor ratio is:

                                     Kt (n)                        N           rt             N

                                            =                                                                                            (A.24)
                                     `t (n)   1                        N       wt

   Labor inputs are di¤erentiated and come in di¤erent varieties (skills). They are de…ned
over a continuum of mass equal to the country size and indexed by j 2 [0; s]. Each …rm n
uses a CES combination of labor inputs:
                                         "            1    Z                                         #           t
                                                                                                                     1
                                                                   s                                         t
                                             1         t
                                                                                1        1
                              `t (n) =                                 `(n; j)            t   dj                                         (A.25)
                                             s                 0


where `(n; j) is the demand of labor input of type j by the producer of good n and > 1
is the elasticity of substitution among labor inputs. Cost minimization implies that `(n; j)
is a function of the relative wage:

                                                      1                wt (j)            t

                                  `t (n; j) =                                                 `t (n)                                     (A.26)
                                                      s                 wt

where w(j) is the wage paid to Home labor input j and the wage index w is de…ned as:
                                                      Z        s
                                                                                                     1
                                              1                            1
                                                                                                 1       t
                                  wt =                             wt (j)           t   dj                                               (A.27)
                                              s            0

   Similar considerations hold for the production of tradables. We denote by T (h) the
supply of each intermediate tradable h. Using self-explanatory notation, we have:
                                                                                                                                 T
                                                  1                        1                 1                           1   T       1
                                                                       1                                             1
                  Tt (h) = ZT;t (1           T)   T    `t (h)              T    +        T
                                                                                             T
                                                                                                  Kt (h)                 T               (A.28)

  4 4 Recall that a productivity shock is de…ned as a deviation from the common world trend. Variants of

the model allow for the possibility of shocks to labor productivity or capital productivity instead of total
factor productivity.
  4 5 Following the notational convention regarding prices, mc , w and r denote marginal costs, wages and
                                                              t   t     t
rental rates in consumption units.




                                                                   v
where ZT is an autoregressive process (in logarithm). Aggregating across …rms, we obtain
the total demand for labor input j as:
        Z s               Z s
            `t (n; j)dn +     `t (h; j)dh
               0                    0
                                           Z   s                 Z      s
                   wt (j)      t
                                    1                                                          wt (j)     t

          =                                        `t (n) dn +              `t (h) dh                         `t     (A.29)
                    wt              s      0                        0                           wt

where ` is per-capita total labor in the economy.

   Price setting in the nontradables sector
Consider now pro…t maximization in the intermediate nontradables sector. Each …rm n
takes into account the demand (A.11) for its product and sets its nominal price by maxi-
mizing the present discounted value of real pro…ts. There are costs of nominal price adjust-
ment measured in terms of total pro…ts foregone. The adjustment cost is denoted P N;t
[pt (n); pt 1 (n)].46
     The price-setting problem is then characterized as:
                   1
                   X                                                                  N;t
                                                                     p (n)
  max1 Et               Dt;   t;   gt; [p (n)        mc (n)]                                (NA; + NE; + GN; ) (1        P N;   (n))
fp (n)g   =t       =t
                                                                     pN;
                                                                                    (A.30)
where Dt; (with Dt;t = 1) is the appropriate discount rate, to be de…ned below in eq.
(A.48). As real variables are detrended and prices are de‡ated by the CPI, eq. (A.30)
includes t; , the CPI in‡ation rate between time t and time , and gt; , the rate of growth
of the global trend between t and .
    As …rms n are symmetric and charge the same equilibrium price p(n) = pN , the …rst
order condition can be written as:
                                                                                      @ P N;t
   0 = (1          P N;t (n)) [pt (n) (1        N;t )   +   N;t mct (n)]            [pt (n)   pt (n)
                                                                                               mct (n)]
                                                                                      @pt (n)
                                                               NA;t+1 + NE;t+1 + GN;t+1 @ P N;t+1
      Et Dt;t+1      t;t+1 gt;t+1   [pt+1 (n)       mct+1 (n)]                                     pt (n)
                                                                 NA;t + NE;t + GN;t       @pt (n)
                                                                                                     (A.31)

Interpreting the previous equation, when prices are fully ‡exible (                              PN   = 0), the optimization
problem collapses to the standard markup rule:

                                                                 N;t
                                                pt (n) =                        mct (n)                              (A.32)
                                                              N;t           1

where the gross markup is a negative function of the elasticity of input substitution. De-
viations from markup pricing occur if …rms are penalized for modifying their prices in the
short term. The speed of adjustment in response to shocks depends on the trade-o¤ between
current and future expected costs, making the price-setting process forward-looking.

   4 6 It is worth emphasizing that the adjustment costs are related to changes in nominal prices. How-

ever, the maximization problem can be carried out in terms of relative prices. In fact, denote with
GP N;t [Pt (n); Pt 1 (n)] the adjustment cost as a function of nominal (i.e. non de‡ated by the CPI)
prices Pt (n) and Pt 1 (n), with GP N;t [Pt (n); Pt 1 (n)] = P N;t [pt (n); pt 1 (n)], and express the price-
setting problem in nominal terms. It is easy to verify that the …rst order condition of the new problem
coincides with (A.31) since Pt (n)@GP N;t =@Pt (n) = pt (n)@ P N;t =@pt (n) and Pt (n)@GP N;t+1 =@Pt (n) =
pt (n)@ P N;t+1 =@pt (n).



                                                               vi
   The speci…c parameterization we adopt allows the model to reproduce realistic nominal
dynamics:
                                                                  !2
                                  PN          p t (n)=p t 1 (n)
                      P N;t (n)         t 1;t        0:25       1                 (A.33)
                                  2                  t 4;t

The adjustment cost is related to changes of the nominal price of nontradable n relative
to the in‡ation target for the CPI, t 4;t . The in‡ation target is speci…ed in annualized
terms (hence indexed by t 4; t), while changes in p(n) occur at a quarterly frequency.47
Underlying this speci…cation is the notion that …rms should not be penalized when their
price hikes are indexed to some (publicly observable) benchmark such as the in‡ation target
for the economy as a whole.

   Price setting in the tradables sector and exchange rate pass-through
Consider now the price-setting problem in the tradables sector. To the extent that the four
country blocs represent segmented markets in the global economy, each …rm h has to set four
prices, one in the domestic market and the other three in the export markets. Exports are
invoiced (and prices are set) in the currency of the destination market. As we re-introduce
export markets, once again our notation needs to make explicit the country indexes. In
what follows we use the index CO for a generic country, and denote as H the country where
the exporting …rm hH is located.
    Accounting for (A.21), the four price-setting problems of …rm h in country H can then
be characterized as follows:
                                        X         1
                                                  X
                                                          H      H
                P       max                  Et          Dt;     t;   gt; ["H;CO pCO (hH )       mcH (hH )]
                         CO (hH )g1
                    CO fp          =t               =t
                                        CO
                                        !    H
                                             T ;t
                  sCO      pCO (hH )                  CO;H    CO;H                      CO;H
                                                     MA;   + ME;                  1     P M; (h)              (A.34)
                   sH       pCO;H
                             M;


When H 6= CO, recall that pCO (hH ) is the price of good hH in country CO, pCO;H
                                                                             M     is the
price of country CO’s imports from country H, and MACO;H + MECO;H are country CO’s
imports from country H. The term "H;CO is the bilateral exchange rate between country
H and country CO (an increase in "H;CO represents a depreciation of country H’s currency
against country CO)48 and H;CO    H
                           P M (h ) are adjustment costs related to changes of the price
          H
of good h in country CO. These costs are the analogs of (A.33):
                                                                                             !2
                                            CO;H                CO H     CO    H
                       CO;H    H            PM            CO pt (h )=pt 1 (h )
                       P M;t (h )                         t 1;t           0:25               1                (A.35)
                                             2                     CO
                                                                   t 4;t

For the domestic prices of tradables pH (hH ) we still use (A.34) with CO = H, adopting the
notational conventions pH;H
                         M    = pH
                                 Q , MA
                                       H;H
                                            = QHA and ME
                                                            H;H
                                                                = QHE as described in (A.12),
      H;H
and P M = H   PQ .

  4 7 This speci…cation implies that the in‡ation target is known at any point in time. More generally, the

adjustment cost could be speci…ed relative to any variable that converges asymptotically to the steady-state
in‡ation rate.
  4 8 All exchange rates are quoted in real terms, that is, in relative consumption units. Of course, "H;CO =

1="CO;H and "H;H = 1.




                                                           vii
    Despite its fastidiousness, the notation above is straightforward and the equations are
self-explanatory. Pro…t maximization yields:
                            h                                            i
               CO;H     H       H;CO CO H         H        H     H    H
     0= 1      P M;t (h   )   " t   p t (h )  1   T;t  +   T;t mct (h   )
       h                                         i @ CO;H
                                                      P M;t
           "H;CO
            t    pCO  H
                  t (h )              mcHt (h H
                                                )            pCO  H
                                                              t (h )
                                                                              H
                                                                        Et fDt;t+1  H
                                                                                    t;t+1 gt;t+1
                                                   @pCO   H
                                                     t (h )
                                                                       !
      h                                           i M CO;H + M CO;H @ CO;H
                                                       A;t+1     E;t+1       P M;t+1 CO H
           "H;CO CO    H
            t+1 pt+1 (h )
                                        H      H
                                      mct+1 (h )       CO;H      CO;H
                                                                                     pt (h )g           (A.36)
                                                     MA;t    + ME;t      @pCO
                                                                            t (h )
                                                                                  H



If adjustment costs in the export market are highly relevant (that is, if the CO;H
                                                                                PM  coe¢ cient
is relatively large), the prices of country H’s goods in the foreign markets are characterized
by signi…cant stickiness in local currency. In this case, the degree to which exchange rate
(and other shocks to marginal costs in country H) pass-through onto import prices in country
CO is rather low. If instead the CO;H  PM   coe¢ cients are zero worldwide, expression (A.36)
collapses to a markup rule under the law of one price, and exchange rate pass-through is
full:
                                                                      T;t
           pH;H
            t    (hH ) = pH
                          Q;t = "t
                                  H;CO CO H
                                       pt (h ) = "H;CO
                                                    t    pCO;H
                                                          M;t   =           mct        (A.37)
                                                                    T;t   1

   Consumer preferences
In each country there is a continuum of households indexed by j 2 [0; s], the same index
of labor inputs. Some households have access to capital markets, some do not. The latter
…nance their consumption by relying exclusively on their labor incomes. We refer to the
…rst type as ‘Ricardian’or ‘forward-looking’; they represent a share (1 sLC ) of domestic
households and are indexed by j 2 [0; s (1 sLC )]. We refer to the second type as ‘non-
Ricardian’or ‘liquidity-constrained’; they represent a share sLC of domestic households and
are indexed by j 2 (s (1 sLC ) ; s].
    The speci…cation of households’preferences adopts the Greenwood, Hercowitz and Hu¤-
man (1988) (GHH) utility function, adjusted for habit formation and preference shocks.
Denoting with Wt (j) the lifetime expected utility of household j, we have:
                                                     1
                                                     X
                                                                 1
                                      Wt (j)    Et        t;    gt;    u ( C (j); ` (j) )               (A.38)
                                                     =t

where the instantaneous felicity is a function of detrended consumption C and labor e¤ort
`:
                                                                        bc      1 b`
                         ut ( Ct (j); `t (j) ) = ZU (1                       )(      )
                                                                      gt 1;t 1
                                  Ct (j) bc Cj;t 1 =gt    1;t          ZV `t (j) b` `j;     1 1+
                              [                                             (                )     ]1   (A.39)
                                        1 bc =gt 1;t                  1+          1 b`
    In the expressions above t; is the discount rate between time t and time , possibly
di¤erent across countries. As mentioned in Section 2, because of technological progress
associated with home production activities (here related to the global trend), the term
 1
gt;   in (A.38) implies that the disutility of labor e¤ort increases with the common trend.49
The parameter in (A.38) and (A.39) is the reciprocal of the elasticity of intertemporal

 4 9 The                       1
           restriction   t;   gt;     < 1 is imposed to ensure that utility is bounded.



                                                                viii
substitution. The parameter which a¤ects the curvature of labor disutility is the reciprocal
of the Frisch elasticity.
    There is habit persistence in consumption with coe¢ cient 0 < bc < 1. The term Cj;t 1 in
(A.39) is past per-capita consumption of household j’s peers, (i.e., either forward-looking or
liquidity-constrained agents). Similarly, there is habit persistence in leisure with coe¢ cient
0 < b` < 1.50 The terms ZU and ZV are constants. Households’preferences are therefore
symmetric within their respective categories but, because of di¤erent reference groups in
habit formation, they are not symmetric across categories.

    Budget constraint (Ricardian households)
The individual ‡ow budget constraint for Ricardian agent j 2 [0; (1                                          sLC ) s] is:

                                                         Bt     1 (j)                                             "t Bt 1 (j)
            Bt (j) + "t Bt (j)       (1 + it       1)                        + (1 + it    1 ) [1        B;t 1 ]   US g
                                                         t   1;t gt    1;t                                        t 1;t t 1;t

             + (1        K;t ) rt Kt (j)   + (1         L;t ) wt (j)`t (j) (     1        W;t (j)   )
                Ct (j)     pE;t It (j) +     t (j)       T Tt (j)                                                               (A.40)

    Households hold two nominal bonds, denominated in domestic and US currency, re-
spectively.51 In terms of our notation, Bt (j) is (detrended) holdings of domestic bond by
household j, expressed in terms of domestic consumption units, Bt (j) is (detrended) hold-
ings of the international bond, expressed in terms of US consumption units, and "t is the
CPI-based real exchange rate, expressed as the price of one US consumption basket in terms
of domestic consumption.52
    The short-term nominal rates it and it are paid at the beginning of period t + 1 and
are known at time t. The two rates are directly controlled by their respective national
governments. Only the US-currency bond is traded internationally: the US bond is in zero
net supply worldwide, while the domestic bond is issued by the local government.53 It
follows that the net …nancial wealth of Ricardian household j at time t is:

                                                                                       "t B t  1 (j)
                                    Ft (j)        (1 + it     1 ) [1         B;t 1 ]     US g
                                                                                                                                (A.41)
                                                                                         t 1;t t 1;t

    A …nancial friction B is introduced to guarantee that international net asset positions
follow a stationary process and the economies converge asymptotically to a well-de…ned
steady state.54 Agents who take a position in the international bond market must deal
with …nancial intermediaries who charge a transaction fee B on sales/purchases of the

  5 0 The instantaneous felicity is normalized such that in a steady state U , U and U can all be written as
                                                                                C     `
constant f (C; `), where f is some function of steady-state consumption and labor e¤ort, independent of
the habit persistence coe¢ cients.
  5 1 The choice of currency denomination of the international bond is arbitrary. With a simple re-de…nition

of the relevant variables one could think of B in terms of any available currency, or basket of currencies.
  5 2 It   is understood that " is shorthand for "H;U S , where H denotes the country under consideration.
  5 3 If   the country under consideration is the US, " = 1 and i = i .
  5 4 See
        Ghironi, I·şcan, and Rebucci (2005) for an analysis of the steady-state distribution of net foreign
assets with heterogeneous discounting.




                                                                       ix
international bond.55 This transaction cost is a function of the average net asset position of
the whole economy. Speci…cally, we adopt the following functional form:
            0                                                         1
                      exp B2 "t Bt bF DES;t GDPt             1            US
 1    B;t =
            @1     B1          h                       i         ZB;t A t              (A.42)
                      exp B2 "t Bt bF DES;t GDPt + 1                       t

                                                          R s(1 sLC )
where 0        B1    1, B2 > 0, and "t B         (1=s) "t 0           B (j)dj represents the per-
capita net asset position of the country in consumption units. The term bF DES is the
‘desired’ net asset position of the country expressed as a ratio of GDP .56 This variable
measures the degree of international exposure that …nancial intermediaries consider appro-
priate for the economy, based on their assessment of the economic outlook.
    To understand the role played by B , suppose …rst that bF DES = ZB = 0 and U S = .
In this case, when the net asset position of the country is equal to its ‘desired’ level of
zero, it must be the case that B = 0 and the return on the international bond is equal
to 1 + i . If the country is a net creditor worldwide B rises above zero, implying that
the country’s households lose an increasing fraction of their international bond returns to
…nancial intermediaries. When holdings of the international bond go to in…nity, the return
on the international bond approaches (1 + i ) (1         B1 ). By the same token, if the country
is a net debtor worldwide B falls from zero to           B1 , implying that households pay an
increasing intermediation premium on their international debt. When net borrowing goes to
in…nity, the cost of borrowing approaches (1 + i ) (1 + B1 ). The parameter B2 controls
the ‡atness of the B function: if B2 = 0 then B = 0 regardless of the net asset position; if
  B2 tends to in…nity then 1      B = (1     B1 ) for any arbitrarily small net lending position,
and 1      B = (1 + B1 ) for any arbitrarily small net borrowing position. An appropriate
parameterization allows the model to generate realistic dynamics for net asset positions and
current account.
    Consider now the other components of (A.42). The variable ZB;t is a stochastic autore-
gressive process:57 in our framework uncertainty in international …nancial intermediation
plays the same role that ‘uncovered interest parity shocks’or risk-premium ‡uctuations play
in other open-economy models. Finally, when rates of time preference diverge across coun-
tries and     6= , the transaction cost is appropriately modi…ed to account for asymmetries
in real interest rates across countries.
    The term bF DES can be positive or negative. The above considerations are still valid
after reinterpreting the concepts of ‘net creditor’ or ‘net borrower’ in terms of deviations
from the desired levels. The desired net asset position in country H is characterized as
follows:
                                               BtH         X CO;H B CO
                                          H                                 t
                  bFHDES;t = bFHN EU T    F1        H
                                                       +          F2          CO
                                                                                           (A.43)
                                             GDPt        CO6=H
                                                                        GDP   t

According to the previous expression, bFHDES is a country-speci…c constant, bFHN EU T , ad-
justed to account for changes in the debt-to-GDP ratios in either the domestic economy

  5 5 In our model it is assumed that all intermediation …rms are owned by the country’s residents, and that

their revenue is rebated to domestic households in a lump-sum fashion. A simple variant of the model
in which intermediation …rms are owned by foreign residents leaves the basic results virtually unchanged.
There are no intermediation costs for US residents entering the international bond market, that is, there is
no di¤erence between onshore and o¤shore US interest rates.
  5 6 The   concept of GDP in our model will be discussed below with reference to (A.83).
  5 7 Fluctuations   in ZB cannot be large enough to push       above 1.
                                                            B




                                                      x
(B H =GDP H ) or the rest of the world (B CO =GDP CO ).
    This speci…cation provides a plausible link between debt imbalances and net asset posi-
tions. If the targeted debt-to-GDP ratio increased in the US, investors in the rest of the world
would require a higher return on US securities, leading to a higher share of US assets in their
portfolios or a reduction of net borrowing from the US. If however the target debt increased
in the home country as well, the US premium would fall somewhat. Of course, our approach
should be viewed only as a crude approximation to the actual determinants of cross-country
spreads and interest rate premia in response to macroeconomic imbalances, whose endog-
enization should be eventually incorporated in a self-contained model. It remains unclear,
however, whether a framework that incorporates a large amount of complications from which
we abstract here would add much to our qualitative conclusions. Quantitatively, one could
take bF DES as a free variable and estimate the F 1 and F 2 parameters on the basis of
empirical evidence on the link between net asset positions and debt levels. Alternatively,
one could rely on cross-fertilization with respect to alternative theoretical models able to
shed light on the structural determinants of these parameters, as mentioned in Section 5.2.2.
    Households accumulate physical capital which they rent to domestic …rms at the after-tax
rate r (1     K ). The law of motion of capital is:


                    Kt+1 (j)gt;t+1 = (1      ) Kt (j) +   I;t Kt (j)        0<       1                (A.44)

where is the country-speci…c depreciation rate of capital. To simulate realistic investment
‡ows, capital accumulation is subject to adjustment costs. Capital accumulation is denoted
  I;t Kt (j), where I (:) is an increasing, concave, and twice-continuously di¤erentiable func-
tion of the investment/capital ratio It (j)=Kt (j) with two properties entailing no adjustment
costs in steady state: I ( + g 1) = + g 1 and 0I ( + g 1) = 1. The speci…c functional
form we adopt is quadratic and encompasses inertia in investment:
                                                               2                                  2
                     It (j)    I1   It (j)                             I2   It (j)       It   1
          I;t (j)                              ( +g       1)
                     Kt (j)    2    Kt (j)                             2    Kt (j)       Kt   1

where I1 , I2 0, and g is the steady-state growth rate.
    Each household j is the monopolistic supplier of a speci…c labor input and sets the
nominal wage for its labor variety j accounting for (A.29). Labor incomes are taxed at the
rate L . There is sluggish wage adjustment due to resource costs that are measured in terms
of the total wage bill. The adjustment cost is denoted W F L;t (for Wage Forward-Looking)
and its speci…cation is the analog of (A.33) above, recalling that the real wage is expressed
in detrended terms:
                                                                        !2
                                  WFL                  wt (j)=wt 1 (j)
                    W F L;t (j)           t 1;t gt 1;t     0:25 g      1               (A.45)
                                   2                       t 4;t t 1;t

   Ricardian households own all domestic …rms and there is no international trade in claims
on …rms’ pro…ts. The variable    includes all dividends accruing to shareholders, plus all
revenue from nominal and real adjustment rebated in a lump-sum way to all Ricardian
households, plus revenue from …nancial intermediation which is assumed to be provided by
domestic …rms exclusively.
   Finally, agents pay lump-sum (non-distortionary) net taxes T Tt (j) denominated in con-
sumption units.




                                                 xi
   Consumer optimization (Ricardian households)
The representative Ricardian household chooses bond holdings, capital and consumption
paths, and sets wages to maximize its expected lifetime utility (A.38) subject to (A.40) and
(A.44), taking into account (A.29).
   For expositional convenience, it is worthwhile to write explicitly the maximization prob-
lem of agent j 2 [0; (1 sLC ) s] in terms of the following Lagrangian:
                                                                     1
                          max                           Et    t;    gt;        fu        C (j) ; w         (j)w         ` ;
   fC (j);I (j);B (j);B (j);K     +1 (j);w    (j)g1=t

                                               (1 + i        1 )B         1 (j)         (1 + i    1 )(1     B;     1 )"    B   1 (j)
   +      (j) (      B (j)    " B (j) +                                           +                    US
                                                        1;    g      1;                                  1; g     1;t

   + (1        K;   ) r K (j) + (1           L;   ) w (j)1           w           ` (1        W;   [w (j); w      1 (j)])

       C (j)        pE; I (j) +      (j)       T T (j) )
   +      (j) (      K   +1 (j)g ; +1   + (1        ) K (j) +             I;     [I (j)=K (j)] K (j) ) g                       (A.46)

where and are the multipliers associated with, respectively, the budget constraint and
capital accumulation.
   The …rst order conditions with respect to Ct (j) and It (j) yield:
                                                                                     0
                                  t (j)   = @ut (j)=@Ct (j) =                  t (j) I;t (j)=pE;t                              (A.47)

In a symmetric setup, @ut (j)=@Ct (j) is the same across Ricardian agents j. Their stochastic
discount rate and pricing kernel is therefore the variable Dt; , which is de…ned as:

                                                              1                   1     1
                                           Dt;          t;   gt;                                                               (A.48)
                                                                           t      t;   gt;

Accounting for the above expressions, the …rst order conditions with respect to Bt (j) and
Bt (j) are, respectively:

                                  1 = (1 + it ) Et Dt;t+1                                                                      (A.49)
                                  1 = (1 + it ) (1             B;t ) Et        (Dt;t+1       t;t+1 )                           (A.50)

where       denotes the rate of nominal exchange rate depreciation against the US, or:
                                                                    "       t;
                                                        t;    =                                                                (A.51)
                                                                    "t      t;t

In a non-stochastic steady state (A.49) implies (1 + i) = = g = , where is the (gross
steady-state quarterly) in‡ation rate, (1 + i) = is the real interest rate, g is the (gross
steady-state quarterly) rate of growth of the world economy, 1= is the rate of time prefer-
ence, and g = is the ‘natural’rate of the economy.58 Expressions (A.49) and (A.50) yield
the risk-adjusted uncovered interest parity, recalling that the return on international bond
holdings is modi…ed to account for the costs of intermediation B . In a non-stochastic
steady state the interest di¤erential (1 + i) =[(1 + i ) (1  B )] is equal to the steady-state
nominal depreciation rate of the currency vis-a-vis the US, and relative purchasing power
parity holds.

  5 8 International di¤erences in natural rates can arise from asymmetric rates of time preference. They are

accounted for in the de…nition of B in (A.42)




                                                               xii
    The …rst order condition with respect to Kt+1 (j) is:
                     pE;t
                     0 (j) Et gt;t+1 = Et f Dt;t+1 t;t+1 gt;t+1 ( (1                                          K;t+1 ) rt+1
                     I;t
                            pE;t+1                                                       0           It+1 (j)
                       +    0         [1                 +        I;t+1 (j)              I;t+1 (j)            ])g                      (A.52)
                            I;t+1 (j)                                                                Kt+1 (j)
Expression (A.52) links capital accumulation to the behavior of the after-tax price of capital
(1    K ) r. In a non-stochastic steady state 1 + (1    K ) r=pE is equal to the sum of the
natural real rate g = and the rate of capital depreciation .59
   Finally, the …rst order condition with respect to w(j) determines wage dynamics for the
wages of the Ricardian households:
          u`;t (j) 1                                                                                 @   W F L;t (j)
      t                   =(       t    1) [1            W F L;t (j)] (1                 L;t )   +                   wt (j) (1        L;t )
          uC;t (j) wt (j)                                                                                @wt (j)
                                (wt+1 (j)=wt+1 )                      t+1
                                                                            wt+1 (j) `t+1 @          W F L;t+1 (j)
 + Et Dt;t+1     t;t+1 gt;t+1                                                                                        wt (j) (1         L;t+1 )
                                       (wt (j)=wt )               t          wt (j) `t                   @wt (j)
                                                                                                                                       (A.53)
Di¤erent from (A.31) above, in expression (A.53) it is no longer true that the wage rate
of the Ricardian household w(j) is equal to the average wage rate in the economy w. In a
non-stochastic steady state the real wage w(j) is equal to the marginal rate of substitution
between consumption and leisure, u` =uc , augmented by the markup = (              1) which
re‡ects monopoly power in the labor market.

   Consumer optimization (liquidity-constrained households)
Liquidity-constrained households have no access to capital markets. Their optimal choices
are con…ned to labor supply. Similar to Ricardian households, they can optimally set their
wages to exploit their market power. The maximization problem of agent j 2 ((1 sLC ) s; s]
can be written in terms of the following static Lagrangian:
                      max          ut ( Ct (j); `t (j) ) +                   t (j)   (     Ct (j)        T Tt (j)
                   Ct (j);wt (j)
                                               1
                     + (1          L;t ) wt (j)
                                                             t   wt t `t (1          W LC;t [wt (j); wt 1 (j)])         )              (A.54)
It is assumed that redistributive policies rebate to these households the income losses asso-
ciated with wage adjustment, so that their consumption level is:
                                               Ct (j) = (1                  L;t ) wt (j)`t (j)                                         (A.55)
The …rst order conditions with respect to C(j) and w(j) determines partial adjustment of
wages:
          u`;t (j) 1                                                                                      @   W LC;t (j)
      t                   = (1              L;t )   [(   t        1) ( 1         W LC;t (j)          )+                    wt (j) ]    (A.56)
          uC;t (j) wt (j)                                                                                     @wt (j)
    Denoting wF L the wage rate w(j) that solves (A.53), and wLC the wage rate w(j) that
solves (A.56), equation (A.27) determines the wage rate for the whole economy as:
                                        1                             1                              1
                                       wt      t
                                                    = sLC wLC;tt + (1                    sLC ) wF L;tt                                 (A.57)

  5 9 The expectation operator on the left hand side of (A.52) is needed as shocks to the trend g
                                                                                                 t;t+1 are
not part of the information set at time t. This is because variables are expressed as deviations from the
current trend. An alternative speci…cation which expresses variables as deviations from the lagged trend
would make little di¤erence.



                                                                          xiii
   Government
Public spending falls on nontradable goods, both …nal and intermediate. In per-capita terms,
GC is government consumption, GI is government investment, and GN denotes public pur-
chases of intermediate nontradables. There are three sources of (net) tax revenue: taxes
on capital income K , taxes on labor income L , and lump-sum taxes T T net of transfers
to households. The government …nances the excess of public expenditure over net taxes
by issuing debt denominated in nominal currency, denoted B in per-capita terms. All na-
tional debt is held exclusively by domestic (Ricardian) agents. The budget constraint of the
government is:
                                             Bt 1
                          Bt (1 + it 1 )               + Gt GREV;t                    (A.58)
                                          t 1;t gt 1;t
where:
                                               Gt = GC;t + pE;t GI;t + pN;t GN;t                                                      (A.59)
and:
                       Z                                       Z                                       Z                         !
                              s                                    s(1 sLC )                                s
                  1
   GREV;t       =                 T Tt (j)dj +        K;t rt                   Kt (j)dj +        L;t            wt (j)`t (j)dj        (A.60)
                  s       0                                    0                                        0

   De…ne now the average tax rate for the economy                                      as:

                                                          t        GREV;t =GDPt                                                       (A.61)

Similarly, de…ne the de…cit-to-GDP ratio as:
                                          DEFt                           Bt     1
                                               =              Bt                          =GDPt                                       (A.62)
                                          GDPt                         t 1;t gt 1;t

From (A.58), in steady state we have:
                                B                       g             G                          g       DEF
                                   =                                                    =                                             (A.63)
                               GDP              g      (1 + i)       GDP                     g         1 GDP
The previous equations de…ne the relations between debt-to-GDP, average tax rate, and
de…cit-to-GDP ratio which are sustainable in the long term. In what follows we treat the
long-run debt-to-GDP ratio as a policy parameter set by the government, and let and
DEF=GDP be determined by (A.63).
   The government is assumed to control lump-sum taxes, and K directly, while L is
endogenously determined. The …scal rule for is speci…ed as:
                                                                      Bt                                                              Bt 1
       t   =(   t 1   +    t      + Et   t+1 ) =3   +     T AX1 (                     T AX2 BT AR;t              (1      T AX2 )            )
                                                                     GDPt                                                            GDPt 1
                      DEFt               DEF                          Gt              G
       +   T AX3                                    +    T AX4                                                                         (A.64)
                      GDPt               GDP                         GDPt            GDP
where BT AR is an autoregressive process for the targeted debt-to-GDP ratio. The tax rate
is a smoothed function of past and expected future rates, adjusted upward when the current
debt-to-GDP ratio is above the average of its current target and its past observed level,
when the current de…cit-to-GDP ratio is above its sustainable steady-state level, and when
current government spending as a share of GDP is above its long-run level.
    The government controls the short-term rate it . Monetary policy is speci…ed in terms of
annualized interest rate rules of the form:
                4                          4                                    4
    (1 + it ) = ! i (1 + it              1)    + (1      ! i ) 1 + ineut
                                                                    t               + ! 1 Et (   t 1;t+3              t 1;t+3 )       (A.65)


                                                                      xiv
The current interest rate it is an average of the lagged rate it                               1   and the current ‘neutral’
rate ineut
      t    , de…ned as:60
                                               0:25
                                               t 4;t (gt 1;t )
                                 1 + ineut
                                      t                                                                              (A.66)
                                                                t 1;t
This average is adjusted to account for the expected in‡ation gap three quarters in the
future.61 The rule (A.65) could be modi…ed to include policy responses to a set of other
variables (such as exchange rate or current account ) expressed as deviations from their
targets. In a steady state when all constant targets are reached it must be the case that:
                                                                0:25
                                                                       g               g
                                    1 + i = 1 + ineut =                        =           :                         (A.67)


   Market clearing
The model is closed by imposing the following resource constraints and market clearing
conditions, adopting explicit country indexes.
    For each country H, the domestic resource constraints for capital and labor are, respec-
tively:
         Z sH (1 sH
                  LC )
                                      Z sH                Z sH
                       KtH (j H )dj H      KtH (nH )dnH +      KtH (hH )dhH           (A.68)
            0                                     0                                0

and:                                Z                                Z
                                          sH                               sH
                     `H   H
                      t (j )                   `H   H H     H
                                                t (n ; j )dn +                  `H   H H
                                                                                 t (h ; j )dh
                                                                                              H
                                                                                                                     (A.69)
                                      0                                0
    The resource constraint for the nontradable good nH is:
                  Z sH                     Z sH
        H   H            H    H   H    H          H
      Nt (n )          NA;t (n ; x )dx +         NE;t (nH ; eH )deH + GH     H
                                                                       N;t (n )                                      (A.70)
                        0                                 0

while the tradable hH can be used by domestic …rms or imported by foreign …rms:
                     Z sH                       Z sH
           T t hH          QA;t (hH ; xH )dxH +      QE;t (hH ; eH )deH
                      0                          0
                     Z sCO                            Z sCO                     !
               X             CO;H                               CO;H
                                       H   CO   CO                      H CO CO
           +               MA;t (h ; x )dx          +       ME;t (h ; e )de       (A.71)
                CO6=H       0                                              0


   The …nal good A can be used for private (by both liquidity-constrained and forward-
looking households) or public consumption:
   Z sH                Z sH (1 sH
                                LC )
                                                Z sH
         H   H    H                   H H    H
        At (x )dx                    C (j )dj +           C H (j H )dj H + sGC;t (A.72)
    0                           0                                    sH (1 sH
                                                                            LC )


and similarly for the investment good E:
                   Z sH               Z (1                sH
                                                           LC )s
                                                                 H

                          H H      H
                         Et (e )de                                   ItH (j H )dj H + sH GH
                                                                                          I;t                        (A.73)
                        0                             0

  6 0 Recall that
                  t ;t   +4 is the year-on-year gross CPI in‡ation target prevailing at time t for the four-
quarter period between t     and t     + 4.
  6 1 In the case of AS, we model an exchange rate targeting regime by introducing the component ! AS AS
                                                                                                   2   t
in (A.65), where AS is de…ned in (A.51) and we choose a very high value of ! AS     2   to peg the nominal
bilateral exchange rate against the US.



                                                          xv
All pro…ts and intermediation revenue accrue to Ricardian households:
Z    sH (1 sH                                 Z    sH (1 sH
            LC )
                             H H      H
                                                          LC )
                                                                                              H     "H;U
                                                                                                     t
                                                                                                         S
                                                                                                           Bt H1 (j H ) H
                             t (j )dj     =                               (1 + it    1)       B;t 1    US g
                                                                                                                       dj
 0                                             0                                                       t 1;t t 1;t
     Z       H
          s (1      sH
                     LC )
                                                                                                Z   sH
                               H         H                     H
+                              W F L;t (j )   1                L;t       wtH (j H )dj H +                              H        H
                                                                                                                       W LC;t (j )     1   H
                                                                                                                                           L;t    wtH (j H )dj H
      0                                                                                           sH (1      sH
                                                                                                              LC )
     Z    sH                                           Z       sH                                        Z    H
                                                                                                              s
+                  pH   H
                    t (n )        mcH   H
                                    t (n )            (               H
                                                                     NA;t (nH ; xH )dxH             +               H
                                                                                                                   NE;t (nH ; eH )deH + GH     H
                                                                                                                                         N;t (n ))dn
                                                                                                                                                     H
      0                                                    0                                                 0
     Z    sH                                  Z             sH                                           Z    sH
+                  pH   H
                    t (h )        mcH
                                    t (h H
                                           ) (                       QH     H   H   H
                                                                      A;t (h ; x )dx +                             QH     H H     H
                                                                                                                    E;t (h ; e )de )dh
                                                                                                                                       H
      0                                                    0                                              0
         X Z            sH
+                            ["H;CO pCO (hH )              mcH (hH )]
     CO6=H          0
     Z       sCO                                                 Z       sCO
                    CO;H                                                        CO;H
    (              MA;t  (hH ; xCO )dxCO                   +                   ME;t  (hH ; eCO )deCO )dhH                                        (A.74)
         0                                                           0

     Market clearing in the asset market requires:
                                                  Z    sH (1 sH
                                                              LC )
                                                                               BtH (j H )dj H = sH BtH                                           (A.75)
                                                   0

for the four government bond markets, and:
                                            XZ             sCO (1 sCO
                                                                   LC )
                                                                                 Bt CO (j CO )dj CO = 0:                                         (A.76)
                                            CO         0

for the international bond market. Finally, aggregating the budget constraints across private
and public agents after imposing the appropriate transversality conditions we obtain the law
of motion for …nancial wealth:
                                                                                                                         H;U S
                                 H        H             H                                              1 + it        1 "t      Bt H1
                             Et Dt;t+1    t;t+1 gt;t+1 Ft+1                = FtH +        H
                                                                                          B;t 1                    US g
                                                                                                                   t 1;t t 1;t

                              + pH    H    H    H
                                 N;t Nt + pT;t Tt                        CtH      pH    H
                                                                                   E;t It           GH
                                                                                                     t                                           (A.77)

where the total value of tradables is de…ned as:
                                                                     X sCO
         pH    H
          T;t Tt             pH    H      H
                              Q;t QA;t + QE;t +                            "H;CO pCO;H
                                                                                  M;t
                                                                                        CO;H
                                                                                       MA;t     CO;H
                                                                                             + ME;t                                              (A.78)
                                                                        sH
                                                                 CO6=H


     Measuring output and current account
Expression (A.78) can be written as:
                                                                                          !
                                                                                                          H;U S
                                                                           Bt H1                  it   1 "t     Bt H1
             CU RBALH
                    t            =   "H;U
                                      t
                                          S
                                                  Bt    H
                                                                         US g
                                                                                              =        US g
                                                                                                                           + T BALt              (A.79)
                                                                         t 1;t t    1;t                t 1;t t 1;t

The left hand side of (A.79) is country H’s current account, the …rst term on the right hand
side are net factor payments from the rest of the world to country H and T BAL is the trade
balance. The latter can be thought of as:

                                                           T BALH     H
                                                                t = EXt                           IMtH                                           (A.80)


                                                                                  xvi
where total exports EX are:

                                EXtH = pH    H
                                        T;t Tt       pH    H      H
                                                      Q;t QA;t + QE;t                           (A.81)

and total imports IM are:

IMtH = pM A;t MA;t
               H             H
                   + pM E;t ME;t
                                            H;CO                                     H;CO
                                                                                                           !
     X                                 1    M A;t                               1    M E;t
=           pH;CO
             M;t
                     H;CO
                    MA;t           H;CO      H;CO 0H;CO
                                                             +    H;CO
                                                                 ME;t        H;CO     H;CO 0H;CO
    CO6=H
                            1      M A;t    MA;t  M A;t                  1   M E;t   ME;t  M E;t
                                                                                                (A.82)

The adjustment terms in the previous equation re‡ects the fact that it takes time for im-
ports to be fully productive in production, so that their e¤ective costs are higher from the
viewpoint of national producers and consumers of …nal goods than at the border level.
   Finally, we de…ne the model-based Gross Domestic Product (in consumption units) as:

      GDPtH = AH    H    H    H    H       H
               t + pE;t Et + pN;t GN;t + EXt                IMtH = pH    H    H    H
                                                                    N;t Nt + pT;t Tt            (A.83)

so that:
                                    H;U S                                                    H;U S
                            it   1 "t     Bt H1                                      it   1 "t     Bt H1
CU RBALH        H
       t = T BALt +              US g
                                                  = GDPtH    CtH + pH    H    H
                                                                    E;t It + Gt +         US g
                                 t 1;t t 1;t                                              t 1;t t 1;t
                                                                                       (A.84)
While theoretically sound, this measure of output would bear little similarity with standard
…xed-weight, constant-dollar measures of real GDP provided by national accounts. The
problem is particularly severe for relatively open economies facing large swings in real ex-
change rates and relative prices. In our simulations, we therefore adopt ‘national accounts’
concepts for GDP , T BAL and their components, evaluating constant-dollar expenditures
at any time t by using …xed steady-state prices instead of the corresponding relative prices
at time t.




                                                   xvii
Table 1: Baseline Parameterization of the Regional Blocs

 Parameter                                                         US      AS      JE      RC
                             4
 Rate of time preference 1=         1 100                          3.2     2.6     2.7     2.7
 Depreciation rate                                                 0.020   0.020   0.020   0.020
 Intertemporal elasticity of substitution 1=                       5.00    5.00    5.00    5.00
 Habit persistence in consumption bc                               0.91    0.91    0.91    0.91
 Inverse of the Frisch elasticity of labor &                       2.50    2.50    2.50    2.50
 Habit persistence in labor b`                                     0.75    0.75    0.75    0.75
 Tradable Intermediate Goods
 Substitution between factors of production T                      0.75    0.75    0.75    0.75
 Bias towards capital T                                            0.67    0.72    0.76    0.67
 Nontradable Intermediate Goods
 Substitution between factors of production N                      0.75    0.75    0.75    0.75
 Bias towards capital N                                            0.62    0.66    0.71    0.62
 Final Consumption Goods
 Substitution between domestic and imported goods A                2.5     2.5     2.5     2.5
 Bias towards domestic goods A                                     0.96    0.07    0.39    0.15
 Substitution between domestic tradables and nontradables "A       0.5     0.5     0.5     0.5
 Bias towards tradable goods A                                     0.35    0.37    0.37    0.32
 Final Investment Goods
 Substitution between domestic and imported goods E                2.5     2.5     2.5     2.5
 Bias towards domestic goods E                                     0.98    0.05    0.78    0.17
 Substitution between domestic tradables and nontradables "E       0.5     0.5     0.5     0.5
 Bias towards tradable goods E                                     0.77    0.82    0.80    0.76

Table 2: Steady-State National Accounts Decomposition in the Baseline Scenario

 Ratio of GDP                             US      AS       JE     RC
 Total Consumption                        79.6    69.7     76.8   77.5
  Private C                               67.1    58.7     56.5   63.5
   Liquidity-constrained consumers CLC    5.1     9.9      3.0    4.4
   Forward-looking consumers CF L         62.1    48.8     53.5   59.1
  Public GC + PN GN                       12.5    11.0     20.5   14.3
 Total Investment PE E                    19.7    29.6     23.3   22.9
  Private PE I                            17.2    27.6     20.2   20.4
  Public PE GI                            2.5     2.0      3.0    2.5
 Trade balance T BAL                      0.7     -0.3     -0.2   -0.3
 Imports IM                               12.1    26.2     15.8   24.3
  Consumption Goods PM A M A              7.9     12.7     13.1   13.1
  Investment Goods PM E M E               4.2     13.5     2.7    11.2
 Government Debt B                        61.5    24.0     67.0   30.0
 Net Foreign Assets B                     -54.2   31.3     17.4   23.5
 Share of World GDP (percent)             27.9    15.5     32.2   24.4
Table 3: Real Adjustment Costs and Nominal Rigidities

 Parameter                                                US       AS     JE     RC
 Real Adjustment Costs
 Capital accumulation I1                                  1.00     1.00   1.00   1.00
 Investment changes I2                                    78       78     78     78
 Imports of consumption goods M A                         0.95     0.95   0.95   0.95
 Imports of investment goods M E                          0.95     0.95   0.95   0.95
 Nominal Rigidities
 Wages for liquidity-constrained consumers W LC           400      400    400    400
 Wages for forward-looking consumers W F L                400      400    400    400
 Price of domestically-produced tradables P Q             400      400    400    400
 Price of nontradables P N                                400      400    400    400
 Price of imported intermediate goods P M                 400      400    400    400

Table 4: Price and Wage Markups

 Parameter                    US     AS     JE     RC
 Tradables
 Markup T =(    T    1)       1.15   1.14   1.21   1.17
  T                           7.67   8.00   5.70   6.73
 Nontradables
 Markup N =(    N        1)   1.28   1.27   1.40   1.33
  N                           4.58   4.75   3.50   4.04
 Wages
 Markup    =(       1)        1.16   1.16   1.30   1.20
                              7.30   7.30   4.30   6.00

Table 5: Monetary Policy

 Parameter                                         IFB Rule      Fixed Exchange Rate Regime
 Lagged interest rate at t-1 ! i                   0.75          1.00
 In‡ation gap at t+3 ! 1                           2.00          0.00
 Change in the nominal exch. rate at t ! 2         0.00          1000000 (proxy for 1)
Table 6: Calibrating the International Linkages

 Parameter                                                US     AS     JE     RC
 Substitution between imports from di¤erent regions   A   1.5    1.5    1.5    1.5
 Bias towards imported consumption goods bA from
 United States (US)                                       ...    0.33   0.22   0.52
 Emerging Asia (AS)                                       0.15   ...    0.16   0.06
 Japan / Euro Area (JE)                                   0.32   0.42   ...    0.42
 Remaining Countries (RC)                                 0.53   0.25   0.62   ...
 Substitution between imports from di¤erent regions   E   1.5    1.5    1.5    1.5
 Bias towards imported investment goods bE from
 United States (US)                                       ...    0.45   0.78   0.51
 Emerging Asia (AS)                                       0.25   ...    0.17   0.11
 Japan / Euro Area (JE)                                   0.30   0.27   ...    0.38
 Remaining Countries (RC)                                 0.45   0.28   0.05   ...
 Net Foreign Liabilities
 Short-run dynamics B1                                    0.05   0.05   0.05   0.05
 Short-run dynamics B2                                    0.10   0.10   0.10   0.10
 % related to domestic government debt   F1               0.50   0.50   0.50   0.50
 % related to US government debt F 2                      ...    0.24   0.38   0.38
Figure 1: Distribution of U.S. Current Accounts, 1960-2004
     Figure 2: The Structure of the Model




         I       GI          C       Gc

             E                   A




GN
             N          Q                 M
                                              Abroad

                         T




     K                               L
Figure 3: International Trade Linkages (steady-state calibration; percent of world GDP)
                                                   Figure 4: United States


                                                     Government Debt Shock in the United States


               Real Effective Exchange Rate                                                                  Trade Balance and the Current Account
                          (p ercen t; +=d ep reciatio n )                                                           (p ercen tag e p o in ts o f n o min al GDP)
  0 .2                                                                                0 .2
                                                                                                                    Trad e B alan ce                  C u rren t Acco u n t
                                                                                                 0 .2                                                                               0 .2
  0 .0                                                                                0 .0

                                                                                                 0 .0                                                                               0 .0
 -0 .2                                                                               -0 .2

                                                                                                -0 .2                                                                              -0 .2
 -0 .4                                                                               -0 .4

                                                                                                -0 .4                                                                              -0 .4
 -0 .6                                                                               -0 .6


 -0 .8                                                                               -0 .8      -0 .6                                                                              -0 .6


 -1 .0                                                                               -1 .0      -0 .8                                                                              -0 .8
          0          5                 10                   15                  20                       0            5                 10                  15                20


                         Real Interest Rate                                                                          Year-on-Year Inflation
                                   (p ercen t)                                                                                (p ercen tag e p o in ts)
 0 .1 0                                                                               0 .1 0    0 .0 4                                                                              0 .0 4

                                                                                                0 .0 3                                                                              0 .0 3

 0 .0 5                                                                               0 .0 5
                                                                                                0 .0 2                                                                              0 .0 2

                                                                                                0 .0 1                                                                              0 .0 1
 0 .0 0                                                                               0 .0 0
                                                                                                0 .0 0                                                                              0 .0 0

                                                                                               -0 .0 1                                                                             -0 .0 1
-0 .0 5                                                                              -0 .0 5

                                                                                               -0 .0 2                                                                             -0 .0 2

-0 .1 0                                                                              -0 .1 0   -0 .0 3                                                                             -0 .0 3
          0          5                 10                   15                  20                       0            5                 10                  15                20

                          National Accounts                                                                               Government Deficit
                                    (perce nt)                                                                      (p ercen tag e p o in ts o f n o min al GDP)
              GDP                     Consum ption               Inve stm ent                    3 .0                                                                               3 .0
  3 .0                                                                                3 .0
                                                                                                 2 .5                                                                               2 .5
  2 .5                                                                                2 .5

  2 .0                                                                                2 .0       2 .0                                                                               2 .0

  1 .5                                                                                1 .5       1 .5                                                                               1 .5
  1 .0                                                                                1 .0
                                                                                                 1 .0                                                                               1 .0
  0 .5                                                                                0 .5
                                                                                                 0 .5                                                                               0 .5
  0 .0                                                                                0 .0

 -0 .5                                                                               -0 .5       0 .0                                                                               0 .0

 -1 .0                                                                               -1 .0      -0 .5                                                                              -0 .5
          0          5                 10                   15                  20                       0            5                 10                  15                20


                     Net Foreign Liabilities                                                                               Government Debt
                    (p ercen tag e p o in ts o f n o min al GDP)                                                    (p ercen tag e p o in ts o f n o min al GDP)
     6                                                                                6           12                                                                                12

     5                                                                                5           10                                                                                10

     4                                                                                4             8                                                                               8

     3                                                                                3             6                                                                               6

     2                                                                                2             4                                                                               4

     1                                                                                1             2                                                                               2

     0                                                                                0             0                                                                               0

    -1                                                                               -1            -2                                                                              -2
          0          5                 10                   15                  20                       0            5                 10                  15                20
                                                                 Figure 5: Rest of the World


                                                                        Government Debt Shock in the United States


               Emerging Asia                                                                  Japan/Euro Area                                                                Remaining Countries
               Output Growth                                                                   Output Growth                                                                   Output Growth
                          (p ercen t)                                                                     (p ercen t)                                                                      (p ercen t)
 0 .2                                                            0 .2          0 .1 0                                                               0 .1 0     0 .0 5                                                                0 .0 5

                                                                               0 .0 5                                                               0 .0 5
 0 .0                                                            0 .0                                                                                          0 .0 0                                                                0 .0 0
                                                                               0 .0 0                                                               0 .0 0
-0 .2                                                           -0 .2                                                                                         -0 .0 5                                                               -0 .0 5
                                                                              -0 .0 5                                                              -0 .0 5
-0 .4                                                           -0 .4                                                                                         -0 .1 0                                                               -0 .1 0
                                                                              -0 .1 0                                                              -0 .1 0

-0 .6                                                           -0 .6         -0 .1 5                                                              -0 .1 5    -0 .1 5                                                               -0 .1 5
        0         5             10            15              20                        0         5             10            15              20                         0          5            10            15              20

            Trade and the Current Account                                                   Trade and the Current Account                                                    Trade and the Current Account
               (percentage points of nominal GDP)                                              (percentage points of nominal GDP)                                               (percentage points of nominal GDP)
               Trade balance                Current account                                    Trade balance                Current account                                     Trade balance                Current account
 0 .6                                                            0 .6           0 .3                                                                0 .3         0 .3                                                                0 .3


 0 .4                                                            0 .4           0 .2                                                                0 .2         0 .2                                                                0 .2


 0 .2                                                            0 .2           0 .1                                                                0 .1         0 .1                                                                0 .1


 0 .0                                                            0 .0           0 .0                                                                0 .0         0 .0                                                                0 .0


-0 .2                                                           -0 .2          -0 .1                                                               -0 .1        -0 .1                                                               -0 .1
        0         5             10            15              20                        0         5             10            15              20                         0          5            10            15              20


Real Effective Exchange Rate                                                   Real Effective Exchange Rate                                                     Real Effective Exchange Rate
              (p ercen t; +=d ep reciatio n )                                                 (p ercen t; +=d ep reciatio n )                                                  (p ercen t; +=d ep reciatio n )
 0 .2                                                            0 .2           0 .6                                                                0 .6         0 .4                                                               0 .4

 0 .1                                                            0 .1
                                                                                0 .4                                                                0 .4         0 .3                                                               0 .3
 0 .0                                                            0 .0

-0 .1                                                           -0 .1           0 .2                                                                0 .2         0 .2                                                               0 .2

-0 .2                                                           -0 .2
                                                                                0 .0                                                                0 .0         0 .1                                                               0 .1
-0 .3                                                           -0 .3
-0 .4                                                           -0 .4          -0 .2                                                               -0 .2         0 .0                                                               0 .0
        0         5             10            15              20                        0         5             10            15              20                         0          5            10            15              20

            Real Interest Rates                                                             Real Interest Rates                                                               Real Interest Rates
                  (p ercen tag e p o in ts)                                                       (p ercen tag e p o in ts)                                                        (p ercen tag e p o in ts)
 0 .5                                                            0 .5          0 .1 0                                                               0 .1 0     0 .0 6                                                                0 .0 6

 0 .4                                                            0 .4          0 .0 5                                                               0 .0 5
                                                                                                                                                               0 .0 4                                                                0 .0 4
 0 .3                                                            0 .3
                                                                               0 .0 0                                                               0 .0 0
 0 .2                                                            0 .2                                                                                          0 .0 2                                                                0 .0 2
                                                                              -0 .0 5                                                              -0 .0 5
 0 .1                                                            0 .1
                                                                                                                                                               0 .0 0                                                                0 .0 0
                                                                              -0 .1 0                                                              -0 .1 0
 0 .0                                                            0 .0
-0 .1                                                           -0 .1         -0 .1 5                                                              -0 .1 5    -0 .0 2                                                               -0 .0 2
        0         5             10            15              20                        0         5             10            15              20                         0          5            10            15              20

        Year-on-Year Inflation                                                          Year-on-Year Inflation                                                           Year-on-Year Inflation
                  (p ercen tag e p o in ts)                                                       (p ercen tag e p o in ts)                                                        (p ercen tag e p o in ts)
 0 .2                                                            0 .2          0 .0 2                                                               0 .0 2    0 .0 1 5                                                               0 .0 1 5

                                                                               0 .0 1                                                               0 .0 1
 0 .0                                                            0 .0                                                                                         0 .0 1 0                                                               0 .0 1 0
                                                                               0 .0 0                                                               0 .0 0

-0 .2                                                           -0 .2         -0 .0 1                                                              -0 .0 1    0 .0 0 5                                                               0 .0 0 5

                                                                              -0 .0 2                                                              -0 .0 2
-0 .4                                                           -0 .4                                                                                         0 .0 0 0                                                               0 .0 0 0
                                                                              -0 .0 3                                                              -0 .0 3
-0 .6                                                           -0 .6         -0 .0 4                                                              -0 .0 4   -0 .0 0 5                                                              -0 .0 0 5
        0         5             10            15              20                        0         5             10            15              20                         0          5            10            15              20
                                                 Figure 6: United States


                                                      Private Savings Shock in the United States


             Real Effective Exchange Rate                                                                Trade Balance and the Current Account
                        (p ercen t; +=d ep reciatio n )                                                         (p ercen tag e p o in ts o f n o min al GDP)
 0 .2                                                                               0 .2
                                                                                                                Trad e B alan ce                  C u rren t Acco u n t
                                                                                             0 .4                                                                               0 .4
 0 .0                                                                               0 .0

-0 .2                                                                              -0 .2     0 .2                                                                               0 .2
-0 .4                                                                              -0 .4
                                                                                             0 .0                                                                               0 .0
-0 .6                                                                              -0 .6

-0 .8                                                                              -0 .8    -0 .2                                                                              -0 .2

-1 .0                                                                              -1 .0
                                                                                            -0 .4                                                                              -0 .4
-1 .2                                                                              -1 .2
-1 .4                                                                              -1 .4    -0 .6                                                                              -0 .6
        0          5                 10                   15                  20                     0            5                 10                  15                20


                       Real Interest Rate                                                                        Year-on-Year Inflation
                                 (p ercen t)                                                                              (p ercen tag e p o in ts)
 0 .7                                                                               0 .7    0 .0 1                                                                              0 .0 1

 0 .6                                                                               0 .6
                                                                                            0 .0 0                                                                              0 .0 0
 0 .5                                                                               0 .5
                                                                                           -0 .0 1                                                                             -0 .0 1
 0 .4                                                                               0 .4

 0 .3                                                                               0 .3   -0 .0 2                                                                             -0 .0 2

 0 .2                                                                               0 .2
                                                                                           -0 .0 3                                                                             -0 .0 3
 0 .1                                                                               0 .1
                                                                                           -0 .0 4                                                                             -0 .0 4
 0 .0                                                                               0 .0
-0 .1                                                                              -0 .1   -0 .0 5                                                                             -0 .0 5
        0          5                 10                   15                  20                     0            5                 10                  15                20

                        National Accounts                                                                             Government Deficit
                                  (perce nt)                                                                    (p ercen tag e p o in ts o f n o min al GDP)
            GDP                     Consum ption               Inve stm ent                 0 .0 5                                                                              0 .0 5
   5                                                                                5


                                                                                            0 .0 0                                                                              0 .0 0
   0                                                                                0


                                                                                           -0 .0 5                                                                             -0 .0 5
  -5                                                                               -5



-1 0                                                                               -1 0    -0 .1 0                                                                             -0 .1 0



-1 5                                                                               -1 5    -0 .1 5                                                                             -0 .1 5
        0          5                 10                   15                  20                     0            5                 10                  15                20


                   Net Foreign Liabilities                                                                             Government Debt
                  (p ercen tag e p o in ts o f n o min al GDP)                                                  (p ercen tag e p o in ts o f n o min al GDP)
 3 .5                                                                               3 .5     0 .5                                                                               0 .5

 3 .0                                                                               3 .0     0 .4                                                                               0 .4

 2 .5                                                                               2 .5
                                                                                             0 .3                                                                               0 .3
 2 .0                                                                               2 .0
                                                                                             0 .2                                                                               0 .2
 1 .5                                                                               1 .5
                                                                                             0 .1                                                                               0 .1
 1 .0                                                                               1 .0
                                                                                             0 .0                                                                               0 .0
 0 .5                                                                               0 .5

 0 .0                                                                               0 .0    -0 .1                                                                              -0 .1

-0 .5                                                                              -0 .5    -0 .2                                                                              -0 .2
        0          5                 10                   15                  20                     0            5                 10                  15                20
                                                                 Figure 7: Rest of the World


                                                                        Private Savings Shock in the United States


               Emerging Asia                                                                  Japan/Euro Area                                                                Remaining Countries
               Output Growth                                                                   Output Growth                                                                   Output Growth
                          (p ercen t)                                                                     (p ercen t)                                                                      (p ercen t)
 0 .5                                                            0 .5         0 .0 5                                                                0 .0 5       0 .2                                                                0 .2

                                                                                                                                                                 0 .1                                                                0 .1
 0 .0                                                            0 .0         0 .0 0                                                                0 .0 0
                                                                                                                                                                 0 .0                                                                0 .0
-0 .5                                                           -0 .5        -0 .0 5                                                               -0 .0 5
                                                                                                                                                                -0 .1                                                               -0 .1
-1 .0                                                           -1 .0        -0 .1 0                                                               -0 .1 0
                                                                                                                                                                -0 .2                                                               -0 .2

-1 .5                                                           -1 .5        -0 .1 5                                                               -0 .1 5      -0 .3                                                               -0 .3
        0         5             10            15              20                        0         5             10            15              20                         0          5            10            15              20

            Trade and the Current Account                                                   Trade and the Current Account                                                    Trade and the Current Account
               (percentage points of nominal GDP)                                              (percentage points of nominal GDP)                                               (percentage points of nominal GDP)
               Trade balance                Current account                                    Trade balance                Current account                                     Trade balance                Current account
 0 .8                                                            0 .8         0 .0 4                                                                0 .0 4       0 .6                                                                0 .6

 0 .6                                                            0 .6         0 .0 2                                                                0 .0 2
                                                                                                                                                                 0 .4                                                                0 .4
                                                                              0 .0 0                                                                0 .0 0
 0 .4                                                            0 .4
                                                                             -0 .0 2                                                               -0 .0 2       0 .2                                                                0 .2
 0 .2                                                            0 .2
                                                                             -0 .0 4                                                               -0 .0 4
                                                                                                                                                                 0 .0                                                                0 .0
 0 .0                                                            0 .0        -0 .0 6                                                               -0 .0 6
-0 .2                                                           -0 .2        -0 .0 8                                                               -0 .0 8      -0 .2                                                               -0 .2
        0         5             10            15              20                        0         5             10            15              20                         0          5            10            15              20


Real Effective Exchange Rate                                                   Real Effective Exchange Rate                                                     Real Effective Exchange Rate
              (p ercen t; +=d ep reciatio n )                                                 (p ercen t; +=d ep reciatio n )                                                  (p ercen t; +=d ep reciatio n )
 0 .5                                                            0 .5           0 .5                                                                0 .5         1 .0                                                                1 .0

                                                                                0 .4                                                                0 .4         0 .8                                                                0 .8

 0 .0                                                            0 .0           0 .3                                                                0 .3         0 .6                                                                0 .6

                                                                                0 .2                                                                0 .2         0 .4                                                                0 .4

-0 .5                                                           -0 .5           0 .1                                                                0 .1         0 .2                                                                0 .2

                                                                                0 .0                                                                0 .0         0 .0                                                                0 .0
-1 .0                                                           -1 .0          -0 .1                                                               -0 .1        -0 .2                                                               -0 .2
        0         5             10            15              20                        0         5             10            15              20                         0          5            10            15              20

            Real Interest Rates                                                             Real Interest Rates                                                               Real Interest Rates
                  (p ercen tag e p o in ts)                                                       (p ercen tag e p o in ts)                                                        (p ercen tag e p o in ts)
 2 .0                                                            2 .0         0 .1 2                                                               0 .1 2       0 .3 0                                                              0 .3 0

 1 .5                                                            1 .5         0 .1 0                                                               0 .1 0       0 .2 5                                                              0 .2 5

                                                                              0 .0 8                                                               0 .0 8       0 .2 0                                                              0 .2 0
 1 .0                                                            1 .0
                                                                              0 .0 6                                                               0 .0 6       0 .1 5                                                              0 .1 5
 0 .5                                                            0 .5
                                                                              0 .0 4                                                               0 .0 4       0 .1 0                                                              0 .1 0
 0 .0                                                            0 .0
                                                                              0 .0 2                                                               0 .0 2       0 .0 5                                                              0 .0 5
-0 .5                                                           -0 .5         0 .0 0                                                               0 .0 0       0 .0 0                                                              0 .0 0
        0         5             10            15              20                        0         5             10            15              20                         0          5            10            15              20

        Year-on-Year Inflation                                                          Year-on-Year Inflation                                                           Year-on-Year Inflation
                  (p ercen tag e p o in ts)                                                       (p ercen tag e p o in ts)                                                        (p ercen tag e p o in ts)
 0 .2                                                            0 .2        0 .0 0 5                                                               0 .0 0 5    0 .0 8                                                               0 .0 8

 0 .0                                                            0 .0        0 .0 0 0                                                               0 .0 0 0    0 .0 6                                                               0 .0 6
-0 .2                                                           -0 .2
                                                                            -0 .0 0 5                                                              -0 .0 0 5    0 .0 4                                                               0 .0 4
-0 .4                                                           -0 .4
                                                                            -0 .0 1 0                                                              -0 .0 1 0    0 .0 2                                                               0 .0 2
-0 .6                                                           -0 .6

-0 .8                                                           -0 .8       -0 .0 1 5                                                              -0 .0 1 5    0 .0 0                                                               0 .0 0

-1 .0                                                           -1 .0       -0 .0 2 0                                                              -0 .0 2 0   -0 .0 2                                                              -0 .0 2
        0         5             10            15              20                        0         5             10            15              20                         0          5            10            15              20
                                                 Figure 8: United States


                                          Preference for US Assets Shock in the Rest of the World


             Real Effective Exchange Rate                                                              Trade Balance and the Current Account
                        (p ercen t; +=d ep reciatio n )                                                       (p ercen tag e p o in ts o f n o min al GDP)
   2                                                                                2
                                                                                                              Trad e B alan ce                  C u rren t Acco u n t
                                                                                              1                                                                               1
   0                                                                                0

  -2                                                                               -2         0                                                                               0

  -4                                                                               -4        -1                                                                              -1

  -6                                                                               -6
                                                                                             -2                                                                              -2
  -8                                                                               -8
                                                                                             -3                                                                              -3
-1 0                                                                               -1 0

-1 2                                                                               -1 2      -4                                                                              -4
        0          5                 10                   15                  20                   0            5                 10                  15                20


                       Real Interest Rate                                                                      Year-on-Year Inflation
                                 (p ercen t)                                                                            (p ercen tag e p o in ts)
 0 .5                                                                               0 .5   0 .1                                                                               0 .1


                                                                                           0 .0                                                                               0 .0
 0 .0                                                                               0 .0

                                                                                           -0 .1                                                                             -0 .1
-0 .5                                                                              -0 .5
                                                                                           -0 .2                                                                             -0 .2
-1 .0                                                                              -1 .0
                                                                                           -0 .3                                                                             -0 .3

-1 .5                                                                              -1 .5
                                                                                           -0 .4                                                                             -0 .4

-2 .0                                                                              -2 .0   -0 .5                                                                             -0 .5
        0          5                 10                   15                  20                   0            5                 10                  15                20

                        National Accounts                                                                           Government Deficit
                                  (perce nt)                                                                  (p ercen tag e p o in ts o f n o min al GDP)
            GDP                     Consum ption               Inve stm ent                0 .4                                                                               0 .4
 10                                                                                 10

   8                                                                                8      0 .3                                                                               0 .3

   6                                                                                6
                                                                                           0 .2                                                                               0 .2
   4                                                                                4

   2                                                                                2      0 .1                                                                               0 .1

   0                                                                                0
                                                                                           0 .0                                                                               0 .0
  -2                                                                               -2

  -4                                                                               -4      -0 .1                                                                             -0 .1
        0          5                 10                   15                  20                   0            5                 10                  15                20


                   Net Foreign Liabilities                                                                           Government Debt
                  (p ercen tag e p o in ts o f n o min al GDP)                                                (p ercen tag e p o in ts o f n o min al GDP)
 25                                                                                 25     0 .4                                                                               0 .4


 20                                                                                 20     0 .2                                                                               0 .2


 15                                                                                 15     0 .0                                                                               0 .0


 10                                                                                 10     -0 .2                                                                             -0 .2


   5                                                                                5      -0 .4                                                                             -0 .4


   0                                                                                0      -0 .6                                                                             -0 .6

  -5                                                                               -5      -0 .8                                                                             -0 .8
        0          5                 10                   15                  20                   0            5                 10                  15                20
                                                                Figure 9: Rest of the World


                                                             Preference for US Assets Shock in the Rest of the World


              Emerging Asia                                                             Japan/Euro Area                                                            Remaining Countries
              Output Growth                                                              Output Growth                                                               Output Growth
                         (p ercen t)                                                                (p ercen t)                                                                  (p ercen t)
  5                                                             5            1                                                                1        0 .5                                                                0 .5


  0                                                             0            0                                                                0
                                                                                                                                                       0 .0                                                                0 .0

 -5                                                            -5           -1                                                               -1

                                                                                                                                                      -0 .5                                                               -0 .5
-1 0                                                           -1 0         -2                                                               -2

-1 5                                                           -1 5         -3                                                               -3       -1 .0                                                               -1 .0
       0         5             10            15              20                   0         5             10            15              20                     0          5            10            15              20

           Trade and the Current Account                                              Trade and the Current Account                                                Trade and the Current Account
              (percentage points of nominal GDP)                                         (percentage points of nominal GDP)                                           (percentage points of nominal GDP)
              Trade balance                Current account                               Trade balance                Current account                                 Trade balance                Current account
  6                                                             6          2 .0                                                               2 .0     2 .0                                                                2 .0

                                                                           1 .5                                                               1 .5     1 .5                                                                1 .5
  4                                                             4

                                                                           1 .0                                                               1 .0     1 .0                                                                1 .0
  2                                                             2
                                                                           0 .5                                                               0 .5     0 .5                                                                0 .5

  0                                                             0
                                                                           0 .0                                                               0 .0     0 .0                                                                0 .0

 -2                                                            -2         -0 .5                                                              -0 .5    -0 .5                                                               -0 .5
       0         5             10            15              20                   0         5             10            15              20                     0          5            10            15              20


Real Effective Exchange Rate                                              Real Effective Exchange Rate                                                Real Effective Exchange Rate
             (p ercen t; +=d ep reciatio n )                                            (p ercen t; +=d ep reciatio n )                                              (p ercen t; +=d ep reciatio n )
  5                                                             5          15                                                                 15       2 .5                                                                2 .5

                                                                                                                                                       2 .0                                                                2 .0
  0                                                             0          10                                                                 10
                                                                                                                                                       1 .5                                                                1 .5

 -5                                                            -5            5                                                                5        1 .0                                                                1 .0

                                                                                                                                                       0 .5                                                                0 .5
-1 0                                                           -1 0          0                                                                0
                                                                                                                                                       0 .0                                                                0 .0
-1 5                                                           -1 5         -5                                                               -5       -0 .5                                                               -0 .5
       0         5             10            15              20                   0         5             10            15              20                     0          5            10            15              20

           Real Interest Rates                                                        Real Interest Rates                                                           Real Interest Rates
                 (p ercen tag e p o in ts)                                                  (p ercen tag e p o in ts)                                                    (p ercen tag e p o in ts)
 20                                                             20         1 .2                                                              1 .2     0 .3 0                                                              0 .3 0

 15                                                             15         1 .0                                                              1 .0     0 .2 5                                                              0 .2 5

                                                                           0 .8                                                              0 .8     0 .2 0                                                              0 .2 0
 10                                                             10
                                                                           0 .6                                                              0 .6     0 .1 5                                                              0 .1 5
  5                                                             5
                                                                           0 .4                                                              0 .4     0 .1 0                                                              0 .1 0
  0                                                             0
                                                                           0 .2                                                              0 .2     0 .0 5                                                              0 .0 5
 -5                                                            -5          0 .0                                                              0 .0     0 .0 0                                                              0 .0 0
       0         5             10            15              20                   0         5             10            15              20                     0          5            10            15              20

       Year-on-Year Inflation                                                     Year-on-Year Inflation                                                       Year-on-Year Inflation
                 (p ercen tag e p o in ts)                                                  (p ercen tag e p o in ts)                                                    (p ercen tag e p o in ts)
  2                                                             2          0 .5                                                               0 .5    0 .0 6                                                               0 .0 6

  0                                                             0          0 .4                                                               0 .4    0 .0 4                                                               0 .0 4
                                                                           0 .3                                                               0 .3
 -2                                                            -2                                                                                     0 .0 2                                                               0 .0 2
                                                                           0 .2                                                               0 .2
 -4                                                            -4                                                                                     0 .0 0                                                               0 .0 0
                                                                           0 .1                                                               0 .1
 -6                                                            -6          0 .0                                                               0 .0   -0 .0 2                                                              -0 .0 2

 -8                                                            -8         -0 .1                                                              -0 .1   -0 .0 4                                                              -0 .0 4
       0         5             10            15              20                   0         5             10            15              20                     0          5            10            15              20
                                    Figure 10: Japan and the Euro Area


                                          Negative Productivity Shock in Japan and the Euro Area


             Real Effective Exchange Rate                                                                Trade Balance and the Current Account
                        (p ercen t; +=d ep reciatio n )                                                         (p ercen tag e p o in ts o f n o min al GDP)
   2                                                                                2
                                                                                                                Trad e B alan ce                  C u rren t Acco u n t
                                                                                             0 .2                                                                               0 .2
   1                                                                                1

   0                                                                                0
                                                                                             0 .1                                                                               0 .1
  -1                                                                               -1

  -2                                                                               -2
                                                                                             0 .0                                                                               0 .0
  -3                                                                               -3

  -4                                                                               -4       -0 .1                                                                              -0 .1
  -5                                                                               -5
  -6                                                                               -6       -0 .2                                                                              -0 .2
        0          5                 10                   15                  20                     0            5                 10                  15                20


                       Real Interest Rate                                                                        Year-on-Year Inflation
                                 (p ercen t)                                                                              (p ercen tag e p o in ts)
 0 .1                                                                               0 .1    0 .0 4                                                                              0 .0 4


                                                                                            0 .0 2                                                                              0 .0 2
 0 .0                                                                               0 .0

                                                                                            0 .0 0                                                                              0 .0 0
-0 .1                                                                              -0 .1
                                                                                           -0 .0 2                                                                             -0 .0 2
-0 .2                                                                              -0 .2
                                                                                           -0 .0 4                                                                             -0 .0 4

-0 .3                                                                              -0 .3
                                                                                           -0 .0 6                                                                             -0 .0 6

-0 .4                                                                              -0 .4   -0 .0 8                                                                             -0 .0 8
        0          5                 10                   15                  20                     0            5                 10                  15                20

                        National Accounts                                                                             Government Deficit
                                  (perce nt)                                                                    (p ercen tag e p o in ts o f n o min al GDP)
            GDP                     Consum ption               Inve stm ent                  0 .1                                                                               0 .1
   5                                                                                5
                                                                                             0 .0                                                                               0 .0
   0                                                                                0
                                                                                            -0 .1                                                                              -0 .1
  -5                                                                               -5
                                                                                            -0 .2                                                                              -0 .2
-1 0                                                                               -1 0
                                                                                            -0 .3                                                                              -0 .3

-1 5                                                                               -1 5
                                                                                            -0 .4                                                                              -0 .4

-2 0                                                                               -2 0     -0 .5                                                                              -0 .5

-2 5                                                                               -2 5     -0 .6                                                                              -0 .6
        0          5                 10                   15                  20                     0            5                 10                  15                20


                   Net Foreign Liabilities                                                                             Government Debt
                  (p ercen tag e p o in ts o f n o min al GDP)                                                  (p ercen tag e p o in ts o f n o min al GDP)
 0 .6                                                                               0 .6     2 .5                                                                               2 .5


                                                                                             2 .0                                                                               2 .0
 0 .4                                                                               0 .4

                                                                                             1 .5                                                                               1 .5
 0 .2                                                                               0 .2
                                                                                             1 .0                                                                               1 .0
 0 .0                                                                               0 .0
                                                                                             0 .5                                                                               0 .5

-0 .2                                                                              -0 .2
                                                                                             0 .0                                                                               0 .0

-0 .4                                                                              -0 .4    -0 .5                                                                              -0 .5
        0          5                 10                   15                  20                     0            5                 10                  15                20
                                                                    Figure 11: Rest of the World


                                                                  Negative Productivity Shock in Japan and the Euro Area


                    United States                                                                Emerging Asia                                                               Remaining Countries
                   Output Growth                                                                 Output Growth                                                                 Output Growth
                              (p ercen t)                                                                   (p ercen t)                                                                    (p ercen t)
  0 .1 0                                                             0 .1 0       0 .2                                                                0 .2       0 .2                                                                0 .2

                                                                                                                                                                 0 .1                                                                0 .1
  0 .0 5                                                             0 .0 5       0 .1                                                                0 .1
                                                                                                                                                                 0 .0                                                                0 .0
  0 .0 0                                                             0 .0 0       0 .0                                                                0 .0
                                                                                                                                                                -0 .1                                                               -0 .1
 -0 .0 5                                                            -0 .0 5      -0 .1                                                               -0 .1
                                                                                                                                                                -0 .2                                                               -0 .2

 -0 .1 0                                                            -0 .1 0      -0 .2                                                               -0 .2      -0 .3                                                               -0 .3
            0         5             10            15              20                      0         5             10            15              20                       0          5            10            15              20

                Trade and the Current Account                                                 Trade and the Current Account                                                  Trade and the Current Account
                   (percentage points of nominal GDP)                                            (percentage points of nominal GDP)                                             (percentage points of nominal GDP)
                   Trade balance                Current account                                  Trade balance                Current account                                   Trade balance                Current account
  0 .2 0                                                             0 .2 0      0 .1 0                                                               0 .1 0    0 .1 0                                                               0 .1 0

  0 .1 5                                                             0 .1 5      0 .0 5                                                               0 .0 5    0 .0 5                                                               0 .0 5
  0 .1 0                                                             0 .1 0      0 .0 0                                                               0 .0 0
                                                                                                                                                                0 .0 0                                                               0 .0 0
  0 .0 5                                                             0 .0 5     -0 .0 5                                                              -0 .0 5
                                                                                                                                                               -0 .0 5                                                              -0 .0 5
  0 .0 0                                                             0 .0 0     -0 .1 0                                                              -0 .1 0

 -0 .0 5                                                            -0 .0 5     -0 .1 5                                                              -0 .1 5   -0 .1 0                                                              -0 .1 0

 -0 .1 0                                                            -0 .1 0     -0 .2 0                                                              -0 .2 0   -0 .1 5                                                              -0 .1 5
            0         5             10            15              20                      0         5             10            15              20                       0          5            10            15              20


   Real Effective Exchange Rate                                                  Real Effective Exchange Rate                                                   Real Effective Exchange Rate
                  (p ercen t; +=d ep reciatio n )                                               (p ercen t; +=d ep reciatio n )                                                (p ercen t; +=d ep reciatio n )
    2 .0                                                             2 .0         2 .0                                                                2 .0          3                                                                3

                                                                                  1 .5                                                                1 .5
    1 .5                                                             1 .5
                                                                                                                                                                    2                                                                2
                                                                                  1 .0                                                                1 .0
    1 .0                                                             1 .0
                                                                                  0 .5                                                                0 .5          1                                                                1
    0 .5                                                             0 .5
                                                                                  0 .0                                                                0 .0
                                                                                                                                                                    0                                                                0
    0 .0                                                             0 .0        -0 .5                                                               -0 .5
   -0 .5                                                            -0 .5        -1 .0                                                               -1 .0         -1                                                               -1
            0         5             10            15              20                      0         5             10            15              20                       0          5            10            15              20

                Real Interest Rates                                                           Real Interest Rates                                                             Real Interest Rates
                      (p ercen tag e p o in ts)                                                     (p ercen tag e p o in ts)                                                      (p ercen tag e p o in ts)
  0 .0 2                                                             0 .0 2      0 .1 0                                                               0 .1 0    0 .0 2                                                               0 .0 2

  0 .0 0                                                             0 .0 0                                                                                     0 .0 0                                                               0 .0 0

                                                                                 0 .0 5                                                               0 .0 5   -0 .0 2                                                              -0 .0 2
 -0 .0 2                                                            -0 .0 2
                                                                                                                                                               -0 .0 4                                                              -0 .0 4
 -0 .0 4                                                            -0 .0 4
                                                                                 0 .0 0                                                               0 .0 0   -0 .0 6                                                              -0 .0 6
 -0 .0 6                                                            -0 .0 6
                                                                                                                                                               -0 .0 8                                                              -0 .0 8
 -0 .0 8                                                            -0 .0 8     -0 .0 5                                                              -0 .0 5   -0 .1 0                                                              -0 .1 0
            0         5             10            15              20                      0         5             10            15              20                       0          5            10            15              20

            Year-on-Year Inflation                                                        Year-on-Year Inflation                                                         Year-on-Year Inflation
                      (p ercen tag e p o in ts)                                                     (p ercen tag e p o in ts)                                                      (p ercen tag e p o in ts)
 0 .0 0 5                                                            0 .0 0 5    0 .1 5                                                               0 .1 5    0 .0 1                                                               0 .0 1

 0 .0 0 0                                                            0 .0 0 0    0 .1 0                                                               0 .1 0
                                                                                                                                                                0 .0 0                                                               0 .0 0

-0 .0 0 5                                                           -0 .0 0 5    0 .0 5                                                               0 .0 5
                                                                                                                                                               -0 .0 1                                                              -0 .0 1
-0 .0 1 0                                                           -0 .0 1 0    0 .0 0                                                               0 .0 0

                                                                                                                                                               -0 .0 2                                                              -0 .0 2
-0 .0 1 5                                                           -0 .0 1 5   -0 .0 5                                                              -0 .0 5

-0 .0 2 0                                                           -0 .0 2 0   -0 .1 0                                                              -0 .1 0   -0 .0 3                                                              -0 .0 3
            0         5             10            15              20                      0         5             10            15              20                       0          5            10            15              20
                                               Figure 12: Emerging Asia


                                                   Positive Productivity Shock in Emerging Asia


             Real Effective Exchange Rate                                                              Trade Balance and the Current Account
                        (p ercen t; +=d ep reciatio n )                                                       (p ercen tag e p o in ts o f n o min al GDP)
   5                                                                               5
                                                                                                              Trad e B alan ce                  C u rren t Acco u n t
                                                                                           0 .5                                                                               0 .5

   4                                                                               4
                                                                                           0 .0                                                                               0 .0

   3                                                                               3
                                                                                           -0 .5                                                                             -0 .5

   2                                                                               2
                                                                                           -1 .0                                                                             -1 .0


   1                                                                               1       -1 .5                                                                             -1 .5


   0                                                                               0       -2 .0                                                                             -2 .0
        0          5                 10                   15                  20                   0            5                 10                  15                20


                       Real Interest Rate                                                                      Year-on-Year Inflation
                                 (p ercen t)                                                                            (p ercen tag e p o in ts)
 1 .0                                                                               1 .0   0 .4                                                                               0 .4

 0 .5                                                                               0 .5
                                                                                           0 .2                                                                               0 .2
 0 .0                                                                               0 .0
                                                                                           0 .0                                                                               0 .0
-0 .5                                                                              -0 .5

-1 .0                                                                              -1 .0   -0 .2                                                                             -0 .2

-1 .5                                                                              -1 .5
                                                                                           -0 .4                                                                             -0 .4
-2 .0                                                                              -2 .0
                                                                                           -0 .6                                                                             -0 .6
-2 .5                                                                              -2 .5
-3 .0                                                                              -3 .0   -0 .8                                                                             -0 .8
        0          5                 10                   15                  20                   0            5                 10                  15                20

                        National Accounts                                                                           Government Deficit
                                  (perce nt)                                                                  (p ercen tag e p o in ts o f n o min al GDP)
            GDP                     Consum ption               Inve stm ent                0 .4                                                                               0 .4
 50                                                                                 50

 40                                                                                 40     0 .3                                                                               0 .3


 30                                                                                 30
                                                                                           0 .2                                                                               0 .2

 20                                                                                 20
                                                                                           0 .1                                                                               0 .1
 10                                                                                 10

                                                                                           0 .0                                                                               0 .0
   0                                                                                0

-1 0                                                                               -1 0    -0 .1                                                                             -0 .1
        0          5                 10                   15                  20                   0            5                 10                  15                20


                   Net Foreign Liabilities                                                                           Government Debt
                  (p ercen tag e p o in ts o f n o min al GDP)                                                (p ercen tag e p o in ts o f n o min al GDP)
   7                                                                               7       0 .2                                                                               0 .2

   6                                                                               6       0 .0                                                                               0 .0

                                                                                           -0 .2                                                                             -0 .2
   5                                                                               5
                                                                                           -0 .4                                                                             -0 .4
   4                                                                               4
                                                                                           -0 .6                                                                             -0 .6
   3                                                                               3
                                                                                           -0 .8                                                                             -0 .8
   2                                                                               2
                                                                                           -1 .0                                                                             -1 .0

   1                                                                               1       -1 .2                                                                             -1 .2
   0                                                                               0       -1 .4                                                                             -1 .4
        0          5                 10                   15                  20                   0            5                 10                  15                20
                                                                  Figure 13: Rest of the World


                                                                            Positive Productivity Shock in Emerging Asia


                  United States                                                                   Japan/Euro Area                                                              Remaining Countries
                 Output Growth                                                                     Output Growth                                                                 Output Growth
                            (p ercen t)                                                                       (p ercen t)                                                                    (p ercen t)
 0 .1 0                                                            0 .1 0          0 .1 5                                                               0 .1 5    0 .1 0                                                               0 .1 0

 0 .0 5                                                            0 .0 5
                                                                                   0 .1 0                                                               0 .1 0
                                                                                                                                                                  0 .0 5                                                               0 .0 5
 0 .0 0                                                            0 .0 0
                                                                                   0 .0 5                                                               0 .0 5
-0 .0 5                                                           -0 .0 5
                                                                                                                                                                  0 .0 0                                                               0 .0 0
                                                                                   0 .0 0                                                               0 .0 0
-0 .1 0                                                           -0 .1 0

-0 .1 5                                                           -0 .1 5         -0 .0 5                                                              -0 .0 5   -0 .0 5                                                              -0 .0 5
          0         5             10            15              20                          0         5             10            15              20                       0          5            10            15              20

              Trade and the Current Account                                                     Trade and the Current Account                                                  Trade and the Current Account
                 (percentage points of nominal GDP)                                                (percentage points of nominal GDP)                                             (percentage points of nominal GDP)
                 Trade balance                Current account                                      Trade balance                Current account                                   Trade balance                Current account
  0 .4                                                             0 .4            0 .1 0                                                               0 .1 0    0 .1 5                                                               0 .1 5

  0 .3                                                             0 .3                                                                                           0 .1 0                                                               0 .1 0
  0 .2                                                             0 .2            0 .0 5                                                               0 .0 5
                                                                                                                                                                  0 .0 5                                                               0 .0 5
  0 .1                                                             0 .1
                                                                                                                                                                  0 .0 0                                                               0 .0 0
  0 .0                                                             0 .0            0 .0 0                                                               0 .0 0

 -0 .1                                                            -0 .1                                                                                          -0 .0 5                                                              -0 .0 5

 -0 .2                                                            -0 .2           -0 .0 5                                                              -0 .0 5   -0 .1 0                                                              -0 .1 0
          0         5             10            15              20                          0         5             10            15              20                       0          5            10            15              20


  Real Effective Exchange Rate                                                     Real Effective Exchange Rate                                                   Real Effective Exchange Rate
                (p ercen t; +=d ep reciatio n )                                                   (p ercen t; +=d ep reciatio n )                                                (p ercen t; +=d ep reciatio n )
  1 .0                                                             1 .0             0 .1                                                                0 .1       0 .5                                                                0 .5

                                                                                    0 .0                                                                0 .0
  0 .5                                                             0 .5                                                                                            0 .0                                                                0 .0

                                                                                   -0 .1                                                               -0 .1
  0 .0                                                             0 .0                                                                                           -0 .5                                                               -0 .5
                                                                                   -0 .2                                                               -0 .2

 -0 .5                                                            -0 .5                                                                                           -1 .0                                                               -1 .0
                                                                                   -0 .3                                                               -0 .3

 -1 .0                                                            -1 .0            -0 .4                                                               -0 .4      -1 .5                                                               -1 .5
          0         5             10            15              20                          0         5             10            15              20                       0          5            10            15              20

              Real Interest Rates                                                               Real Interest Rates                                                             Real Interest Rates
                    (p ercen tag e p o in ts)                                                         (p ercen tag e p o in ts)                                                      (p ercen tag e p o in ts)
 0 .1 5                                                           0 .1 5           0 .1 2                                                              0 .1 2     0 .0 6                                                               0 .0 6

                                                                                   0 .1 0                                                              0 .1 0     0 .0 4                                                               0 .0 4
 0 .1 0                                                           0 .1 0           0 .0 8                                                              0 .0 8
                                                                                                                                                                  0 .0 2                                                               0 .0 2
                                                                                   0 .0 6                                                              0 .0 6
                                                                                                                                                                  0 .0 0                                                               0 .0 0
 0 .0 5                                                           0 .0 5           0 .0 4                                                              0 .0 4
                                                                                                                                                                 -0 .0 2                                                              -0 .0 2
                                                                                   0 .0 2                                                              0 .0 2
 0 .0 0                                                           0 .0 0           0 .0 0                                                              0 .0 0    -0 .0 4                                                              -0 .0 4
          0         5             10            15              20                          0         5             10            15              20                       0          5            10            15              20

          Year-on-Year Inflation                                                            Year-on-Year Inflation                                                         Year-on-Year Inflation
                    (p ercen tag e p o in ts)                                                         (p ercen tag e p o in ts)                                                      (p ercen tag e p o in ts)
 0 .0 4                                                           0 .0 4           0 .0 5                                                               0 .0 5    0 .0 3                                                               0 .0 3

                                                                                   0 .0 4                                                               0 .0 4
 0 .0 3                                                           0 .0 3                                                                                          0 .0 2                                                               0 .0 2
                                                                                   0 .0 3                                                               0 .0 3

 0 .0 2                                                           0 .0 2           0 .0 2                                                               0 .0 2    0 .0 1                                                               0 .0 1

                                                                                   0 .0 1                                                               0 .0 1
 0 .0 1                                                           0 .0 1                                                                                          0 .0 0                                                               0 .0 0
                                                                                   0 .0 0                                                               0 .0 0
 0 .0 0                                                           0 .0 0          -0 .0 1                                                              -0 .0 1   -0 .0 1                                                              -0 .0 1
          0         5             10            15              20                          0         5             10            15              20                       0          5            10            15              20
                                              Figure 14: Emerging Asia


                        Positive Fiscal Policy Shock in Emerging Asia, including Export Subsidies


            Real Effective Exchange Rate                                                          Trade Balance and the Current Account
                       (p ercen t; +=d ep reciatio n )                                                   (p ercen tag e p o in ts o f n o min al GDP)
  5                                                                                5
                                                                                                         Trad e B alan ce                  C u rren t Acco u n t
                                                                                         1                                                                              1
  0                                                                                0

                                                                                         0                                                                              0
 -5                                                                               -5

                                                                                         -1                                                                             -1
-1 0                                                                              -1 0

                                                                                         -2                                                                             -2
-1 5                                                                              -1 5


-2 0                                                                              -2 0   -3                                                                             -3


-2 5                                                                              -2 5   -4                                                                             -4
       0          5                 10                   15                  20               0            5                 10                  15                20


                      Real Interest Rate                                                                  Year-on-Year Inflation
                                (p ercen t)                                                                        (p ercen tag e p o in ts)
  2                                                                                2     8                                                                              8

                                                                                         7                                                                              7
  0                                                                                0
                                                                                         6                                                                              6
 -2                                                                               -2
                                                                                         5                                                                              5

 -4                                                                               -4     4                                                                              4

                                                                                         3                                                                              3
 -6                                                                               -6
                                                                                         2                                                                              2
 -8                                                                               -8
                                                                                         1                                                                              1
-1 0                                                                              -1 0   0                                                                              0
       0          5                 10                   15                  20               0            5                 10                  15                20

                       National Accounts                                                                       Government Deficit
                                 (perce nt)                                                              (p ercen tag e p o in ts o f n o min al GDP)
           GDP                     Consum ption               Inve stm ent               5                                                                              5
 30                                                                                30

 25                                                                                25    4                                                                              4

 20                                                                                20    3                                                                              3

 15                                                                                15
                                                                                         2                                                                              2
 10                                                                                10
                                                                                         1                                                                              1
  5                                                                                5
                                                                                         0                                                                              0
  0                                                                                0

 -5                                                                               -5     -1                                                                             -1
       0          5                 10                   15                  20               0            5                 10                  15                20


                  Net Foreign Liabilities                                                                       Government Debt
                 (p ercen tag e p o in ts o f n o min al GDP)                                            (p ercen tag e p o in ts o f n o min al GDP)
 15                                                                               15     12                                                                             12

                                                                                         10                                                                             10

                                                                                         8                                                                              8
 10                                                                               10
                                                                                         6                                                                              6

                                                                                         4                                                                              4
  5                                                                               5
                                                                                         2                                                                              2

                                                                                         0                                                                              0

  0                                                                               0      -2                                                                             -2
       0          5                 10                   15                  20               0            5                 10                  15                20
                                                                    Figure 15: Rest of the World


                                          Positive Fiscal Policy Shock in Emerging Asia, including Export Subsidies


                    United States                                                               Japan/Euro Area                                                              Remaining Countries
                   Output Growth                                                                 Output Growth                                                                 Output Growth
                              (p ercen t)                                                                   (p ercen t)                                                                    (p ercen t)
    0 .6                                                             0 .6            3                                                                3             3                                                                3


    0 .4                                                             0 .4            2                                                                2             2                                                                2


    0 .2                                                             0 .2            1                                                                1             1                                                                1


    0 .0                                                             0 .0            0                                                                0             0                                                                0

   -0 .2                                                            -0 .2           -1                                                               -1            -1                                                               -1
            0         5             10            15              20                      0         5             10            15              20                       0          5            10            15              20

                Trade and the Current Account                                                 Trade and the Current Account                                                  Trade and the Current Account
                   (percentage points of nominal GDP)                                            (percentage points of nominal GDP)                                             (percentage points of nominal GDP)
                   Trade balance                Current account                                  Trade balance                Current account                                   Trade balance                Current account
    0 .3                                                             0 .3         0 .4                                                                0 .4       0 .8                                                                0 .8

    0 .2                                                             0 .2         0 .3                                                                0 .3       0 .6                                                                0 .6

                                                                                                                                                                 0 .4                                                                0 .4
    0 .1                                                             0 .1         0 .2                                                                0 .2
                                                                                                                                                                 0 .2                                                                0 .2
    0 .0                                                             0 .0         0 .1                                                                0 .1
                                                                                                                                                                 0 .0                                                                0 .0
   -0 .1                                                            -0 .1         0 .0                                                                0 .0      -0 .2                                                               -0 .2
   -0 .2                                                            -0 .2        -0 .1                                                               -0 .1      -0 .4                                                               -0 .4
            0         5             10            15              20                      0         5             10            15              20                       0          5            10            15              20


   Real Effective Exchange Rate                                                  Real Effective Exchange Rate                                                   Real Effective Exchange Rate
                  (p ercen t; +=d ep reciatio n )                                               (p ercen t; +=d ep reciatio n )                                                (p ercen t; +=d ep reciatio n )
      2                                                              2            1 .0                                                                1 .0        10                                                                10

                                                                                                                                                                    8                                                               8
      1                                                              1            0 .5                                                                0 .5

                                                                                                                                                                    6                                                               6
      0                                                              0            0 .0                                                                0 .0
                                                                                                                                                                    4                                                               4

     -1                                                             -1           -0 .5                                                               -0 .5
                                                                                                                                                                    2                                                               2

     -2                                                             -2           -1 .0                                                               -1 .0          0                                                               0
            0         5             10            15              20                      0         5             10            15              20                       0          5            10            15              20

                Real Interest Rates                                                           Real Interest Rates                                                             Real Interest Rates
                      (p ercen tag e p o in ts)                                                     (p ercen tag e p o in ts)                                                      (p ercen tag e p o in ts)
  0 .0 4                                                             0 .0 4      0 .2 0                                                               0 .2 0    0 .2 0                                                               0 .2 0

                                                                                 0 .1 5                                                               0 .1 5    0 .1 5                                                               0 .1 5
  0 .0 2                                                             0 .0 2
                                                                                 0 .1 0                                                               0 .1 0    0 .1 0                                                               0 .1 0

  0 .0 0                                                             0 .0 0      0 .0 5                                                               0 .0 5    0 .0 5                                                               0 .0 5

                                                                                 0 .0 0                                                               0 .0 0    0 .0 0                                                               0 .0 0
 -0 .0 2                                                            -0 .0 2
                                                                                -0 .0 5                                                              -0 .0 5   -0 .0 5                                                              -0 .0 5
 -0 .0 4                                                            -0 .0 4     -0 .1 0                                                              -0 .1 0   -0 .1 0                                                              -0 .1 0
            0         5             10            15              20                      0         5             10            15              20                       0          5            10            15              20

            Year-on-Year Inflation                                                        Year-on-Year Inflation                                                         Year-on-Year Inflation
                      (p ercen tag e p o in ts)                                                     (p ercen tag e p o in ts)                                                      (p ercen tag e p o in ts)
 0 .0 1 0                                                            0 .0 1 0    0 .1 0                                                               0 .1 0    0 .0 6                                                               0 .0 6

 0 .0 0 5                                                            0 .0 0 5                                                                                   0 .0 4                                                               0 .0 4
                                                                                 0 .0 5                                                               0 .0 5
 0 .0 0 0                                                            0 .0 0 0
                                                                                                                                                                0 .0 2                                                               0 .0 2
-0 .0 0 5                                                           -0 .0 0 5    0 .0 0                                                               0 .0 0
                                                                                                                                                                0 .0 0                                                               0 .0 0
-0 .0 1 0                                                           -0 .0 1 0
                                                                                -0 .0 5                                                              -0 .0 5
-0 .0 1 5                                                           -0 .0 1 5                                                                                  -0 .0 2                                                              -0 .0 2

-0 .0 2 0                                                           -0 .0 2 0   -0 .1 0                                                              -0 .1 0   -0 .0 4                                                              -0 .0 4
            0         5             10            15              20                      0         5             10            15              20                       0          5            10            15              20
Figure 16: Forecasts from the IMF’s World Economic Outlook, 1999 to 2005


                                                                        United States

Real Effective Exchange Rate                                            Real Interest Rate                                Year-on-Year Inflation
       (+=d ep reciatio n ; in d ex : 1 9 9 0 =1 0 0 )                            (p ercen t)                                             (p ercen t)
130                                                  130   4                                                    4   6                                               6

120                                                120     3                                                    3
                                                                                                                    5                                               5

110                                                110     2                                                    2
                                                                                                                    4                                               4
100                                                100     1                                                    1
                                                                                                                    3                                               3
90                                                 90      0                                                    0

                                                                                                                    2                                               2
80                                                 80      -1                                               -1

70                                                 70      -2                                               -2      1                                               1
      19 90    19 95     20 00      20 05     20 10             19 90     19 95      20 00      20 05   20 10            19 90    19 95      20 00      20 05   20 10




               Trade Balance                                Current Account Balance                                          Government Deficit
      (p ercen tag e p o in ts o f n o min al GDP)              (p ercen tag e p o in ts o f n o min al GDP)             (p ercen tag e p o in ts o f n o min al GDP)
 0                                               0         1                                                    1   8                                                   8

 -1                                                -1      0                                                    0   6                                                   6

                                                           -1                                               -1
 -2                                                -2                                                               4                                                   4
                                                           -2                                               -2
 -3                                                -3                                                               2                                                   2
                                                           -3                                               -3
 -4                                                -4                                                               0                                                   0
                                                           -4                                               -4

 -5                                                -5      -5                                               -5      -2                                              -2

 -6                                                -6      -6                                               -6      -4                                              -4
      19 90    19 95     20 00      20 05     20 10             19 90     19 95      20 00      20 05   20 10            19 90    19 95      20 00      20 05   20 10




              Government Debt                                             Consumption                                               Investment
      (p ercen tag e p o in ts o f n o min al GDP)              (p ercen tag e p o in ts o f n o min al GDP)             (p ercen tag e p o in ts o f n o min al GDP)
70                                               70        71                                              71       22                                              22

                                                           70                                               70      21                                              21
60                                                 60

                                                           69                                               69      20                                              20
50                                                 50
                                                           68                                               68      19                                              19
40                                                 40
                                                           67                                               67      18                                              18

30                                                 30
                                                           66                                               66      17                                              17

20                                                 20      65                                               65      16                                              16
      19 90    19 95     20 00      20 05     20 10             19 90     19 95      20 00      20 05   20 10            19 90    19 95      20 00      20 05   20 10
                            Figure 17: The Baseline Scenario - United States


                                                                               (Levels)



Real Effective Exchange Rate                                        Real Interest Rate                                   Year-on-Year Inflation
      (+=d ep reciatio n ; in d ex : 1 9 9 0 =1 0 0 )                          (p ercen t)                                              (p ercen t)
115                                                 115   8                                                   8   4 .0                                             4 .0

110                                               110
                                                          6                                                   6   3 .5                                             3 .5
105                                               105

100                                               100     4                                                   4   3 .0                                             3 .0
95                                                95

90                                                90      2                                                   2   2 .5                                             2 .5

85                                                85
                                                          0                                                   0   2 .0                                             2 .0
80                                                80

75                                                75      -2                                              -2      1 .5                                             1 .5
           20 00         20 10        20 20                         20 00         20 10        20 20                          20 00        20 10        20 20




         Productivity Growth                                            Consumption                                                   Investment
                      (p ercen t)                              (p ercen tag e p o in ts o f n o min al GDP)              (p ercen tag e p o in ts o f n o min al GDP)
 5                                                   5    74                                              74       22                                               22

 4                                                   4
                                                          72                                              72       21                                              21

 3                                                   3
                                                          70                                              70       20                                              20
 2                                                   2
                                                          68                                              68       19                                              19
 1                                                   1

                                                          66                                              66       18                                              18
 0                                                   0

 -1                                               -1      64                                              64       17                                              17
           20 00         20 10        20 20                         20 00         20 10        20 20                          20 00        20 10        20 20




              Trade Balance                                          Current Account                                         Net Foreign Assets
      (p ercen tag e p o in ts o f n o min al GDP)             (p ercen tag e p o in ts o f n o min al GDP)              (p ercen tag e p o in ts o f n o min al GDP)
 6                                                   6    2                                                   2     0                                               0

 4                                                   4                                                            -1 0                                             -1 0
                                                          0                                                   0
                                                                                                                  -2 0                                             -2 0
 2                                                   2
                                                          -2                                              -2
                                                                                                                  -3 0                                             -3 0
 0                                                   0
                                                          -4                                              -4      -4 0                                             -4 0
 -2                                               -2
                                                                                                                  -5 0                                             -5 0
                                                          -6                                              -6
 -4                                               -4                                                              -6 0                                             -6 0

 -6                                               -6      -8                                              -8      -7 0                                             -7 0
           20 00         20 10        20 20                         20 00         20 10        20 20                          20 00        20 10        20 20




         Government Deficit                                         Government Debt
      (p ercen tag e p o in ts o f n o min al GDP)             (p ercen tag e p o in ts o f n o min al GDP)
 5                                                   5    65                                              65

 4                                                   4    60                                              60

 3                                                   3
                                                          55                                              55
 2                                                   2
                                                          50                                              50
 1                                                   1
                                                          45                                              45
 0                                                   0

 -1                                               -1      40                                              40

 -2                                               -2      35                                              35
           20 00         20 10        20 20                         20 00         20 10        20 20
                           Figure 18: The Baseline Scenario - Emerging Asia


                                                                                 (Levels)



Real Effective Exchange Rate                                          Real Interest Rate                                    Year-on-Year Inflation
      (+=d ep reciatio n ; in d ex : 1 9 9 0 =1 0 0 )                            (p ercen t)                                                (p ercen t)
135                                                 135    20                                                   20    14                                               14

130                                               130                                                                 12                                               12
                                                           15                                                   15
125                                               125
                                                                                                                      10                                               10
                                                           10                                                   10
120                                               120
                                                                                                                       8                                               8
115                                               115       5                                                   5
                                                                                                                       6                                               6
110                                               110
                                                            0                                                   0
                                                                                                                       4                                               4
105                                               105
                                                           -5                                               -5         2                                               2
100                                               100

95                                                95      -1 0                                              -1 0       0                                               0
           20 00         20 10        20 20                           20 00         20 10        20 20                           20 00         20 10        20 20




         Productivity Growth                                              Consumption                                                    Investment
                      (p ercen t)                                (p ercen tag e p o in ts o f n o min al GDP)               (p ercen tag e p o in ts o f n o min al GDP)
15                                                   15    62                                               62        40                                               40

                                                           60                                               60        38                                               38
10                                                   10    58                                               58
                                                                                                                      36                                               36
                                                           56                                               56
                                                                                                                      34                                               34
 5                                                   5     54                                               54
                                                                                                                      32                                               32
                                                           52                                               52
                                                                                                                      30                                               30
 0                                                   0     50                                               50

                                                           48                                               48        28                                               28

 -5                                               -5       46                                               46        26                                               26
           20 00         20 10        20 20                           20 00         20 10        20 20                           20 00         20 10        20 20




              Trade Balance                                            Current Account                                          Net Foreign Assets
      (p ercen tag e p o in ts o f n o min al GDP)               (p ercen tag e p o in ts o f n o min al GDP)               (p ercen tag e p o in ts o f n o min al GDP)
 8                                                   8     10                                                   10    50                                                   50

 6                                                   6      8                                                   8     40                                                   40

 4                                                   4      6                                                   6
                                                                                                                      30                                                   30
 2                                                   2      4                                                   4
                                                                                                                      20                                                   20
 0                                                   0      2                                                   2
                                                                                                                      10                                                   10
 -2                                               -2        0                                                   0

 -4                                               -4       -2                                               -2         0                                                   0

 -6                                               -6       -4                                               -4       -1 0                                              -1 0
           20 00         20 10        20 20                           20 00         20 10        20 20                           20 00         20 10        20 20




         Government Deficit                                           Government Debt
      (p ercen tag e p o in ts o f n o min al GDP)               (p ercen tag e p o in ts o f n o min al GDP)
 6                                                   6     30                                               30

 5                                                   5     25                                               25

 4                                                   4
                                                           20                                               20
 3                                                   3
                                                           15                                               15
 2                                                   2
                                                           10                                               10
 1                                                   1

 0                                                   0      5                                               5

 -1                                               -1        0                                               0
           20 00         20 10        20 20                           20 00         20 10        20 20
                 Figure 19: The Baseline Scenario - Japan and the Euro Area


                                                                                (Levels)



Real Effective Exchange Rate                                         Real Interest Rate                                      Year-on-Year Inflation
       (+=d ep reciatio n ; in d ex : 1 9 9 0 =1 0 0 )                          (p ercen t)                                                 (p ercen t)
110                                                  110   6                                                   6    3 .0                                                3 .0

105                                                105     5                                                   5
                                                                                                                    2 .5                                                2 .5
                                                           4                                                   4
100                                                100
                                                                                                                    2 .0                                                2 .0
                                                           3                                                   3
95                                                 95
                                                           2                                                   2    1 .5                                                1 .5
90                                                 90
                                                           1                                                   1
                                                                                                                    1 .0                                                1 .0
85                                                 85      0                                                   0

80                                                 80      -1                                              -1       0 .5                                                0 .5
            200 0         201 0        202 0                         200 0         201 0        202 0                            200 0         201 0         202 0




          Productivity Growth                                            Consumption                                                     Investment
                       (p ercen t)                              (p ercen tag e p o in ts o f n o min al GDP)                (p ercen tag e p o in ts o f n o min al GDP)
3 .0                                               3 .0    61                                               61     2 4 .5                                               2 4 .5

                                                           60                                              60      2 4 .0                                               2 4 .0
2 .5                                               2 .5
                                                                                                                   2 3 .5                                               2 3 .5
                                                           59                                              59
2 .0                                               2 .0
                                                                                                                   2 3 .0                                               2 3 .0
                                                           58                                              58
1 .5                                               1 .5                                                            2 2 .5                                               2 2 .5
                                                           57                                              57
                                                                                                                   2 2 .0                                               2 2 .0
1 .0                                               1 .0
                                                           56                                              56
                                                                                                                   2 1 .5                                               2 1 .5
0 .5                                               0 .5    55                                              55      2 1 .0                                               2 1 .0

0 .0                                               0 .0    54                                              54      2 0 .5                                               2 0 .5
            200 0         201 0        202 0                         200 0         201 0        202 0                            200 0         201 0         202 0




               Trade Balance                                          Current Account                                           Net Foreign Assets
       (p ercen tag e p o in ts o f n o min al GDP)             (p ercen tag e p o in ts o f n o min al GDP)                (p ercen tag e p o in ts o f n o min al GDP)
  3                                                   3    4                                                   4     25                                                 25

  2                                                   2    3                                                   3
                                                                                                                     20                                                 20

  1                                                   1    2                                                   2
                                                                                                                     15                                                 15
  0                                                   0    1                                                   1
                                                                                                                     10                                                 10
 -1                                                -1      0                                                   0

                                                                                                                      5                                                 5
 -2                                                -2      -1                                              -1

 -3                                                -3      -2                                              -2         0                                                 0
            200 0         201 0        202 0                         200 0         201 0        202 0                            200 0         201 0         202 0




          Government Deficit                                         Government Debt
       (p ercen tag e p o in ts o f n o min al GDP)             (p ercen tag e p o in ts o f n o min al GDP)
5 .5                                              5 .5     75                                               75

5 .0                                               5 .0
                                                           70                                              70
4 .5                                               4 .5

4 .0                                               4 .0    65                                              65
3 .5                                               3 .5

3 .0                                               3 .0    60                                              60

2 .5                                               2 .5
                                                           55                                              55
2 .0                                               2 .0

1 .5                                               1 .5    50                                              50
            200 0         201 0        202 0                         200 0         201 0        202 0
Figure 20: Loss of Appetite for US Assets - Benign Scenario Where the U.S. Current Account
De…cit Declines by 1.5 Percentage Points: Exchange Peg in Emerging Asia (Solid Lines)
and Move to Flexible Exchange Rates in Emerging Asia (Dashed Lines) [Deviation from
baseline]


                    United States                                     Emerging Asia                                  Japan/Euro Area                                    Remaining Countries
               Output Growth                                          Output Growth                                      Output Growth                                          Output Growth
                            (p ercent)                                            (p ercent)                                          (p ercent)                                             (p ercent)
        0 .5                                        0 .5         4                                        4       1 .0                                        1 .0       0 .6                                        0 .6

        0 .0                                        0 .0         2                                        2                                                              0 .4                                        0 .4
                                                                                                                  0 .5                                        0 .5
       -0 .5                                       -0 .5         0                                        0                                                              0 .2                                        0 .2
                                                                                                                  0 .0                                        0 .0
       -1 .0                                       -1 .0        -2                                       -2                                                              0 .0                                        0 .0

       -1 .5                                       -1 .5        -4                                       -4      -0 .5                                       -0 .5      -0 .2                                       -0 .2
                0       2     4     6      8 10                       0       2     4     6      8 10                     0       2     4     6      8 10                        0       2     4     6      8 10

      Current Account Balance                                Current Account Balance                            Current Account Balance                                Current Account Balance
      (percentage points of nominal GDP)                     (percentage points of nominal GDP)                 (percentage points of nominal GDP)                     (percentage points of nominal GDP)
        2 .0                                       2 .0          1                                        1       0 .0                                       0 .0        0 .2                                        0 .2

                                                                                                                                                                         0 .0                                        0 .0
        1 .5                                       1 .5          0                                        0
                                                                                                                 -0 .2                                       -0 .2
                                                                                                                                                                        -0 .2                                       -0 .2
        1 .0                                       1 .0         -1                                       -1
                                                                                                                                                                        -0 .4                                       -0 .4
                                                                                                                 -0 .4                                       -0 .4
        0 .5                                       0 .5         -2                                       -2
                                                                                                                                                                        -0 .6                                       -0 .6
        0 .0                                       0 .0         -3                                       -3      -0 .6                                       -0 .6      -0 .8                                       -0 .8
                0       2     4     6      8 10                       0       2     4     6      8 10                     0       2     4     6      8 10                        0       2     4     6      8 10

         Real Interest Rates                                   Real Interest Rates                                 Real Interest Rates                                    Real Interest Rates
                    (p ercen tage p o in ts)                              (p ercen tage p o in ts)                            (p ercen tage p o in ts)                               (p ercen tage p o in ts)
        0 .8                                       0 .8         10                                        10      0 .2                                        0 .2      0 .0 5                                       0 .0 5

        0 .6                                       0 .6                                                           0 .0                                        0 .0      0 .0 0                                       0 .0 0
                                                                 5                                        5
        0 .4                                       0 .4                                                          -0 .2                                       -0 .2     -0 .0 5                                      -0 .0 5
                                                                 0                                        0
        0 .2                                       0 .2                                                          -0 .4                                       -0 .4     -0 .1 0                                      -0 .1 0

        0 .0                                       0 .0         -5                                       -5      -0 .6                                       -0 .6     -0 .1 5                                      -0 .1 5
                0       2     4     6      8 10                       0       2     4     6      8 10                     0       2     4     6      8 10                        0       2     4     6      8 10

     Real Effective Exchange Rate                            Real Effective Exchange Rate                       Real Effective Exchange Rate                           Real Effective Exchange Rate
                    (p ercent; +=dep reciatio n)                          (p ercent; +=dep reciatio n)                        (p ercent; +=dep reciatio n)                           (p ercent; +=dep reciatio n)
           8                                        8            5                                        5          1                                        1          0 .5                                        0 .5

           6                                        6                                                                0                                        0
                                                                 0                                        0                                                              0 .0                                        0 .0
           4                                        4                                                               -1                                       -1

           2                                        2                                                               -2                                       -2
                                                                -5                                       -5                                                             -0 .5                                       -0 .5
           0                                        0                                                               -3                                       -3
          -2                                       -2          -1 0                                      -1 0       -4                                       -4         -1 .0                                       -1 .0
                0       2     4     6      8 10                       0       2     4     6      8 10                     0       2     4     6      8 10                        0       2     4     6      8 10

      Year-on-Year Inflation                                 Year-on-Year Inflation                             Year-on-Year Inflation                                 Year-on-Year Inflation
                    (percentage points)                                   (percentage points)                                 (percentage points)                                    (percentage points)
       0 .2 0                                       0 .2 0       4                                        4      0 .0 5                                       0 .0 5    0 .0 2                                       0 .0 2

       0 .1 5                                       0 .1 5       2                                        2      0 .0 0                                       0 .0 0
                                                                                                                                                                        0 .0 1                                       0 .0 1
       0 .1 0                                       0 .1 0       0                                        0     -0 .0 5                                      -0 .0 5
                                                                                                                                                                        0 .0 0                                       0 .0 0
       0 .0 5                                       0 .0 5      -2                                       -2     -0 .1 0                                      -0 .1 0
                                                                                                                                                                       -0 .0 1                                      -0 .0 1
       0 .0 0                                       0 .0 0      -4                                       -4     -0 .1 5                                      -0 .1 5
      -0 .0 5                                      -0 .0 5      -6                                       -6     -0 .2 0                                      -0 .2 0   -0 .0 2                                      -0 .0 2
                0       2     4     6      8 10                       0       2     4     6      8 10                     0       2     4     6      8 10                        0       2     4     6      8 10
 Figure 21: More Painful Current Account Reversal [Deviation from baseline]


             United States                                  Emerging Asia                                Japan/Euro Area                                 Remaining Countries
         Output Growth                                      Output Growth                                     Output Growth                                      Output Growth
                     (p ercen t)                                        (p ercen t)                                       (p ercen t)                                        (p ercen t)
    1                                       1          1                                       1       0 .5                                      0 .5     1 .0                                      1 .0

                                                                                                                                                          0 .5                                      0 .5
    0                                       0          0                                       0
                                                                                                       0 .0                                      0 .0
                                                                                                                                                          0 .0                                      0 .0
   -1                                      -1         -1                                      -1
                                                                                                                                                         -0 .5                                     -0 .5
                                                                                                      -0 .5                                     -0 .5
   -2                                      -2         -2                                      -2
                                                                                                                                                         -1 .0                                     -1 .0
   -3                                      -3         -3                                      -3      -1 .0                                     -1 .0    -1 .5                                     -1 .5
         0       2     4     6     8 10                     0       2     4     6     8 10                    0       2     4     6     8 10                     0       2     4     6     8 10

Current Account Balance                            Current Account Balance                           Current Account Balance                            Current Account Balance
(percentage points of nominal GDP)                 (percentage points of nominal GDP)                (percentage points of nominal GDP)                 (percentage points of nominal GDP)
    4                                      4           0                                      0        0 .0                                     0 .0      0 .5                                      0 .5

                                                      -1                                      -1
    3                                      3                                                                                                              0 .0                                      0 .0
                                                                                                      -0 .5                                     -0 .5
                                                      -2                                      -2
    2                                      2                                                                                                             -0 .5                                     -0 .5
                                                      -3                                      -3
                                                                                                      -1 .0                                     -1 .0
    1                                      1                                                                                                             -1 .0                                     -1 .0
                                                      -4                                      -4
    0                                      0          -5                                      -5      -1 .5                                     -1 .5    -1 .5                                     -1 .5
         0       2     4     6     8 10                     0       2     4     6     8 10                    0       2     4     6     8 10                     0       2     4     6     8 10


  Real Interest Rates                                Real Interest Rates                               Real Interest Rates                                Real Interest Rates
             (p ercen tag e p o in ts)                          (p ercen tag e p o in ts)                         (p ercen tag e p o in ts)                          (p ercen tag e p o in ts)
  2 .5                                     2 .5        6                                       6       0 .2                                      0 .2     1 .5                                      1 .5

  2 .0                                     2 .0
                                                       4                                       4       0 .0                                      0 .0     1 .0                                      1 .0
  1 .5                                     1 .5
                                                       2                                       2      -0 .2                                     -0 .2     0 .5                                      0 .5
  1 .0                                     1 .0
                                                       0                                       0      -0 .4                                     -0 .4     0 .0                                      0 .0
  0 .5                                     0 .5
  0 .0                                     0 .0       -2                                      -2      -0 .6                                     -0 .6    -0 .5                                     -0 .5
         0       2     4     6     8 10                     0       2     4     6     8 10                    0       2     4     6     8 10                     0       2     4     6     8 10

Real Effective Exchange Rate                       Real Effective Exchange Rate                      Real Effective Exchange Rate                       Real Effective Exchange Rate
             (p ercent; +=dep reciation)                        (p ercent; +=dep reciation)                       (p ercent; +=dep reciation)                        (p ercent; +=dep reciation)
  15                                        15         0                                      0          2                                       2        0 .5                                      0 .5

                                                      -2                                      -2
  10                                        10                                                           0                                       0        0 .0                                      0 .0
                                                      -4                                      -4
    5                                       5                                                           -2                                      -2       -0 .5                                     -0 .5
                                                      -6                                      -6
    0                                       0                                                           -4                                      -4       -1 .0                                     -1 .0
                                                      -8                                      -8
   -5                                      -5        -1 0                                     -1 0      -6                                      -6       -1 .5                                     -1 .5
         0       2     4     6     8 10                     0       2     4     6     8 10                    0       2     4     6     8 10                     0       2     4     6     8 10

Year-on-Year Inflation                             Year-on-Year Inflation                            Year-on-Year Inflation                             Year-on-Year Inflation
             (percentage points)                                (percentage points)                               (percentage points)                                (percentage points)
  0 .8                                      0 .8       0                                      0        0 .3                                      0 .3     0 .8                                      0 .8

  0 .6                                      0 .6                                                       0 .2                                      0 .2     0 .6                                      0 .6
                                                      -2                                      -2
  0 .4                                      0 .4                                                       0 .1                                      0 .1     0 .4                                      0 .4

  0 .2                                      0 .2                                                       0 .0                                      0 .0     0 .2                                      0 .2
                                                      -4                                      -4
  0 .0                                      0 .0                                                      -0 .1                                     -0 .1     0 .0                                      0 .0
 -0 .2                                     -0 .2      -6                                      -6      -0 .2                                     -0 .2    -0 .2                                     -0 .2
         0       2     4     6     8 10                     0       2     4     6     8 10                    0       2     4     6     8 10                     0       2     4     6     8 10
Figure 22: E¤ects of a Permanent Reduction in Government Debt through Tax Hikes:
Exchange Rate Peg in Emerging Asia (Solid Lines) and Move to Flexible Exchange Rates
in Emerging Asia (Dashed Lines) [Deviation from baseline]


                   United States                                    Emerging Asia                                         Japan/Euro Area                                         Remaining Countries
              Output Growth                                         Output Growth                                             Output Growth                                               Output Growth
                           (p ercen t)                                          (p ercen t)                                               (p ercen t)                                                  (p ercen t)
       0 .0                                      0 .0        1 .5                                           1 .5       0 .4                                           0 .4         0 .4                                            0 .4

                                                                                                                       0 .3                                           0 .3         0 .3                                            0 .3
                                                             1 .0                                           1 .0
      -0 .5                                      -0 .5
                                                                                                                       0 .2                                           0 .2         0 .2                                            0 .2
                                                             0 .5                                           0 .5
                                                                                                                       0 .1                                           0 .1         0 .1                                            0 .1
      -1 .0                                      -1 .0
                                                             0 .0                                           0 .0
                                                                                                                       0 .0                                           0 .0         0 .0                                            0 .0
      -1 .5                                      -1 .5      -0 .5                                          -0 .5      -0 .1                                          -0 .1        -0 .1                                           -0 .1
               0       2     4     6     8 10                       0       2     4     6     8       10                      0       2     4     6     8       10                         0       2     4     6     8       10

     Current Account Balance                               Current Account Balance                                  Current Account Balance                                      Current Account Balance
      (percentage points of nominal GDP)                   (percentage points of nominal GDP)                        (percentage points of nominal GDP)                          (percentage points of nominal GDP)
          3                                      3           0 .0                                          0 .0        0 .0                                          0 .0          0 .0                                           0 .0

                                                            -0 .5                                          -0 .5      -0 .2                                          -0 .2
          2                                      2                                                                                                                                -0 .5                                           -0 .5
                                                            -1 .0                                          -1 .0      -0 .4                                          -0 .4

                                                            -1 .5                                          -1 .5      -0 .6                                          -0 .6
          1                                      1                                                                                                                                -1 .0                                           -1 .0
                                                            -2 .0                                          -2 .0      -0 .8                                          -0 .8
          0                                      0          -2 .5                                          -2 .5      -1 .0                                          -1 .0        -1 .5                                           -1 .5
               0       2     4     6     8 10                       0       2     4     6     8       10                      0       2     4     6     8       10                         0       2     4     6     8       10


        Real Interest Rates                                  Real Interest Rates                                       Real Interest Rates                                          Real Interest Rates
                   (p ercen tag e p o in ts)                            (p ercen tag e p o in ts)                                 (p ercen tag e p o in ts)                                    (p ercen tag e p o in ts)
      0 .2 0                                      0 .2 0     0 .5                                           0 .5     0 .0 1                                           0 .0 1      0 .0 5                                           0 .0 5

      0 .1 5                                      0 .1 5                                                             0 .0 0                                           0 .0 0
                                                             0 .0                                           0 .0                                                                  0 .0 0                                           0 .0 0
      0 .1 0                                      0 .1 0                                                            -0 .0 1                                          -0 .0 1
                                                            -0 .5                                          -0 .5                                                                 -0 .0 5                                          -0 .0 5
      0 .0 5                                      0 .0 5                                                            -0 .0 2                                          -0 .0 2
                                                            -1 .0                                          -1 .0                                                                 -0 .1 0                                          -0 .1 0
      0 .0 0                                      0 .0 0                                                            -0 .0 3                                          -0 .0 3
     -0 .0 5                                     -0 .0 5    -1 .5                                          -1 .5    -0 .0 4                                          -0 .0 4     -0 .1 5                                          -0 .1 5
               0       2     4     6     8 10                       0       2     4     6     8       10                      0       2     4     6     8       10                         0       2     4     6     8       10

     Real Effective Exchange Rate                          Real Effective Exchange Rate                            Real Effective Exchange Rate                                  Real Effective Exchange Rate
                   (p ercent; +=dep reciation)                          (p ercent; +=dep reciation)                               (p ercent; +=dep reciation)                                  (p ercent; +=dep reciation)
          4                                      4           1 .5                                           1 .5       0 .0                                          0 .0          0 .0                                           0 .0

                                                             1 .0                                           1 .0                                                                  -0 .2                                           -0 .2
          3                                      3
                                                                                                                      -0 .5                                          -0 .5
                                                             0 .5                                           0 .5                                                                  -0 .4                                           -0 .4
          2                                      2
                                                             0 .0                                           0 .0                                                                  -0 .6                                           -0 .6
                                                                                                                      -1 .0                                          -1 .0
          1                                      1
                                                            -0 .5                                          -0 .5                                                                  -0 .8                                           -0 .8
          0                                      0          -1 .0                                          -1 .0      -1 .5                                          -1 .5        -1 .0                                           -1 .0
               0       2     4     6     8 10                       0       2     4     6     8       10                      0       2     4     6     8       10                         0       2     4     6     8       10

     Year-on-Year Inflation                                Year-on-Year Inflation                                   Year-on-Year Inflation                                       Year-on-Year Inflation
                   (percentage points)                                  (percentage points)                                       (percentage points)                                          (percentage points)
      0 .0 6                                      0 .0 6     1 .5                                           1 .5    0 .0 1 5                                          0 .0 1 5    0 .0 1                                           0 .0 1

      0 .0 4                                      0 .0 4                                                            0 .0 1 0                                          0 .0 1 0    0 .0 0                                           0 .0 0
                                                             1 .0                                           1 .0
      0 .0 2                                      0 .0 2                                                            0 .0 0 5                                          0 .0 0 5   -0 .0 1                                          -0 .0 1
                                                             0 .5                                           0 .5
      0 .0 0                                      0 .0 0                                                            0 .0 0 0                                          0 .0 0 0   -0 .0 2                                          -0 .0 2
                                                             0 .0                                           0 .0
     -0 .0 2                                     -0 .0 2                                                           -0 .0 0 5                                         -0 .0 0 5   -0 .0 3                                          -0 .0 3
     -0 .0 4                                     -0 .0 4    -0 .5                                          -0 .5   -0 .0 1 0                                         -0 .0 1 0   -0 .0 4                                          -0 .0 4
               0       2     4     6     8 10                       0       2     4     6     8       10                    0         2     4     6     8       10                         0       2     4     6     8       10
Figure 23: E¤ects of a Permanent Reduction in Government Debt through Tax Hikes:
Sensitivity Analysis with Alternative Assumptions on the Link Between Government Debt
and Net Foreign Liabilities [Deviations from baseline]

                    United States                                    Emerging Asia                                         Japan/Euro Area                                         Remaining Countries

               Output Growth                                         Output Growth                                             Output Growth                                               Output Growth
                            (p ercen t)                                          (p ercen t)                                               (p ercen t)                                                  (p ercen t)
        0 .0                                      0 .0        2 .0                                           2 .0       0 .5                                           0 .5         0 .6                                            0 .6

                                                                                                                        0 .4                                           0 .4
                                                              1 .5                                           1 .5
                                                                                                                                                                                    0 .4                                            0 .4
       -0 .5                                      -0 .5                                                                 0 .3                                           0 .3
                                                              1 .0                                           1 .0
                                                                                                                        0 .2                                           0 .2         0 .2                                            0 .2
                                                              0 .5                                           0 .5
       -1 .0                                      -1 .0                                                                 0 .1                                           0 .1
                                                                                                                                                                                    0 .0                                            0 .0
                                                              0 .0                                           0 .0       0 .0                                           0 .0
       -1 .5                                      -1 .5      -0 .5                                          -0 .5      -0 .1                                          -0 .1        -0 .2                                           -0 .2
                0       2     4     6     8 10                       0       2     4     6     8       10                      0       2     4     6     8       10                         0       2     4     6     8       10

     Current Account Balance                                Current Account Balance                                  Current Account Balance                                      Current Account Balance
      (percentage points of nominal GDP)                    (percentage points of nominal GDP)                        (percentage points of nominal GDP)                          (percentage points of nominal GDP)
        3 .0                                      3 .0        0 .0                                          0 .0        0 .0                                          0 .0          0 .0                                           0 .0

        2 .5                                      2 .5       -0 .5                                          -0 .5      -0 .2                                          -0 .2

        2 .0                                      2 .0                                                                                                                             -0 .5                                           -0 .5
                                                             -1 .0                                          -1 .0      -0 .4                                          -0 .4
        1 .5                                      1 .5
                                                             -1 .5                                          -1 .5      -0 .6                                          -0 .6
        1 .0                                      1 .0                                                                                                                             -1 .0                                           -1 .0
                                                             -2 .0                                          -2 .0      -0 .8                                          -0 .8
        0 .5                                      0 .5

        0 .0                                      0 .0       -2 .5                                          -2 .5      -1 .0                                          -1 .0        -1 .5                                           -1 .5
                0       2     4     6     8 10                       0       2     4     6     8       10                      0       2     4     6     8       10                         0       2     4     6     8       10

         Real Interest Rates                                  Real Interest Rates                                       Real Interest Rates                                          Real Interest Rates
       0 .2 0                                      0 .2 0     0 .5                                           0 .5     0 .0 1                                           0 .0 1      0 .0 5                                           0 .0 5


       0 .1 5                                      0 .1 5     0 .0                                           0 .0     0 .0 0                                           0 .0 0
                                                                                                                                                                                   0 .0 0                                           0 .0 0

       0 .1 0                                      0 .1 0    -0 .5                                          -0 .5    -0 .0 1                                          -0 .0 1
                                                                                                                                                                                  -0 .0 5                                          -0 .0 5
       0 .0 5                                      0 .0 5    -1 .0                                          -1 .0    -0 .0 2                                          -0 .0 2

                                                                                                                                                                                  -0 .1 0                                          -0 .1 0
       0 .0 0                                      0 .0 0    -1 .5                                          -1 .5    -0 .0 3                                          -0 .0 3

      -0 .0 5                                     -0 .0 5    -2 .0                                          -2 .0    -0 .0 4                                          -0 .0 4     -0 .1 5                                          -0 .1 5
                0       2     4     6     8 10                       0       2     4     6     8       10                      0       2     4     6     8       10                         0       2     4     6     8       10

     Real Effective Exchange Rate                           Real Effective Exchange Rate                            Real Effective Exchange Rate                                  Real Effective Exchange Rate
                    (p ercent; +=dep reciation)                          (p ercent; +=dep reciation)                               (p ercent; +=dep reciation)                                  (p ercent; +=dep reciation)
        3 .5                                      3 .5        2 .0                                           2 .0       0 .0                                          0 .0          0 .0                                           0 .0

        3 .0                                      3 .0        1 .5                                           1 .5                                                                  -0 .2                                           -0 .2
        2 .5                                      2 .5
                                                              1 .0                                           1 .0      -0 .5                                          -0 .5        -0 .4                                           -0 .4
        2 .0                                      2 .0
                                                              0 .5                                           0 .5                                                                  -0 .6                                           -0 .6
        1 .5                                      1 .5
                                                              0 .0                                           0 .0      -1 .0                                          -1 .0        -0 .8                                           -0 .8
        1 .0                                      1 .0

        0 .5                                      0 .5       -0 .5                                          -0 .5                                                                  -1 .0                                           -1 .0

        0 .0                                      0 .0       -1 .0                                          -1 .0      -1 .5                                          -1 .5        -1 .2                                           -1 .2
                0       2     4     6     8 10                       0       2     4     6     8       10                      0       2     4     6     8       10                         0       2     4     6     8       10

      Year-on-Year Inflation                                Year-on-Year Inflation                                   Year-on-Year Inflation                                       Year-on-Year Inflation
                    (percentage points)                                  (percentage points)                                       (percentage points)                                          (percentage points)
       0 .0 6                                      0 .0 6     2 .0                                           2 .0    0 .0 1 5                                          0 .0 1 5    0 .0 1                                           0 .0 1

       0 .0 4                                      0 .0 4     1 .5                                           1 .5    0 .0 1 0                                          0 .0 1 0    0 .0 0                                           0 .0 0

       0 .0 2                                      0 .0 2     1 .0                                           1 .0    0 .0 0 5                                          0 .0 0 5   -0 .0 1                                          -0 .0 1

       0 .0 0                                      0 .0 0     0 .5                                           0 .5    0 .0 0 0                                          0 .0 0 0   -0 .0 2                                          -0 .0 2

      -0 .0 2                                     -0 .0 2     0 .0                                           0 .0   -0 .0 0 5                                         -0 .0 0 5   -0 .0 3                                          -0 .0 3

      -0 .0 4                                     -0 .0 4    -0 .5                                          -0 .5   -0 .0 1 0                                         -0 .0 1 0   -0 .0 4                                          -0 .0 4
                0       2     4     6     8 10                       0       2     4     6     8       10                    0         2     4     6     8       10                         0       2     4     6     8       10
Figure 24: E¤ects of a Permanent Reduction in Government Debt through Tax Hikes:
Sensitivity Analysis using GFM Comparing a Planning Horizon of 10 Years (Solid Lines)
with a Planning Horizon of 20 Years (Dashed Lines) [Deviations from baseline]


                United States                                   Emerging Asia                                Japan/Euro Area                              Remaining Countries
              Output Growth                                    Output Growth                                    Output Growth                                    Output Growth
                       (p ercen t)                                      (p ercen t)                                      (p ercen t)                                      (p ercen t)
       0 .5                                    0 .5    0 .2 5                                 0 .2 5     0 .4                                    0 .4    0 .2 5                                  0 .2 5

                                                       0 .2 0                                 0 .2 0     0 .3                                    0 .3    0 .2 0                                  0 .2 0
       0 .0                                    0 .0
                                                       0 .1 5                                 0 .1 5     0 .2                                    0 .2    0 .1 5                                  0 .1 5
      -0 .5                                   -0 .5
                                                       0 .1 0                                 0 .1 0     0 .1                                    0 .1    0 .1 0                                  0 .1 0
      -1 .0                                   -1 .0
                                                       0 .0 5                                 0 .0 5     0 .0                                    0 .0    0 .0 5                                  0 .0 5
      -1 .5                                   -1 .5    0 .0 0                                 0 .0 0    -0 .1                                   -0 .1    0 .0 0                                  0 .0 0
           0      2     4     6      8   10                 0      2     4     6      8 10                   0      2     4     6      8   10                 0      2     4     6      8   10

     Current Account Balance                          Current Account Balance                          Current Account Balance                          Current Account Balance
      (percentage points of nominal GDP)              (percentage points of nominal GDP)               (percentage points of nominal GDP)               (percentage points of nominal GDP)
       2 .5                                   2 .5      0 .0                                  0 .0       0 .0                                   0 .0      0 .0                                   0 .0

       2 .0                                   2 .0                                                                                                       -0 .2                                   -0 .2
                                                                                                        -0 .2                                   -0 .2
                                                       -0 .5                                  -0 .5
       1 .5                                   1 .5                                                                                                       -0 .4                                   -0 .4
                                                                                                        -0 .4                                   -0 .4
       1 .0                                   1 .0                                                                                                       -0 .6                                   -0 .6
                                                       -1 .0                                  -1 .0
                                                                                                        -0 .6                                   -0 .6
       0 .5                                   0 .5                                                                                                       -0 .8                                   -0 .8
       0 .0                                   0 .0     -1 .5                                  -1 .5     -0 .8                                   -0 .8    -1 .0                                   -1 .0
           0      2     4     6      8   10                 0      2     4     6      8 10                   0      2     4     6      8   10                 0      2     4     6      8   10


        Real Interest Rates                              Real Interest Rates                             Real Interest Rates                               Real Interest Rates
               (p ercen tag e p o in ts)                        (p ercen tag e p o in ts)                        (p ercen tag e p o in ts)                        (p ercen tag e p o in ts)
       0 .0                                   0 .0      0 .4                                   0 .4      0 .4                                    0 .4     0 .4                                    0 .4

                                                        0 .2                                   0 .2                                                       0 .2                                    0 .2
      -0 .2                                   -0 .2                                                      0 .2                                    0 .2
                                                        0 .0                                   0 .0                                                       0 .0                                    0 .0
      -0 .4                                   -0 .4                                                      0 .0                                    0 .0
                                                       -0 .2                                  -0 .2                                                      -0 .2                                   -0 .2
      -0 .6                                   -0 .6                                                     -0 .2                                   -0 .2
                                                       -0 .4                                  -0 .4                                                      -0 .4                                   -0 .4
      -0 .8                                   -0 .8    -0 .6                                  -0 .6     -0 .4                                   -0 .4    -0 .6                                   -0 .6
           0      2     4     6      8   10                 0      2     4     6      8 10                   0      2     4     6      8   10                 0      2     4     6      8   10

     Real Effective Exchange Rate                     Real Effective Exchange Rate                     Real Effective Exchange Rate                     Real Effective Exchange Rate
               (p ercent; +=dep reciation)                      (p ercent; +=dep reciation)                      (p ercent; +=dep reciation)                      (p ercent; +=dep reciation)
         6                                    6         0 .0                                  0 .0       0 .0                                   0 .0      0 .0                                   0 .0

                                                       -0 .1                                  -0 .1     -0 .5                                   -0 .5
         4                                    4                                                                                                          -0 .5                                   -0 .5
                                                       -0 .2                                  -0 .2     -1 .0                                   -1 .0

                                                       -0 .3                                  -0 .3     -1 .5                                   -1 .5
         2                                    2                                                                                                          -1 .0                                   -1 .0
                                                       -0 .4                                  -0 .4     -2 .0                                   -2 .0
         0                                    0        -0 .5                                  -0 .5     -2 .5                                   -2 .5    -1 .5                                   -1 .5
          0       2     4     6      8   10                 0      2     4     6      8 10                   0      2     4     6      8   10                 0      2     4     6      8   10

      Year-on-Year Inflation                          Year-on-Year Inflation                           Year-on-Year Inflation                           Year-on-Year Inflation
               (percentage points)                              (percentage points)                              (percentage points)                              (percentage points)
       0 .5                                    0 .5     0 .0                                  0 .0       0 .0                                   0 .0      0 .0                                   0 .0

                                                                                                        -0 .5                                   -0 .5    -0 .5                                   -0 .5
       0 .0                                    0 .0    -0 .5                                  -0 .5
                                                                                                        -1 .0                                   -1 .0    -1 .0                                   -1 .0

                                                                                                        -1 .5                                   -1 .5    -1 .5                                   -1 .5
      -0 .5                                   -0 .5    -1 .0                                  -1 .0
                                                                                                        -2 .0                                   -2 .0    -2 .0                                   -2 .0
      -1 .0                                   -1 .0    -1 .5                                  -1 .5     -2 .5                                   -2 .5    -2 .5                                   -2 .5
           0      2     4     6      8   10                 0      2     4     6      8 10                   0      2     4     6      8   10                 0      2     4     6      8   10
Figure 25: E¤ects of a Permanent Reduction in Government Debt through Tax Hikes (Solid
Lines) and Expenditure Cuts (Dashed Lines) [Deviations from baseline]


                  United States                                  Emerging Asia                                         Japan/Euro Area                                         Remaining Countries
              Output Growth                                      Output Growth                                             Output Growth                                               Output Growth
                          (p ercen t)                                        (p ercen t)                                               (p ercen t)                                                  (p ercen t)
         2                                       2        1 .5                                           1 .5       0 .4                                           0 .4         1 .0                                            1 .0

         1                                       1                                                                  0 .3                                           0 .3
                                                          1 .0                                           1 .0
                                                                                                                                                                                0 .5                                            0 .5
         0                                       0                                                                  0 .2                                           0 .2
                                                          0 .5                                           0 .5
        -1                                      -1                                                                  0 .1                                           0 .1
                                                                                                                                                                                0 .0                                            0 .0
                                                          0 .0                                           0 .0
        -2                                      -2                                                                  0 .0                                           0 .0
        -3                                      -3       -0 .5                                          -0 .5      -0 .1                                          -0 .1        -0 .5                                           -0 .5
              0       2     4     6     8 10                     0       2     4     6     8       10                      0       2     4     6     8       10                         0       2     4     6     8       10

     Current Account Balance                            Current Account Balance                                  Current Account Balance                                      Current Account Balance
      (percentage points of nominal GDP)                (percentage points of nominal GDP)                        (percentage points of nominal GDP)                          (percentage points of nominal GDP)
       2 .0                                     2 .0      0 .0                                          0 .0        0 .0                                          0 .0          0 .0                                           0 .0

                                                                                                                                                                               -0 .2                                           -0 .2
       1 .5                                     1 .5     -0 .5                                          -0 .5      -0 .2                                          -0 .2
                                                                                                                                                                               -0 .4                                           -0 .4
       1 .0                                     1 .0     -1 .0                                          -1 .0      -0 .4                                          -0 .4
                                                                                                                                                                               -0 .6                                           -0 .6
       0 .5                                     0 .5     -1 .5                                          -1 .5      -0 .6                                          -0 .6
                                                                                                                                                                               -0 .8                                           -0 .8
       0 .0                                     0 .0     -2 .0                                          -2 .0      -0 .8                                          -0 .8        -1 .0                                           -1 .0
              0       2     4     6     8 10                     0       2     4     6     8       10                      0       2     4     6     8       10                         0       2     4     6     8       10


        Real Interest Rates                               Real Interest Rates                                       Real Interest Rates                                          Real Interest Rates
                  (p ercen tag e p o in ts)                          (p ercen tag e p o in ts)                                 (p ercen tag e p o in ts)                                    (p ercen tag e p o in ts)
       0 .2                                      0 .2     0 .5                                           0 .5     0 .0 4                                           0 .0 4       0 .1                                            0 .1

       0 .0                                      0 .0     0 .0                                           0 .0
                                                                                                                  0 .0 2                                           0 .0 2       0 .0                                            0 .0
      -0 .2                                     -0 .2    -0 .5                                          -0 .5
                                                                                                                  0 .0 0                                           0 .0 0      -0 .1                                           -0 .1
      -0 .4                                     -0 .4    -1 .0                                          -1 .0
                                                                                                                 -0 .0 2                                          -0 .0 2      -0 .2                                           -0 .2
      -0 .6                                     -0 .6    -1 .5                                          -1 .5
      -0 .8                                     -0 .8    -2 .0                                          -2 .0    -0 .0 4                                          -0 .0 4      -0 .3                                           -0 .3
              0       2     4     6     8 10                     0       2     4     6     8       10                      0       2     4     6     8       10                         0       2     4     6     8       10

     Real Effective Exchange Rate                       Real Effective Exchange Rate                            Real Effective Exchange Rate                                  Real Effective Exchange Rate
                  (p ercent; +=dep reciation)                        (p ercent; +=dep reciation)                               (p ercent; +=dep reciation)                                  (p ercent; +=dep reciation)
         3                                      3         1 .5                                           1 .5       0 .0                                          0 .0          0 .0                                           0 .0

                                                          1 .0                                           1 .0
         2                                      2                                                                  -0 .5                                          -0 .5        -0 .5                                           -0 .5
                                                          0 .5                                           0 .5

                                                          0 .0                                           0 .0
         1                                      1                                                                  -1 .0                                          -1 .0        -1 .0                                           -1 .0
                                                         -0 .5                                          -0 .5
         0                                      0        -1 .0                                          -1 .0      -1 .5                                          -1 .5        -1 .5                                           -1 .5
              0       2     4     6     8 10                     0       2     4     6     8       10                      0       2     4     6     8       10                         0       2     4     6     8       10

      Year-on-Year Inflation                            Year-on-Year Inflation                                   Year-on-Year Inflation                                       Year-on-Year Inflation
                  (percentage points)                                (percentage points)                                       (percentage points)                                          (percentage points)
       0 .2                                      0 .2     1 .5                                           1 .5    0 .0 1 5                                          0 .0 1 5    0 .0 5                                           0 .0 5

                                                                                                                 0 .0 1 0                                          0 .0 1 0
       0 .0                                      0 .0     1 .0                                           1 .0                                                                  0 .0 0                                           0 .0 0
                                                                                                                 0 .0 0 5                                          0 .0 0 5
      -0 .2                                     -0 .2     0 .5                                           0 .5                                                                 -0 .0 5                                          -0 .0 5
                                                                                                                 0 .0 0 0                                          0 .0 0 0
      -0 .4                                     -0 .4     0 .0                                           0 .0                                                                 -0 .1 0                                          -0 .1 0
                                                                                                                -0 .0 0 5                                         -0 .0 0 5
      -0 .6                                     -0 .6    -0 .5                                          -0 .5   -0 .0 1 0                                         -0 .0 1 0   -0 .1 5                                          -0 .1 5
              0       2     4     6     8 10                     0       2     4     6     8       10                    0         2     4     6     8       10                         0       2     4     6     8       10
Figure 26: Estimated E¤ects of More Competition-Friendly Policies in Japan and the Euro
Area: Financed by All Other Regional Blocs (Solid Lines) and Financed Only by the United
States (Dashed Lines) [Deviations from baseline]


                    United States                                     Emerging Asia                                   Japan/Euro Area                                 Remaining Countries
               Output Growth                                          Output Growth                                       Output Growth                                       Output Growth
                            (p ercent)                                            (p ercent)                                          (p ercent)                                          (p ercent)
        0 .5                                        0 .5         2                                        2          3                                       3         1 .0                                       1 .0

                                                                                                                                                                       0 .5                                       0 .5
        0 .0                                        0 .0         1                                        1          2                                       2
                                                                                                                                                                       0 .0                                       0 .0
       -0 .5                                       -0 .5         0                                        0          1                                       1
                                                                                                                                                                      -0 .5                                      -0 .5

       -1 .0                                       -1 .0        -1                                       -1          0                                       0        -1 .0                                      -1 .0
                0       2     4      6     8 10                       0       2     4      6     8 10                     0       2     4      6     8 10                     0       2     4      6     8 10

      Current Account Balance                                Current Account Balance                             Current Account Balance                             Current Account Balance
      (percentage points of nominal GDP)                     (percentage points of nominal GDP)                  (percentage points of nominal GDP)                  (percentage points of nominal GDP)
        1 .5                                       1 .5        2 .0                                       2 .0     0 .0                                      0 .0      2 .0                                       2 .0

                                                               1 .5                                       1 .5                                                         1 .5                                       1 .5
                                                                                                                  -0 .5                                      -0 .5
        1 .0                                       1 .0
                                                               1 .0                                       1 .0                                                         1 .0                                       1 .0
                                                                                                                  -1 .0                                      -1 .0
                                                               0 .5                                       0 .5                                                         0 .5                                       0 .5
        0 .5                                       0 .5
                                                                                                                  -1 .5                                      -1 .5
                                                               0 .0                                       0 .0                                                         0 .0                                       0 .0
        0 .0                                       0 .0       -0 .5                                      -0 .5    -2 .0                                      -2 .0    -0 .5                                      -0 .5
                0       2     4      6     8 10                       0       2     4      6     8 10                     0       2     4      6     8 10                     0       2     4      6     8 10

         Real Interest Rates                                   Real Interest Rates                                 Real Interest Rates                                 Real Interest Rates
                    (p ercen tage p o in ts)                              (p ercen tage p o in ts)                            (p ercen tage p o in ts)                            (p ercen tage p o in ts)
        0 .6                                        0 .6         1                                        1        0 .5                                      0 .5      1 .5                                       1 .5

                                                                                                                   0 .0                                      0 .0
        0 .4                                        0 .4                                                                                                               1 .0                                       1 .0
                                                                 0                                        0
                                                                                                                  -0 .5                                      -0 .5
        0 .2                                        0 .2                                                                                                               0 .5                                       0 .5
                                                                                                                  -1 .0                                      -1 .0
                                                                -1                                       -1
        0 .0                                        0 .0                                                                                                               0 .0                                       0 .0
                                                                                                                  -1 .5                                      -1 .5
       -0 .2                                       -0 .2        -2                                       -2       -2 .0                                      -2 .0    -0 .5                                      -0 .5
                0       2     4      6     8 10                       0       2     4      6     8 10                     0       2     4      6     8 10                     0       2     4      6     8 10

     Real Effective Exchange Rate                            Real Effective Exchange Rate                        Real Effective Exchange Rate                        Real Effective Exchange Rate
                    (p ercent; +=dep reciatio n)                          (p ercent; +=dep reciatio n)                        (p ercent; +=dep reciatio n)                        (p ercent; +=dep reciatio n)
           6                                        6            6                                        6          5                                       5           4                                        4

           4                                        4            4                                        4
                                                                                                                     0                                       0           2                                        2
           2                                        2            2                                        2
                                                                                                                    -5                                       -5          0                                        0
           0                                        0            0                                        0

          -2                                       -2           -2                                       -2        -1 0                                      -1 0       -2                                       -2
                0       2     4      6     8 10                       0       2     4      6     8 10                     0       2     4      6     8 10                     0       2     4      6     8 10

      Year-on-Year Inflation                                 Year-on-Year Inflation                              Year-on-Year Inflation                              Year-on-Year Inflation
                    (percentage points)                                   (percentage points)                                 (percentage points)                                 (percentage points)
       0 .2 0                                       0 .2 0     2 .0                                       2 .0     0 .2                                      0 .2      0 .6                                       0 .6

       0 .1 5                                       0 .1 5     1 .5                                       1 .5     0 .0                                      0 .0
                                                                                                                                                                       0 .4                                       0 .4
       0 .1 0                                       0 .1 0     1 .0                                       1 .0    -0 .2                                      -0 .2
                                                                                                                                                                       0 .2                                       0 .2
       0 .0 5                                       0 .0 5     0 .5                                       0 .5    -0 .4                                      -0 .4
                                                                                                                                                                       0 .0                                       0 .0
       0 .0 0                                       0 .0 0     0 .0                                       0 .0    -0 .6                                      -0 .6
      -0 .0 5                                      -0 .0 5    -0 .5                                      -0 .5    -0 .8                                      -0 .8    -0 .2                                      -0 .2
                0       2     4      6     8 10                       0       2     4      6     8 10                     0       2     4      6     8 10                     0       2     4      6     8 10
