NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

A GLOBAL PERSPECTIVE ON EXTERNAL POSITIONS
Philip R. Lane
Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti
Working Paper 11589
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11589
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2005

This paper has been prepared for the NBER conference G7 Current Account Imbalances: Sustainability and
Adjustment. We thank our discussant Richard Portes and the other conference participants for useful
comments. We also thank Vahagn Galstyan for excellent research assistance, Frank Warnock for helpful
advice, and Jaewoo Lee, Dermot McAleese, Danny McCoy, and Alessandro Rebucci, for useful comments.
We also thank and seminar participants at Harvard, the International Monetary Fund and the University of
Virginia for helpful feedback. Parts of this paper were written while Lane was a visiting scholar at the
International Monetary Fund, Centre for Economic Performance (LSE) and Harvard-NBER. Lane also
gratefully acknowledges the financial support of a Government of Ireland Research Fellowship, the Irish
Research Council on Humanities and Social Sciences (IRCHSS) and the HEA-PRTLI grant to the IIIS. The
views expressed here are the authors' only and do not represent those of the IMF. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
©2005 by Philip R. Lane and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

A Global Perspective on External Positions
Philip R. Lane and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti
NBER Working Paper No. 11589
August 2005
JEL No. F31, F32
ABSTRACT

The paper highlights the increased dispersion in net external positions in recent years, particularly
among industrial countries. It provides a simple accounting framework that disentangles the factors
driving the accumulation of external assets and liabilities (such as trade imbalances, investment
income flows, and capital gains) for major external creditors and debtors. It also examines the factors
driving the foreign asset portfolio of international investors, with a special focus on the weight of
U.S. liabilities in the rest of the world's stock of external assets. Finally, it relates the empirical
evidence to the current debate about the roles of portfolio balance effects and exchange rate
adjustment in shaping the external adjustment process.

Philip R. Lane
IIIS - The Sutherland Centre
Arts Block, Level 6
Trinity College Dublin
Dublin 2, IRELAND
plane@tcd.ie
Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti
International Monetary Fund
Research Department
700 19th Street NW
Washington, DC 20431
gmilesiferretti@imf.org

I. INTRODUCTION
It is a basic accounting identity in international economics that the sum of external balances
(whether for stock or flow positions) must add to zero: for every debtor, there must be a
creditor counter-party in the system.1 Although much can be learned by examining the
external positions of individual countries in isolation, this fundamental insight suggests that a
comprehensive understanding of external imbalances can only be achieved by taking a global
perspective that recognizes the asymmetric interdependence between creditor and debtor
nations.2
A global perspective is also warranted by a second consideration—the growing level of
cross-border integration in financial markets.3 An important consequence of financial
globalization is that countries are exposed to asset price movements in other countries even if
net balances are zero, with the degree of exposure an increasing function of the scale of gross
cross-border asset trade. However, the structure of international balance sheets radically
differs across countries along dimensions such as the mix of equity and debt, currency
composition, maturity structures, and liquidity. This means that shifts in the relative prices of
different assets have implications for the dynamics of external balances, since individual
countries have variable exposures to specific assets and hence experience asymmetric
“valuation effects” from fluctuations in the financial terms of trade. Moreover, imperfect
integration in goods markets means that the macroeconomic implications of even common
asset price movements may be asymmetric across countries, since real exchange rate
movements drive a wedge between domestic and foreign real returns.
Accordingly, our goal in this paper is to develop an empirical analysis of the dynamics of
external positions that takes into account the global interdependencies generated by net
imbalances and the asymmetries in external capital structures. We are able to make progress
on this issue by exploiting a revised and extended database on the foreign assets and
liabilities held by a large number of countries over 1970-2003 (see Lane and Milesi-Ferretti
2005b for a description), with an update to 2004 for most G-7 countries. This database allows
us to trace out the dynamics of external positions for major creditor and debtor nations and
identify the relative contributions of trade balances and valuation effects in generating and
correcting external imbalances.

1

It is well known that this adding-up condition is wildly violated in the data, mainly due to
endemic under-reporting of foreign assets by many countries.
2

The global nature of external imbalances is a mainstay of academic research in this field but
not always fully recognized in the policy debate. Bernanke (2005) represents an influential
recent exception.
3

See Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2001, 2003, 2005a) for our contributions in documenting and
analyzing the financial globalization process.

-2-

Moreover, our measures of the external stocks of assets and liabilities can be combined with
balance of payments data on capital flows to explore the nature of global portfolio
adjustment. For instance, we can address such questions as to the determinants of relative
rates of return between the United States and other destinations and how international
investors re-allocate capital between the United States and other destinations in their foreign
asset portfolios in response to shifts in relative rates of returns and their net exposure to the
United States.
Last but not least, the stylized facts and evidence provided in the paper can be useful in
assessing the relative merits of different views that have been put forward on the causes and
consequences of widening global imbalances, which have emphasized factors such as
productivity developments, shocks to portfolio preferences, bubbles in asset prices, shifts in
fiscal policy, and increased desired saving in emerging markets.
The structure of the rest of the paper is as follows. In Section II, we provide a brief overview
of trends in global imbalances over the last decade. Section III lays out an accounting
framework that permits a decomposition of the dynamics of net external positions into the
underlying contributions of trade balances, rate of return effects and other factors. This
section then provides a detailed and up-to-date empirical analysis of the dynamics of external
positions for major creditor and debtor nations, with a particular focus on the factors
influencing rate of return differentials across countries. Another contribution of this section is
to provide a detailed narrative of the role of valuation effects in driving the net external
positions of the United States and Japan over the longer span of 1980-2004.
We take a first step in Section IV in analyzing some features of the portfolio of cross-border
assets held by foreign investors, with a particular emphasis on understanding fluctuations in
the U.S. share in the foreign asset portfolio held by the rest of the world. This section also
considers what recent portfolio trends can tell us about the likely future path of capital flows
to the United States. Finally, we offer some concluding remarks in Section V.
II. TRENDS IN GLOBAL IMBALANCES, 1994-2004
In this section we document the main trends in global imbalances during the last decade.
Figure 1 shows the current account balances (scaled by world GDP) for major countries and
regions for the period 1994-2004. The picture highlights the substantial deterioration in the
U.S. current account balance starting around 1997. This deterioration is mirrored by an
improvement in the current account balance of emerging Asia, oil-producing Middle-Eastern
countries (especially in recent years) and, to a lesser extent, small industrial countries such as
Switzerland and Scandinavian countries.4
4

A closer look at the factors underlying current account developments in emerging Asia
suggests an interesting dichotomy between China and other East Asian emerging markets.
While in China both national saving and domestic investment rose sharply as a ratio of GDP
throughout the period, in other emerging Asian economies investment rates fell sharply in the
aftermath of the Asian crisis, and explain entirely the current account reversal.

-3-

Figure 2 shows the dynamics of the net foreign asset position.5 The deterioration in the U.S.
net foreign asset position until 2002, in line with widening current account deficits, is
remarkable, but so is the fact that during 2003 and 2004 U.S. net liabilities have actually
declined when scaled by world GDP, despite the large current account deficits. We
investigate this issue further in the next section. At the same time, Japan, some small
industrial countries, emerging Asia, and Middle-Eastern countries have built up significant
creditor positions.
As shown in Figure 3, the cross-country dispersion of net external positions has also
increased during the last decade, whether scaled by world GDP or domestic GDP. The
increase is sharper for external positions scaled by world GDP, because of the increased
liabilities of the United States. The point is reinforced if one examines the size of net
holdings of the top 5 creditors and debtors: in 1994 the liabilities of the top debtors (United
States, Australia, Canada, Brazil, and Mexico) were 3.5 percent of world GDP, while the
assets of the top creditors (Japan, Switzerland, Germany, Taiwan Province of China, and the
United Arab Emirates) accounted for 5 percent of world GDP. By 2003, the top-five creditors
(Japan, Switzerland, Hong Kong SAR, Taiwan Province of China, and Singapore) had a net
balance of 8.2 percent of world GDP and the top-five debtors (United States, Spain,
Australia, Brazil, and Mexico) a net balance of -10.3 percent of world GDP.6
In previous work (Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2003, 2005b), we have documented the
spectacular growth in gross international asset trade, especially since the mid-1990s. To
relate the magnitude of net positions to the size of gross asset trade, we use the Grubel-Lloyd
(GL) index as a summary measure, following Obstfeld (2004). The GL index is given by
A− L
1−
, where A are external assets and L external liabilities. It takes the value 1 if the net
A+ L
position is zero and only gross cross-border asset trade takes place and the value 0 if asset
trade occurs solely to finance net positions.
Figure 4 shows the unweighted-average GL index in our database, as well as the index for Gi Ai − Li
7 countries, defined as 1 −
. The unweighted index is clearly trending upwards
( Ai + Li )
i
since the late 1980s, indicating that the growth in gross asset trade has been more dramatic

5

The net foreign asset data are from the comprehensive database on international investment
positions developed by Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2005b). Investment position data for 2004
are based on preliminary calculations by the authors.
6

Even excluding the United States, the 5 other largest debtors accounted for 2.6 percent of
world GDP in 1994 and 3.9 percent in 2003.

-4-

than the increased dispersion in net positions. As for G-7 countries, they have primarily
engaged in gross asset trade, with smaller net positions, as indicated by the absolute values of
the index close to unity. Since 1990, the index has first increased sharply with the growth in
asset trade, peaking in 1999, and then declined as G-7 net imbalances have widened.
The growth in cross-border asset trade suggests that rates of return on external portfolios may
have increased in importance as a driver of external positions, in addition to trade balances.
In particular, return differentials between external assets and liabilities—driven by factors
such as differences in types of instruments, currency composition, and risk profiles—can
potentially exert significant effects on the dynamics of net foreign assets. How important a
role have these factors played in explaining the widening dispersion of external imbalances
in recent years? We turn to this question in the next section.
III. THE DYNAMICS OF EXTERNAL POSITIONS
To explore in more detail the stylized facts described in the previous section, we first provide
a simple accounting framework that relates the dynamics of net foreign assets to the trade
balance, output growth, rates of return, and real exchange rates. We then use the framework
to decompose the factors underlying changes in net foreign asset positions for the largest
external creditors and debtors in recent years.
A. An Accounting Framework
The change in the net foreign asset position B can be written as follows:
Bt − Bt −1 = CAt + KGt + Εt

(1)

where Bt is the net foreign asset position, CAt is the current account balance, KGt is the
capital gain or loss on net foreign assets (equal to the change in stocks minus the underlying
flows) and the term Et includes factors such as capital account transfers (the so-called capital
account balance) and errors and omissions that drive a wedge between a country’s current
account and net inflows of capital. In turn, the current account CAt equals the sum of the
balance on goods, services, and current transfers BGSTt and the investment income balance
itA At −1 − itL Lt −1 , where A and L are external assets and liabilities, respectively, and itA , itL are
the nominal yields on these assets and liabilities.7

Indicating ratios to GDP with lower-case letters, we can express (1) as follows:

7

We incorporate international labor income in the term BGST.

-5-

bt − bt −1 ≡ bgstt +

itA At −1 − itL Lt −1 + KGt
gt + π t
−
bt −1 + ε t
Yt
(1 + gt )(1 + π t )

(2)

where gt is the growth rate of real GDP, π t is the inflation rate, and the term ε includes the
ratio of capital transfers and errors and omissions to GDP. The second term on the righthand-side of equation (2) captures the effect of nominal returns on external assets and
liabilities on the dynamics of the external position. To see this more clearly, define kgtA (kg tL )
as the ratio of the capital gain on external assets (liabilities), measured in domestic currency,
to the outstanding stock of external assets (liabilities) at the beginning of the period, so
that kgtA At −1 − kgtL Lt −1 = KGt . Then the real rate of return on foreign assets, measured in
domestic currency, will equal rt A =

1 + itA + kg tA
− 1 , and an analogous definition will hold for
1+ πt

the rate of return on foreign liabilities rt L . Using these definitions, we can re-write (2) as
follows:8
bt − bt −1 ≡ bgstt +

rt L − gt
r A − rt L
bt −1 + t
at −1 + ε t
1 + gt
1 + gt

(3)

This framework delivers several important insights. First, the gap between current production
and current absorption (i.e. the trade balance) is only one factor in determining the aggregate
evolution of the net foreign asset position: the “intrinsic dynamics” of net foreign assets
depend on the difference between the rate of return and the growth rate, captured by the
second term on the RHS of (3), which is familiar from the standard debt accumulation
equation. Second, when rates of return on external assets and liabilities differ, as captured by
the last term on the RHS of equation (3), the gross scale of the international balance sheet
matters in addition to the net position.
Several factors can account for differences in rates of return between external assets and
liabilities.9 In larger advanced economies, assets tend to be denominated in foreign currency
and liabilities mostly in domestic currency. Consequently, an unexpected exchange rate
depreciation (not reflected in ex-ante interest differentials) will increase the domesticcurrency rate of return on external assets and hence improve the net foreign asset position. In
contrast, for emerging markets that are net debtors and whose external liabilities are
primarily denominated in foreign currency, a real exchange rate depreciation raises the
8

The same equation can be written using real rates of return in dollars, rather than domestic
currency, using the equivalence 1 + rt$ = (1 + rt )(1 + st ) where st is the rate of real domesticcurrency appreciation vis-à-vis the US dollar.
9

See also the extended discussion in Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2005a).

-6-

domestic-currency burden of foreign liabilities. 10 More generally, differential changes in
asset prices (for example, in stock prices) across countries will tend to drive a wedge between
returns on external assets and liabilities. We highlight the quantitative role of these factors in
explaining the recent evolution of net external positions in the following section.
B. Recent Evolution: Selected Countries
We can now make use of equations (2) and (3) to show the factors contributing to the
evolution of net foreign asset positions for a number of key countries over the past decade.
Table 1 uses the decomposition highlighted by equation (2) for large industrial
countries/areas for the period 1994-2000, and Table 2 for the period 2001-2004.
During 1994-2000, the U.S. dollar strengthened and stock prices increased sharply in most
markets. The current account deficit in the United States started to widen in 1998, but other
industrial countries saw no large change in current account balances, with Switzerland
continuing to post large current account surpluses and Australia large current account
deficits. As was already discussed in the previous section, external imbalances were reduced
or reversed in some emerging markets, particularly so in Asia after the 1997 crisis, and from
the following year in Latin America.
As shown in Table 1, valuation effects implied some losses for the United States and the
United Kingdom during 1994-2000, on account of their strengthening currencies and
booming stock markets during this period. Canada experienced large capital gains, in part
due to its positive net equity position, which benefited from rapidly rising stock prices.
As for the period 2001-2004, a number of interesting factors emerge from Table 2:
•

Despite running substantial trade deficits (close to 5 percent of GDP per year on
average), the cumulative increase in the external liabilities of the United States has
been only about 1.5 percentage points per year. While growth helped, the lion’s share
of the difference between the cumulative trade deficits and the deterioration in the net
external position is accounted for by large capital gains (over 10 percent of GDP). In
addition, despite being a net debtor throughout the period, the United States’ net
investment income receipts have been positive.

•

The picture for Canada and the euro area is in many ways the mirror image of the one
for the United States. Despite running trade surpluses during this period, both have
seen a deterioration in their external accounts, primarily in light of substantial capital
losses.

10

A trend towards a larger share of external liabilities denominated in domestic currency is at
play in emerging markets as well, driven in particular by the increased importance of foreign
FDI and portfolio equity investment.

-7-

Tables 1 and 2 highlight the importance of capital gains and losses in driving the dynamics of
net foreign asset positions. Accordingly, we probe more deeply the overall impact of rates of
return on the dynamics of external positions in Table 3 and 4. The overall effect of returns is
easily calculated by combining the capital gains with investment income (columns (4) and
(7) in Tables 1 and 2). The Tables also shows the real rate of return (expressed in domestic
currency) on external assets and liabilities, as well as financial market factors that can help
explain rate of return differentials—namely, the percentage change in the real effective
exchange rate and the differential between stock market price gains overseas and in the
domestic economy (both measured in U.S. dollars).
To fix thoughts, consider the following numerical example. Take a country that has net
external liabilities of 20 percent of GDP at the beginning of the sample period, and assume
that the rate of return on external assets and liabilities is the same, and is equal to 6 percent in
nominal terms for the whole 4-year period. In this case, returns would explain a cumulative
deterioration in the net external position of around 5 percent (1.2 percent per year).
During the period 1994-2000 (Table 3), all large economies made strong returns on their
external portfolios, thanks in particular to booming stock prices. It is interesting to notice that
while the United States made some capital losses, in light of the large dollar appreciation and
buoyant domestic stock market, it still earned higher returns on its assets than on its
liabilities, thanks in particular to the larger weight of equity instruments in its asset portfolio
than in its stock of foreign liabilities.
Among countries that benefited from valuation effects during this period, Australia and
Canada stand out. These countries enjoyed a hefty positive difference between the return on
assets and on liabilities: Australia was helped by the depreciation of its currency, and
Canada, as mentioned above, by its positive net equity position.
As already highlighted in Table 2, the U.S. has made substantial capital gains on its net
foreign asset position in the period 2001-2004. During these years, as shown in the second
column of Table 4, the real effective exchange rate of the dollar has depreciated by 15
percent, and “foreign” stock market prices have increased more rapidly than domestic prices
(third column). As a result, rates of return on foreign assets (which are to a considerable
extent denominated in foreign currency) have exceeded the rate of return on external
liabilities by an average of over 5 percentage points.
Results for Canada and the euro area are the opposite to the U.S. case (with the United
Kingdom representing an intermediate case). Both have made capital losses on their external
position, both experienced a real appreciation, and both paid out higher returns on their
external liabilities than the returns they gained on their external assets.
C. Return Differentials and Capital Gains: Some Historical Evidence
While differences in rates of return on external assets and liabilities are not new, two factors
at play in recent years have contributed to make them both more important and more volatile.

-8-

First, as documented in Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2003, 2005a), the size of gross external
portfolios has grown dramatically, particularly during the past decade. As a result, a given
rate of return differential between assets and liabilities has now a much larger effect on the
dynamics of the net position, as clearly shown by equation (3). Second, the relative
importance of direct investment and portfolio equity investment in international portfolios
has increased, and those instruments have on average higher and more volatile returns than
debt instruments. We document these stylized facts making use of a longer time series for the
United States and Japan.
United States11
For the United States, capital gains and losses on external assets and liabilities are driven by
stock price fluctuations and currency fluctuations. Since most of the foreign-currencydenominated assets held by U.S. residents are in the form of equity (direct investment and
portfolio equity instruments), capital gains and losses are primarily determined by the
difference in foreign and domestic stock market performance, measured in U.S. dollars.
Figure 5 plots the evolution of capital gains and losses (defined as the difference between the
net external position and cumulative capital flows) together with the real effective exchange
rate of the dollar, for the period 1980-2004. While in certain periods the correlation between
capital gains and the real exchange rate is clearly very strong, the data suggest a more
nuanced view.
•

During the period 1983-1989, the co-movement between the real exchange rate and
capital gains was very strong. In particular, the United States made substantial capital
gains on its external position between end-1984 and end-1988 (around 7 percent of
GDP), thanks to two factors. First, the impact of the sharp real effective depreciation
(over 30 percent) on the dollar value of foreign assets, particularly foreign direct
investment. And second, the strong increase in foreign stock prices, above and
beyond what can be explained by the dollar depreciation.12

•

During 1988-1992, the U.S. made capital losses on its external position of around 3
percent of GDP.13 This time the real exchange rate was broadly flat. However, stock
market performance diverged strongly: U.S. markets increased sharply, while foreign
markets—particularly Japan—declined. Therefore, capital gains were driven by asset
prices, rather than exchange rates.

11

See Tille (2003) for an interesting study of valuation effects during the period 1990-2002.

12

It is striking that these gains accrued with equity holdings abroad totaling only 8 percent of
GDP at end-1984. At end-2004, equity holdings abroad amounted to 50 percent of GDP.
13

Losses may actually be understated in the data, because likely underestimation of portfolio
equity outflows suggests very large capital gains on U.S. foreign equity holdings, despite
very weak stock market performance outside the United States. See Thomas et al (2004).

-9-

•

During 1992-1994, the exchange rate was again broadly flat, while there was a major
net capital gain (7.5 percent of GDP), arising from the strong performance of nonU.S. stock markets (up almost 40 percent) relative to the U.S. stock market (up 6
percent).

•

During the period 1994-2001, the real appreciation of the U.S. dollar and the stronger
performance of U.S. stock markets relative to overseas markets implied capital losses
on external asset holdings totaling 5 percent of GDP.

•

Finally, during 2002-2004 the weakening dollar and stronger stock market
performance overseas with respect to the United States generated capital gains for the
U.S. amounting to over 12 percent of GDP.

In sum, over the period the United States has enjoyed nontrivial capital gains on its external
asset holdings, albeit with considerable fluctuations from period to period. This effect is in
addition to the well-documented positive differential between the yield on U.S. assets and the
one on U.S. liabilities, and has implied that the U.S. has enjoyed a large positive rate of
return differential between its overseas holdings and its liabilities.
Japan
For Japan, capital gains and losses on their external equity portfolio depend on asset prices in
equity markets, while gains and losses on the debt portfolio depend particularly on exchange
rate fluctuations, as the currency composition of domestic liabilities is more skewed towards
yen denomination than the currency composition of their debt assets.
During the second half of the 1980s Japan’s real appreciation and run-up in stock prices
implied capital losses on their net external position (Figure 6), while during the mid-1990s
Japan did not experience sizable net capital gains or losses on its external position. A sizable
“cycle” in capital gains and losses started in 1999, with significant losses driven by the equity
portfolio—liabilities increased in value substantially, with booming domestic stock prices.
These losses were reversed since, driven by gains on the equity portfolio during 2000-2001
(as Japanese stock price plummeted faster than world stock prices), and by gains on debt
instruments following the yen depreciation over the next 3 years.
Rates of return for major countries
Table 5 puts together capital gains and investment income data, showing the rates of return
on external assets and liabilities, broken down by international financial instrument, for the
last 10 years. Care should be exercised in comparing returns across countries, particularly so
since some countries (like the United States) measure foreign direct investment at market

- 10 -

value, while others (like the euro area) measure investment at book value.14 Nevertheless,
Table 5 contains some useful and interesting stylized facts.
•

The share of equity instruments in total external assets and liabilities differs sharply
across major financial centers; for example, the 2004 share of equity assets in the
U.S. external portfolio is close to 60 percent, compared to under 20 percent in Japan.

•

During the last decade, the United States earned a higher rate of return on its assets
than on its liabilities, except for the period 2000-2001.15 In general, the favorable
return differential is associated with the ‘equity premium’, together with the higher
weight of equities in total assets than in total liabilities.

•

Japan has instead earned lower returns on its assets than on its liabilities, with the
exception of the period 2000-2001.

•

Rates of return on assets and liabilities for the United Kingdom have been lower than
for the United States, primarily on account of the lower share of equities in the United
Kingdom‘s external portfolio.
D. Summary and Discussion

The evidence in this section has highlighted that the distribution of net external positions has
widened in recent years. Moreover, with financial globalization, the dynamics of positions
has become heavily influenced by factors other than accumulated current account balances.
A striking illustration is provided by the contrasting fortunes of the U.S. and Canada during
2001-2004: both countries experienced virtually identical declines in their net foreign asset
positions (5.8 percent and 5.7 percent respectively), even though the U.S. ran a cumulative
trade deficit of 19.8 percent of GDP, while Canada ran a cumulative trade surplus of 18.5
percent of GDP during this period.
The wealth effects associated with capital gains and losses on international positions are
imperfectly understood (Obstfeld 2004). Clearly, sharp distinctions must be drawn between
valuation shocks that benefit both home and foreign investors (such as an improvement in
14

Ceteris paribus, returns measured at market value will be higher than returns at book value
during stock market booms (for example, the periods 1994-1999 and 2003-2004) and lower
during periods of stock market declines (such as 2000-2001). Another potential problem in
measuring returns on foreign direct investment is the distortion created by tax-driven transfer
pricing practices.
15

The same result holds for the previous decade. The U.S. made earned higher returns on
assets in 1980-84 (3 percentage points), 1985-89 (7 percentage points), and 1990-94 (4
percentage points).

- 11 -

domestic asset returns) versus those that inevitably generate asymmetries (such as the
valuation effects induced by shifts in exchange rates): external valuation effects should not
be viewed in isolation from aggregate (domestic and foreign) wealth dynamics.16 Indeed,
valuation effects at times simply reflect risk sharing: if a country’s economic prospects
improve, the value of capital will go up, and part of the benefit accrues to foreign owners of
domestic capital.
Some recent contributions have attempted to incorporate international valuation effects into
analyses of external adjustment (Blanchard, Giavazzi and Sa 2005, Cline 2005, Corsets and
Konstantinou 2005, Edwards 2005, Gourinchas and Rey 2005, International Monetary Fund
2005, Obstfeld and Rogoff 2005, and Roubini and Setser 2005) and quantitative models of
monetary policy (Benigno 2001 and Tille 2005). It is widely recognized in this literature that
the portfolio behavior of international investors is a critical element in understanding the
macroeconomic impact of valuation shocks.17 Accordingly, in the next section, we conduct a
preliminary investigation of the dynamics of international portfolios, with a special focus on
the distribution of foreign asset holdings between the U.S. and other destinations.
IV. GLOBAL PORTFOLIO DYNAMICS
In the previous section, a recurrent theme has been that the growth in cross-border
investment positions has increased the importance of valuation effects in determining the
evolution of net foreign assets. There has also been some speculation that financial
globalization has also increased the sustainability of external imbalances, in line with an
increased capacity of the global investor pool to absorb the liabilities issued by individual
countries (Greenspan 2005).
In this section, we probe this claim by investigating the relations among rate of return
differentials, portfolio holdings, capital flows and net foreign asset positions. In particular,
we focus on the dynamics of the U.S. share in the aggregate cross-border financial holdings
of foreign investors. Finally, we discuss whether there are indications that the capacity of the
rest of the world to absorb U.S. liabilities is diminishing.
A. Recent Trends
Figure 7 shows the importance of U.S. external liabilities in total and in various asset
categories relative to the rest of the world’s holdings of foreign assets.
16

Ideally, it would be desirable to express external positions relative to measures of wealth
rather than GDP. However, good measures of domestic wealth are not widely available and
most proxies are highly correlated with GDP.
17

These authors generally build on the earlier portfolio-balance literature developed by
Henderson and Rogoff (1982) and Kouri (1983), amongst others.

- 12 -

In terms of total holdings, the early 1980s represents an earlier phase of rapid growth in U.S.
prominence in the foreign portfolios of the rest of the world, growing from 19.3 percent in
1980 to 28.3 percent in 1985. There was a subsequent reversal during 1986-1990, with the
1985 peak only being surpassed in 1996. The late 1990s saw a rapid increase in the U.S.
share, peaking at 34.9 percent in 1999. Recent years have seen a substantial decline: the share
of the U.S. in the total foreign assets held by the rest of the world had decreased to 26.2
percent in 2003. The decline has been even more spectacular for the equity category: the U.S.
share has fallen from 51.2 percent in 1998 to 29.7 percent in 2003. The smallest decline has
been in the debt category, falling from a 2001 peak of 27.8 percent to 24.1 percent in 2003. 18
Of course, the recent decline in part has to do with the decline in the value of U.S. assets in
recent years, between the asset price reversal in U.S. equity markets and the depreciation of
the dollar since 2001. It also reflects an acceleration in the scale of cross-border asset trade
among other country pairs in recent years (for instance, growing cross-border trade within
Europe and within the emerging market grouping), such that the U.S. matters less than it
previously did as a financial trading partner.
Figure 8 provides a complementary perspective by showing the evolution of the net external
position of the U.S. (scaled by U.S. GDP): in recent years, the trend increase in net portfolio
debt has accelerated, while its traditional net positive position in equity has re-emerged, after
the temporary decline in this category in the late 1990s (in fact, the net equity position was
only negative in one year – 2001).
B. An Analysis of Portfolio Dynamics
Next, we examine the underlying factors driving the evolution of the share of U.S. assets in
the cross-border portfolios of international investors. Define this share by

θt =

18

FAt ROW ,US
FAt ROW ,SUM

(4)

The International Monetary Fund’s Coordinated Portfolio Investment Survey provides an
alternative source of information on the US share in international portfolios. Excluding
offshore centers, the 2003 US share in the total portfolio holdings of the rest of the world
amounted to 21.7 percent. For individual asset categories, the shares for portfolio equity,
long-term debt securities and short-term debt securities were 18.4 percent, 22.4 percent and
32.7 percent respectively.

- 13 -

where FAt ROW ,SUM is the total value of cross-border assets held by non-U.S. investors and
FAt ROW ,US is the value of the U.S. assets held by non-U.S. investors.19 This ratio will fluctuate
over time in line with shifts in the allocation of capital flows between the U.S. and other
destinations and rate of return differentials between the U.S. and other destinations, so that

θt = θt −1

(1 + RtUS ) + FLtUS
(1 + Rt SUM ) + FLt SUM

(5)

where rates of return RtUS , RtSUM are expressed in dollar terms and flows are expressed as a
percentage of the accumulated positions FLt = FLOWt / FAt −1 .
Given this partitioning, it is useful to analyze the behavior of relative rates of return and
relative capital flows. With respect to the former, we begin by highlighting the key role
played by the exchange rate in determining rate of return differentials between the U.S. and
the rest of the world. Table 6 reports simple regressions of various relative return indicators
on the U.S. multilateral real exchange rate. Using investment position and balance of
payments data, we derive rates of return for the U.S. as in the previous section: namely, the
rate of return in a given category is the sum of investment income plus capital gains, divided
by the accumulated asset position. For rates of return in the rest of the world, we use marketbased indicators, based on ex-US global return indices for stocks and bonds.20 As a
robustness check, we also examine return indices for U.S. stocks and bonds in addition to the
BOP-derived returns. Finally, as a general proxy for economy-wide returns, we also consider
the difference between U.S. and global GDP growth rates.
The results are shown in Table 6. With the exceptions of BOP-derived debt returns and
relative output growth, the simple regression of relative returns on the real exchange rate is

19

An increase in foreign holdings of US assets can be attributed to some combination of an
increase in the share of foreign assets that is allocated to the US; an increase in the ratio of
foreign to total assets of the rest of the world; and an increase in the ratio of total assets to
GDP for the rest of the world. Here, we focus on the first component: the share of total crossborder assets that is allocated to the US. As such, we do not here investigate the growth in the
aggregate foreign assets held by the rest of the world and its relation to the financial
development and international financial integration of these countries.
20

The bond and stock return data are from Global Financial Data. The stock return index is
used as a proxy for returns on both portfolio equity and FDI; the bond return index is used a
proxy for returns in the debt category. A weighted average of stock and bond returns is
employed for the return on the aggregate holdings of foreign assets.

- 14 -

significant in all categories: real appreciation of the dollar increases the return on U.S.located assets relative to overseas returns.21
Although Table 6 contains some useful information, it is desirable to seek the underlying
fundamental determinants of changes in real exchange rates and other factors driving return
differentials. In particular, we are interested in knowing whether the outstanding portfolio
positions influences these return factors. According to the portfolio balance literature, we
might expect a negatively-sloped demand schedule for U.S.-issued liabilities – the greater is
the share of U.S. assets in the accumulated portfolio, the larger is the risk premium required
to hold these assets. On the other side, as has been highlighted by Gourinchas and Rey
(2005), the stability of the U.S. net external position is facilitated by a negative relation
between outstanding liabilities and returns.
Accordingly, Table 7 regresses these return factors on the lagged level of the U.S. net foreign
asset position, the lagged share of U.S. assets in the aggregate cross-border portfolio of
foreign investors, and the lagged share of capital flows to the U.S. to aggregate cross-border
flows. In order to isolate the exchange rate channel, we first examine the impact of portfolio
factors on exchange rate behavior; in subsequent regressions for the other return factors, the
exchange rate term is held fixed such that these regressions pick up any influence of portfolio
factors on other components of these return factors. Accordingly, for these return categories,
the specification is
US
US
( RtUS − Rt ROW ) = α + ρ DREERtUS + β1 NFAYtUS
−1 + β 2 ST _ SHAREt −1 + β 3 FL _ SHAREt −1 + ε t

(6)

where DREERUS is the rate of real exchange rate appreciation by the U.S. against its trading
partners, NFAY US is the ratio of U.S. net foreign assets to GDP, ST _ SHARE US is the share
of the U.S. in the rest of the world’s total cross-border holdings in that category,
and FL _ SHARE US is the share of capital flows to the U.S. in the rest of the world’s total
cross-border capital flows in that category.
A number of striking results emerge from Table 7. First, the exchange rate tends to
appreciate, the more positive is the lagged net foreign asset position and the smaller is the
lagged share of the U.S. in portfolio flows. This pattern is qualitatively consistent with the
Gourinchas-Rey finding: strong capital inflows and a high outstanding net liability position is
associated with subsequent real depreciation.22 Second, the strong influence of exchange
21

Here we employ the trade-weighted real exchange rate. Results were quite similar for a
crude portfolio-weighted real exchange rate. That the exchange rate is significant for relative
bond returns in row (6) but not relative debt returns in row (2) is consistent with poor
measurement of overall returns on non-portfolio debt (e.g. bank loans).
22

The Gourinchas-Rey setup involves identifying unsustainable external positions by
examining the co-movement of net exports and the net foreign asset position. Our

- 15 -

rates on return differentials found in Table 6 is confirmed in the broader specifications in
columns (2)-(6) of Table 7. Third, the exchange rate channel is not the only route by which
the outstanding net foreign asset position influences debt and equity return differentials –
again, the pattern is stabilizing, with relative returns on U.S. assets declining (holding fixed
the exchange rate) as the net foreign asset position deteriorates.
Moreover, as shown in columns (3) and (5), an increase in the share of the U.S. in lagged
equity positions and lagged equity flows is associated with a decline in subsequent relative
returns, reinforcing the stabilization pattern. The only evidence in favor of the portfoliobalance argument is that relative bond returns are increasing in the relative size of the U.S. in
bond portfolios – but these results are not quite significant and hold constant the exchange
rate channel. Finally, it is intriguing to note that an increase in the share of the U.S. in the
foreign asset portfolio of foreign investors is associated with an increase in relative output
growth in the U.S. (although again this result is only marginally significant).
In summary, the results in Table 7 do not provide much evidence that investors have
demanded a risk premium in relative returns in order to absorb increased levels of U.S.
liabilities in their portfolios. Rather, there is considerable support for a stabilizing pattern in
returns, with returns negatively covarying with portfolio exposures. Of course, these results
may well be specific to this sample period and may not carry over in projecting future returns
to the extent that investor attitudes to U.S. liabilities may well shift (or have already shifted).
Our next step is to explore the influence of portfolio factors on relative capital flows. Again,
we adopt a portfolio-balance perspective and ask how relative capital flows adjust to lagged
returns and the scale of the portfolio exposure to the U.S. We look at both absolute capital
flows to the U.S., FLUS
t (expressed as a percentage of lagged U.S. liabilities) and capital flows
to the U.S. relative to capital flows from the rest of the world to other destinations
ROW
( FLUS
). We allow for persistence in flows by including the lagged dependent
t − FLt
variable as a regressor.
In addition, we include the lagged three-year moving average of relative returns in the U.S.
ROW
versus the rest of the world RtUS
−1 − Rt −1 . To the extent that future relative returns are
unpredictable, an investor that wishes to maintain a fixed U.S. weight in her international
portfolio must offset poor relative returns in one period with a subsequent increase in relative
flows. However, lagged returns may also serve as a leading indicator for future returns (with

specification rather takes a ‘financial account’ perspective by looking at capital flows rather
than the trade balance.

- 16 -

positive or negative sign), such that the sign on this variable in explaining capital flows is not
easily tied down.23
In order to further capture elements of the portfolio-balance story, we also include the
outstanding portfolio position (for absolute capital flows to the U.S., we include the lagged
stock of U.S. liabilities relative to U.S. GDP, LUS
t −1 ; for the relative flows specification, we
include the lagged share of U.S. liabilities in the total foreign asset portfolio of international
investors, ST _ SHAREtUS
−1 ). To the extent that investors wish to maintain stable portfolio
shares, we should generally expect that an increase in the portfolio share in one period is
associated with a subsequent contraction in relative capital flows.
More formally, the specifications for absolute and relative capital flows are
US
US
US
FLUS
t = α + ρ FLt −1 + β1 Rt −1 + β 2 Lt −1 + ε t

( FL

US
t

US
ROW
US
− FLROW
) = α + ρ ( FLUSt −1 − FLROW
t
t −1 ) + β1 ( Rt −1 − Rt −1 ) + β 2 ST _ SHAREt −1 + ε t

(7)

The results are presented in Table 8. These regressions deliver some striking results. First,
the dynamic behavior of capital flows differs substantially across asset categories. While
there is significant positive serial correlation for aggregate flows and FDI flows, the pattern
is actually negative for equity flows: all else equal, high equity flows in one period are
reversed in the next period.
Second, there is some evidence that lagged returns influence the level of capital flows. For
absolute and relative debt flows, an improvement in U.S. relative returns is associated with a
subsequent decline in the relative share of the U.S. in debt flows. In contrast, there is some
evidence that capital flows are positively influenced by lagged returns for the equity and FDI
categories. (However, this is only true for absolute capital flows. Lagged relative returns do
not explain the relative share of flows to the U.S. in these categories. It seems as if high
relative returns in the U.S. are associated with a generalized increase in capital flows in the
equity and FDI categories to the U.S. but also to other destinations.)
Holding fixed return differentials, the evidence on the relation between outstanding portfolio
positions and subsequent capital flows is mixed. For absolute and relative capital flows in the
FDI category, the results do indicate that a high outstanding U.S. share is associated with a
subsequent decline in FDI flows to the US. This is also true for relative flows in the portfolio
equity category, even if absolute portfolio equity flows positively co-move with the
23

Hau and Rey (2004) provide empirical support for the portfolio-balance model, using
monthly data on equity flows, equity returns, and exchange rates. Also using monthly data,
Bohn and Tesar (1996) find evidence of return-chasing in the foreign equity purchases of US
investors. However, Portes and Rey (2005) do not find evidence of return-chasing in annual
data on equity transactions for a sample of 14 advanced countries.

- 17 -

outstanding level of U.S. portfolio equity liabilities. The outstanding debt position does not
influence absolute or relative debt flows to the U.S. In part, this may reflect the role played
by central banks in debt flows and the complexity of policy decisions regarding reserve
accumulation.
In summary, the results from the non-structural regressions in Table 8 provide some insights
into the dynamics of capital flows. The variation in behavior across asset categories is
especially striking, with the correlates of capital flows markedly different between debt,
portfolio equity and FDI categories. However, our findings are certainly not conclusive
regarding the importance of portfolio-balance factors: more detailed investor-level data, plus
a structural econometric approach, would be required for a more accurate investigation.
C. Looking to the Future

We conclude this section by examining whether there any indications that the capacity of
foreign investors to absorb U.S. liabilities is diminishing.
There are several forces pointing towards a declining appetite for U.S.-issued liabilities. First,
as is shown in Figures 9, 10, and 11, the composition of capital flows to the U.S. has shifted
in recent years: equity (portfolio and FDI) inflows have dried up, with a much greater
reliance on debt inflows than in the late 1990s. This is consistent with the evidence in the
previous section to the extent that the decline in equity inflows may be attributed to the lower
returns earned by foreign equity investors in the U.S. relative to other major financial centers.
An increased dependence on debt flows increases the risk profile of U.S. external liabilities
and also leaves the U.S. more vulnerable to sudden shifts in investor sentiment.
Second, within the category of debt flows, there has been a broadly-recognized shift from
private to official foreign investors, with foreign central banks emerging as the key marginal
purchaser of U.S. debt issues (especially U.S. government debt). We illustrate this in Figure
12: the ratio of official to total debt inflows average 8.8 percent during 1999-2001 and rose to
26.3 percent during 2002-2004 (official flows relative to portfolio debt inflows averaged 17.3
percent during 1999-2001 and 42.6 percent during 2002-2004).24
Third, there are strong reasons to believe that the recent rapid pace of reserve accumulation
that has been a mainstay of demand for U.S.-issued liabilities will not be sustained. For
instance, Figure 13 shows that reserves are at a historic high for the group of developing
countries and studies such as IMF (2003) have shown that the recent level of reserves far
exceeds that predicted by standard models of optimal reserve holdings. The current policy
debate in these countries all point to a reduction in their level of demand for U.S. debt
24

These numbers are lower bounds for the importance of the official sector, since significant
official flows take place through indirect transactions. See also Higgins and Klitgaard (2004).
Roubini and Setser (2005) make the important additional observation that the maturity
structure of U.S. (government) liabilities has shortened considerably in recent years.

- 18 -

securities via greater currency diversification in reserves, modifications of exchange rate
strategies, and an improving climate for domestic investment after several years of post-crisis
retrenchment, reform and restructuring.25
More generally, the evidence in this paper is that an important reason why the share of U.S.
liabilities in the portfolios of foreign investors has been maintained at a relatively stable level
(relative to the scale of capital flows to the U.S.) has been the operation of the valuation
channel of exchange rate adjustment: increases in portfolio shares have been undone through
exchange rate depreciation. As is extensively discussed in Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2005a),
it is not a viable long-run strategy to rely on such valuation gains to ameliorate a structural
reliance on net capital inflows. At some point, the vision of the U.S. as a safe haven and
natural home for liquid holdings would be undercut by persistent portfolio losses induced by
a depreciating currency and/or investors will begin to require more significant risk premia on
U.S.-issued liabilities.
Finally, a countervailing factor is that the growth in cross-border asset trade has amplified the
importance of rate of return differentials. To the extent that the U.S. does manage to maintain
a positive return differential (either due to composition effects or superior performance
within given asset categories), the ongoing scaling-up of its international balance sheet
progressively increases the gain from this financial transformation process. A simple
numerical example helps clarify this point, using U.S. data and equation (3) as a guide.
Assume that the net foreign asset position b equals minus 25 percent of GDP, the output
growth rate g is 3 percent, the real rate of return on external liabilities r L is 4 percent (its
average level in the U.S. for the past 20 years), and gross foreign assets stand at 80 percent of
GDP (roughly their end-2004 level for the U.S.). In this case, with no return differential
between external assets and liabilities, a trade deficit of 5 percent of GDP would entail a
deterioration of net foreign assets of 5¼ percent of GDP. However, with a positive
differential of 300 basis points between returns on assets and on liabilities (its average level
for the period 1990-2004), the net foreign asset position would deteriorate by only 3 percent
of GDP—a gain of over 2 percent of GDP with respect to the benchmark case.26 If gross
assets were, say, 110 percent of GDP, the deterioration in net foreign assets would only be 2
percent of GDP—a gain of over 3 percent of GDP. Even a 125 basis point differential at the
current level of financial globalization delivers a non-trivial gain of 1 percent of GDP.
Clearly these calculations are purely illustrative, and rely on the assumption that the rate of
return differential stay constant as the level of international financial integration increases—
the pay-off to an increase in the gross foreign asset position would obviously be smaller, if
25

It is also understood that Japan has decelerated its official purchases of U.S. assets, ceasing
to intervene in the yen-dollar market.
26

To put it differently, a 300 basis points return differential means that a trade deficit of 2
percent of GDP would be consistent with a stable net foreign asset position, despite the
assumption that the return on liabilities is higher than the growth rate.

- 19 -

growth in cross-border holdings were concentrated in those asset categories in which the U.S.
return premium is less significant.

V. CONCLUSIONS

This paper has provided wide-ranging empirical evidence on the dynamics of external
positions for key creditor and debtor nations. We have highlighted the key role of valuation
effects in the recent evolution of external imbalances, which have moved in a stabilizing
direction for the world’s largest debtor, while other countries have experienced the
depressing combination of substantial trade surpluses yet sharp declines in their net external
positions. We have also presented some preliminary findings concerning the inter-relations,
between relative rates of return, portfolio shares, and international capital flows.
An important message from our work is that the notion that the United States attracts foreign
capital because it offers high returns to foreign investors appears, for the years of the new
millennium, rather shaky. Our analysis of relative rates of return and capital flows shows
that: (i) U.S. residents have consistently earned higher returns on their assets than they pay
out on their liabilities; (ii) real dollar returns on foreign investment in the United States have
on average been negative over the past 4 years, and even more so when expressed in the
currencies of most foreign investor countries; and (iii) since 2000, capital flows to the United
States have shifted towards fixed-rate (and low-yield) debt instruments, and away from
equities, even during the recovery in stock market performance in 2003-2004. In addition, the
recent accumulation of dollar assets by the foreign official sector is unlikely to persist into
the indefinite future—a tightening at the margin of external demand for U.S.-issued liabilities
is clearly possible, although the timing of this shift is of course highly uncertain.
Finally, the United States has relied on sizable capital gains to stabilize its external position
during the past few years. Looking forward, exploiting this channel again would require a
continued sizable differential in rates of return between U.S. external assets and liabilities.
While some positive differential may well persist, and would play an increasingly important
role as long as financial integration increases, logic would suggest that return differentials of
the order of magnitude of those seen in the past 3 years cannot be sustained for a prolonged
period of time—they would likely require persistent dollar depreciation, which would
eventually be incorporated in inflation expectations and ex-ante interest rate differentials.
Notwithstanding the importance of valuation effects, the current level of U.S. trade deficits
cannot be permanently sustained and global adjustment requires the rebalancing of savings
and investment flows between the United States and the rest of the world.

- 20 -

References

Benigno, Pierpaolo, (2001), “Price Stability with Imperfect Financial Integration,” mimeo,
New York University.
Bernanke, Ben (2005), “The Global Saving Glut and the U.S. Current Account Deficit,”
Homer Jones Lecture.
Blanchard, Olivier, Francesco Giavazzi and Filipa Sa (2005), “The U.S. Current Account and
the Dollar,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, forthcoming.
Bohn, Henning and Linda Tesar (1996), “U.S. Equity Investment in Foreign Markets:
Portfolio Rebalancing or Return Chasing?,” American Economic Review, 86, 77-81.
Cline, William (2005), The United States as a Debtor Nation: Risks and Policy Reform,
manuscript, Institute for International Economics.
Corsetti, Giancarlo and Panagiotis Konstantinou (2005), “Current Account Theory and the
Dynamics of US Net Foreign Liabilities,” mimeo, European University Institute.
Edwards, Sebastian (2005), “Is the U.S. Current Account Deficit Sustainable? And If Not,
How Costly is Adjustment Likely To Be?,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,
forthcoming.
Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, and Helene Rey, (2005), “International Financial Adjustment,”
NBER Working Paper No. 11155.
Greenspan, Alan (2005), “Current Account,” Speech, Advancing Enterprise 2005
Conference, February 4.
Hau, Harald and Helene Rey (2004), “Can Portfolio Rebalancing Explain the Dynamics of
Equity Returns, Equity Flows, and Exchange Rates,” American Economic Review,
94, No. 2, May 2004, 126-133.
Henderson, Dale and Kenneth Rogoff (1982), “Negative Net Foreign Asset Positions and
Stability in a World Portfolio Balance Model,” Journal of International Economics
13: pp. 85-194.
Higgins, Matthew and Thomas Klitgaard (2004), “Reserve Accumulation: Implications for
Global Capital Flows and Financial Markets,” Current Issues in Economics and
Finance, Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
International Monetary Fund, (1993), Balance of Payments Manual, 5th edition, Washington,
DC.

- 21 -

International Monetary Fund (2003), “Three Current Policy Issues in Developing Countries,”
World Economic Outlook, Chapter II, September (Washington, DC: International
Monetary Fund).
International Monetary Fund, (2005), “Globalization and External Imbalances,” World
Economic Outlook, Chapter III, April (Washington, DC: International Monetary
Fund).
Kouri, Pentti (1983), "Balance of Payments and the Foreign Exchange Market: A Dynamic
Partial Equilibrium Model, in J. Bhandari and B. Putnam, eds. (1983), Economic
Interdependence and Flexible Exchange Rates (Cambridge: MIT Press).
Lane, Philip R., and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti, 2001, “The External Wealth of Nations:
Measures of Foreign Assets and Liabilities for Industrial and Developing Countries,”
Journal of International Economics, Vol. 55, pp. 263–94.
———, (2003), “International Financial Integration,” IMF Staff Papers, Vol. 50 Special
Issue, pp. 82–113 (Washington: International Monetary Fund).
———, (2005a), “Financial Globalization and Exchange Rates,” IMF Working Paper 05/03,
January.
———, (2005b), “The External Wealth of Nations Mark II: Revised and Extended Estimates
of Foreign Assets and Liabilities, 1970–2003,” in progress.
Obstfeld, Maurice (2004), “External Adjustment,” Review of World Economics, 140 (4),
541-568.
——— and Kenneth Rogoff (2005), “Global Current Account Imbalances and Exchange
Rate Adjustments,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, forthcoming.
Portes, Richard and Helene Rey (2005), “The Determinants of Cross-Border Equity Flows,”
Journal of International Economics, 65, 269-296.
Roubini, Nouriel and Brad Setser (2005), “Will the Bretton Woods 2 Regime Unravel Soon?
The Risk of a Hard Landing in 2005-2006,” mimeo, New York University.
Thomas, Charles P., Francis E. Warnock, and Jon Wongswan, 2004. "The Performance of
International Portfolios," International Finance Discussion Paper 817, Board of
Governors of the Federal Reserve System
Tille, Cédric, (2003), “The Impact of Exchange Rate Movements on U.S. Foreign Debt,”
Current Issues in Economics and Finance 9(1), Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
———, (2004), “Financial Integration and the Wealth Effect of Exchange Rate

- 22 -

Fluctuations,” mimeo, Federal Reserve Bank of New York.

Table 1. Decomposition of change in net foreign assets, 1995-2000
Cumulative current account
Initial NFA position
Change in net foreign assets
(1994)

United States
United Kingdom
France
Germany
Italy
Canada
Japan
Switzerland
Australia

-3.3

-13.5

2.0

-5.7

-4.2

14.4

15.1
-8.1
11.8
28.8
9.9

100.3

23.1

-65.3

5.1

9.5
-9.4
-33.6

Other factors

Cumulative trade
balance

Cumulative
investm. Income

KA, EO

Growth
effect

K-gains

-15.9
-10.8
11.0
-4.4
16.8
20.6
6.6
9.5
-7.0

1.4
2.8
0.5
-0.7
-6.7
-20.4
7.3
47.7
-20.0

0.6
2.1
2.6
0.8
-6.2
6.3
0.8
1.8
1.3

2.7
2.4
-0.6
-0.7
1.3
5.5
-0.5
-15.3
18.5

-2.4
-2.3
1.5
-3.1
6.5
16.8
-4.3
-20.7
12.3

Note: The decomposition reflects the one in equation (2) in the text, with all variables scaled by GDP. For example, the
cumulative trade balance is equal to the sum of the trade balance to GDP ratio. The column KA, EO indicates the sum of errors
and omissions and capital account transfers. See IMF (1993) for a description of these categories.

- 24 -

Table 2. Decomposition of change in net foreign assets, 2001-2004

Initial NFA
(2000)

Change in net
foreign assets

-16.7

United Kingdom

Cumulative current account

Other factors

Cumulative trade
balance

Cumulative inv.
income

KA, EO

Growth

K-gains

-5.8

-19.8

1.0

-0.9

3.9

10.1

-3.7

-9.1

-15.3

7.4

0.6

1.0

-2.9

Euro Area

-9.8

-5.6

3.9

-2.3

0.4

1.4

-9.0

Canada

-4.8

-5.7

18.5

-9.7

-1.0

1.7

-15.2

Japan

24.3

14.5

5.0

6.8

-1.2

0.3

3.7

-52.2

-17.2

-7.5

-11.4

-1.5

14.6

-11.4

United States

Australia

Note: The decomposition reflects the one in equation (2) in the text, with all variables scaled by GDP. For example, the
cumulative trade balance is equal to the sum of the trade balance to GDP ratio. The column KA, EO indicates the sum of errors
and omissions and capital account transfers. See IMF (1993) for a description of these categories.

- 25 -

Table 3. Decomposition of change in net foreign assets, 1995-2000: rates of return

Initial NFA
position (1994)

United States
United Kingdom
France
Germany
Italy
Canada
Japan
Switzerland
Australia

Rate of return
effects Change in REER

-3.3

-0.9

2.0

0.5

-4.2

2.1

9.5

-3.8

-9.4

-0.2

-33.6

-3.6

14.4

3.0

100.3

27.0

-65.3

-7.7

26.4
25.6
-9.9
-12.6
2.0
-1.4
-5.1
-4.6
-12.9

Stock prices
(foreign minus
domestic)

avg real return
on assets

avg real return
on liabilities

-143.0

8.8

7.9

10.9

4.7

4.7

-54.5

11.0

11.0

-4.2

5.4

6.8

-16.5

7.1

6.4

-41.9

8.0

6.0

168.6

7.2

8.2

-47.2

7.0

8.5

85.9

11.1

5.7

Note: The decomposition reflects the one in equation (3) in the text. The rate of return effects are given by the sum of investment
income and capital gains in Table 2. The change in REER equals the percentage change in the country’s real effective exchange
rate between end-1994 and end-2000. The stock price column indicates the difference between the percentage increase of foreign
stock prices (in dollars) and domestic stock prices (also in dollars). Real rates of return on external assets and liabilities are
expressed in domestic currency.

- 26 -

Table 4. Decomposition of change in net foreign assets, 2001-2004: Rates of return
Initial NFA
Rate of return
Change in REER
position
effects
(2000)
United States

Stock prices (foreign avg real return
minus domestic)
on assets

avg real return
on liabilities

-16.7

11.1

-14.8

11.6

4.8

-0.4

United Kingdom

-3.7

4.6

1.6

-6.3

0.1

-0.4

Euro Area

-9.8

-11.3

31.5

4.4

-2.7

-0.5

Canada

-4.8

-24.9

16.0

-27.8

-5.3

0.5

Japan

24.3

10.5

-16.8

-0.6

5.9

5.0

-52.2

-22.8

23.8

-81.1

1.7

3.3

Australia

Note: The decomposition reflects the one in equation (3) in the text. The rate of return effects are given by the sum of investment
income and capital gains in Table 2. The change in REER equals the percentage change in the country’s real effective exchange
rate between end-2000 and end-2004. The stock price column indicates the difference between the percentage increase of foreign
stock prices (in dollars) and domestic stock prices (also in dollars). Real rates of return on external assets and liabilities are
expressed in domestic currency.

- 27 -

Table 5. Real domestic-currency returns on external assets and liabilities
United States
Asset returns

Share of equity
in total assets

Total

Equity

Debt

1995-1999

11.8

17.8

3.5

2000-2001

-7.9

-14.4

2002-2004

9.6

13.7

Returns on liabilities

Share of equity
in total
liabilities

Total

Equity

Debt

59

10.5

22.9

2.4

42

3.5

60

-4.9

-13.3

3.9

47

6.1

56

0.9

3.8

0.3

38

Japan
1995-1999

6.2

3.1

1.9

29

10.1

22.1

-0.4

20

2000-2001

13.7

6.8

10.2

40

0.7

-24.4

3.2

29

2002-2004

2.8

-1.7

1.3

33

5.8

8.7

-2.2

26

United Kingdom
1995-1999

4.8

11.3

2.4

28

5.4

16.0

2.5

24

2000-2001

1.7

-1.6

3.5

33

0.4

-5.5

3.2

29

2002-2004

0.4

3.6

-0.9

30

-0.3

0.4

-0.3

23

Euro area
1995-1999
2000-2001

0.7

-5.8

5.1

32

0.6

-5.8

4.9

45

2002-2004

-4.2

-2.2

-5.7

38

-1.0

4.0

-2.9

45

Note: returns are constructed as the sum of investment income and capital gains, divided by
the stock of outstanding assets or liabilities at the end of the previous year. Capital gains in
year t are given by the difference between the change in the stock of assets and liabilities
between end-year t and year t-1, minus the asset or liability flow during year t. They are
deflated by the domestic consumer price index.

- 28 -

Table 6. Rate of Return Differentials and the Real Exchange Rate

(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)

Adj. R

2

Return differential

D(REER)

Obs

DW

Aggregate
Debt
Portfolio equity
FDI

0.35
0.15
1.45
0.77

(3.84)***
(1.35)
(2.95)***
(2.8) ***

0.18
0.09
0.24
0.23

24
18
18
24

2.18
1.85
1.94
1.42

Stocks (US minus ROW)
1.46
Bonds (US minus ROW)
0.71
Growth differ. (US minus ROW) 0.02

(3.12)***
(2.96)***
(.49)

0.31
0.27
-0.04

24
24
24

1.39
2.32
1.57

Note: The dependent variable is the differential between the rate of return on assets held by
nonresidents in the U.S. and the rate of return in the rest of the world. The explanatory
variable is the rate of appreciation of the U.S. real effective exchange rate. Estimation by
OLS, with t-statistics calculated using Newey-West standard errors in parenthesis. See text
for definitions of variables. ***,**,* denote significance at the 1, 5 and 10 percent levels
respectively.

- 29 -

Table 7. Real Exchange Rate, Rate of Return Differentials, and Portfolio Factors
(1)

(2)
Debt
return
differential

(3)
(4)
(5)
Equity
FDI return Stocks
return
differential return
differential
differential

0.78
(13.8)***

0.5
(2.04)*

0.76
(2.6) **

1.33
(5.5) ***

0.78
(3.1)***

0.05
(1.1)

0.51
(1.92)*

0.23
(2.78)**

0.83
(5.3)***

0.47
(1.1)

0.9
(2.75) **

0.58
(1.63)

-0.01
(.09)

-0.34
(.39)

0.27
(.88)

-1.11
(4.6)***

-0.45
(.96)

-0.78
(4.7)***

1.43
(1.62)

0.19
(1.79)*

-0.85
(1.82)*

-0.15
(.94)

-0.02
(1.52)

-0.47
(.94)

0.03
(2.35)**

-0.7
(1.4)

0.13
(1.3)

DREER

DREERUS
NFAYtUS
−1
ST _ SHAREtUS
−1
FL _ SHAREtUS
−1
Adjusted R

2

US

(6)
(7)
Bonds
Growth
return
differential
differential

0.24

0.8

0.55

0.16

0.54

0.27

-0.02

Observations

22

18

18

23

23

23

23

DW

1.55

2.33

1.71

1.81

1.79

2.5

1.79

Note: In Column (1) the dependent variable is the percentage change in the U.S. real
effective exchange rate. In Columns (2)-(4), the dependent variable is the difference between
the rate of return on assets held in the U.S. by foreign investors and the rate of return on other
cross-border assets held by foreign investors. In Column (5) ((6)) the dependent variable is
the difference between equity (debt) returns in the U.S. and in the rest of the world. In
Column (7) the dependent variable is the difference between the growth rate in the U.S. and
the rest of the world. RHS variables are defined as follows: DREERUS is the rate of U.S. real
appreciation vis-à-vis its trading partners, NFAY US is the ratio of U.S. net foreign assets to
GDP, ST _ SHARE US is the share of the U.S. in the rest of the world’s total cross-border
holdings in the asset category being considered, and FL _ SHARE US is the share of capital
flows to the U.S. in the rest of the world’s total cross-border capital flows in the asset
category being considered. Estimation by OLS, with t-statistics calculated using Newey-West
standard errors. The regression in column (1) also includes an AR(1) correction. ***,**,*
denote significance at the 1, 5 and 10 percent levels respectively.

- 30 -

Table 8. Capital Flows and Portfolio Factors

Lagged Dep. Var.

Lagged returns
LUS
t −1

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

All flows

All flows

To the
U.S.

To U.S.
relative
to ROW

Debt
flows
To the
U.S.

Debt
flows
To U.S.
relative
to ROW

Equity
flows
To the
U.S.

Equity
flows
To U.S.
relative
to ROW

FDI
flows
To the
U.S.

FDI
flows
To U.S.
relative
to ROW

0.54
(3.0)***

0.61
(3.0) ***

0.24
(1.53)

0.3
(1.45)

-0.83
(5.26)***

-0.53
(2.11)*

0.58
(4.4)***

0.36
(1.99)*

-0.06
(.32)

-0.02
(.4)

-1.44
(3.56)***

0.09
(.34)

0.16
(4.93)***

0.11
(.09)

0.17
(2.77)**

-0.06
(.6)

0.11
(1.11)

ST _ SHAREtUS
−1
Adjusted R

2

Observations
DW

-0.09
(.8)
-0.18
(.61)

1.14
(5.75)***
-0.23
(.63)

-0.19
(2.42)**
-9.38
(3.4)***

-0.2
(1.82)*

0.33

0.52

0.37

-0.14

0.67

0.2

0.55

0.33

18

21

15

15

15

15

21

21

1.62

1.64

1.92

1.3

1.87

1.93

1.9

1.99

Note: Estimation by OLS, with t-statistics calculated using Newey-West standard errors. In
columns (1), (3), (5), and (7) the dependent variable is capital flows to the U.S. in the
respective category, scaled by outstanding U.S. liabilities. In the remaining columns, the
dependent variable is the difference between capital flows to the U.S. and capital flows to
other destinations, scaled by the respective size of outstanding liabilities. As for RHS
variables, lagged returns are returns on U.S. external liabilities for columns (1), (3), (5), and
(7), and the return differential between the U.S. and the ROW for columns (2), (4), (6), (8).
Lt −1 is the outstanding stock of U.S. external liabilities in the category being considered,
scaled by GDP, and ST _ SHARE US is the share of the U.S. in the rest of the world’s total
cross-border holdings in the asset category being considered. ***,**,* denote significance at
the 1, 5 and 10 percent levels respectively.

- 31 -

Figure 1. Current account balances (percent of world GDP)
1.0

0.5

Emg Asia

Japan

Swi+Nordics
0.0

Middle East
euro area

-0.5

-1.0
United States

-1.5

-2.0
1994

1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

Note: the emerging Asia group includes China, Hong Kong SAR, Taiwan prov. of China,
Korea, Malaysia, Singapore, and Thailand. The Swi + Nordics group includes Norway,
Sweden, and Switzerland. The Middle East group includes Algeria, Bahrain, Egypt, Iran,
Jordan, Kuwait, Libya, Saudi Arabia, Syria, United Arab Emirates, and Yemen.

- 32 -

Figure 2. Net foreign assets (percent of world GDP)
6

4
Japan
Emerging Asia

2

Swi + Nordics
Middle East

0

-2

euro area

-4

-6

United States

-8

-10
1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

Note: the emerging Asia group includes China, Hong Kong SAR, Taiwan prov. of China,
Korea, Malaysia, Singapore, and Thailand. The Swi + Nordics group includes Norway,
Sweden, and Switzerland. The Middle East group includes Algeria, Bahrain, Egypt, Iran,
Jordan, Kuwait, Libya, Saudi Arabia, Syria, United Arab Emirates, and Yemen.

- 33 -

Figure 3. Standard deviation of net foreign assets across countries, 1980-2003
0.6

0.015

0.5

NFA/GDP (left scale)
0.01

0.4

0.005
NFA/world GDP (right scale)

0.3

0.2

0
1980

1982

1984

1986

1988

1990

1992

1994

1996

1998

2000

2002

Note: the dashed line plots the standard deviation in the ratio of net foreign assets to GDP
and the solid line the standard deviation in the ratio of net foreign assets to domestic GDP for
a large set of industrial countries and emerging markets. The samples excludes transition
economies 9for which data are available only since the early 1990s) and extreme outliers
such as small financial centers, with net financial positions equal to multiples of GDP.

- 34 -

Figure 4. Grubel-Lloyd index (G-7 and cross-country average)
0.7

0.96

0.68
0.95
0.66
0.94

0.64

G-7 (right scale)

0.62

0.93

0.6
0.92

0.58
0.56

0.91

0.54
0.90

unweighted average (left scale)

0.52
0.5

0.89
1980

1982

1984

1986

1988

1990

1992

1994

1996

1998

2000

2002

Note: see Section II for a description of the construction of the Grubel-Lloyd index.

- 35 -

Figure 5. United States: capital gains and the real exchange rate, 1980-2004
16%

140

14%
130

12%
10%

120

8%
6%

110

4%
100

2%
0%
1980

1982

1984

1986

1988

1990

1992

1994

1996

1998

2000

2002

2004 90

-2%
-4%

80
capital gain (ratio of GDP)

RER

Figure 6. Japan: capital gains and the real exchange rate, 1980-2004
0%

110
1980

1982

1984

1986

1988

1990

1992

1994

1996

1998

2000

2002

2004
105

-2%
100
-4%

95
90

-6%

85
-8%

80
75

-10%

70
-12%
65
-14%

60
Capital gains (ratio of GDP)

Real exchange rate

Note: capital gains are the difference between the net foreign asset position and cumulative
capital flows (both scaled by GDP), with an arbitrary starting value of zero in 1980.

- 36 -

Figure 7. Share of the United States in the Foreign Asset Portfolio of International Investors
55
50
Portfolio equity + FDI liabilities
45
40
35
30
Total liabilities
25
20

Debt liabilities

15
1980

1982

1984

1986

1988

1990

1992

1994

1996

1998

2000

2002

Note: Total liabilities are U.S. gross external liabilities scaled by total foreign assets of the
rest of the world; portfolio equity + FDI liabilities are the sum of gross U.S. FDI and
portfolio equity liabilities, scaled by the portfolio equity and FDI assets of the rest of the
world; and debt liabilities are gross U.S. portfolio debt and other liabilities, scaled by total
(portfolio and other) debt assets of the rest of the world.

- 37 -

Figure 8. United States: net external position, underlying components (ratio of GDP)
10%

Net portfolio equity +
FDI

5%

0%
Net other claims
-5%

-10%

Net portfolio debt

-15%

-20%

-25%

-30%
1980

1982

1984

1986

1988

1990

1992

1994

1996

1998

2000

2002

2004

Note: net portfolio equity + FDI equals the difference between the sum of FDI and portfolio
equity assets and the sum of FDI and portfolio equity liabilities. Net other indicates the
difference between the stock of other assets and other liabilities, and net portfolio debt the
difference between the sum of portfolio debt assets and reserves and the stock of portfolio
debt liabilities.

- 38 -

Figure 9. Composition of capital flows to the United States, 1980-2004
(share of outstanding liabilities)
0.25

0.2
Debt flows

0.15

0.1

Portfolio equity + FDI flows
0.05

0
1980

1982

1984

1986

1988

1990

1992

1994

1996

1998

2000

2002

2004

Note: Equity inflows to the United States (portfolio and FDI) are scaled by the outstanding
stock of U.S. equity liabilities; debt inflows (portfolio and other) are scaled by outstanding
stock of U.S. debt liabilities.

- 39 -

Figure 10. United States: Composition of Capital Inflows (ratio of GDP)
14%
12%
10%
Other debt
8%

Portfolio debt
FDI

6%

Equity

4%
2%
0%
-2%
1980

1982

1984

1986

1988

1990

Source: IMF, Balance of Payments Statistics.

1992

1994

1996

1998

2000

2002

2004

- 40 -

Figure 11. Capital flows to the United States (percent of rest of the world’s capital outflows)
50%

40%

Debt

30%

20%

Portfolio equity + FDI

10%

0%
1980

1982

1984

1986

1988

1990

1992

1994

1996

1998

2000

2002

Note: The solid line (“Debt”) is the three-year moving average of debt flows to the United
States as a share of total debt outflows of the rest of the world. The broken line (“Portfolio
equity+FDI”) is the three-year moving average of the sum of portfolio equity and FDI
inflows to the United States, as a share of portfolio equity + FDI outflows of the rest of the
world. Source: Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2005b).

- 41 -

Figure 12. United States: Official Inflows as a percent of Total Debt Inflows, 1999-2004
40

35

30

25

20

15

10

5

0
1999

2000

2001

Note: Data source is Bureau of Economic Analysis.

2002

2003

2004

- 42 -

Figure 13. Official Reserves in percent of Total Foreign Liabilities, Developing Countries
35

30

25

20

15

10
1980

1982

1984

1986

1988

1990

1992

1994

1996

1998

2000

2002

Note: Ratio of official reserves in percent of total foreign liabilities for the group of nonindustrial countries.

