NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE INTERGENERATIONAL EFFECTS
OF WORKER DISPLACEMENT
Philip Oreopolous
Marianne Page
Ann Huff Stevens
Working Paper 11587
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11587
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2005

This work was completed while Oreopoulos was a Statistics Canada Research Fellow and member of the
Family and Labour Studies Division of Statistics Canada. The financial support of the National Science
Foundation is gratefully acknowledged. We also wish to thank Miles Corak, and seminar participants at
Brown University, MIT, Princeton University, Stanford University, Yale University, the University of
California Berkeley, UCLA, the University of Toronto and the NBER summer institute for their helpful
comments. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by Philip Oreopolous, Marianne Page and Ann Huff Stevens. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

The Intergenerational Effect of Worker Displacement
Philip Oreopolous, Marianne Page and Ann Huff Stevens
NBER Working Paper No. 11587
August 2005
JEL No. J0
ABSTRACT

This paper uses variation induced by firm closures to explore the intergenerational effects of worker
displacement. Using a Canadian panel of administrative data that follows almost 60,000 father-child
pairs from 1978 to 1999 and includes detailed information about the firms at which the father
worked, we construct narrow treatment and control groups whose fathers had the same level of
permanent income prior to 1982 when some of the fathers were displaced. We demonstrate that job
loss leads to large permanent reductions in family income. Comparing outcomes among individuals
whose fathers experienced an employment shock to outcomes among individuals whose fathers did
not, we find that children whose fathers were displaced have annual earnings about 9% lower than
similar children whose fathers did not experience an employment shock. They are also more likely
to receive unemployment insurance and social assistance. The estimates are driven by the
experiences of children whose family income was at the bottom of the income distribution, and are
robust to a number of specification checks.

Philip Oreopoulos
University of Toronto
150 Saint George Street
Toronto, ON M5S 3G7
CANADA
and NBER
oreo@economics.utoronto.ca
Marianne Page
Department of Economics
1 Shields Avenue
University of California, Davis
Davis, CA 95616
and NBER
mepage@ucdavis.edu

Ann Huff Stevens
Department of Economics
1 Shields Avenue
University of California, Davis
Davis, CA 95616
and NBER
annstevens@ucdavis.edu

It is well known that children from affluent families tend to have higher incomes as
adults than children who grow up in poor families (Solon, 1992; Zimmerman, 1992). This pattern
has convinced many social scientists and policymakers that family income plays an important
role in determining children’s life chances. Duncan and Brooks-Gunn (1997), for example,
suggest that raising the incomes of poor families “…will enhance the cognitive development of
children and may improve their chances of success in the labor market during adulthood.” Policy
discussions often invoke the legacy of growing up in a poor family as evidence of the potential
effectiveness of income transfer programs such as Aid to Families with Dependent Children.
Despite such claims, the process that generates the intergenerational income correlation is not
well understood. One possibility is that differences in income lead to differences in parents’
monetary investments in their children. It is just as likely, however, that differences in income
reflect differences in innate parental characteristics that parents pass onto their children.
Certainly, the magnitude of the intergenerational correlation is hard to ignore. Solon’s
(1999) survey of the intergenerational mobility literature suggests that the correlation between
fathers’ and sons’ earnings is about 0.4. At issue is the extent to which this correlation reflects
the importance of monetary vs. non-monetary family background characteristics. High income
parents are likely to have other attributes such as high ability or motivation that independently
have a positive affect on their children’s outcomes. Cross-sectional comparisons of individuals
who grew up in families with different income levels are thus likely to overstate the degree to
which family resources matter.
This paper examines the effect of firm closings on the next generation’s outcomes.1
Jacobsen, Lalonde and Sullivan (1993) (henceforth, JLS) and Stevens (1997) have documented
that workers displaced by such events experience substantive long-lasting reductions in earnings,
and they argue that firm closings can be thought of as exogenous employment shocks after
conditioning on pre-displacement earnings. Our estimation strategy constructs narrow treatment
1

When we include mass layoffs in our treatment group we obtain very similar results.

1

and control groups of individuals whose fathers had the same levels of permanent income prior to
1982 when some of the fathers were displaced, and worked in firms of similar size and industry.
Like previous studies, we demonstrate that displacement leads to permanent reductions in family
income.
Comparing outcomes among individuals whose fathers experienced an employment
shock to outcomes among individuals whose fathers did not, we find that children whose fathers
were displaced have annual earnings that are about 9% lower than similar children whose fathers
did not experience an employment shock. They are also more likely to receive unemployment
insurance and social assistance. The estimates are driven by the experiences of children whose
family income was at the bottom of the income distribution. The results suggest that the long
term consequences of unexpected job loss extend beyond the effect on one’s own income to the
eventual labor market outcomes of one’s children.

I. Background
Understanding which factors contribute to the intergenerational transmission of income is
crucial to the development of successful public policies. In the United States there are a number
of programs designed to help low-income children, including Temporary Assistance to Needy
Families, Medicaid, Head Start, Food Stamps, and public education. Some of these involve
income transfers whereas others are direct-intervention programs.

Mayer (1997) notes that

throughout the history of the United States social policy has swung back and forth between the
belief that material deprivation is the primary reason that poor children have poor outcomes, and
the belief that parental characteristics that contribute to low incomes are mostly responsible for
poor children’s failure. Informed social policy depends critically on understanding which of
these beliefs is correct. If, for example, money is a key determinant of children’s outcomes then
the effects of policies on family income should be a central consideration when evaluating their
costs and benefits. On the other hand, if children’s outcomes are mostly determined by innate

2

parental characteristics that are correlated with income then social policy should be less
concerned with income redistribution and focus more on addressing deficits in the other
characteristics.
A number of cross-sectional studies show that positive income correlations remain even
after controlling for a variety of parental characteristics (e.g. Corcoran et. al, 1992; Duncan and
Hill, 1987), but these correlations are likely to overstate the degree to which parental income
matters if some parental attributes that are positively correlated with income and children’s
outcomes cannot be observed.

It is difficult to find compelling variation in income that is

unrelated to parental characteristics that might affect child development (Duncan and BrooksGunn, 1997; Haveman and Wolfe, 1995).

Shea (2000), for example, uses cross-sectional

variation in fathers’ earnings due to union status, industry wage differentials and involuntary job
loss to identify the effects of parental income, but other researchers (Dickens and Katz, 1987;
Gibbons and Katz, 1992; Lee, 1978) have argued that wage differences associated with these job
characteristics reflect workers’ innate attributes.

Dahl and Lochner (2004) also create an

instrument for income that includes family background characteristics (as well as changes in
income induced by the Earned Income Tax Credit).2 Mayer (1997) controls for unobserved
parental characteristics by adding to her regression a measure of parental income taken after the
child’s outcome is observed. She argues that future income is exogenous with respect to a
previously measured outcome, so that it can serve as a proxy for the unmeasured components of
family background. The success of this strategy requires that parental investment when the child
is still at home is not influenced by the anticipation of future income, however. Blau (1999),
Duncan, et. al. (1998) and Levy and Duncan (1999) all compare outcomes across siblings with
different age-specific family income levels, but this approach can only identify the effect of

2

The extent to which Dahl and Lochner’s identification is driven by the EITC vs. these other family
background characteristics is unclear to us.

3

transitory changes in family income and it has been well documented that permanent income has
a much stronger relationship with children’s long-term outcomes (Solon, 1999).3
Most existing studies that explore the effects of family resources on offspring’s outcomes
have been based on longitudinal datasets such as the Panel Study of Income Dynamics and the
National Longitudinal Study of Youth, which are relatively small. It has turned out to be difficult
to precisely identify parental income effects with so little data. The confidence interval around
Shea’s IV estimate of the effect of father’s earnings on children’s earnings, for example, includes
effects ranging from approximately -30% to 30%. Solon’s (1999) comparison of sibling and
intergenerational earnings correlations suggests that no more than 40% of the similarity in
brothers’ outcomes is likely due to factors related to their parents’ income. While this leaves open
the possibility that family income plays an important role in children’s development it also
suggests that when the data are limited to only a few thousand observations the effect may not be
strong enough to estimate precisely.
This paper makes several contributions to the growing literature on intergenerational
income mobility. First, by exploiting variation that is induced by firm closings, we can separate
the effect of a long-lasting income shock from the effect of innate parental attributes. While
cross-sectional differences in fathers’ labor market characteristics are likely to reflect individual
attributes, our longitudinal data allow us to construct narrow groups of “treatment” and “control”
children whose families look identical before 1982, when some of the fathers lost their jobs. We
base our analysis on a sample of children whose fathers worked continuously for the same firm
between 1978 and 1981, and control for average family income, regional location, industry, and
3

A very different approach is taken by Acemoglu and Pischke (2001) who use long-run trends in earnings
levels at different points in the U.S. earnings distribution (and in different geographic regions) to generate
exogenous income variation. They find that demographic groups with more sharply rising incomes also
experienced larger increases in their children’s educational attainment. One puzzle with these results is
that, in their preferred specification, the return to education has no significant effect on college enrollment
decisions. This may reflect the fact that their framework makes it difficult to control for both the current
return to education and the change in parental income, since both are driven by the same national trends in
returns to skill. The rise in return to skill should affect children’s education directly, and so their strategy
may not provide a valid instrument for changes in parental income.

4

firm size during those four years. Thus, we are able to compare outcomes across children whose
families would likely have had the same level of permanent income if the treatment fathers had
not been displaced.

A second advantage of our study is that it makes use of a longitudinal

dataset that contains earnings and income observations on almost 60,000 father-son pairs. The
sheer magnitude of this dataset substantially increases the precision with which intergenerational
relationships can be estimated.

II. Empirical Strategy
We conduct our analysis in two stages. In the first stage, we use methods developed in
the displacement literature to demonstrate that displacement has a substantive and long-lasting
effect on a family’s resources. The purpose of this part of the analysis is to make a convincing
case that displacement produces an exogenous shock to family income. In the second stage, we
use this information to identify the intergenerational effect of a family income shock.

II.A. Estimating the Effect of Displacement on a Family’s Resources
We begin by following the empirical strategy introduced by JLS, and demonstrate that
displacement has a large, persistent effect on a family’s monetary resources.

We start by

regressing annual measures of family income, father’s income and father’s earnings on a full set
of father’s age fixed effects and a set of province by year dummy variables.4 The residual from
this regression provides an annual estimate of family resources that is purged of life-cycle effects,
province specific business-cycle effects and province-specific trends in earnings. We then regress
this residual on a set of dummy variables indicating whether the father left his firm because the
firm closed in a current, future or previous year. Specifically, given longitudinal data on fathers’
labor market experiences, the effect of displacement on a family’s resources is modeled in the
following way:
4

The province fixed effect is determined in the initial year the father is observed (1978).

5

ln I ipt = Dipt δ + α i + u ipt

(1)

where ln Iipt is the log of the residual of family i’s resources in province p and year t, and Dipt is a
vector of dummy variables indicating that a displacement has taken (or will take) place in a
future, current, or previous year. The error term has two components, a family-specific fixed
effect, α i , and a random component, u ipt . Since the model includes fixed effects, individual
characteristics that do not vary over time, such as race and education, are not included.
The vector of displacement indicators (Dipt) contains three types of variables: dummy
variables that equal one in the years prior to the displacement, a dummy variable equal to one in
the year that the father loses his job, and a series of dummy variables indicating that a
displacement took place in a previous year. The first set of indicator variables captures the
possibility that the father’s wages may begin to deteriorate prior to the actual displacement. This
might happen if wages are cut when the firm hits difficult times: failure to include these
dummies would lead to a biased estimate of the effect of the displacement. Our model, therefore,
includes a dummy variable for each of the three years before the job loss occurs. The dummy
variable indicating the year of the displacement captures its immediate effect on family resources,
whereas the coefficients on the set of variables indicating that a displacement occurred in a
previous year will reflect the persistence of the displacement effect over time. We follow the
post-displacement period for eight years, including a dummy variable indicating that eight or
more years have elapsed since the displacement took place. An eight year reduction in family
resources comprises a significant fraction of the time a child is growing up, though most of the
children in our sample will no longer be living at home at the end of the eight year period.
The error term in the above equation contains a time-invariant family-specific effect, α i ,
which measures average resources net of displacement. By including this fixed effect, we are
able to separate variation in resources that is likely to be correlated with unobserved parental
characteristics from variation due to a random shock.

6

At the same time, the series of

displacement dummies allows us to trace out the economic consequences in each year following
the job loss and to estimate both the short-term and long-term effects, which may differ.
As will be discussed in Section III.B. the results from this exercise show that
displacement substantively reduces family resources for many years. In order to facilitate our
subsequent analyses, we will also estimate the effect of displacement using a version of equation
(1) that replaces the individual fixed effect with the average of family income between 1978 and
1980 (which is at least two years before any displacements occur) and replaces the vector of
displacement dummies with a single indictor for whether or not a displacement has occurred in
the last five years or will occur in the next two years:

ln I ipt = Shock ipt δ + φAvgInc78−80 + u ipt

(2)

where AvgInc is the family’s (or father’s) average income or earnings between 1978 and 1980,
and Shock is a dummy variable equal to 1 if a displacement occurs during the displacement
window described above. The coefficient on the Shock dummy indicates the average effect of
displacement on family income over the years we study. The estimates produced by equations 12 will inform us about the magnitude and persistence of the economic losses that result from
displacement.

II.B. Estimating the Effect of Displacement on Children’s Outcomes
After documenting that job loss leads to a large, persistent decline in resources, we next
use information about whether a child’s father lost his job to identify the effect of an income
shock on children’s long-term economic outcomes. In this part of our analysis, we regress a
measure of the child’s economic well-being on average family income between 1978 and 1980
and the Shock dummy.

Oi = a + bAvgInc78−80 + cShock i + ε i

(3)

7

where Oi represents an economic outcome for child i.

Thus we compare outcomes across

children whose parents experienced a job loss to outcomes for those whose parents did not,
controlling for family income in the pre-displacement years. We also include a number of
additional firm, region, and industry control variables that will be discussed in the next section.
The key to this identification strategy is the assumption that after conditioning on fathers with
similar income, in similar firms, industries, and regions, the families that experienced a
displacement were ex ante no different from those who did not.

III. Data
Our analysis is based on data from the Intergenerational Income Database (IID), which is
maintained by the Family and Labour Studies Division of Statistics Canada. The IID links tax
information on children born between 1963 and 1970 to data on their parents, for all years
between 1978 and 1999. The links were made possible using the T1 Family File (T1FF) of the
Small Area and Administrative Data Division of Statistics Canada.
The T1FF is a data set of individual tax records that has been processed in a way that
matches members of each tax filer’s family. The primary way in which children are matched to
their parents is through their name and address. In order to be identified as living in the same
family, the child must file from the same address as the parent at least once during a five year
period beginning when the child is 16-19 years of age. Evidence presented in Oreopolous (2003)
suggests that this matching process picks up most adolescents in Canada. Younger children are
more likely to be living at home, but less likely to file a tax return.5 All Canadians must file a tax
return if they pay income tax in that year, and if they claim unemployment insurance benefits, a
nonrefundable tuition tax credit or the monthly deduction for enrollment in a full-time education
program. Since a child need only file once over a five year period in order to be included in the
5

Note that a child may live away from home but still file from a parent’s address, and thus be included in
the IID. Children who are away at college fall into this category.

8

sample, the vast majority of children make it into the IID. From the 1981 Canadian census, 96
percent of 17 year olds lived with a parent and 53 percent received non-transfer income in the
previous year. Over 80 percent of 20 year olds lived with a parent, for and 73 percent of them
received non-transfer income. Oreopoulos reports that the database includes 72 percent of youth
who were 16-19 in 1982, 1984 or 1986 (the years in which the matches took place).
One way of exploring the representativeness of our sample is to compare the income
distribution for children later in life to the income distribution for the same cohorts in the Census.
Figure 1 plots 1995 income distributions for 25-33 year olds in the IID and the 1996 Census. It is
clear that the IID misses a fraction of children who ultimately end up at the low end of the income
distribution. In Section IV, we show that this is the group for whom our results are strongest,
however, so it is likely that, if anything, this omission biases our estimates towards zero.
We have also examined whether there are differences in family size between those
households with fathers who worked in firms that closed vs. those that did not. If there is
selection into our treatment and control groups we might expect to see a correlation between
family size (based on the number of children matching to the parents) and the corresponding
father’s displacement category. We do not find this. In 1982, the average number of children
aged 12 to 19 per family is 1.81 among those whose fathers are classified as displaced, and 1.82
among those whose fathers are not.
The IID provides detailed administrative data on the incomes of children and their
matched parents from 1978 to 1999. It also includes information on their age, gender, marital
status, family composition, and residential address as well as an identification number for the firm
at which the individual is employed. This ID number is used to match fathers in the IID to
information about their firms from Statistics Canada’s Longitudinal Employment Analysis
Program database (LEAP). LEAP is a company-level database that includes all employers in
Canada, both corporate and unincorporated. The database tracks the employment and payroll

9

characteristics of individual firms from their year of entry to their year of exit.6 Employers in
Canada are required to register a payroll deduction account and issue a T4 slip to each employee
that summarizes earnings received in a given fiscal year. The LEAP database includes every
business that issues a T4 taxation slip.
Only those already in the IID are matched to the LEAP firm identification number. Firm
size is calculated as the number of fathers in the same firm in a given year. An internal match to
the full LEAP database at Statistics Canada indicates the average ratio between total firm size and
total father firm size for firms identified in the IID is 9.9. Thus, on average, the IID contains
approximately a one-in-ten (non-random) sample of all employees in firms matched in both the
IID and the LEAP database. Our sample also includes a 3 digit industry code for each firm and
province location of firm’s head office.
The longitudinal nature of the matched IID allows firm entry and exit to be identified on
an annual basis. A firm closure is assigned in a given year if there are no IID fathers working at
the firm in any following year (through 1999).7 In order to distinguish true closures from
company reorganizations that lead to new identification codes, however, we do not count a firm
as being closed if 35% or more of its workers move to the same “new” firm.8 9
Our main sample is limited to individuals who were between the ages of 12 and 14 in
1982. Information on older children is available in the IID, but we do not include these children
because they are likely to have left home shortly after the displacement occurred. Information on

6

Self-employed persons who do not draw a salary are not included on the LEAP database. In addition,
businesses comprised solely of individuals or partnerships who do not draw a salary are also excluded from
the LEAP.
7
This may lead to some misclassifications. For example, if a firm disappears in 1983, we will identify the
closing year as 1982. In some cases, the firm may have closed early enough in 1983 that it did not file T-4
slips.
8
We examined the sensitivity of the results around this threshold using alternative values of 15 and 50
percent. Coefficient estimates for the main tables were similar. The standard errors were somewhat larger
for the 15 percent threshold.
9
We also explored displacement through mass layoffs. Identifying mass-layoffs is more difficult than firm
closures because we can only observe what fraction of the firm leaves in between years, and this fraction
depends on the firm’s size. Firms can choose who leaves and for this reason we chose to focus on firm
closures.

10

younger children is not available. Children whose fathers are missing tax data are eliminated
because without the tax data we cannot observe fathers’ earnings, place of employment or labor
market status. This restriction reduces the sample of fathers by about 11 percent. We also restrict
the sample to children whose fathers were between the ages of 30 and 50 in 1978. This ensures
that we are focusing on fathers whose incomes would have been relatively stable: earnings of
young workers tend to be more volatile than those of workers who are over 30, and Stevens
(1997) shows that the long-term effects of displacement are largest for workers with more years
of tenure.
We also restrict our main sample to fathers who are initially working at firms that
employed between 2 and 500 men (in the IID). We require that the firm employ at least 2 fathers
because one-father firms will include self-employed fathers, and in order to reduce the possibility
of mislabeling as displaced, men who voluntarily left small firms. An upper bound of 500 is
chosen because closures at larger firms are extremely rare, and we were concerned that including
such firms would introduce heterogeneity across the treatments and controls. Wage premiums are
associated with large firms. Finally, we eliminate children whose fathers earned more than
$1,000,000 (measured in 1999 dollars) in a single year, in order to be sure that our estimates are
not driven by outliers.
The treatment group consists of 12 to 14 year olds whose fathers experienced a
displacement in 1982. Our primary control group consists of individuals whose fathers stayed
with the firm through 1982, but who may have left after that. Fifty-six percent of fathers in this
control group remained at the same firm until at least 1988. As part of our sensitivity analysis,
we explore the consequences of including early leavers in our sample. We also show that the
early exit rate (before 1982) is not correlated with closure in 1982, a finding similar to that of
Hamermesh and Pfann (1996).
Our analysis focuses on the effects of displacements that occurred in 1982. Choosing this
date allows us to base our sample on the children of fathers who had at least four years of tenure

11

at the firm, while maximizing the number of years the children would be likely to be living at
home after the displacement occurs.

Another advantage of focusing on displacements that

occurred in 1982 is that it was the beginning of a substantial and prolonged recession in Canada
so that the number of displacement events is high.
The IID includes information on three socioeconomic outcomes: earnings, receipt of
unemployment benefits, and receipt of social assistance.

We use information that is available

between 1995 and 1999 to create three dependent variables: the log of a five-year earnings
average, an indicator for whether the individual received unemployment insurance during the five
year period, and an indicator for whether the individual received social assistance during the five
year period. Since earnings generally increase with age, we adjust our earnings measure by
regressing it on a set of age dummies and use the residual as our dependent variable.

IV. Results
IV.A. Summary Statistics
Sample summary statistics are shown in Table 1.

Appendix Table A.1 includes

additional information about the firms in our sample. As described above, most of our analysis
focuses on children whose fathers were employed at firms with between 2 and 500 fathers. Our
sample contains 54,145 fathers, 1,541 of whom experienced a firm closure in 1982. These men
worked at 14,857 different firms, 509 of which closed during 1982.10 Control fathers remained
with the same firm between 1978 and 1982.
Table 1 shows separate statistics for our treatment and control groups. Fathers’ average
age, income and earnings are initially very similar across the two groups, but by 1988, six years
after treatment fathers have lost their jobs, the labor market characteristics of the two groups are
10

The control group in the main sample may include fathers displaced after 1982. The fraction of
displaced workers in the control, however, is likely to be small. We also considered an alternative control
group that remained in the same firm between 1978 and 1988 and produced similar results with this group
than with the control group we use here. The control group in our main sample is free to leave old and
enter new firms, whether such a move occurs for positive or negative reasons.

12

quite different.

Average earnings of displaced fathers are roughly $43,000, while the average

earnings of the control fathers are roughly $49,000. Not surprisingly, the displaced fathers are
also much more likely to be receiving unemployment insurance.11

Table 1 thus provides some

initial evidence that firm closings generate substantial shocks to a family’s economic status. At
the same time, these shocks do not appear to affect other family background characteristics:
fathers’ marital status and mothers’ income, for example are very similar for the treatment and
control groups in both 1978 and 1988.
Table 1 also shows that treatment and control children have somewhat different labor
market outcomes. For example, average earnings between 1995 and 1998 are about $21,000
among those whose fathers experienced a job loss and $23,000 for those whose fathers did not.
Similarly, treatment children have higher rates of UI and SA receipt than the controls.
The last column of Table 1 provides these descriptive statistics for all individuals in the
IID who were 12-14 years old in 1982. Average family income is comparable, though slightly
higher for these children. Otherwise, the samples are very similar.

IV.B. The Monetary Costs of Displacement
In this section we document that displacement leads to a substantive long-term reduction
in family resources. We begin by graphing the average earnings trajectories of treatment and
control fathers. Our earnings measure is the residual from a regression of earnings on age and
province/year fixed effects, which allows us to abstract from life-cycle trends and provincespecific business cycles. Figure 2A makes clear that prior to 1982 the two groups experienced
virtually identical earnings trajectories, lending weight to our hope that the treatment and control
children come from similar backgrounds. At the same time we see that displacement produces a
large and persistent shock to earnings. Both of these findings are necessary to our identification
strategy. Figure 2B tells a similar story. Here we plot kernel density estimates of the earnings
11

Information on social assistance receipt is not available prior to 1992.

13

distributions for the two groups.

The distributions are very similar prior to 1982, but after 1982

the distribution among displaced fathers is shifted substantially to the left.
We see a similar pattern when we look at receipt of UI (Figure 2C).

12

As expected,

displaced fathers experience a spike in benefit receipt in 1982, and by 1983, almost 40 percent of
displaced father’s are receiving UI benefits. UI use falls thereafter, but gradually, and never to
the average levels of the non-displaced group. We also note that UI receipt rises in 1982 and
1983 among the control fathers. Some of these fathers may have been displaced from firms that
did not meet our definition of a closure, or they may have claimed UI without being laid off.
Table 2 presents the results from our regressions of fathers’ annual earnings and income
on the displacement dummies. Columns 1 through 3 show estimates based on equation (1) using
father’s earnings, father’s income, and parental income as the dependent variables. Like previous
studies, we find that family resources decline substantially when a job loss occurs. For example,
in the year following a job loss, father’s earnings fall by 30%, father’s income falls by 19%, and
parental income falls by 13%.13

14

Family resources recover somewhat over time, but even 8

years later earnings are approximately 15% lower than they would have been if the displacement
had not occurred. Similarly, the two income measures are reduced by 8 and 9 percent. These
estimates are all statistically significant, and indicate that displacement produces substantive and
persistent economic losses. They are similar to the estimates produced by JLS.
The first 3 rows of Table 2 also show what happens to family resources in the years prior
to the displacement. As foreshadowed in Figure 1, there is no evidence that earnings or income
begin to deteriorate prior to the job loss. The coefficient estimates are small and precisely
estimated.

This suggests that pre-displacement income can be included in our subsequent

analysis as a control for permanent income.
12

UI receipt is zero between 1978-1981, when the father was working at the same firm.
δ

The percentage effect on earnings is computed as e − 1.
A firm closure can occur anytime during the year. The fathers in our sample may, therefore, lose their
job anytime between early January and late December. As a result, spells of unemployment and earnings
losses may be larger in the year following the displacement than in the displacement year itself.

13
14

14

The last three columns of Table 2 provide the estimates produced by estimation of
equation (2).

This paired-down version of equation (1) summarizes the monetary effect of

displacement in a single coefficient, which is convenient for the second stage of the analysis.
Similar to the first three columns of the table, the estimates suggest that men who lost their jobs
in 1982 experienced permanent reductions in earnings and income of about 14%.15

IV.C. Intergenerational Effects of Displacement
Having established that displacement substantially reduces family resources, we now
investigate whether it produces intergenerational effects. Table 3 displays the results from this
second stage of our analysis. Dependent variables include the log of average earnings between
1995 and 1999, a dummy variable indicating whether the child filed for unemployment benefits
between 1995 and 1999, and a dummy variable indicating whether she filed for social assistance
between 1995 and 1999. Column 1 shows the results produced by an OLS regression of the log
of child’s earnings on the log of father’s income between 1978 and 1980. Sample variation in
this variable is likely to reflect variation in other family background characteristics though Figure
1 suggests that characteristics correlated with family income are unlikely to differ much between
the treatment and control children. The estimated coefficient of 0.38 is consistent with the
intergenerational correlations literature, which generally finds that the correlation between
American fathers’ and sons’ earnings is about 0.40.16

15

The estimates presented in Table 2 could be biased if displaced workers have unobserved characteristics
that not only lower their earnings levels, but also their rate of earnings growth. In order to address this
concern, we have also re-estimated equation (1) including father-specific time trends (equation 2). The
results are very similar. Since the inclusion of person-specific trends does not appear to alter our estimates,
we exclude these trends from the rest of our analyses.
16
The correlation is significantly higher than that estimated for Canada by Corak and Heisz (1999). Some
of the difference can be explained by our more selective sample of fathers in medium-sized firms for at
least 5 years. Our correlation falls to 0.35 without this selection. Our correlation further reduces to 0.30
when keeping only sons and daughters aged 29 to 31 (which corresponds to Corak and Heisz’ sample), and
falls further to 0.28 when only looking at sons. Corak and Heisz find a correlation of about 0.25.

15

In the next column we include only a dummy variable indicating whether the father lost
his job due to a plant closing. This variable has a powerful effect on the child’s earnings, which
are 8% lower than the earnings of those whose fathers were not displaced.

Remarkably, this

estimate barely changes even when we control for father’s pre-1981 income (column 3).
Furthermore, the point estimate on the log of pre-1981 income is robust to the inclusion of the
displacement dummy. Taken together, these results suggest that our treatment and control groups
are well-matched.
Column 4 adds firm-level controls to our model, including a quartic in father’s firm size,
the median wage, and 11 industry fixed effects. If the inclusion of these controls alters the
estimated displacement coefficient then we should be concerned about the possible influence of
family background characteristics. We also include 36 dummies indicating region of residence
and urban/rural status, since firm closings that occur in company towns may have long lasting
effects on local labor market conditions (Flint, Michigan comes to mind). If individuals tend to
stay in the same location where they grew up then the displacement coefficient may partly reflect
the fact that firm closings depress wages in the local economy.

The estimated displacement

coefficient is not changed by the addition of these controls, however. Furthermore, the estimates
are robust to the inclusion of fixed effects that capture even more finely defined industry
categories, such as at the three digit industry level.
The remainder of Table 3 shows what happens when we replace the dependent variable
with indicators for whether the child received unemployment benefits or social assistance. These
specifications also suggest that children whose parents experienced a job loss have worse
economic outcomes than those whose parents did not. We find that children whose fathers were
displaced are two percentage points more likely to receive unemployment benefits (though this is
not statistically significant), and 3 percentage points more likely to receive social assistance as
adults than those whose fathers remained at the same firm through 1982. The mean level of
social assistance receipt in the second generation is 0.10, so this estimated effect is very large.

16

We have also repeated the analysis separately for boys and girls. While the results are
not shown, they are very similar to those for the full sample, though the point estimates for girls
are much less precisely estimated. The noisiness of the girls’ estimates is undoubtedly driven by
the fact that many women in their 20’s and 30’s choose not to work, or to work fewer hours while
they are raising children, and not because they have poor labor market options. Women with no
earnings between 1995 and 1999 are not observed.
Table 4 shows the sensitivity of the base line results from including more detailed region
and industry fixed effects at the time of displacement. These estimates explore whether the main
results simply capture local or region-specific shocks that affect everyone in these categories, not
just those displaced. The analysis focuses on displacement effects within detailed region-industry
groups. Keeping observations where at least one displaced father is matched to another nondisplaced father within a region-industry category produced similar results.
The baseline estimates for the intergenerational effects of displacement on earnings,
unemployment receipt, and social assistance receipt are shown again in columns 1, 4, and 7
respectively. These results include 1-digit initial industry and initial province by urban-rural
status fixed effects. The second set of columns (2, 5, and 8) include 317 3-digit industry
categories. The estimated displacement effect increases slightly from -.086 to -.103 (while the
standard error increases slightly). If we further condition on 180 local regions by controlling for
the first 2-alphanumeric digits of the father’s postal code of initial residence, the point estimate
stays about the same, at -.094, although the effect is significant only at the 10 percent level. The
coefficients from estimating the displacement effects separately by fathers in rural or urban
(Census Metropolitan Areas) also leads to similar point estimates.
The fall in annual income for children appears too large to attribute solely to the decline
in family income from displacement.

Table 2 suggests that the average effect of father’s

displacement on his own log earnings is approximately .14. The corresponding reduction in the
second generation’s earnings is about .08. This would imply that a one dollar reduction in

17

father’s permanent earnings leads to a subsequent reduction in his son’s earnings of 34 cents.
This is a very large effect, although the standard error estimate is also large.
Job loss is likely to impact the family in other ways than on income. Displacement
disrupts the routine of everyday family life and may increase feelings of stress and anxiety.
Spouses may try to compensate for the loss in income by working more. Lower income levels or
subsequent re-employment could also be associated with residential moves, which are thought to
have a negative impact on children (McLanahan and Sandefur, 1994). We explore some of these
possibilities in Table 5 by estimating the effects of displacement on father’s marital status and
unemployment, mother’s earnings, and residential mobility. We can also examine whether the
inclusion of these variables affects the estimated effect of displacement on children’s outcomes.
Column 1 provides, at best, weak evidence that fathers who lost their jobs are more likely
to be divorced than fathers who did not lose their jobs. Two years after a firm closure, treatment
fathers are 1.5 percentage points more likely to have divorced than control fathers, but the gap
soon disappears, as the divorce rate among the control group rises for other reasons. We find
stronger evidence of effects of displacement on residential mobility. Compared to children whose
fathers are able to keep their jobs, displaced children are about 4 percentage points more likely to
have moved in the short run and about 2 percentage points more likely to move in the long run.
Unemployment insurance use is clearly higher among fathers displaced in 1982, even 8 years
later. There is no evidence of a change in mother’s earnings following the father’s displacement.
Table 6 shows that divorce and residential mobility do not seem to explain any part of the
displacement effects we estimate. Here we report results of regressions of kid’s outcomes on
family income prior to the job loss, the displacement dummy, and indicators for whether the
parents divorce or move. The displacement effects are very similar to those shown in Table 3,
suggesting that they are not driven by either divorce or residential mobility in the aftermath of
displacement.

18

An alternative way of investigating the possibility that our displacement effects are
generated by factors unrelated to income is to add the log of average earnings between 1982 and
1988 to our basic specification:

Oi = β 1 + β 2 AvgInc 78 −80 + β 3 AvgInc82 −88 + β 4 Shock i + ε i .

(4)

The estimates of β 3 and β 4 allow us to separate the displacement effect into an income
component and a part that is unrelated to income. The results of this exercise, which are
displayed in Table 7, suggest that the displacement effect is driven almost entirely by changes in
income. The inclusion of post-displacement income leads to a dramatic fall in the estimated
displacement coefficient, which is no longer statistically different from zero. At the same time,
the estimated effect of post-displacement income on child’s earnings is substantive. One needs to
be careful in interpreting this coefficient because differences in father’s 1983-1988 income,
controlling for displacement, may be driven by variation in unobserved characteristics. The
estimates in Table 7, however, are not consistent with a large portion of the displacement effects
being driven by non-monetary factors.
Next, we consider how the displacement effects vary across the income distribution.
Since the financial constraints and associated stress that accompany a job loss are likely to be
larger for low income families, we expect that the intergenerational displacement effects will be
largest for individuals who grew up in less affluent families.17 An advantage of basing our
analysis on such a large dataset is that we can investigate this issue directly. In Table 8 we
present displacement estimates separately by the family’s (initial) income quartile.

The

displacement effects appear to be concentrated among those families for whom father’s earnings
are in the lowest quartile. Among children in this group subsequent earnings are 17% lower than
they would have been if the father had not been displaced, and the probability of social assistance

17

For example, Coelli (2004) finds that low income teenagers whose parents experience a job loss are less
likely to attend college, and virtually all of this affect is concentrated among parents with only a high
school education or less

19

and UI receipt are 4 and 6 percentage points higher. In contrast, there is no evidence that there is
any intergenerational effect among families in the top two quartiles. This finding may provide
some insight as to why previous studies have failed to find income effects on the next generation:
small sample sizes make it difficult to estimate nonlinear effects, yet virtually all of the action
appears to be at the bottom of the income distribution.

IV.D. Robustness Checks
In the remainder of the paper we discuss several exercises that are designed to examine
the sensitivity of our results to model specification and variable definitions. First, we investigate
whether job losses that occur after children have left home have the same intergenerational effects
as those that occur when the children are younger.

A father’s displacement should have a

smaller psychological and financial effect on individuals who are no longer living in the
household, so estimates of the same magnitude may be a sign that the displacement coefficient is
picking up the effects of unobserved family background characteristics.
We investigate this possibility by aging our sample of children to 1989 and estimating the
intergenerational effects of parental displacements that occur in that year. By 1989 our sample
of children is between the ages of 19 and 21 and should be less sensitive to a parental job loss. In
Table 9 we see the results from this exercise. Labor market outcomes are measured for the same
cohorts of children whom we followed in Table 3, but by 1989 these children were 19-21 years
old. As in Table 3, children’s earnings and benefit receipt are measured between 1995 and 1999.
Unlike Table 3, however, we see no evidence that parental job loss affects the next generation’s
outcomes: the estimated coefficient on the displacement variable is 0.008, which is dramatically
lower than the estimated displacement effect at younger ages, and it is not statistically different
from zero.

Similarly, the estimated effect on children’s social assistance receipt is not

statistically significant. This finding is particularly noteworthy because father’s earnings losses
following a 1989 displacement are even larger than those following a job loss in 1982: fathers

20

who were displaced in 1989 experience short term earnings declines that are nearly double those
experienced by fathers who lost their jobs in 1982.
Finally, we consider the possibility that our results are driven by heterogeneity across
workers who leave firms before they close and those who are displaced at the time the firm shuts
down. Our sample includes the latter, but not the former. One concern is that those who leave a
firm before it closes are more able to obtain alternative jobs than those who stay until the firm
shuts down. In this case our estimates would reflect only the experiences of children whose
fathers are least likely to recover from displacement. We explore this possibility in Tables 10 and
11, where we extend our sample to include children whose fathers left the firm after 1979. Table
10 compares demographic characteristics in 1978 for those fathers who left the firm before it shut
down in 1982 to those who were displaced by the firm closure. There is no evidence that “early
leavers” have higher incomes, are of different ages, or have different marriage propensities than
those who remain in the firm until it closes. Table 11 shows the results of IV regressions in
which we use an indicator for whether or not the firm closed in 1982 as an instrument for whether
the father was displaced in 1982.

As we would expect, this instrument has strong predictive

power: the first stage coefficient estimate is highly significant, and indicates that working in a
firm that closes in 1982 increases the probability of leaving the firm in 1982 by 80%. Also as
expected, the reduced form regressions (not shown) of the child’s outcome on whether the firm
his father worked at in 1978 closed in 1982 produces smaller coefficient estimates than the
estimated effects of displacement, but the IV estimates are of similar magnitude to those in Table
3, and retain their statistical significance.

V. Conclusions
This paper provides new evidence on the transmission of economic status across
generations. While the existence of large intergenerational income correlations has lead many
researchers to conclude that family income is an important determinant of children’s eventual

21

economic success, the evidence in support of this hypothesis is surprisingly limited. Previous
research has been hampered by small sample sizes and the difficult task of controlling for
unobserved parental attributes. Because we exploit longitudinal variation that is induced by firm
closings we are able to separate the effect of a long-lasting income shock from the effect of innate
parental attributes. Our access to a dataset that contains nearly 60,000 father/child pairs aids our
ability to identify this effect.
We find that the adult earnings of children whose fathers were displaced are 8% lower
than earnings of similar individuals whose fathers did not experience an employment shock, even
after we account for fathers’ pre-displacement earnings, initial region of work, industry and firm
size. Relative to children whose fathers did not lose their jobs, children of displaced workers are
also more likely to receive unemployment insurance and social assistance. Our estimates are
driven almost exclusively by the experiences of individuals whose family income during
childhood was in the bottom quartile of the income distribution. The results suggest that the long
term consequences of unexpected job loss extend beyond the effect on one’s own income to the
eventual labor market outcomes of one’s children.
The interpretation of these results relies on the quality of the control group. Our analysis
assumes that the labor market experiences of control fathers provide an appropriate counterfactual
for what would have happened to the treatment fathers if the displacement had not occurred. Put
differently, we assume that conditional on 1978-1981 earnings and the other firm characteristic
and region control variables, the likelihood that a job loss occurs is the same for the treatment and
control groups. The fact that pre-displacement labor market characteristics are virtually identical
for the two groups is a promising sign that we have successfully controlled for innate family
background characteristics, but if treatment and control families differ in ways that affect the
second generation’s economic outcomes without affecting the economic outcomes of the parents,
then our displacement effects will not be identified.
characteristics would be, however.

22

It is hard to imagine what such

Finally, it is important to note that our estimation strategy captures the full effect of
displacement. We have demonstrated that job loss leads to large, long lasting reductions in a
family’s monetary resources, but it may also impose non-monetary costs (such as stress, or
residential mobility) on the family that affect the children’s long-run outcomes. If the nonmonetary costs of displacement are substantial, our results could overstate the effect of a pure
income shock. Suggestive evidence points to income as the major avenue through which
displacement affects families, however.
The intergenerational effects of displacement estimated here point to the possibility that,
particularly among the lowest income families, lasting reductions in family income can have
substantial negative effects on children.

This has not been a common finding in previous

investigations of the causal link between parental income and children’s outcomes.

The

qualitative difference between our findings and those in the earlier literature are likely to be
related to three factors: our use of a large sample that allows for precise estimation of effects; the
fact that displacement produces quite large and persistent reductions in family resources; and our
ability to look at differential effects of the income shock across the income distribution.

23

References

Blau, David M.; “The Effect of Income on Child Development,” Review of Economics and
Statistics, Vol. 81, No. 2, May 1999, pp. 261-76.

Corak, Miles and Andrew Heisz. 1999. "The Intergenerational Earnings and Income Mobility
of Canadian men: Evidence from Longitudinal Income Tax Data." Journal of Human
Resources 34(3):504-533.

Corcoran, Mary, Roger Gordon, Deborah Laren and Gary Solon; “The Association Between
Men’s Economic Status and Their Family and Community Origins,” The Journal of Human
Resources, Vol. 27, 575-601.

Dahl, Gordon and Lance Lochner, “The Impact of Family Income on Child Achievement,”
mimeo, 2004.

Dickens, William and Lawrence Katz,“Inter-Industry Wage Differences and Industry
Characteristics,” in Lang, K. and Leonard. J.,eds. Unemployment and the Structure of Labor
Markets, Oxford Press 1987.

Duncan, Greg J., and Jeanne Brooks-Gunn, Consequences of Growing up Poor, 1997, Russell
Sage Foundation, New York.

Duncan, Greg J., W. Yeung, Jeanne Brooks-Gunn, and Jeffery Smith, “How Much Does
Childhood Poverty Affect the Life Chances of Children?” American Sociological Review,
Vol. 63, 406-423, June 1998.

24

Eissa, Nada and Jeffrey B. Liebman, “Labor Supply Response to the Earned Income Tax
Credit,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111[2], May 1996, 605-637.

Eissa, Nada and Hilary W. Hoynes, “Taxes and the Labor Market Participation of Married
Couples: The Earned Income Tax Credit,” Journal of Public Economics, 88[9-10], August
2004, 1931-58.

Gibbons, Robert and Lawrence Katz, “Does Unmeasured Ability Explain Inter-Industry
Wage Differentials,” The Review of Economic Studies, 59(3), 515-535.

Hamermesh, Daniel S. and G. Pfann. "Turnover and the Dynamics of Labour Demand,"
Economica, August 1996.

Haveman, Robert and Barbara Wolfe; “The Determinants of Children’s Attainments: A
Review of Methods and Findings,” Journal of Economic Literature, 33(4):

1829-1878,

December, 1995.

Hill, Martha and Greg Duncan; “Parental Family Income and the Socioeconomic Attainment
of Children,” Social Science Research, Vol. 16, 37-73.

Jacobson, Louis S., Robert J. LaLonde, and Daniel G. Sullivan; “Earnings Losses of
Displaced Workers,” The American Economic Review, Vol. 83, No. 4, September 1993, pp.
685-709.

25

Lee, Lung-Fei; “Unionism and Wage Rates:

A Simultaneous Equations Model with

Qualitative and Limited Dependent Variables,” International Economic Review, 19(2), 415433.

Levy, D. and Greg Duncan; “Using Sibling Samples to Assess the Effect of Childhood
Family Income on Completed Schooling,” mimeo, 1999.

Mayer, Susan E., What Money Can’t Buy: Family Income and Children’s Life Chances,
1997, Harvard University Press, Cambridge MA.

Oreopoulos, Philip, “The Long-Run Consequences of Living in a Poor Neighborhood,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 118, No. 4, November 2003; pp. 1533-75.

Page, Marianne E. and Gary Solon, “Correlations between Brothers and Neighboring Boys in
Their Adult Earnings: The Importance of Being Urban,” Journal of Labor Economics,
21[4], October 2003: 831-55.

Shea, John; “Does Parents’ Money Matter?” Journal of Public Economics, Vol. 77, No. 2,
August 2000; pp. 155-84.

Solon, Gary; “Intergenerational Income Mobility in the United States,” American Economic
Review, Vol. 82, 393-408.

Stevens, Ann Huff, “Persistent Effects of Job Displacement: The Importance of Multiple Job
Losses,” Journal of Labor Economics, Vol. 15, No. 1, Part 1., January 1997, pp. 165-88.

26

Zimmerman, David; “Regression Towards Mediocrity in Economic Stature,”
Economic Review, Vol. 82, 409-429.

27

American

Figure 1
Comparison of IID sample to 1986 Census
Kernel densities for total income among 25-32 year olds in 1995

1995 IID
1995 Census

0

20000

40000

60000

28

80000

100000

Figure 2A
Annual Average Father’s Income
by Whether Firm Worked at between 1978 and 1982 Closed in 1982
Number of Father’s at Initial Firm between 10 and 500

50000

45000

40000

35000
77

78

79

80

81

82

83 84
year

Father in same firm, 78 - 82

85

86

87

88

89

Father's 78-82 firm Closes in 82

29

Figure 2B: Kernel Density of Father’s Earnings by Displacement Status in 1982,
1978-89

78

0

20000 40000 60000 80000100000
dminc

79

0

82

0

2000040000 60000 80000100000
dminc

20000 40000 60000 80000100000
dminc

0

83

0

86

0

20000 40000 60000 80000100000
dminc

80

20000 4000060000 80000100000
dminc

20000 40000 60000 80000100000
dminc

30

0

84

0

87

0

20000 40000 60000 80000100000
dminc

81

20000 40000 60000 80000100000
dminc

85

0

88

0

20000 40000 60000 80000100000
dminc

20000 40000 60000 80000100000
dminc

20000 40000 60000 80000100000
dminc

89

0

20000 40000 60000 80000100000
dminc

0

.1

.2

.3

.4

Figure 2C
Annual Average of Unemployment Insurance Receipt
by Whether Firm that Father Worked at between 1978 and 1982 Closed in 1982
Number of Father’s at Initial Firm between 2 and 500

77

78

79

80

81

82

Father in same firm, 78 - 82

83
84
year

85

86

87

88

89

Father's 78-82 firm Closes in 82

Table A.1
Descriptive Statistics, Firms

Closures

Controls

All Children in IID
ages 12 to 14

Average Father Firmsize

15
(28)

14
(34)

15
(200)

Minimim Father Firmsize

2

2

1

Maximim Father Firmsize

493

496

27824

39,940
(11,971)

40,131
(12,086)

38,754
(15,815)

Average Median Wage

Province
Newfoundland
Prince Edward Island
Noval Scotia
New Brunswick
Quebec
Ontario
Manitoba
Saskatchewan
Alberta
British Columbia

2.8
0.6
2.6
3.4
31.2
37.8
2.6
2.6
12.5
4.2

1.4
0.6
3.0
2.4
32.0
42.6
3.8
2.9
7.3
4.1

2.0
0.6
3.6
2.8
30.9
38.2
4.1
4.0
8.9
5.0

0.2
6.3
2.2
8.1
10.4
19.5
9.2
13.4
15.9
5.1
9.8

0.0
3.2
5.6
9.5
14.4
21.8
12.7
12.4
8.8
4.4
7.3

0.1
4.6
3.4
6.3
8.9
21.9
10.6
14.9
9.6
9.1
10.6

1-Digit Industry
Missing
Agriculture
Primary Textiles and Leather
Clothing and Furniture
Manufacturing
Construction and Transportation
Wholesale Trade
Retail Trade
Finance and Insurance
Education and Health Services
Accomodation, Food and Bev.

Number of Firms

509

14,348

35,983

Note: Sample consists of all father-child pairs for which the child was between
12 and 14 in 1982 and the father worked at a firm with between 2 and 500
fathers in the IID. Fathers must have worked at the same firm for four years
(between 1978 and 1981) and received no unemployment insurance during that
time. The 'closures' sample includes fathers displaced from a firm that closes in
1982. Standard Deviations are in parenthesis.

Table 1
Descriptive Statistics, Fathers and Children
Closures

Controls

All Children in IID

Parents 1978
Father's Age

37
(5)

37
(5)

37
(5)

Father's Earnings

43,066
(16,905)

43,136
(15,829)

44,986
(16,839)

Father's Total Income

44,244
(15,827)

44,331
(15,198)

46,344
(16,077)

0.00

0.00

0.09

0.95
(0.22)

0.96
(0.21)

0.95
(0.21)

7,971
(11,297)

7,756
(11,479)

8,067
(12,238)

1,541

52,604

165,325

Father on UI
Father Married

Mother's Earnings

Father Sample Size

Parents 1988
47
(5)

47
(5)

47
(5)

Father's Earnings

42,760
(31,199)

49,355
(30,437)

49,379
(45,499)

Father's Total Income

44,098
(30,189)

50,228
(58,664)

50,454
(43,669)

Father on UI

0.16
(0.37)

0.09
(0.28)

0.10
(0.30)

married

0.88
(0.33)

0.87
(0.33)

0.87
(0.34)

14,987
(15,683)

15,000
(17,374)

15,795
(18,090)

0.53
(0.50)

0.49
(0.50)

0.49
(0.50)

Father's Age

Mother's Total Income

Moved from 1978 Address

Children 1995-1999
Child's Earnings (95-99)

21,257
(14,820)

23,219
(15,235)

23,257
(15,187)

29.9
0.82

30.0
0.82

29.9
0.82

Child on UI at least once (95-99)

0.44
(0.50)

0.42
(0.49)

0.42
(0.49)

Child on Welfare at least once (95-99)

0.13
(0.33)

0.10
(0.30)

0.10
(0.30)

Number of Children

1,718

57,963

176,930

Child's Age

Note: Sample consists of all father-child pairs for which the child was between 12 and 14 in
1982 and the father worked at a firm with between 2 and 500 fathers in the IID. Fathers mus
have worked at the same firm for four years (between 1978 and 1981) and received no
unemployment insurance during that time. The 'closures' sample includes fathers displaced
from a firm that closes in 1982. Standard Deviations are in parenthesis.

Table 2
Effects of Displacement on Father's Real Log Earnings, Log Income and Mobility
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Log Father's
Earnings

Log Father's
Income

Log Parenta
Income

Log Income 1978-80

1.032
(0.005)

1.014
(0.005)

1.015
(0.004)

Displacement

-0.136
(0.007)

-0.132
(0.011)

-0.095
(0.009)

686,397

703,885

703,885

Dependent Variable

Displacement
Lead or Lag
-3
-2
-1
0
+1
+2
+3
+4
+5
+6
+7
+8

Observations
R-squared

Log Father's
Earnings

Log Father's
Income

Log Parental
Income

-0.005
[0.008]
-0.001
[0.008]
-0.005
[0.007]
-0.156
[0.011]
-0.355
[0.019]
-0.234
[0.015]
-0.223
[0.015]
-0.201
[0.019]
-0.193
[0.018]
-0.173
[0.018]
-0.159
[0.020]
-0.157
[0.019]

0.012
[0.027]
0.006
[0.028]
0.01
[0.027]
-0.085
[0.030]
-0.208
[0.032]
-0.202
[0.034]
-0.192
[0.036]
-0.157
[0.036]
-0.165
[0.037]
-0.118
[0.036]
-0.13
[0.039]
-0.108
[0.041]

0.016
[0.022]
0.017
[0.022]
0.01
[0.022]
-0.06
[0.023]
-0.144
[0.024]
-0.164
[0.027]
-0.151
[0.028]
-0.122
[0.028]
-0.143
[0.030]
-0.091
[0.028]
-0.094
[0.030]
-0.085
[0.031]

686,397

703,885

703,885

0.55

0.59

0.49

0.33

0.39

0.19

Note: Columns 1 through 3 show regressions using as dependent variables log father's annual earnings
and log total income (both demeaned by age and year). The regressors are individual fixed effects and
indicator variables for years since job displacement for fathers in firms that closed (the omitted category is
not displaced or displacement in at least 3 years. Columns 4 through 6 show results from regressing the
same dependent variables on average log earnings between 1978 and 1981, and a dummy variable for
whether a father is displaced in 1982.

Table 3
Estimated Effects of Father's Displacement
on Child's Earnings, Unemployment and Social Assistance Receipt

Dep var:
Father's Log Income
Residual

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Age Adj. Log
Earnings,
1995-99

Age Adj. Log
Earnings,
1995-99

Age Adj. Log
Earnings,
1995-99

Age Adj. Log
Earnings,
1995-99

0.383
[0.023]

0.38
[0.024]

-0.086
[0.040]

-0.086
[0.039]

-0.088
[0.039]

0.016
[0.012]

0.018
[0.012]

0.025
[0.008]

0.026
[0.008]

No

No

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

57,683

57,683

57,683

57,683

59,681

59,681

59,681

59,681

0.04

0.03

0.04

0.05

0.02

0.05

0

0.02

0.383
[0.023]

Father Displaced

With Initial Firm
Characteristic Controls
Observations
R-squared

(5)

UI Receipt

(6)

(7)

(8)

UI Receipt

Social
Assistance
Receipt

Social
Assistance
Receipt

-0.047
[0.007]

-0.081
[0.004]

Note: The dependent variable in columns 1-4 is child's log real earnings averaged between 1995 and 1999 after de-meaning by age. All regressions include fixed effects for birth cohort interacted
with gender. The initial firm characteristic controls include fixed effects for regional location of firm (18 possible characters that identify provinces and smaller regions in large provinces)
interacted with an indicator variable for whether the firm is in an urban or rural location. The controls also include 11 industry categories and the median log wage of the initial firm in 1978. HuberWhite standard errors are shown from clustering by father ID.

Table 4
Estimated Effects of Father's Displacement on Child's Outcomes
Conditional on Region and Industry Fixed Effects
(1)

(2)

(3)

Age Adj. Log
Earnings,
1995-99

Age Adj. Log
Earnings,
1995-99

Age Adj. Log
Earnings,
1995-99

UI Receipt

Father's Log Income
Residual

0.383
[0.023]

0.368
[0.020]

0.365
[0.023]

Father Displaced

-0.086
[0.039]

-0.103
[0.041]

Yes

Number of initial industry F.E.
Number of initial region F.E.

Dep var:

With Initial Firm
Characteristic Controls

Observations
R-squared

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

UI Receipt

UI Receipt

Social
Assistance
Receipt

Social
Assistance
Receipt

Social
Assistance
Receipt

-0.047
[0.007]

-0.053
[0.007]

-0.054
[0.008]

-0.081
[0.004]

-0.076
[0.004]

-0.074
[0.005]

-0.094
[0.049]

0.018
[0.012]

0.011
[0.014]

0.012
[0.017]

0.026
[0.008]

0.033
[0.009]

0.028
[0.010]

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

10

317

317

10

317

317

10

317

317

36

36

180

36

36

180

36

36

180

57,683

57,683

57,683

59,681

59,681

59,681

59,681

59,681

59,681

0.04

0.13

0.24

0.05

0.13

0.24

0.02

0.1

0.22

Notes: The dependent variable in columns 1-4 is child's log real earnings averaged between 1995 and 1999 after de-meaning by age. All regressions include fixed effects for birth cohort interacted with gender. The
initial firm characteristic controls include fixed effects for regional location of firm interacted with an indicator variable for whether the firm is in an urban or rural location. The controls also include 11 industry
categories and the median log wage of the initial firm in 1978. Huber-White standard errors are shown from clustering by father ID.

Table 5
Estimated Effects of Father's Displacement
On the Probability of Divorce, Residential Moves, and Mother's Income
Dependent Variable
Ever Not
Married
since
1978

-3

Moved

Mother's
Earnings

Unemp.
Insurance
Receipt

0
[0.003]

0.008
[0.008]

53.681
[98.772]

-0.011
[0.006]

-2

0.001
[0.004]

0.003
[0.009]

-200.147
[130.319]

-0.015
[0.006]

-1

0.001
[0.005]

0.006
[0.010]

-250.188
[160.781]

-0.01
[0.006]

0

0.006
[0.005]

0.039
[0.010]

-265.791
[169.206]

0.233
[0.012]

+1

0.007
[0.006]

0.04
[0.010]

-179.216
[180.592]

0.281
[0.012]

+2

0.015
[0.007]

0.035
[0.011]

26.057
[190.868]

0.135
[0.010]

+3

0.01
[0.008]

0.035
[0.011]

-32.187
[218.225]

0.112
[0.010]

+4

0.007
[0.008]

0.034
[0.011]

-123.249
[222.071]

0.077
[0.009]

+5

0.007
[0.009]

0.028
[0.011]

32.499
[251.133]

0.065
[0.009]

+6

0.004
[0.009]

0.025
[0.011]

-67.235
[284.825]

0.06
[0.009]

+7

0.004
[0.009]

0.02
[0.011]

-191.588
[287.696]

0.046
[0.009]

+8

0.004
[0.009]

0.018
[0.011]

-19.425
[294.987]

0.055
[0.010]

Displacement
Lead or Lag

Observations
R-squared

703885

703885

703885

703885

0.6

0.69

0.76

0.28

Notes: The regressors are individual fixed effects and indicator variables for
years since job displacement for fathers in firms that closed (the omitted category
is not displaced or no displacement for at least 3 years.

Table 6
Estimated Effects of Father's Displacement, Divorce, and Mobility
on Child's Earnings, Unemployment and Social Assistance Receipt
Dependent Variable
Age Adj.
Log
Earnings,
1995-99

UI Receipt

Social
Assistance
Receipt

Log Income 1978-80

0.36
[0.026]***

-0.045
[0.007]***

-0.074
[0.005]***

Displacement

-0.088
[0.044]**

0.017
[0.013]

0.025
[0.009]***

Father Divorced

-0.204
[0.032]***

0.017
[0.010]*

0.078
[0.007]***

Moved

-0.027
[0.025]

-0.009
[0.008]

0.016
[0.006]***

Observations

703,885

703,885

703,885

0.05

0.05

0.02

R-squared

Note: The dependent variables are is child's log real earnings
averaged between 1995 and 1999 after de-meaning by age, a dummy
for ever receiving UI between 1995 and 1999, and a dummy for ever
receiving Social Assistance between 1995 and 1999. All regressions
include fixed effects for birth cohort interacted with gender.

Table 7
Effects of Father's Income and Father Displacement
on Child's Earnings, Unemployment and Social Assistance Receipt
Controlling for Father' Income 1983-1988

(1)

(2)

Log
Earnings
Residual

Log
Earnings
Residual

Father's Log Income
Residual, 1978 - 1981

0.376
[0.024]

Father Displaced

-0.086
[0.039]

Dep var:

Father's Log Income
Residual, 1983 - 1988
With Initial Firm
Characteristic Controls
Observations
R-squared

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

UI Receipt

UI Receipt

Social
Assistance
Receipt

Social
Assistance
Receipt

0.158
[0.034]

-0.046
[0.007]

-0.02
[0.009]

-0.08
[0.004]

-0.038
[0.006]

-0.027
[0.039]

0.018
[0.012]

0.004
[0.012]

0.026
[0.008]

0.009
[0.008]

0.224
[0.022]

-0.027
[0.006]

-0.043
[0.004]

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

57683

57683

59681

59681

59681

59681

0.05

0.05

0.05

0.05

0.02

0.02

Notes: The dependent variable in columns 1-2 is child's log real earnings averaged between 1995 and 1999 after de-meaning by age. All regressions
include fixed effects for birth cohort interacted with gender, and firm characteristic controls for regional location of firm industry and the median log
wage of the initial firm in 1978. Huber-White standard errors are shown from clustering by father ID.

Table 8
Effects of Father's Income and Father Displacement
on Child's Earnings, Unemployment and Assistance Receipt
by Father's Income Quartile in 1978

Income Quartile:

(1)

Dependent var:

(2)

(3)

(4)

Log Earnings

Father's Log Income

0.381
[0.119]

0.405
[0.210]

0.359
[0.189]

0.298
[0.068]

Father Displaced

-0.191
[0.088]

-0.111
[0.087]

0.085
[0.059]

-0.09
[0.070]

Receipt of UI

Father's Log Income

0.034
[0.015]

-0.030
[0.070]

-0.095
[0.066]

-0.170
[0.026]

Father Displaced

0.067
[0.026]

0.026
[0.024]

-0.019
[0.022]

0.006
[0.024]

Receipt of Social Assistance

Father's Log Income

-0.017
[0.011]

-0.161
[0.046]

-0.158
[0.039]

-0.063
[0.013]

Father Displaced

0.042
[0.018]

0.028
[0.015]

0.009
[0.016]

0.020
[0.017]

Notes: The sample of fathers are split by income quartile based on average income between 1978 and
1981. The table shows results from regressions run separately by father's income quartile. All
regressions include fixed effects for birth cohort interacted with gender, and firm characteristic controls
for regional location of firm industry and the median log wage of the initial firm in 1978. Huber-White
standard errors are shown from clustering by father ID.

Table 9
Effects of Father's Displacement in 1989
on Son's Earnings, Unemployment and Assistance Receipt
Father Displaced when Son Aged 19 to 21

Log Son's Earnings
Earnings

Receipt of
UI

Receipt of
SA

Father's Residual
Log Income

0.342
[0.021]

-0.072
[0.006]

-0.039
[0.004]

Father Displaced

0.008
[0.023]

-0.004
[0.007]

-0.001
[0.008]

Number of Obs.

39856

41197

41197

Notes: All regressions include fixed effects for birth cohort interacted with gender, and
firm characteristic controls for regional location of firm industry and the median log wage
of the initial firm in 1978. Huber-White standard errors are shown from clustering by
father ID.

Table 10
Estimated Differences In Father's Characteristics Between Early Leavers and
Displaced Workers

Left Early

Firm Fixed Effects?
Number of Observations

R-squared

Log Father's
Income

Mother's
Earnings

Father's
Age

Unmarried

0.019
(0.02)

-471.68
(583.60)

-0.404
(0.27)

-0.008
(0.01)

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

59,730

60,277

60,277

60,277

0.50

0.31

0.30

0.34

Table 11
IV and Reduced From Results including Early Leavers
Child' Log
Income

Child on UI

Child on
SA

Log Father's
Income

0.288
(0.016)

-0.022
(0.004)

-0.044
(0.002)

Displaced in 1982

-0.08
(0.034)

0.016
(0.009)

0.015
(0.006)

First Stage: Dependent Variable:
Displaced in 1982

Log Father's
Income

-0.001
(0.001)
0.793
(0.008)

