                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         WORKPLACE SEGREGATION IN THE UNITED
                          STATES: RACE, ETHNICITY, AND SKILL

                                            Judith Hellerstein
                                             David Neumark

                                          Working Paper 11599
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w11599


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 2005




Neumark is also a Research Fellow at IZA. This is a substantially revised version of an earlier version of
this paper by the same name. This research was funded by the Russell Sage Foundation and NIH. We are
grateful to Megan Brooks, Joel Elvery, Gigi Foster, and especially Melissa McInerney for outstanding
research assistance, to Stephen Raphael and Seth Sanders for helpful discussions, and to seminar participants
at the Public Policy Institute of California, the BLS, the Census Bureau, the Federal Reserve Board, the
NBER Summer Institute, ITAM, The University of California-Berkeley, and the Color Lines Conference at
Harvard University. This paper reports the results of research and analysis undertaken while the authors
were research affiliates at the Center for Economic Studies at the U.S. Census Bureau. It has undergone a
Census Bureau review more limited in scope than that given to official Census Bureau publications. It has
been screened to ensure that no confidential information is revealed. Research results and conclusions
expressed are those of the authors and do not necessarily indicate concurrence by the Census Bureau, the
Public Policy Institute of California, or the Russell Sage Foundation. The views expressed herein are those
of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by Judith Hellerstein and David Neumark. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
Workplace Segregation in the United States: Race, Ethnicity, and Skill
Judith Hellerstein and David Neumark
NBER Working Paper No. 11599
August 2005
JEL No.

                                           ABSTRACT


We study workplace segregation in the United States using a unique matched employer-employee
data set that we have created. We present measures of workplace segregation by education and
language–as skilled workers may be more complementary with other skilled workers than with
unskilled workers–and by race and ethnicity, using simulation methods to measure segregation
beyond what would occur randomly as workers are distributed across establishments. We also assess
the role of education- and language-related skill differentials in generating workplace segregation
by race and ethnicity, as skill is often correlated with race and ethnicity. Finally, we attempt to
distinguish between segregation by skill based on general crowding of unskilled poor English
speakers into a narrow set of jobs, and segregation based on common language for reasons such as
complementarity among workers speaking the same language.
Our results indicate that there is considerable segregation by education and language in the
workplace. Racial segregation in the workplace is of the same order of magnitude as education
segregation, and segregation between Hispanics and whites is larger yet. Only a tiny portion of racial
segregation in the workplace is driven by education differences between blacks and whites, but a
substantial fraction of ethnic segregation in the workplace can be attributed to differences in
language proficiency.


Judith Hellerstein                                    David Neumark
Department of Economics                               Public Policy Institute of California
University of Maryland                                500 Washington Street, Suite 800
College Park, MD 20742                                San Francisco, CA 94111
and NBER                                              and NBER
hellerst@econ.umd.edu                                 neumark@ppic.org
I. Introduction

        Wage differentials by education, race, and ethnicity in the United States have been extensively

documented. When it comes to wage differentials by education, the past two decades have generally

been marked by increased returns to education, the extent and sources of which have been the subject of

much discussion (see, e.g., Katz and Murphy, 1992; Juhn, et al., 1992; Card and DiNardo, 2002; Autor,

et al., 2004). As for wage differences by race and ethnicity (as documented in, e.g., Donohue and

Heckman, 1991; Cain, 1986; Altonji and Blank, 1999; Welch, 1990; and Ihlanfeldt and Sjoquist, 1990),

there has been extensive research trying to uncover their sources. Most researchers agree that skill

differences such as education (including its quality) and language account for sizable shares of wage gaps

by race and ethnicity (e.g., O’Neill, 1990; Trejo, 1997), with the sharper dispute whether gaps in these

and other skills (such as those captured in test scores) fully explain these wage gaps or whether

discrimination contributes as well (e.g., Darity and Mason, 1998; Neal and Johnson, 1996).

        In contrast to this vast literature on wage differences, much less is known about the extent and

sources of segregation in the labor market. There has been speculation that one source of increased wage

inequality by education is increased segregation by skill (e.g., Kremer and Maskin, 1996), but there is

little evidence of the extent of labor market segregation by education in the first place with which to test

this hypothesis. Moreover, while there is widespread agreement that there is labor market segregation by

race and ethnicity, and that this segregation accounts–at least in a statistical sense–for a sizable share of

wage gaps between white males and other demographic groups (e.g., Carrington and Troske, 1998a;

Bayard, et al., 1999; King, 1992; Watts, 1995; Higgs, 1977), there has been very little work trying to

uncover whether this segregation is due to discrimination or other sources.1



1
  This segregation may occur along industry and occupation lines, as well as at the more detailed level of
the establishment or job cell (occupations within establishments). For example, Bayard, et al. (1999)
found that, for men, job cell segregation by race accounts for about half of the black-white wage gap and
a larger share of the Hispanic-white wage gap. Carrington and Troske (1998a, 1998b) use data sets much
more limited in scope than the one we use here to examine workplace segregation by race and sex. In
general, the paucity of research on workplace segregation is presumably a function of the lack of data
linking workers to establishments.

                                                      1
        Workplace segregation by education, or by skill more generally, and workplace segregation by

race and ethnicity have the potential to be intimately connected. There are numerous models suggesting

that employers may segregate workers across workplaces by skill, most likely because of

complementarities among workers with more similar skills. Because in U.S. labor markets skill is often

correlated with race and ethnicity, an unintended effect of profit-maximizing skill segregation in the

workplace may be segregation along racial and ethnic lines.2 Alternatively, race and ethnic segregation

in the workplace may be a function of discrimination in the labor market. Perhaps the most convincing

evidence of discrimination in employment comes from audit studies of hiring (Cross, et al., 1990; Turner,

et al., 1991), although this work does not speak to segregation per se.3

        This paper has two goals: to use a new matched employer-employee data set to provide the best

available measurements of workplace segregation by education, language, race, and ethnicity in the

United States; and to present evidence that helps in understanding the sources of this segregation, in

particular the role of skill in generating race and ethnic segregation. We pursue these goals using the

1990 Decennial Employer-Employee Database (DEED), a unique data set that we have created. The

1990 DEED is based on matching records in the 1990 Decennial Census of Population to a Census

Bureau list of most business establishments in the United States.4 The matching yields data on multiple

workers matched to establishments, providing the means to measure workplace segregation in the United

States based on a large, fairly representative data set.5 In addition, the reliance on the Decennial Census


2
  On the supply side, labor market networks can also generate workplace segregation; we do not focus on
labor market networks in this paper.
3
  Heckman (1998) notes that even if there is hiring discrimination–as audit studies suggest–whether or
not a wage differential arises depends on the discriminatory behavior of the marginal rather than the
average employer. Black (1995) shows that in a search model discriminatory tastes on the part of some
employers can result in a wage gap, even when the discriminatory employers do not hire any minorities.
4
  The 1990 Census of Population is currently the only Decennial Census for which this match has been
done.
5
  For example, Carrington and Troske (1998a) study workplace segregation using the Worker-
Establishment Characteristics Database (WECD), which includes only manufacturing plants, and the
Characteristics of Business Owners, which is restricted to small establishments. Bayard, et al. (1999) use
the New Worker-Establishment Characteristics Database, which extends beyond manufacturing, but
because of the method of matching used is nonetheless heavily biased toward manufacturing.

                                                     2
of Population as the source of information on workers creates the capacity to link information on

workplace segregation to information on other characteristics of workers. This allows us to examine the

extent of segregation in the workplace by skill, and to examine the impact of skill segregation in

generating segregation by race and ethnicity. Thus, the DEED provides unparalleled opportunities to

study workplace segregation by race, ethnicity, and skill.

        Our empirical analysis proceeds in three steps that exploit these various characteristics of the

DEED. First, we present measures of workplace segregation in the United States, focusing on

segregation along the lines of education, language, race, and ethnicity.6 Rather than considering all

deviations from proportional representation across establishments as an “outcome” or “behavior” to be

explained, we scale our measured segregation to reflect segregation above and beyond that which would

occur by chance if workers were distributed randomly across establishments, using Monte Carlo

simulations to generate measures of randomly occurring segregation.7

        Simple calculations of workplace segregation across establishments are important in their own

right, aside from the questions we consider concerning the sources of workplace segregation. Most

research on segregation by race and ethnicity focuses on residential segregation (e.g., Massey and

Denton, 1987; and Cutler, et al., 1999). But the boundaries used in studying residential segregation may

not capture social interactions, and are to some extent explicitly drawn to accentuate segregation among

different groups; for example, Census tract boundaries are often generated in order to ensure that the

tracts are “as homogeneous as possible with respect to population characteristics, economic status, and

living conditions.”8 In contrast, workplaces–specifically establishments–are units of observation that are



6
  In studying segregation by ethnicity, we focus exclusively on Hispanic ethnicity. We leave the
measurement of workplace segregation by sex to other work, partly due to space constraints.
7
  This distinction between comparing measured segregation to a no-segregation ideal versus segregation
that is generated by randomness is discussed in other work (see, e.g., Cortese, et al., 1976; Winship,
1977; Boisso, et al., 1994; and Carrington and Troske, 1997).
8
  U.S. Census Bureau, www.census.gov/geo/www/GARM/Ch10GARM.pdf (viewed April 27, 2005).
Echenique and Fryer (2005) develop a segregation index that relies much less heavily on ad-hoc
definitions of geographical boundaries.

                                                     3
generated by economic forces and in which people clearly do interact in a variety of ways, including

work, social activity, labor market networks, etc.9 Thus, while it is more difficult to study workplace

segregation because of data constraints, measuring workplace segregation may be more useful than

measuring residential segregation, as traditionally defined, for describing the interactions that arise in

society between different groups in the population.10 Of course similar arguments to those about

workplaces could be made about other settings, such as schools, religious institutions, etc. (e.g., James

and Taeuber, 1985).

        The second step in our analysis probes the relationship between skill segregation on the one hand

and racial and ethnic segregation on the other. Numerous models suggest that employers find it useful to

group workers of similar skills together. For example, Kremer and Maskin (1996) develop a model in

which employers have incentives to segregate workers by skill when workers of different skill levels are

not perfect substitutes and different tasks within firms are differentially sensitive to skill.11 Saint-Paul

(2001) generates skill segregation across firms by assuming that there are productivity-related spillovers

among workers within an establishment.12 Cabrales and Calvó-Armengol (2002) show that when


9
  For a discussion of the importance of the workplace as a venue for social interaction between groups
see Estlund (2003).
10
   Moreover, industry code, the closest proxy in public-use data to an establishment identifier, is a very
crude measure to use to examine segregation. For example, we calculate that racial and ethnic
segregation at the three-digit industry level in the DEED is typically on the order of one third as large as
the establishment-level segregation we document below.
11
   For example, let the production function be f(L1 , L2 ) = L1 cL2 d , with d > c. Assume that there are two
types of workers: unskilled workers (L1 ) with labor input equal to one efficiency unit, and skilled
workers (L2 ) with efficiency units of q > 1. Kremer and Maskin show that for low q, it is optimal for
unskilled and skilled workers to work together, but above a certain threshold of q (that is, a certain
amount of skill inequality), the equilibrium will reverse, and workers will be sorted across firms
according to skill. Hirsch and Macpherson (1999) do not posit a formal model of sorting by skill, but
assume that employers tend to hire workers of similar skills, and use this assumption–coupled with an
assumption that blacks are on average less skilled than whites in terms of both observed and unobserved
(to the researcher) skills–to suggest that the wage penalty associated with working in establishments with
a large minority share in the workforce in part reflects lower unobserved skills of workers in such
establishments.
12
   For example, positive spillovers may be reflected in each worker’s productivity being the product of
his productivity and an increasing function of the establishment’s average skill level. Negative spillovers
may arise because of fixed factors of production. All that is required for segregation in Saint-Paul’s
model is that over some range of average skill levels of an establishment’s workforce there are increasing

                                                       4
workers’ utility depends on interpersonal comparisons with nearby workers (such as those in the same

firm), segregation by skill results.13 And, of course, there are potential benefits to employers from

grouping together workers who speak the same language.

        Because race and ethnicity are correlated with skill (for example, blacks have less education than

whites and Hispanics have lower English proficiency), racial and ethnic segregation may not reflect

discrimination, but may be generated by segregation along skill lines. We begin by calculating the extent

of segregation in the workplace by education. We calculate education segregation measures focusing

only on whites, assuming implicitly that segregation by education for whites is generated by employers

solely for reasons of economic efficiency. We then measure the extent of segregation between blacks

and whites, and calculate how much of this segregation can be explained by differences in educational

attainment between blacks and whites. We contrast these results with the extent to which wage

differences between blacks and whites in our sample can be explained by education.

        We repeat the analysis for the extent of segregation between Hispanics and whites. In

considering the impact of skill in generating workplace segregation by Hispanic ethnicity, we measure

the extent to which segregation by English language ability can explain Hispanic-white workplace

segregation, treating language ability as another important dimension of skill.14 We also compare these

results to those from wage regressions where we measure how much of the Hispanic-white wage gap is

driven by English language ability.

        Finally, language is associated not only with skill, but also with country of origin, immigrant

status, and assimilation. Consequently, if discriminatory forces lead to the segregation of blacks or




returns to skill.
13
   These authors also discuss evidence consistent with sorting by skill across employers, including Brown
and Medoff (1989) and Davis, et al. (1991).
14
   We first documented segregation by language ability and explored its consequences for wages in
Hellerstein and Neumark (2003). Because language may reflect things other than skill, there may be
additional influences on hiring by language, including customer discrimination or the need for workers to
speak the same language as customers, which, coupled with residential patterns, lead to this form of
workplace segregation.

                                                     5
Hispanics from whites, they can also operate to segregate workers with poor English skills (immigrants,

most likely) from other workers, in which case segregation by language would not reflect skill

complementarities. We probe this question by exploring segregation among those whose English

proficiency is poor, but whose native (and spoken) languages differ.

        Our analysis focuses on larger establishments–the first quartile of establishment size for workers

distribution in our analysis is approximately 40 workers. By comparison, the first quartile of the

employment-weighted size distribution of all establishments in the SSEL is 20. The focus on larger

establishments arises for two reasons. First, there are important methodological advantages to examining

segregation in establishments where we observe at least two workers, which occurs infrequently for small

establishments. Second, we match respondents to the Census Long Form–who are a randomly chosen

one-sixth of the population–to establishments, and there is always a greater likelihood that any given

number of workers will be sampled from a large establishment than a small establishment. Although we

acknowledge that it would be nice to be able to measure segregation in all establishments, this is not the

data set with which to do that convincingly. On the other hand, most legislation aimed at combating

discrimination is directed at larger establishments; EEOC laws cover employers with 15 or more workers

and affirmative action rules for federal contractors cover employers with 50 or more workers. Since

policy has been directed at larger establishments, examining the extent of workplace segregation by race

and ethnicity (in particular) in larger establishments is particularly salient.

        Our results point to workplace segregation by education and race, and more so by ethnicity and

language (at least for Hispanics). We find, however, that education plays very little role in generating

workplace segregation by race. In contrast, segregation by language ability can explain approximately

one third of overall Hispanic-white segregation. Finally, the evidence from poor English speakers points

to segregation of Hispanics from others, suggesting that the role of language segregation among

Hispanics is driven by complementarity in language skills.

II. Data



                                                       6
        The analysis in this paper is based on the DEED, which we have created at the Center for

Economic Studies at the U.S. Bureau of the Census. The DEED is formed by matching workers to

establishments. The workers are drawn from the 1990 Sample Edited Detail File (SEDF), which contains

all individual responses to the 1990 Decennial Census of Population one-in-six Long Form. The

establishments are drawn from the Standard Statistical Establishment Listing (SSEL), an administrative

database containing information for all business establishments operating in the United States in 1990.

Here we provide a brief overview of the construction of the DEED; more details regarding the matching

of the data are provided in Hellerstein and Neumark (2003).

        Households receiving the 1990 Decennial Census Long Form were asked to report the name and

address of the employer in the previous week for each employed member of the household. The file

containing this employer name and address information is referred to as the “Write-In” file, and had

previously been used only for internal Census Bureau purposes. The Write-In file contains the

information written on the questionnaires by Long-Form respondents, but not actually captured in the

SEDF. The SSEL is an annually-updated list of all business establishments with one or more employees

operating in the United States. The Census Bureau uses the SSEL as a sampling frame for its Economic

Censuses and Surveys, and continuously updates the information it contains. The SSEL contains the

name and address of each establishment, geographic codes based on its location, its four-digit SIC code,

and an identifier that allows the establishment to be linked to other establishments that are part of the

same enterprise, and to other Census Bureau establishment- or firm-level data sets that contain more

detailed employer characteristics. We can therefore use employer names and addresses for each worker

in the Write-In file to match the Write-In file to the SSEL. Because the name and address information on

the Write-In file is also available for virtually all employers in the SSEL, nearly all of the establishments

in the SSEL that are classified as “active” by the Census Bureau are available for matching. Finally,

because both the Write-In file and the SEDF contain identical sets of unique individual identifiers, we

can use these identifiers to link the Write-In file to the SEDF. Thus, this procedure yields a very large



                                                      7
data set with workers matched to their establishments, along with all of the information on workers from

the SEDF.

        Matching workers and establishments is a difficult task, because we would not expect employers’

names and addresses to be recorded identically on the two files. To match workers and establishments

based on the Write-In file, we use MatchWare–a specialized record linkage program. MatchWare is

comprised of two parts: a name and address standardization mechanism (AutoStan); and a matching

system (AutoMatch). This software has been used previously to link various Census Bureau data sets

(Foster, et al., 1998). Our method to link records using MatchWare involves two basic steps. The first

step is to use AutoStan to standardize employer names and addresses across the Write-In file and the

SSEL. Standardization of addresses in the establishment and worker files helps to eliminate differences

in how data are reported. For example, a worker may indicate that she works on “125 North Main

Street,” while her employer reports “125 No. Main Str.” The standardization software considers a wide

variety of different ways that common address and business terms can be written, and converts each to a

single standard form.

        Once the software standardizes the business names and addresses, each item is parsed into

components. To see how this works, consider the case just mentioned above. The software will first

standardize both the worker- and employer-provided addresses to something like “125 N Main St.” Then

AutoStan will dissect the standardized addresses and create new variables from the pieces. For example,

the standardization software produces separate variables for the House Number (125), directional

indicator (N), street name (Main), and street type (St). The value of parsing the addresses into multiple

pieces is that we can match on various combinations of these components.

        We supplemented the AutoStan software by creating an acronym for each company name, and

added this variable to the list of matching components. We noticed that workers often included only the

initials of the company for which they work (e.g., “ABC Corp”), while the business is more likely to

include the official corporate name (e.g., “Albert, Bob, and Charlie Corporation”).



                                                     8
        The second step of the matching process is to select and implement the matching specifications.

The AutoMatch software uses a probabilistic matching algorithm that accounts for missing information,

misspellings, and even inaccurate information. This software also permits users to control which

matching variables to use, how heavily to weight each matching variable, and how similar two addresses

must be in order to constitute a match. AutoMatch is designed to compare match criteria in a succession

of “passes” through the data. Each pass is comprised of “Block” and “Match” statements. The Block

statements list the variables that must match exactly in that pass in order for a record pair to be linked. In

each pass, a worker record from the Write-In file is a candidate for linkage only if the Block variables

agree completely with the set of designated Block variables on analogous establishment records in the

SSEL. The Match statements contain a set of additional variables from each record to be compared.

These variables need not agree completely for records to be linked, but are assigned weights based on

their value and reliability.

        For example, we might assign “employer name” and “city name” as Block variables, and assign

“street name” and “house number” as Match variables. In this case, AutoMatch compares a worker

record only to those establishment records with the same employer name and city name. All employer

records meeting these criteria are then weighted by whether and how closely they agree with the worker

record on the street name and house number Match specifications. The algorithm applies greater weights

to items that appear infrequently. So, for example, if there are several establishments on Main St. in a

given town, but only one or two on Mississippi St., then the weight for “street name” for someone who

works on Mississippi St. will be greater than the “street name” weight for a comparable Main St. worker.

The employer record with the highest weight will be linked to the worker record conditional on the

weight being above some chosen minimum. Worker records that cannot be matched to employer records

based on the Block and Match criteria are considered residuals and we attempt to match these records on

subsequent passes using different criteria.




                                                      9
        It is clear that different Block and Match specifications may produce different sets of matches.

Matching criteria should be broad enough to cover as many potential matches as possible, but narrow

enough to ensure that only matches that are correct with a high probability are linked. Because the

AutoMatch algorithm is not exact there is always a range of quality of matches, and we were therefore

cautious in accepting linked record pairs. Our general strategy was to impose the most stringent criteria

in the earliest passes, and to loosen the criteria in subsequent passes, while always maintaining criteria

that erred on the side of avoiding false matches. We did substantial experimentation with different

matching algorithms, and visually inspected thousands of matches as a guide to help determine cutoff

weights. In total, we ran 16 passes, obtaining most of our matches in the earliest passes. Finally, we

engaged in a number of procedures to fine-tune the matching process, involving hand-checking of

thousands of matches and subsequent revision of the matching procedures.

        The final result is an extremely large data set of workers matched to their establishment of

employment. The DEED consists of information on 3.3 million workers matched to nearly one million

establishments, which accounts for 27 percent of workers in the SEDF and 19 percent of establishments

in the SSEL.15 In Table 1 we provide descriptive statistics for the matched workers from the DEED as

compared to the SEDF. Column (1) reports summary statistics for the SEDF for the sample of workers

who were eligible to be matched to their establishments. Column (2) reports summary statistics for the

full DEED sample. The means of the demographic variables in the full DEED are quite close to the

means in the SEDF across many dimensions. For example, female workers comprise 46 percent of the

SEDF and 47 percent of the full DEED. Nonetheless, there are a few discrepancies. Perhaps most

15
  For both the DEED and SEDF we have excluded individuals as follows: with missing wages; who did
not work in the year prior to the survey year (1989) or in the reference week for the Long Form of the
Census; who did not report positive hourly wages; who did not work in one of the fifty states or the
District of Columbia (even if the place of work was imputed); who were self-employed; who were not
classified in a state of residence; or who were employed in an industry that was considered “out-of-
scope” in the SSEL. (“Out-of-scope” industries do not fall under the purview of Census Bureau surveys.
They include many agricultural industries, urban transit, the U.S. Postal Service, private households,
schools and universities, labor unions, religious and membership organizations, and government/public
administration. The Census Bureau does not validate the quality of SSEL data for businesses in out-of-
scope industries.)

                                                     10
salient for this analysis is discrepancies in race and ethnicity. In the SEDF, white, Hispanic, and black

workers account for 82, 7, and 8 percent of the total, respectively. The comparable figures for the full

DEED are 86, 5, and 5 percent. While these differences are not huge, given that we are examining race

and ethnic segregation, it is worth considering why they exist. In particular, there are many individuals

who meet our sample inclusion criteria but for whom the quality of the business address information in

the Write-In file is poor.16

        In Appendix Table 1 we report a series of linear probability models where we examine the

probability a worker who appears in the SEDF is successfully matched to an employer and appears in the

DEED, as a function of observable characteristics. For this analysis we further limit the SEDF sample of

column (1) of Table 1 to whites, blacks, and Hispanics. As shown in Appendix Table 1, column (1),

blacks (Hispanics) are 11 (seven) percentage points less likely than whites to appear in the DEED. In

column (2) we add a series of controls for whether an SEDF worker included business address

information that appears in the Write-In file. Not surprisingly, a worker who included an employer name

on the Write-In file is 23 percentage points more likely to be matched to an employer than a worker who

did not. More important, including this set of controls reduces the coefficients on the black and Hispanic

dummies substantially, so that conditional on including address information, blacks (Hispanics) are only

six (five) percentage points less likely to appear in the DEED. In column (3) we include a full set of

demographic characteristics as well, further reducing somewhat the estimated coefficient on the black

and Hispanic dummy variables. In sum, these basic controls explain at least half of the racial and ethnic

discrepancies in the probability that a worker is matched to the DEED. Many, if not all, of these controls

likely are associated with attachment to the labor force and even with attachment to a specific employer.

This leads to two conclusions. First, it is not a good idea to try to impute non-matched workers to




16
  For example, approximately four percent of workers in the SEDF do not provide any business address
information at all.

                                                    11
employers in the SEDF,17 or to re-weight the segregation measures we obtain to try to account for non-

matched workers, given that non-matched workers differ substantially in observable and unobservable

ways from matched workers. Second, one might therefore interpret the segregation results we obtain

below as measuring of the extent of segregation among workers who have relatively high labor force

attachment and high attachment to their employers. For measuring workplace segregation, this is a

reasonable sample of workers to use, but another dimension along which it is not fully representative.

        Returning to Table 1, column (3) reports summary statistics for the workers in the DEED who

comprise the sample from which we calculate segregation measures and conduct inference. The sample

size reduction between columns (2) and (3) arises for three reasons. First, we exclude workers who do

not live and work in the same Metropolitan Statistical Area/Primary Metropolitan Statistical Area

(MSA/PMSA). We use this U.S. Census Bureau measure of metropolitan areas because it is defined to

some extent based on areas within which substantial commuting to work occurs.18 Second, our analysis

generally focuses on differences between whites and blacks and whites and Hispanics. We therefore

exclude individuals who do not fall into those categories, with one exception. Because one of our

analyses below compares Hispanics who do not speak English well to others who do not speak English

well, we include in column (3) all workers, regardless of race and ethnicity, who self-reported speaking

English “not well” or “not at all”. Third, we exclude workers who are the only workers matched to their

establishments. The latter restriction effectively causes us to restrict the sample to workers in larger

establishments, which is the main reason why some of the descriptive statistics are slightly different




17
   Even imputing place of work at the level of the census tract does not appear to be easy. For example,
there are workers in the SEDF that we are able to match to an employer in the DEED using name and
address information whose place of work code actually is allocated in the SEDF. For these workers, the
allocated census tract in the SEDF disagrees with the SSEL census tract of the matched establishment in
more than half the cases.
18
   See U.S. Census Bureau, http://www.census.gov/geo/lv4help/cengeoglos.html (viewed April 18, 2005).
This is not to say that residential segregation at a level below that of MSAs and PMSAs may not
influence workplace segregation. However, an analysis of this question requires somewhat different
methods. For example, in conducting the simulations it is not obvious how one should limit the set of
establishments within a metropolitan area in which a worker could be employed.

                                                     12
between the second and third columns. Finally, in columns (4) and (5) we report results for the

subsample of workers who are used to construct two of our main segregation results, segregation by race

and segregation by Hispanic ethnicity.

        In addition to comparing worker-based means, it is useful to examine the similarities across

establishments in the SSEL and the DEED. Table 2 shows descriptive statistics for establishments in

each data set. As column (1) indicates, there are 5,237,592 establishments in the SSEL; of these, 972,436

(19 percent) also appear in the full DEED as reported in column (2). Because only one in six workers are

sent Decennial Census Long Forms, as noted earlier, it is more likely that large establishments will be

included in the DEED. One can see evidence of the bias toward larger employers by comparing the

means across data sets for total employment. (No doubt this also influences the distribution of workers

and establishments across industries.) On average, establishments in the SSEL have 18 employees, while

the average in the DEED is 53 workers. The distributions of establishments across industries in the

DEED relative to the SSEL are similar to those for workers in the worker sample. For example,

manufacturing establishments are somewhat over-represented in the DEED, constituting 13 percent of

establishments, relative to six percent in the SSEL. In column (3) we report descriptive statistics for

establishments in the restricted DEED, corresponding to the sample of workers in column (3) of Table 1.

In general, the summary statistics are quite similar between columns (2) and (3), with a small and

unsurprising right shift in the size distribution of establishments. Overall, analyses reported in

Hellerstein and Neumark (2003) indicate that the DEED sample is far more representative than previous

detailed matched data sets for the United States.

III. Methods

        We focus our analysis on one measure of segregation which is based on measures of the

percentages of workers in an individual’s establishment, or workplace, in different demographic groups.

For a dichotomous classification of workers (e.g., whites and Hispanics), we define two segregation

variables: the average percentage of Hispanic workers with which Hispanic workers work, denoted HH ;



                                                     13
and the average percentage of Hispanic workers with which white workers work, denoted WH . The

difference between these,

        CW = HH ! WH

is our measure of observed “co-worker segregation,” and measures the extent to which Hispanics are

more likely than are whites to work with other Hispanics. For example, if Hispanics and whites are

perfectly segregated, then HH equals 100, WH is zero, and CW equals 100.19

        To be precise, we exclude an individual’s own ethnicity in calculating HH and WH . In the

sociology literature on segregation, the percentage of Hispanics in a Hispanic’s workplace is often called

the “isolation index” and the percentage of whites in a Hispanic’s workplace is the “exposure index.” In

that literature, the isolation and exposure indexes always include the own worker’s ethnicity. However,

when the own worker’s ethnicity is included, the co-worker segregation measure is sensitive to the

number of matched workers in the establishment. The problem is particularly severe in cases where there

are only a few workers matched to each establishment, which happens frequently in the DEED. To see

this, consider, as a simple example, the index of isolation, which in this case would be the average

fraction of Hispanics among the workers in a Hispanic’s establishment (including the worker himself).

For a Hispanic worker in an establishment with two workers observed, the index is either 1 or 0.5, and

most importantly never less than 0.5. But for a Hispanic worker in an establishment with 200 workers

observed, the index can range from 0.005 to 1. In contrast, if we exclude the worker, the index can range

from 0 to 1 for either type of establishment. If workers are randomly allocated across establishments, in

a large sample we should expect the index of isolation to equal the share Hispanic. But when the worker

is himself included this cannot happen in this example because the index is constrained to be between 0.5

and 1. In contrast, when the own worker’s ethnicity is excluded from the segregation measure, as we do,

this problem does not arise.




19
 We could equivalently define the percentages of white workers with which Hispanic or white workers
work, HW and WW , which would simply be 100 minus these percentages, and CW’ = WW ! HW .

                                                    14
        One limitation this poses is that the co-worker index can only be computed for establishments

where we observe at least two workers. Coupled with the matching of Long-Form respondents, this

contributes to yielding a sample in which small establishments are under-represented. Nonetheless, as

we argued above, larger establishments may be a particularly important subset to examine given that

policies to combat discrimination in the workplace are aimed at larger establishments.

        There are, of course, other possible segregation measures, such as the traditional Duncan index

(Duncan and Duncan, 1955) or the Gini coefficient. We prefer the co-worker segregation measure (CW)

to these other measures for two reasons. First, the Duncan and Gini measures are insensitive to the

proportions of each group in the workforce. For example, if the number of Hispanics doubles, but they

are allocated to establishments in the same proportion as the original distribution, the Duncan index is

unchanged but CW will rise, and in our view this doubling of the number of Hispanics implies more

segregation. Second, these alternative segregation measures have the same basic problem outlined above

with respect to sensitivity to the number of matched workers, and because they are measures that are

calculated at only the establishment-level–unlike the co-worker segregation measure we use–there is no

conceptual parallel to excluding the own worker from the calculation.20

        We first report observed segregation, which is simply the sample mean of the segregation

measure across workers. We denote this measure by appending an ‘O’ superscript to the segregation

measures–i.e., CW O . One important point that is often overlooked in research on segregation, however,

is that some segregation occurs even with random assignment, and we are presumably most interested in

the segregation that occurs systematically–i.e., that which is greater than would be expected to result

from randomness. In the case of an infinitely large sample of workers, random allocation across

establishments would imply that the co-worker segregation measure as we have defined it would be equal

to zero, since, for example, HH and WH would be equal to the population Hispanic share.




20
  We believe this explains why, in Carrington and Troske (1998a, Table 3), the estimated Gini indexes
are often extremely high due to small samples of workers within establishments.

                                                    15
          There are two reasons why in our analysis the segregation measure with randomly assigned

workers is not necessarily expected to be zero. The first is that some of our segregation measures are

calculated conditional on geography and skill. So, for example, when we condition on geography, we

calculate the extent of segregation that would be expected if workers were randomly allocated across

establishments within a geographic area. If Hispanics and whites are not evenly distributed across

geographic borders, random allocation of workers within geography will yield the result that Hispanics

are more likely to have Hispanic co-workers than are white workers, because for example, more

Hispanics will come from the areas where both whites and Hispanics work with a high share of Hispanic

workers. Second, although the baseline sample size in our data is large, the actual samples that we use to

calculate segregation below are not always large when we condition on geography and skill, or at least

not necessarily large enough to approximate well this asymptotic result. For that reason, in order to

determine how much segregation would occur randomly, we conduct a Monte Carlo simulation of the

extent of segregation with random allocation of workers. We denote the mean measure of “random

segregation” across the simulations CW R .

          Following Carrington and Troske (1997), to measure segregation beyond that which would occur

randomly, we compute the difference between observed segregation and the mean level of random

segregation, and scale the difference by the maximum segregation that can occur. We refer to this as

“effective segregation.” For CWO > CWR , the effective segregation measure is:

          [{CWO ! CWR }/{100 ! CWR }]×100 .

          The denominator, 100 ! CWR , is the maximum by which observed segregation can exceed

random segregation, and so the scaling converts the difference CW O ! CWR into the share of this

maximum possible segregation that is actually observed.21

          For the Monte Carlo simulations that generate measures of random segregation, we first define

the unit within which we are considering workers to be randomly allocated–which for most of the



21
     In principle, CWO can be lower than CW R . This never happens in our application.

                                                     16
analysis is metropolitan areas. We then calculate for each metropolitan area the numbers of workers in

each category for which we are doing the simulation–for example, blacks and whites–as well as the

number of establishments and the size distribution of establishments (in terms of sampled workers).

Within a metropolitan area, we then randomly assign workers to establishments, ensuring that we

generate the same size distribution of establishments within a metropolitan area as we have in the sample.

We do this simulation 100 times, and compute the random segregation measures as the means over these

100 simulations. Not surprisingly, the random segregation measures are very precise; in all cases the

standard deviations were trivially small.

        With our measures of observed and random segregation, we then construct the effective

segregation measures, which capture the level of effective segregation to which the average worker is

subjected, conditional on the distribution of workers across metropolitan areas.

        For descriptive purposes we also present some “unconditional” nationwide segregation measures

where we do not first condition on metropolitan area, and where in the simulations we randomly assign

workers to establishments anywhere in the country. 22 For comparability, when we construct these

unconditional segregation measures we use only the workers included in the MSA/PMSA sample.23 We

emphasize the conditional measures much more in the paper. These can be interpreted as taking

residential segregation by city as given. In contrast, because the “counterfactual” for the unconditional

measure is that workers are randomly distributed across establishments nationwide, one could interpret

the unconditional measures as estimating the degree of workplace segregation attributable to the

distribution of workers both across cities as well as across establishments within cities.24 As a result, for


22
  Not surprisingly, all the simulations we report where we randomly assign workers to establishments
anywhere in the country lead to random segregation measures that are zero or virtually indistinguishable
from zero.
23
  The results in this paper are robust to measuring segregation at the level of the MSA/CMSA
metropolitan area, as well as measuring unconditional segregation by including all workers in the United
States whether or not they live or work in a metropolitan area.
24
  Carrington and Troske (1998b) go further and characterize the interpretation of the national
unconditional measure as “employment segregation causes residential segregation” (p. 243). We prefer
to simply characterize it as capturing the joint effects of workplace segregation and the distribution of

                                                     17
the observed segregation measures the conditional and unconditional measures yield identical results;

only the simulations differ.

        Finally, in addition to constructing estimates of effective segregation in the workplace along

various dimensions, we are interested in comparisons of measures of effective segregation across

different samples. Given also that we are sometimes comparing estimates across samples that have some

overlap,25 we assess statistical significance of measures of effective segregation or differences between

them using bootstrap methods. Briefly, the evidence indicates that our estimates are quite precise, and

that the differences between the effective segregation indexes discussed in detail in the next section are

generally strongly statistically significant.

IV. Basic Wage Regressions

        Prior to presenting the results from the analysis of segregation, we first report the results of some

basic wage regressions, illustrating in our DEED subsample the black-white wage gap, the Hispanic-

white wage gap, and the importance of measured education and English language proficiency in

explaining these gaps. These results parallel those commonly reported elsewhere, and serve to provide a

benchmark for our later analysis of the link between workplace segregation, race, and ethnicity. As with

most studies, we treat education and English language proficiency as measured without error and

exogenous to wages (and similarly, for our segregation measures, place of employment).

        First, in Table 3 we report results for the sample of black and white workers (corresponding to

Table 1, column (4)). In columns (1) and (2) we report the educational distributions among whites and

blacks. Only ten percent of whites in the sample have less than a high school degree, whereas 18 percent

of blacks do. In contrast, at the top end of the education distribution, 25 percent of whites have at least a

college degree but only 14 percent of blacks do. In column (3) we report that the coefficient on the black



workers across metropolitan areas by demographic group, without literally attributing this distribution
across metropolitan areas to the forces that might generate workplace segregation.
25
  For example, we compare effective segregation between Hispanics who speak English poorly and
Hispanics who speak English well, to effective segregation between Hispanics who speak English poorly
and non-Hispanics who speak English poorly.

                                                     18
dummy in a log wage regression with only a control for race is !0.204. In column (4), we report results

from a log wage regression where we include a dummy variable for black as well as dummy variables for

educational attainment. The coefficients on the education dummies illustrate the usual monotonically

increasing return to education. More important, the coefficient on the black dummy falls to !0.127, a

reduction of 38 percent, indicating that education accounts for a large share of the black-white wage

gap.26

         In Table 4 we report results of a similar exercise where we examine the wage gap between

Hispanic and white workers and the impact of English language proficiency on the Hispanic-white wage

gap. In columns (1) and (2) we report the distributions of self-reported English language proficiency for

whites and Hispanics, respectively. In the sample, almost 99 percent of (a very large sample of) whites

report speaking English very well, whereas only 63 percent of Hispanic workers do. Many more

Hispanics report speaking English not well or not at all. The raw Hispanic-white log wage gap, as

reported in column (3) is !0.277. In column (4) we include controls for English language proficiency.

The coefficients on the language dummies themselves show that the return to language proficiency is

monotonic and increasing, and causes the coefficient on the Hispanic dummy to fall to !0.204, a 26

percent drop.27 Similar results have been found in other work on the Hispanic-white wage gap (and in

our previous work with the DEED, in Hellerstein and Neumark, 2003). Like for the black-white wage

gap and education, skill therefore accounts for a sizable share of the Hispanic-white wage gap.28



26
  For a small fraction of the sample used in Tables 2 and 6 (less than one percent), hourly wages are less
than one dollar per hour, rendering the log wage negative. Excluding workers whose measured hourly
wage is less than $2 does not markedly affect either the wage regression results, or the measurement of
black-white segregation reported later.
27
  The result is larger (a 42 percent drop) if we control for a quadratic in age and a sex dummy in the
regression, but is very robust to trimming the sample to exclude workers who earn hourly wages
computed to be below $2 per hour.
28
  Education also helps explain the Hispanic-white wage gap, and indeed explains more of the wage gap
than language. However, because language differences are larger than education differences between
Hispanics and whites, and because we find that much more of the Hispanic-white workplace segregation
we document below can be explained by language differences than by education differences, we limit our
focus to language.

                                                    19
        With these results in mind we turn to the key contribution of the paper, measuring and explaining

workplace segregation by skill, race, and ethnicity.

V. Segregation Results

Workplace Segregation by Education

        The segregation analysis begins with measures of workplace segregation by education for whites.

We focus first on whites so as not to confound our measures of segregation by education with

segregation that is driven by other factors, such as race, which are correlated with education. Because it

is easiest to characterize segregation with a binary measure of education, we define workers as low

education if they have a high school degree or less, and high education if they have at least some

college.29 Table 5 reports results for education segregation, using the sample of establishments with two

or more matched workers. To provide a sense of overall segregation by education for whites, column (1)

provides the various segregation measures at the unconditional national level, looking at all urban areas

(PMSAs and MSAs) as a whole. Column (2) presents the conditional national segregation indexes that

are constructed by weighting up to the national level each individual PMSA/MSA segregation measure.

        In column (1), looking first at the observed co-worker segregation by education for whites , we

see extensive segregation. In particular, low educated white workers on average work in establishments

in which 53.0 percent of matched white co-workers are also low education. In contrast, high education

workers work in establishments with white co-workers who are only 33.1 percent low education on

average. Below these figures we present the calculations from the simulations. Given that we randomize

workers in this sample across the whole United States in conducting this simulation, it is not surprising

that the results of the simulation imply that, on average, both low and high educated white workers work

with co-workers who are 41.3 percent low education–the sample average. That is, for this particular

exercise, the random co-worker segregation measure is zero, so that the effective co-worker simulation

measure, 20.0, is simply the observed co-worker simulation measure (CW O ). One useful way to interpret

29
  We further disaggregate workers by education below when we consider how much of segregation by
race is attributable to segregation by education.

                                                       20
this number is that 20 percent of the maximum amount of segregation that could arise due to non-random

factors is actually observed in the data. While it is not clear to what one should compare this result, it

suggests that there is substantial segregation by education.

        Column (2) looks at segregation within urban areas defined as PMSAs/MSAs. As noted earlier,

observed co-worker segregation is the same within and across urban areas; only the random segregation

measure differs. The random segregation measure is 4.2 (no longer zero for reasons explained above,

because workers are reallocated for the simulation only within urban areas); the pattern of random

segregation has low education workers working, on average, with co-workers who are 43.7 percent low

educated, while for high education workers the corresponding figure is 39.6 percent. As a result, the

effective segregation measure in column (2) falls to 16.5. That is, about 17 percent of the maximum

amount of segregation that could arise due to non-random factors is observed in the data.

        Column (3) of Table 5 calculates segregation by education for blacks in the sample, conditional

on the metropolitan area in which they live. There are more low education blacks in the sample than

whites, but observed and random segregation (CW O and CWR ) across the two columns are very similar,

so that the effective segregation measure for education segregation for blacks is 15.0, similar to the 16.5

estimate for whites. This is suggestive evidence that the factors driving skill segregation, as defined here

by education, are the same for whites as for blacks, as would be expected if skill segregation is arising

due to profit-maximizing behavior.

Workplace Segregation by Race

        Table 6 reports results for overall black-white segregation which can be compared to segregation

by education (Table 5). In column (1) of Table 6, we report the extent of segregation by race (black

versus white) in the whole United States where random segregation is defined by allowing workers to

work anywhere. In column (2), random segregation by race is calculated by conditioning on the

MSA/PMSA in which a worker lives. On average, black workers work with co-workers who are 23.7

percent black, while white workers work with co-workers who are 5.8 percent black. Based on the



                                                     21
sample average of blacks in the population, random allocation across the United States would imply that

blacks and whites should each work with co-workers who are 7.1 percent black, so that the overall level

of effective segregation as reported in column (1) is 17.8. Because there is some racial segregation

across urban areas, when we simulate random segregation within urban areas, in column (2), there is

some segregation that arises randomly. In particular, random assignment would lead blacks to work in

establishments with co-workers who are on average 11.2 percent black, versus an average percent black

of 6.8 percent for whites. Based on the comparison between observed and random segregation, the

effective segregation measure is 14.0, meaning that 14 percent of the maximum amount of racial

segregation that could arise due to non-random factors is actually observed in the data.

        A comparison of Tables 5 and 6 shows that the extent of segregation by race is very similar to

that of segregation by education. Although the overall fraction of black workers is much lower than the

fraction of low educated workers in the sample, the observed and random co-worker segregation

measures are remarkably similar when comparing racial segregation to education segregation. As a

result, the overall extent of racial segregation in the United States (14.0) is very similar to the extent of

education segregation for whites (16.5) or blacks (15.0).

Workplace Segregation by Race, Conditional on Education

        Next, we measure the extent to which racial segregation in the workplace can be explained by

education differences between blacks and whites. We do this by constructing new “conditional” random

segregation measures, where we simulate segregation holding the distribution of education fixed across

all workplaces. So, for example, if an establishment in our sample is observed to have three workers

with a high school degree, three workers with a high school degree will be randomly allocated to that

establishment. We again compute the average (across the simulations) simulated fraction of co-workers

who are black for blacks, denoting this BB C , and the average (across the simulations) simulated fraction

of co-workers who are black for whites, denoting this WB C . The difference between these two is denoted

CWC , and we define the extent of “effective conditional segregation” to be:



                                                      22
        [{CWO ! CWC }/{100 ! CWR }]×100 ,

where CWR is the measure of random segregation obtained when not conditioning on education. A

conditional effective segregation measure of zero would imply that all of the effective segregation

between blacks and whites can be attributed to education segregation that is coupled with differences in

the education distribution between blacks and whites. Conversely, a conditional effective segregation

measure equal to that of the (unconditional) effective segregation measure would imply that none of the

effective segregation between blacks and whites can be attributed to education segregation across

workplaces. We first do this calculation with the same two-way classification of education used in Table

5, and then expand to four educational levels; we also use an occupational classification with six

groupings that we consider to be skill-related.

        Column (1) of Table 7 reports the results for the two-way education classification. Observed

segregation between blacks and whites is unaffected by this conditioning, of course, and so the top part

of column (1) of Table 7, which reports the observed segregation between blacks and whites, repeats the

results from Table 6. We report the conditional random segregation measures starting in the middle of

the rows of Table 7. On average, random allocation of workers, conditional on randomization within the

two education categories and within MSA/PMSA results in black workers working, on average, with co-

workers who are 11.4 percent black, and white workers working, on average, with co-workers who are

6.8 percent black. These numbers are very close to the (unconditional) simulated numbers reported in

Table 6, column (2). As a result, the conditional effective segregation measure is 13.9, very close to the

unconditional segregation measure of 14.0. In other words, segregation by the binary education

distinction (which we measure to be extensive) can explain only a tiny fraction (0.9 percent) of overall

black-white segregation.

        We repeat this analysis in column (2) of Table 7, this time conditioning on four education

groupings when randomizing workers to workplaces: less than high school; high school degree; some

college or associates degree; and bachelors degree or above. The results of the conditional random



                                                    23
segregation are very similar to that obtained with two education groupings, so that our conditional

effective segregation measure falls only to 13.6.

        Education is, of course, only one dimension of skill across which employers may sort workers

and which may be correlated with race. Another possible mechanism by which workers may be sorted is

by occupation. Sorting by occupation may represent skill sorting, or it may be a proxy for a sorting

mechanism in which employers engage for other reasons (such as alleviating employee discrimination).

We explore the role of occupation sorting by computing random segregation conditional on the six one-

digit occupation categories in column (3) of Table 7 (listed in the notes to the table). While this

conditioning has slightly more effect than conditioning on education, the effective conditional

segregation measure is still 12.9, accounting for only eight percent of overall black-white segregation.

        As we reported in Table 3, it is not the case that education differences between blacks and whites

are too small in this sample to have meaningful consequences for workplace segregation by race. There

are large differences in education between blacks and whites, particularly at the upper and lower ends of

the spectrum, and these differences can explain a large fraction of black-white wage differences. This

implies that while education differences between blacks and whites go a reasonably long way toward

explaining wage differences, they do not explain differences in where black and white workers in our

sample work.

        To show this explicitly, in Table 8 we report wage regressions where we compare the black-

white wage gaps as estimated with and without including establishment fixed effects in the regressions.

In columns (1) and (2) we repeat the results from Table 3, where we estimate the black-white wage gap

without controlling for establishment fixed effects. Column (3) replicates the specification in column

(1), but includes establishment fixed effects. The coefficient on the black dummy actually becomes more

negative when we include a dummy variable for race and establishment fixed effects, implying that

blacks work in slightly higher-wage establishments, rather than lower-wage establishments.30 When we

30
  Including one-digit industry dummy variables in the regression leaves the coefficient on the black
dummy almost unchanged from columns (1) and (2) and has very little effect on the coefficients on the

                                                    24
add the education controls to this specification, in column (4), the coefficient on the black dummy again

falls by about one-third. The fact that the difference in the coefficient on the black dummy falls by as

much with the fixed effects as without them indicates that the role of education in explaining the black-

white wage gap does not arise through sorting of blacks and whites across establishments based on

education. This is consistent with our evidence that education contributes minimally to black-white

workplace segregation.

          These results do not indicate that sorting across establishments has nothing to do with skill. On

the contrary, the results from columns (2) and (4) of Table 8 show that including the establishment fixed

effects in the regression reduces the estimated returns to education substantially, suggesting that there is,

in fact, sorting by skill across establishments so that education differences of workers within a given

establishment play a reduced role in explaining wage differences between workers. But what these

results do suggest is that the sorting of workers by education across establishments (that we established

in Table 5) is not related to the sorting of workers by race that leads to wage gaps between blacks and

whites.

          Given that education essentially plays no role in generating what we consider to be the rather

substantial amount of racial segregation in the workplace, it is difficult to imagine that unobservable skill

differences between blacks and whites could explain a sizable fraction of workplace segregation by race.

The mechanism(s) behind workplace segregation by race therefore appear not to be skill related.

Alternative mechanisms such as labor market discrimination, residential segregation/spatial mismatch

within urban areas, or labor market networks are all possibilities worthy of future exploration.

Workplace Segregation by Ethnicity

          We now turn to an examination of the extent and causes of workplace segregation by Hispanic

ethnicity. The baseline estimates for the extent of Hispanic-white segregation are reported in columns

(1) and (2) of Table 9, and the basic conclusion is that there is extensive workplace segregation by



education variables.

                                                      25
Hispanic ethnicity. The first specific thing to note is that the segregation figures for the unconditional

national indexes indicate more segregation by ethnicity than their counterparts for race as reported in

Table 6. Specifically, in column (1) of Table 9 the average percentage of Hispanics with whom

Hispanics work is 39.4 percent, versus a comparable figure of 23.7 percent for blacks. The effective

segregation measures are similarly different: 34.9 for Hispanic-white segregation versus 17.8 for black-

white segregation.

        The results are not as starkly different when we condition on metropolitan areas. This occurs

because, for Hispanics, randomly-generated segregation is quite far from zero, conditional on

metropolitan areas. In column (2) of Table 9, for example, the randomly allocated share Hispanic for

Hispanic workers is 24.4 percent, compared with a parallel share Hispanic for white workers of 5.6

percent. This difference mainly arises because Hispanics are not as evenly dispersed across metropolitan

areas as are blacks, some of which have few Hispanics. The net result is that, conditional on

metropolitan area, the effective co-worker segregation measure is only somewhat higher for Hispanics

(19.8) than for blacks (14.0).

        In columns (3) and (4) of Table 9, we explore the extent of workplace segregation by English

language proficiency for whites and Hispanics separately. As for education, employers may find it

efficient to segregate workers by English language proficiency. Indeed, it is possible that the motives for

segregation by language are even stronger than for segregation by education since workers who cannot

communicate with each other impose clearly impose costs on employers relative to the alternative. We

divide language proficiency into two categories. The first, “poor English,” consists of workers who

report speaking English not well or not at all. The second, “good English,” consists of workers who

report speaking English well or very well.

        In column (3) we report the extent of workplace segregation by language for whites. Less than

one half of one percent of the white sample are in the poor English category, yet a worker in this category

works, on average, with co-workers for whom 6.9 percent speak English poorly. In contrast, for white



                                                     26
workers in the good English category, only 0.4 percent of their co-workers speak English poorly.

Random co-worker segregation for this sample, while not zero, is small (0.6). As a result, effective

segregation for whites by language proficiency is 6.0. While the scale of this is smaller than for the other

effective segregation measures computed thus far, we think it is notable given the very small percentage

of poor English speakers among the whites.

        The results on language segregation for Hispanics, in column (4), illustrate more starkly that

there is extensive workplace segregation by language proficiency. Hispanics who speak English not well

or not at all are likely to have Hispanic co-workers among whom, on average, 48.1 percent also speak

English poorly or not at all. In stark contrast, Hispanics in the “good English” category are likely to have

Hispanic co-workers of whom, on average, only 15.4 percent are in the “poor English” group. The

random segregation measures indicate that some segregation arises randomly, conditional on geographic

area. Under random allocation Hispanics in the “poor English” category would have 26.8 percent of

Hispanic co-workers speaking English poorly or not at all, while workers in the “good English” category

would have 21.7 percent of co-workers speaking English poorly or not at all. All together, this implies

that the effective segregation measure for language segregation for Hispanics is 29.1, much larger than

any other (within MSA/PMSA) segregation measure thus far.

        In Table 10, we explore the extent to which the very pronounced language segregation for

Hispanics may be driving Hispanic-white workplace segregation, since Hispanics have so much lower

English language proficiency, on average, than whites. In the top panel of column (1) we repeat the

figures for observed Hispanic-white segregation from Table 9, column (2); as reported earlier, the

difference between co-worker segregation for Hispanics and whites is 34.9. We then report conditional

random segregation for Hispanics and whites, conditional on the two language groupings used in the

previous table (in addition to MSA/PMSA). With random allocation within the two language groups,

Hispanics on average work with co-workers who are 26.8 percent Hispanic, whereas whites work with

co-workers who are 5.5 percent Hispanic. That is, the simulated difference between the co-worker



                                                    27
segregation measures is 21.3. Together these numbers lead to an effective segregation measure of 16.7.

When we repeat this exercise in column (2), this time randomizing workers within the four language

groups for which workers self-report English language proficiency (not at all, not well, well, very well),

the effective segregation measure is 13.5. This figure can be interpreted as saying that of the Hispanic-

white unconditional effective segregation measure of 19.8, nearly a third (32 percent = (19.8-13.5)/19.8)

can be explained by language segregation.

        Paralleling the analysis for black-white segregation, in column (3) we explore the extent to which

Hispanic-white segregation can be explained by segregation across 1-digit occupation. The results

indicate that segregation by 1-digit occupation is 16.6 and therefore explains about the same amount of

Hispanic-white segregation as can segregation by language proficiency when defined as a dichotomous

variable as in column (1). This is not surprising, given the large overlap in the distributions of

occupation and English language proficiency among Hispanics. For example, among Hispanic managers,

97% report speaking English well or very well, as compared to only 66% for Hispanic laborers. Indeed,

in unreported results, the effective segregation measure conditional on both 1-digit occupation and the

two English language proficiency categories is 14.0, not much below that of conditioning only on English

language proficiency.

        The result that English language proficiency can explain a large fraction of Hispanic-white

segregation is starkly different from the result we obtained for black-white workplace segregation, which

could not be explained by the large differences in educational attainment between blacks and whites. It

is useful, then, to examine whether the impact of language on ethnic workplace segregation manifests

itself in wage gaps between Hispanics and whites. We do this in Table 11. Columns (1) and (2) report

the basic wage regression results from Table 4, where we noted that controlling for English language

proficiency caused a 26 percent drop in the Hispanic-white wage gap. Columns (3) and (4) report results

including establishment fixed effects. Including fixed effects causes the “raw” (unconditional on

language) Hispanic-white wage gap to fall from !0.277 to !0.255, indicating that Hispanics work in



                                                     28
somewhat lower-paying establishments than whites. With fixed effects included, however, including

English language proficiency only causes the Hispanic-white wage gap to fall to !0.221, as shown in

column (4). This is only a 13 percent drop from column (3). Moreover, each of the coefficients on the

dummy variables for English language proficiency falls with the inclusion of the fixed effects. This

indicates that the role of English language proficiency in explaining wage gaps between Hispanics and

whites is partially manifested in the role of language in sorting workers across establishments. This is

consistent with our workplace segregation finding that language differences between Hispanics and

whites can explain a large fraction of workplace segregation by Hispanic ethnicity.

        In sum, skill differences between Hispanics and whites, at least as defined by language

proficiency, explain approximately the same share of Hispanic-white workplace segregation as of the

Hispanic-white wage gap, and are consistent with the role of sorting across establishments in explaining

the Hispanic-white wage gap. This contrasts with the finding that skill differences between blacks and

whites, as defined by education differentials, explain virtually none of racial segregation in the

workplace.

Understanding Workplace Segregation by Language Proficiency

        For Hispanic workers we have documented that substantial workplace segregation is generated

by skill differences, at least as defined by language proficiency. One interpretation of this evidence is

that employers have good reasons to pursue such segregation, and because language proficiency is

correlated with ethnicity, segregation by language arising for non-discriminatory reasons generates

segregation by ethnicity. Another possibility, though, is that language is associated with other

dimensions along which employers discriminate–such as national origin or socioeconomic factors–and

on the basis of which employers crowd workers into a subset of jobs (typically jobs that pay less). It can




                                                     29
be difficult to distinguish between these competing hypotheses.31 In the case of language skills, however,

we believe some progress can be made on this question.

        In particular, to test whether there are efficiency reasons for segregation by language skill, as

opposed to simple segregation of those with poor English into a subset of jobs, we can consider

employment patterns for workers who speak poor English but who also speak different languages. If

Hispanic poor English speakers (who generally speak Spanish) are not segregated from non-Hispanic

poor English speakers (who speak a language other than Spanish), then this would suggest that those with

low skills are clustered in the same workplaces for reasons other than efficiency gains from grouping

workers who speak the same language; such segregation would be more consistent with simple

segregation of “less desirable” workers into a subset of jobs. In contrast, if Hispanic poor English

speakers are segregated from those who have poor English skills but speak languages other than Spanish,

then segregation by language skills may be arising for reasons of greater complementarity between

workers who speak the same language (or a related economic incentive to segregate workplaces by

common language). Alternatively, such segregation by language may be a function of residential

segregation and/or hiring networks where workers who speak the same language have access to the same

subset of employers. Network relationships can themselves be efficiency enhancing if they make it

easier for workers to find jobs or for employers to find workers.

        The results of this analysis are reported in Table 12. Column (1) repeats the calculations from

Table 9 for segregation between Hispanic workers with poor English skills and Hispanic workers with

good English skills. In contrast, column (2) reports calculations for segregation between Hispanics with

poor English skills and non-Hispanics (including non-whites) with poor English skills. These figures

indicate much more extensive segregation than in column (1): 49.5 versus 29.1. Note that in column (2)

31
  This is potentially true in many contexts, even though it is often ignored. For example, Bertrand and
Mullainathan (2004) provide evidence from an audit study that employers are less likely to interview job
candidates with “black-sounding” names. This may be because of race discrimination per se, or because
of discrimination against workers whose names suggest a certain cultural and socioeconomic upbringing
(or the intersection of the two), but the paper has been interpreted as providing evidence of
discrimination on the basis of race. (See also Fryer and Levitt, 2003.)

                                                     30
random segregation is far from zero, much of this resulting from sorting across MSA/PMSAs. Thus, this

evidence suggests that much of the segregation of Hispanics with poor English skills arises because of

factors other than the general crowding of low-skilled workers with poor English skills into the same set

of low-paying workplaces.

Differences in Workplace Segregation by Establishment Size

        Finally, in Table 13 we report the effective segregation measure for various dimensions of

segregation by establishment size, for approximately the four quartiles of the establishment size

distribution in our sample. This is of interest for a few reasons. First, we might expect to find less

segregation in larger establishments simply because employers may be able to achieve the goal of

segregation–whether it is separating workers by race or ethnicity, taking advantage of skill

complementarity, or something else–by segregating workers within establishments.32 Second, as noted

earlier, EEO and affirmative action target larger employers, which may tend to discourage segregation in

large establishments.33

        The estimates are consistent with these expectations. In the first two rows, Hispanic-white and

black-white segregation effective segregation range from 24-27 in the smallest establishments to 9-12 in

the largest establishments, and in the third row skill segregation among whites falls from 18.0 to 12.7.

The differences are sharper still when we compare segregation between Hispanics and non-Hispanics

who speak English poorly and Hispanics who speak English well and those who speak it poorly.

Segregation of Hispanics by language ability follows a roughly similar pattern to the other forms of

segregation documented in the preceding rows in the table. But segregation of Hispanics from non-


32
  As an anecdotal example, an article in the New York Times describes a Texas factory that nearly
completely segregates its Hispanic and Vietnamese workers into two different departments in the factory
(with the Hispanics working in the lower-paying department). This article also points to the role of
language complementarities between workers and supervisors, as one of the company’s defenses of this
practice is that the supervisor of the higher-paying department speaks Vietnamese but not Spanish
(Greenhouse, 2003).
33
  Other research has documented a pattern of lower hiring of blacks in small establishments, and has
argued that this reflects weaker or non-existing anti-discrimination policies at those establishments
(Chay, 1998; Holzer, 1998; Carrington, et al., 2000).

                                                     31
Hispanics when both groups have poor English skills is very high in the small establishments (77.8), and

falls by nearly 50 percentage points in going from the smallest to the largest establishments. The very

high segregation by language in small establishments, coupled with the sharp drop as we move to larger

establishments, reinforces the idea that language complementarities contribute to workplace segregation

by language among those who speak poor English. Nonetheless, if residential location is less important

in determining employment at large establishments than small establishments, which would be the case if

those working at large establishments tend to be drawn from a wider geographic area, these results may

again be consistent with residential segregation between Hispanics and other groups with poor English

skills driving the workplace segregation results.

V. Conclusions

        We use a unique data set of employees matched to establishments to study workplace segregation

in the United States. We document that there is rather extensive segregation by education for white

workers, consistent with models where employers find it efficient to segregate workers by skill.

Similarly, among Hispanics we document extensive segregation by language, which is perhaps even

stronger evidence that skill complementarities in the workplace generate segregation. We also document

that there is segregation by race in the workplace of the same magnitude as education segregation, and

segregation by Hispanic ethnicity that is slightly larger.

        After documenting these different dimensions of segregation, our analysis focuses on whether

racial and ethnic workplace segregation reflects race or ethnicity per se, likely stemming from

discrimination, or instead is attributable to skills that differ across race and ethnic groups and along

which employers might find it useful to segregate workers. For racial segregation, we find that virtually

none of it is attributable to skill differences, at least as these are manifested in education (or occupation)

differences between blacks and whites. In contrast, we show that approximately one-third of ethnic

segregation in the workplace is attributable to language proficiency. These results are reflected in wage

regressions, where sorting across establishments does not decrease (and even increases) black-white



                                                      32
wage gaps while it decreases the impact of education on wages, whereas sorting across establishments by

Hispanic ethnicity decreases the ethnic wage gap and decreases the importance of language proficiency

in explaining Hispanic-white wage gaps.

        Finally, in order to further probe the role of skill in generating ethnic (and language) segregation,

we ask whether segregation by skill likely arises due to the consignment of less-skilled workers to the

same subset of workplaces, perhaps because of discrimination against workers on the basis of numerous

characteristics associated with low skills–such as immigrant status–or whether other factors such as skill-

based complementarities lead certain types of workers to work together. Providing evidence inconsistent

with the first hypothesis, we find that Hispanics with poor English skills are considerably more

segregated from workers with poor English skills who speak other languages than they are from

Hispanics with good English skills. It therefore appears that the process by which Hispanic and white

workers are sorted into workplaces is not simply one whereby low-skilled workers are relegated to the

same set of (low-paying) workplaces, but rather is driven in part by sorting on language skills.

        In addition to finding that there is extensive segregation by skill in the workplace, our results

document the reality of racial and ethnic segregation in U.S. workplaces. For blacks, the fact that

education differences between blacks and whites explain virtually none of racial workplace segregation

means that further research must be conducted to uncover the sources of racial segregation in the

workplace, and that this research necessarily must examine explanations that are not skill-based:

discrimination, residential segregation, and labor market networks are the most obvious possibilities.

While language proficiency can explain a large fraction of ethnic segregation in the workplace, these

alternative explanations must also be considered with regard to the remaining ethnic segregation.

Finally, understanding the mechanisms that lead segregation across workplaces to decrease with

establishment size may help in understanding the sources of workplace segregation more generally, while

for larger establishments it may be important to examine whether workers remain segregated within the

workplace.



                                                     33
34
Appendix
         From the point of view of drawing statistical inferences, we need to be able to assess the
statistical significance of our effective segregation measures and of differences between them. Given the
precision of the simulated segregation measures as discussed in Section III, the effective segregation
measures are also likely relatively precise. To assess this more formally, we explore bootstrapped
distributions for the effective segregation measures.
         We use as our base sample the “Restricted DEED” as in Table 1, column (1). The data
generating process for that sample can be approximated to a first order as a random sample of workers
who are then matched to establishments, where workers have a constant probability of being matched to
their establishment. For our bootstrap exercise we therefore draw a sample of workers with replacement
of the original size of the Restricted DEED sample, maintaining for that worker the original sample
estimate of the fraction of workers in the categories of interest (e.g. percent black, percent Hispanic). We
then calculate the observed segregation measures in the entire paper for that bootstrap sample, making
sample restrictions for each table in the paper as necessary from that bootstrap sample. We do not
recalculate random segregation, but instead treat it as a population parameter from the Restricted DEED.
Finally, we collect the information on the empirical distributions of the observed and effective
segregation measures.
         We do not report full results from the bootstrap replications. Observed segregation is measured
very precisely in each case so that observed segregation is always statistically significantly different from
random segregation. For example, consider Table 6, column (2). Observed co-worker segregation is
17.8 and random segregation is 4.4. From the bootstraps, we find that the standard error of the estimate
of observed segregation is 0.08.
         Finally, in order to assess whether the differences in estimated effective segregation between any
two columns in the tables are statistically significant, we pair each of the 100 bootstraps across the two
results, calculate the difference in the segregation measures across the samples for each bootstrap, and
calculate the standard deviation of the difference in the segregation measures across columns. The
differences in effective segregation across columns of the tables are virtually always highly significant.




                                                     35
                                             References

Altonji, Joseph G., and Rebecca M. Blank. 1999. “Race and Gender in the Labor Market.” In Handbook
of Labor Economics, Vol. 3, eds. Ashenfelter and Card (Amsterdam: Elsevier), pp. 3143-259.

Autor, David H., Lawrence F. Katz, and Melissa S. Kearney. 2004. “Trends in U.S. Wage Inequality: Re-
Assessing the Revisionists.” Unpublished manuscript, MIT.

Bayard, Kimberly, Judith Hellerstein, David Neumark, and Kenneth Troske. 1999. “Why Are Racial and
Ethnic Wage Gaps Larger for Men than for Women? Exploring the Role of Segregation Using the New
Worker-Establishment Characteristics Database.” In The Creation and Analysis of Employer-Employee
Matched Data, eds. Haltiwanger, Lane, Spletzer, Theeuwes, and Troske (Amsterdam: Elsevier Science
B.V.), pp. 175-203.

Bertrand, Marianne, and Sendhil Mullainathan. 2004. “Are Emily and Greg More Employable than
Lakisha and Jamal? A Field Experiment on Labor Market Discrimination.” American Economic Review,
Vol. 94, No. 4, September, pp. 991-1013.

Becker, Gary S. 1971. The Economics of Discrimination, Second Edition (Chicago: University of
Chicago Press).

Boisso, Dale, Kathy Hayes, Joseph Hirschberg, and Jacques Silber. 1994. “Occupational Segregation in
the Multidimensional Case.” Journal of Econometrics, Vol. 61, No. 1, March, pp. 161-71.

Brown, Charles, and James Medoff. 1989. “The Employer Size Wage Effect.” Journal of Political
Economy, Vol. 97, No. 5, October, pp. 1027-59.

Cabrales, Antonio, and Antoni Calvó-Armengol. 2002. “Social Preferences and Skill Segregation.”
Unpublished paper, Universitat Pompeu Fabra.

Cain, Glen. 1986. “The Economic Analysis of Labor Market Discrimination: A Survey.” In Handbook of
Labor Economics, Vol. 1, eds. Ashenfelter and Layard (Amsterdam: North-Holland), pp. 693-785.

Card, David, and John E. DiNardo. 2002. “Skill-Biased Technological Change and Rising Wage
Inequality: Some Problems and Puzzles.” Journal of Labor Economics, Vol. 20, No. 4, October, pp. 733-
83.

Carrington, William J., and Kenneth R. Troske. 1997. “On Measuring Segregation in Samples with Small
Units.” Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, Vol. 15, No. 4, October, pp. 402-9.

Carrington, William H., and Kenneth R. Troske. 1998a. “Interfirm Racial Segregation and the
Black/White Wage Gap.” Journal of Labor Economics, Vol 16, No. 2, April, pp. 231-60

Carrington, William J. And Kenneth Troske. 1998b. “Sex Segregation in U.S. Manufacturing.” Industrial
and Labor Relations Review, Vol. 51, April, pp. 445-464.

Carrington, William J., Kristin McCue, and Brooks Pierce. 2000. “Using Establishment Size to Measure
the Impact of Title VII and Affirmative Action.” Journal of Human Resources, Vol. 35, No. 3, Summer,
pp. 503-23.
Chay, Kenneth Y. 1998. “The Impact of Federal Civil Rights Policy on Black Economic Progress:
Evidence from the Equal Employment Opportunity Act of 1972.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review,
Vol. 51, No. 4, January, pp. 608-32.

Cortese, Charles, F., R. Frank Falk, and Jack K. Cohen. 1976. “Further Considerations on the
Methodological Analysis of Segregation Indices.” American Sociological Review, Vol. 51, No. 4,
August, pp. 630-7.

Cross, Harry, Genevieve Kenney, Jane Mell, and Wendy Zimmerman. 1990. Employer Hiring Practices:
Differential Treatment of Hispanic and Anglo Job Seekers (Washington, DC: Urban Institute Press).

Cutler, David M., Edward L. Glaeser, and Jacob L. Vigdor. 1999. “The Rise and Decline of the
American Ghetto.” Journal of Political Economy, Vol 107, No. 3, June, pp. 455-506.

Darity, William A., Jr., and Patrick L. Mason. 1998. “Evidence on Discrimination in Employment: Codes
of Color, Codes of Gender.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 12, No. 2, Spring, pp. 63-92.

Davis, Steve J., John Haltiwanger, Lawrence F. Katz, and Robert Topel. 1991. “Wage Dispersion
Between and Within U.S. Manufacturing Plants, 1963-1986.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity:
Microeconomics, Vol. 1, pp. 115-200.

Donohue, John J., and James Heckman. 1991. “Continuous Versus Episodic Change: The Impact of Civil
Rights Policy on the Economic Status of Blacks.” Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. 29, No. 4,
December, pp. 1603-43.

Duncan, Otis D., and Beverly Duncan. 1955. “A Methodological Analysis of Segregation Indices.”
American Sociological Review, Vol. 20, No. 2, April, pp. 210-7.

Echenique, Frederico, and Roland Fryer. 2005. “On the Measurement of Segregation.” NBER Working
Paper No. 11258.

Estlund, Cynthia. 2003. Working Together: How Workplace Bonds Strengthen a Diverse Democracy
(New York: Oxford University Press).

Foster, Lucia, John Haltiwanger, and C.J. Krizan. 1998. “Aggregate Productivity Growth: Lessons from
Microeconomic Evidence.” NBER Working Paper No. 6803.

Fryer, Roland G., and Steven D. Levitt. 2003. “The Causes and Consequences of Distinctively Black
Names.” NBER Working Paper No. 9938.

Greenhouse, Steven. 2003. “At a Factory in Houston, Hispanics Fight to Work in Coveted Department.”
New York Times, February 9, p. 14.

Heckman, James J. 1998. “Detecting Discrimination.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 12, No. 2,
Spring, pp. 101-16.

Hellerstein, Judith, and David Neumark. 2003. “Ethnicity, Language, and Workplace Segregation:
Evidence from a New Matched Employer-Employee Data Set.” Annales d’Economie et de Statistique,
Vol. 71-72, July-December, pp. 19-78.

Higgs, Robert. 1977. “Firm-Specific Evidence on Racial Wage Differentials and Workforce
Segregation.” American Economic Review, Vol. 67, No. 2, March, pp. 236-45.
Hirsch, Barry T., and David A. Macpherson. 2003. “Wages, Sorting on Skill, and the Racial Composition
of Jobs.” IZA Discussion Paper No. 741.

Holzer, Harry J. 1998. “Why Do Small Establishments Hire Fewer Blacks than Large Ones?” Journal of
Human Resources, Vol. 33, No. 4, Fall, pp. 896-914.

Ihlanfeldt, Keith, and David Sjoquist. 1990. “Job Accessibility and Racial Differences in Youth
Employment Rates.” American Economic Review, Vol. 80, No. 1, March, pp. 267-76.

James, Daniel R., and Karl E. Taeuber. 1985. “Measures of Segregation.” In Sociological Methodology,
ed. Brandon Tuma (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass), pp. 1-32.

Juhn, Chinhui, Kevin M. Murphy, and Brooks Pierce. 1993. “Wage Inequality and the Rise in Returns to
Skill.” Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 101, No. 3, June, pp. 410-42.

Katz, Lawrence F., and Kevin M. Murphy. 1992. “Changes in Relative Wages, 1963-1987: Supply and
Demand Factors.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 107, No. 1, February, pp. 35-78.

King, Mary C. 1992. “Occupational Segregation by Race and Sex, 1940-1988.” Monthly Labor Review,
April, pp. 30-7.

Kremer, Michael, and Eric Maskin. 1996. “Wage Inequality and Segregation by Skill.” National Bureau
of Economic Research Working Paper No. 5718.

Massey, Douglas, and Nancy Denton. 1987. “Trends in the Residential Segregation of Blacks, Hispanics,
and Asians: 1970-1980.” American Sociological Review, Vol. 52, No. 6, December, pp. 802-25.

Neal, Derek A., and William R. Johnson. 1996. “The Role of Premarket Factors in Black-White Wage
Differences.” Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 104, No. 5, October, pp. 869-95.

O'Neill, June. 1990. “The Role of Human Capital in Earnings Differences between Black and White
Men.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 4, No. 4, Fall, pp. 25-45.

Rivera, Elaine. 2003. “Area Bosses Try to Bridge Language Gaps.” Washington Post, May 6, p. B1.

Saint-Paul, Gilles. 2001. “On the Distribution of Income and Worker Assignment under Intrafirm
Spillovers, with an Application to Ideas and Networks.” Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 109, No. 1,
February, pp. 1-37.

Turner, Margery Austin, Michael Fix, and Raymond J. Struyk. 1991. Opportunities Denied,
Opportunities Diminished: Racial Discrimination in Hiring (Washington, DC: Urban Institute Press).

U.S. Census Bureau. “Census Geographic Glossary.” http://www.census.gov/geo/lv4help/
cengeoglos.html (viewed July 3, 2003).

U.S. Census Bureau, “Census Tracts and Block Numbering Areas.”
http://www.census.gov/geo/www/GARM/Ch10GARM.pdf (viewed May 10, 2004).

Watts, Martin J. 1995. “Trends in Occupational Segregation by Race and Gender in the U.S.A., 1983-92:
A Multidimensional Approach.” Review of Radical Political Economics, Vol. 27, No. 4, Fall, pp. 1-36.
Welch, Finis. 1990. “The Employment of Black Men.” Journal of Labor Economics, Vol. 8, No. 2, April,
pp. S26-S75.

Winship, Christopher. 1977. “A Revaluation of Indexes of Residential Segregation.” Social Forces, Vol.
55, No. 4, June, pp. 1058-66.
Table 1: Means of Worker Characteristics
                                                                Restricted    Black/White    Hispanic/White
                                  SEDF          Full DEED        DEED           sample          Sample
                                   (1)              (2)            (3)            (4)               (5)
Age                                37.08            37.51          37.56         37.74             37.60
                                  (12.78)          (12.23)        (12.16)       (12.17)           (12.19)
Female                              0.46             0.47           0.470        0.480             0.470
Married                             0.60             0.65           0.630        0.630             0.640
White                               0.82             0.86          0.870           0.93            0.930
Hispanic                            0.07             0.05          0.060            ---            0.070
Black                               0.08             0.05          0.070         0.070               ---
Full-time                           0.77             0.83          0.840         0.840             0.840
Number of kids (if female)          1.57             1.53           1.46           1.44             1.43
                                   (1.62)           (1.55)         (1.53)         (1.51)           (1.51)
High school diploma                 0.34             0.33          0.310         0.310             0.310
Some college                        0.30             0.32          0.330         0.340             0.330
B.A.                                0.13             0.16          0.170         0.180             0.180
Advanced degree                     0.05             0.05          0.060         0.060             0.060
Ln(hourly wage)                     2.21             2.30           2.37           2.39             2.39
                                   (0.70)           (0.65)         (0.64)        (0.64)            (0.64)
Hourly wage                        12.10            12.89          13.67         13.91             13.86
                                  (82.19)          (37.07)        (27.72)       (28.36)           (28.43)
Hours worked in 1989               39.51            40.42          40.56         40.57             40.62
                                  (11.44)          (10.37)        (10.10)       (10.10)           (10.13)
Weeks worked in 1989               46.67            48.21          48.51         48.64             48.60
                                  (11.05)           (9.34)         (8.99)         (8.82)           (8.86)
Earnings in 1989                  22,575           25,581         27,500         28,112           28,034
                                 (26,760)         (29,475)       (31,023)       (31,613)         (31,730)
 Industry:
  Mining                            0.01             0.01          0.010         0.010              0.010
  Construction                      0.07             0.04          0.030         0.030              0.040
  Manufacturing                     0.25             0.34          0.350         0.340              0.350
  Transportation                    0.08             0.05          0.060         0.060              0.050
  Wholesale                         0.05             0.07          0.080         0.080              0.080
  Retail                            0.20             0.17          0.150         0.150              0.150
  FIRE                              0.08             0.08          0.080         0.090              0.090
  Services                          0.26             0.24          0.240         0.250              0.240
 Observations                   12,143,183        3,291,213      1,755,825    1,618,876          1,625,953
Standard deviations of continuous variables are reported in parentheses. Column (3) is restricted to workers with at
least one other worker matched to their establishment, and who work in the same metropolitan area (MSA/PMSA) in
which they reside.
Table 2: Means for Establishments
                                                   SSEL                   Full DEED           Restricted DEED
Total employment                                   17.57                    52.68                  106.44
                                                  (253.75)                 (577.39)              (1011.57)
Establishment size:
  1 - 25                                            0.88                     0.65                   0.38
  26 - 50                                           0.06                     0.15                   0.22
  51 - 100                                          0.03                     0.10                   0.19
  101 +                                             0.03                     0.10                   0.22
Industry:
  Mining                                            0.00                     0.01                   0.00
  Construction                                      0.09                     0.07                   0.05
  Manufacturing                                     0.06                     0.13                   0.19
  Transportation                                    0.04                     0.05                   0.05
  Wholesale                                         0.08                     0.11                   0.12
  Retail                                            0.25                     0.24                   0.22
  FIRE                                              0.09                     0.10                   0.10
  Services                                          0.28                     0.26                   0.23
In MSA                                              0.81                     0.82                   1.00
Census Region:
  North East                                        0.06                     0.06                   0.05
  Mid Atlantic                                      0.16                     0.15                   0.16
  East North Central                                0.16                     0.20                   0.22
  West North Central                                0.07                     0.08                   0.07
  South Atlantic                                    0.18                     0.16                   0.16
  East South Central                                0.05                     0.05                   0.04
  West South Central                                0.10                     0.10                   0.09
  Mountain                                          0.06                     0.05                   0.05
  Pacific                                           0.16                     0.15                   0.15
 Payroll ($1000)                                     397                    1,358                  2,963
                                                   (5,064)                 (10,329)               (16,818)
Payroll/total employment                              21.02                    24.24                   26.73
                                                   (1,385.12)                (111.79)                (184.25)
Share of employees matched                             –                       0.17                    0.14
Multi-unit establishment                              0.23                     0.42                    0.53
Observations                                       5,237,592                 972,436                 307,496
Standard deviations of continuous variables are reported in parentheses. 55 establishments in the Full DEED sample
do not have valid county data from the SSEL. For these 55, the workers reported place of work was used to
determine MSA status.
Table 3: The Distribution of Education by Race and the Impact of Education on Black-White Wage Gaps
                                                                Sample means                          Regression results

                                                       Whites               Blacks

                                                         (1)                   (2)                  (3)                 (4)

 Black                                                    0                    1                 -0.204                -0.127
                                                                                                 (0.002)              (0.002)

 Less than a high school degree                         0.10                 0.18

 High school degree                                     0.31                 0.32                                      0.196
                                                                                                                      (0.002)

 Some college or Associates degree                      0.33                 0.37                                      0.331
                                                                                                                      (0.002)

 College degree or above                                0.25                 0.14                                      0.744
                                                                                                                      (0.002)

 Number of observations                              1,503,640             115,236               1,618,876          1,618,876
The dependent variable in the regressions reported in columns (3) and (4) is the log of the hourly wage. There is a constant in the
regressions.
Table 4: The Distribution of English Language Proficiency by Ethnicity and the Impact of Language Proficiency on Hispanic-
White Wage Gaps
                                                           Sample means                               Regression results

                                                  Whites         Hispanics

                                                    (1)                    (2)                  (3)                        (4)

 Hispanic                                            0                     1                   -0.277                  -0.204
                                                                                              (0.002)                 (0.002)

 Speak English “not at all”                       0.0002                  0.05

 Speak English “not well”                         0.0036                  0.14                                         0.210
                                                                                                                      (0.009)

 Speak English well                               0.0072                  0.184                                        0.396
                                                                                                                      (0.009)

 Speak English very well                           0.989                  0.626                                        0.471
                                                                                                                      (0.009)

 Number of observations                         1,513,277             112,676                1,625,953             1,625,953
The dependent variable in the regressions reported in columns (3) and (4) is the log of the hourly wage. There is a constant in the
regressions.
Table 5: Segregation by Education
                                             Segregation by education for          Segregation by
                                                       whites:                  education for blacks:
                                              U.S.,
                                           MSA/PMSA,            Within
                                             sample           MSA/PMSA          Within MSA/PMSA
                                             %Low ed           %Low ed                %Low ed
                                                (1)               (2)                    (3)

 Co-worker segregation
 Observed segregation
 Low education workers (LLO )                   53.0              53.0                  58.9
 High education workers (HLO )                  33.1              33.1                  41.0
 Difference (CW O )                             19.9              19.9                  17.8
 Random segregation
 Low education workers (LLO )                   41.3              43.7                  51.6
 High education workers (HLO )                  41.3              39.6                  48.3
 Difference (CW R )                              0                4.2                    3.3



 Effective segregation,
                                                20.0              16.5                  15.0
 [{CWO ! CWR }/{100 ! CWR }]×100
 Number of workers                           1,500,322         1,500,322               83,401
  Number of establishments                     273,084           273,084                  19,062
Low education is defined as high school degree or less. High education is defined as more than high
school. Calculations are for establishments with two or more matched workers, where, for example, for
the sample of workers in the first two columns, the median number of workers matched to an
establishment is 8, and the median share of the workforce matched is 7.7 percent. (The hypothetical
maximum is 16.7 percent, given that only 1/6 of workers receive the Census long form.) All medians are
reported as “fuzzy medians” to comply with confidentiality restrictions; but they are extremely close to
actual medians.
Table 6: Black-White Segregation
                                                     All workers

                                   Black-white segregation   Black-white segregation
                                          in U.S.              within MSA/PMSA
                                          %Black                    %Black

                                             (1)                       (2)

 Co-worker segregation
 Observed segregation
 Black workers (BB O )                      23.7                      23.7
 White workers (WB O )                      5.8                       5.8
 Difference (CW O )                         17.8                      17.8
 Random segregation
 Black workers (BB R )                      7.1                       11.2
 White workers (WB R )                      7.1                       6.8
 Difference (CW R )                          0                        4.4

 Effective co-worker
                                            17.8                      14.0
 segregation
 Number of workers                       1,618,876                 1,618,876
 Number of establishments                 285,988                   285,988

See notes to Table 5.
Table 7: Black-White Segregation Conditional on Education or Occupation
                                          Black-white          Black-white         Black-white segregation
                                          segregation          segregation          conditional on 1-digit
                                        conditional on 2     conditional on 4          occupation (six
                                        education groups     education groups            categories)
                                                (1)                  (2)                      (3)
 Co-worker segregation
 Observed segregation
 Black workers (BB O )                         23.7                 23.7                     23.7
 White workers (WB O )                         5.8                   5.8                      5.8


 Difference (CW O )                            17.8                 17.8                     17.8
 Conditional random segregation
 Black workers (BB C )                         11.4                 11.6                     12.2
 White workers (WB C )                         6.8                   6.8                      6.7
 Difference (CW C )                            4.6                   4.8                      5.4



 Effective conditional segregation,
 [{CWO ! CWC }/                                13.9                 13.6                     12.9
 {100 ! CWR }]×100

 Number of workers                          1,618,876            1,618,876                1,618,876
 Number of establishments                      285,988              285,988                   285,988
See notes to Table 5. In column (1) the education groups are: high school or less; more than high school. In
column (2) the four education groups are: less than high school; high school degree; some college or
associates degree; bachelors degree or higher. In column (3) the occupations are: managerial and
professional specialty; technical, sales, and administrative support; service; farming, forestry, and fishery;
precision production, craft, and repair; and operators, fabricators, and laborers.
Table 8: Black-White Wage Gaps without and with Establishment Fixed Effects
                               Without establishment fixed effects        With establishment fixed effects
                                   (1)                    (2)                  (3)                (4)
 Black                            -0.204                 -0.127               -0.232            -0.164
                                 (0.002)                (0.002)              (0.002)           (0.002)
 High school degree                                      0.196                                  0.096
                                                        (0.002)                                (0.002)
 Some college or                                         0.331                                  0.205
 Associates degree                                      (0.002)                                (0.002)
 College degree or                                       0.744                                  0.534
 above                                                  (0.002)                                (0.002)
  Number of                      1,618,876              1,618,876           1,618,876          1,618,876
  observations
The dependent variable in the regressions is the log of the hourly wage. The category less than high school
is omitted from the regressions in columns (2) and (4).
Table 9: Hispanic-White Segregation and Language Segregation by Ethnicity
                                                                                          Establishment language
                             Establishment ethnic composition:                                 composition:
                              Hispanic-white      Hispanic-white                         Language        Language
                            segregation in U.S.    segregation                          segregation     segregation
                               (MSA/PMSA              within                             for whites    for Hispanics
                                  sample)          MSA/PMSA
                                                                                          %Poor          %Poor
                                %Hispanic           %Hispanic                             English        English
                                    (1)                 (2)                                 (3)             (4)
 Co-worker segregation
 Observed segregation
 Hispanic workers (HH O )          39.4                39.4        Poor English             6.9            48.1
                                                                   workers (PP O )
 White workers (WH O )              4.5                 4.5        Good English             0.4            15.4
                                                                   workers (GP O )
 Difference (CW O )                34.9                34.9        Difference (CW O )       6.6            32.7
 Random segregation
 Hispanic workers (HH R )           6.9                24.4        Poor English             0.9            26.8
                                                                   workers (PP R )
 White workers (WH R )              6.9                 5.6        Good English             0.4            21.7
                                                                   workers (GP R )
 Difference (CW R )                  0                 18.8        Difference (CW R )       0.6            5.1



 Effective segregation,
 [{CWO ! CWR }/                    34.9                19.8                                 6.0            29.1
 {100 ! CWR }]×100
 Number of workers              1,625,953           1,625,953                            1,491,434        81,595


 Number of                          293,989             293,989                          271,101          21,933
 establishments
See notes to Table 5. Results in columns (3) and (4) are derived within MSA/PMSA; poor English is defined as speaking
English “not well” or “not at all”; good English is speaking English well or very well.
Table 10: Hispanic-White Segregation Conditional on Language and Occupation
                                                                                    Hispanic-white
                                        Hispanic-white         Hispanic-white         segregation
                                         segregation            segregation         conditional on
                                       conditional on 2       conditional on 4          1-digit
                                       language groups        language groups       occupation (six
                                                                                      categories)
                                         %Hispanic               %Hispanic            %Hispanic
                                             (1)                     (2)                  (3)

 Co-worker segregation
 Observed segregation
 Hispanic workers (HH O )                    39.4                   39.4                  39.4
 White workers (WH O )                       4.5                     4.5                  4.5
 Difference (CW O )                          34.9                   34.9                  34.9
 Conditional random segregation
 Hispanic workers (HH O )                    26.8                   29.2                  26.9
 White workers (WH O )                       5.5                     5.3                  5.4
 Difference (CW C )                          21.3                   23.9                  21.4



 Effective conditional
 segregation,                                16.7                   13.5                  16.6
 [{CWO ! CWC }/
 {100 ! CWR }]×100
 Number of workers                        1,625,953              1,625,953             1,625,953
  Number of establishments                  293,989                293,989              293,989
See notes to Table 5. In column (1), the two language groups are: speak English “not well” or “not at
all”; speak English well or very well. In column (2), the four language groups are: speak English not
at all; speak English not well; speak English well; speak English very well. Occupations are listed in
notes to Table 7.
Table 11: Hispanic-White Wage Gaps and the Importance of English Language Proficiency
                                     Without establishment fixed effects     With establishment fixed effects
                                            (1)                (2)                 (3)                (4)
 Hispanic                                 -0.277              -0.204             -0.255             -0.221
                                         (0.002)             (0.002)            (0.002)            (0.002)
 Speak English not well                                       0.210                                 0.138
                                                             (0.009)                               (0.009)
 Speak English well                                           0.396                                 0.256
                                                             (0.009)                               (0.009)
 Speak English very well                                      0.471                                 0.330
                                                             (0.009)                               (0.009)
 Number of observations                   1,625,953          1,625,953          1,625,953          1,625,953
The dependent variable is the log of the hourly wage. There is a constant in the regressions; the category speak
English not at all is omitted from the regression in columns (2) and (4).
Table 12: Language Segregation, Within MSA/PMSA
                                     Establishment ethnic and skill composition:
        Hispanic workers, poor English-             Hispanic workers, poor English-
        Hispanic workers, good English             non-Hispanic workers, poor English
                            %Hispanic, poor                             %Hispanic, poor
                               English                                     English
                                   (1)                                         (2)
 Co-worker segregation
 Observed segregation
 Hispanic workers, poor           48.1         Hispanic workers,              90.0
 English                                       poor English
 Hispanic workers, good           15.4         Non-Hispanic                   26.0
 English                                       workers, poor
                                               English
 Difference                       32.7                                        64.0
 Random segregation
 Hispanic workers, poor           26.8         Hispanic workers,              80.1
 English                                       poor English
 Hispanic workers, good           21.7         Non-Hispanic                   51.5
 English                                       workers, poor
                                               English
 Difference                        5.1                                        28.6



 Effective segregation,
 {CWO ! CWR }/                    29.1                                        49.5
 {100 ! CWR }]×100
 Number of workers               81,595                                      19,926
 Number of                       21,933                                       6,393
 establishments
See notes to Table 5.
Table 13: Effective Segregation, Sensitivity to Establishment Size
                                        Employment       Employment       Employment          Employment >
                                          # 20           > 20 and # 80    >80 and # 380           380
                                             (1)               (2)              (3)                 (4)

 Co-worker effective segregation
 Hispanic-white                             26.6              23.0             19.6                11.9
 Black-white                                23.5              17.6             13.3                 8.8
 White, low education-
                                            18.0              16.0             15.1                12.7
 white, high education
 Hispanic workers, poor English-
                                            34.0              28.9             25.7                23.7
 Hispanic workers, good English
 Hispanic workers, poor English-
 non-Hispanic workers, poor                   77.8             61.3               46.2               28.4
 English
The employment cutoffs chosen are approximately the 25th, 50th, and 75th percentiles of the employment-weighted
establishment size distribution in the full SSEL. Effective segregation equals {CWO ! CWR }/{100 ! CWR }]×100.
Appendix Table A1:Probability of an SEDF Worker Appearing in the DEED
                                                           (1)                   (2)                   (3)
 Intercept                                               0.300                 -0.047                -0.084
 Black                                                   -0.110                -0.056                -0.047
 Hispanic                                                -0.074                -0.048                -0.037
 Information on Write-In File:
           Employer Name                                                          0.232               0.229
           Employer Address                                                       0.026               0.022
           Employer City                                                         -0.014               -0.013
           Employer State                                                        -0.068               -0.068
           Employer Zip Code                                                      0.106               0.102
           Street Number in Address                                               0.202               0.194
 Age                                                                                                  0.000
 Age squared                                                                                          -0.001
 Female                                                                                               0.010
 Less than High School                                                                                -0.018
 Some College                                                                                         0.005
 Bachelors Degree                                                                                     0.010
 Advanced Degree                                                                                      0.001
 Working Full Time                                                                                    0.038
 Mining                                                                                               0.017
 Construction                                                                                         -0.036
 Manufacturing                                                                                        0.128
 Transportation                                                                                       -0.037
 Wholesale                                                                                            0.100
 Retail                                                                                               0.002
 FIRE                                                                                                 -0.004
 Manager                                                                                              0.009
 Service                                                                                              -0.061
 Farming                                                                                              -0.107
 Production                                                                                           -0.019
 Laborer                                                                                              -0.016
 Sample Size                                           11,731,793              11,731,793           11,731,793
Estimated coefficients are reported. Standard errors in all cases but one are no larger than 0.001. The standard
error for Farming in column (3) is 0.002.
