NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WHY ARE SOME PUBLIC OFFICIALS
MORE CORRUPT THAN OTHERS?
Jennifer Hunt
Working Paper 11595
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11595
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2005

This paper has been prepared for the Handbook of Economic Corruption, edited by Susan Rose-Ackerman
and forthcoming in the Edward Elgar Press. I thank Vincent Chandler for excellent research assistance, and
the Social Science and Humanities Research Council of Canada for financial support. I am grateful to Susan
Rose-Ackerman, Sonia Laszlo and participants in the McGill summer seminar series for comments, to Miguel
Jaramillo Baanante for enlightening conversations about Peru and to the Instituto Nacional de Estadística
e Información for providing the data. I am also affiliated with the CEPR, the IZA and the DIW-Berlin. The
views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by Jennifer Hunt. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Why Are Some Public Officials more Corrupt Than Others?
Jennifer Hunt
NBER Working Paper No. 11595
August 2005
JEL No. K4, H4
ABSTRACT

Using detailed Peruvian data measuring bribery, I assess which types of public official are most
corrupt and why. I distinguish between the bribery rate and the size of bribes received, and seek to
explain the variation in each across public institutions. The characteristics of officials’ clients explain
most of the variation for bribery rates, but none for bribe amounts. A measure of the speed of honest
service at the institution explains much of the remaining variation for both bribery rates and
amounts. The results indicate that the bribery rate is higher at institutions with bribe-prone clients,
and that bribery rates and bribe amounts are higher where clients are frustrated at slow service. Faster
and better service would reduce corruption. Overall, the judiciary and the police are by far the most
corrupt institutions.
Jennifer Hunt
Department of Economics
McGill University
855 Sherbrooke Street West
Montreal, QC H3A 2T7
CANADA
and NBER
jennifer.hunt@mcgill.ca

In all countries, some public officials are more corrupt than others depending upon variations in
the opportunities for private gain and the willingness to pay of private citizens and businesses.
Effective anti-corruption campaigns need to be able both to identify which types of officials are
most likely to be corrupt and to understand why some, such as the judiciary or the police, are
more corrupt than others. A number of surveys report household and business perceptions of
corruption across official types, but these data provide no information on why one type of
official is more susceptible to corruption than another. One is left with plausible, but empirically
untested, theoretical speculations. Newly available Peruvian data permit analysis of this very
important issue. In this paper I use the data both to measure corruption by type of official and to
seek the causes of corruption across official types.
The existing literature has uncovered some determinants of corruption using a crosssection of countries. Factors found to be associated with lower corruption include a common law
legal system, Protestant traditions and British colonial rule (Treisman 2000), fiscal
decentralization (Fisman and Gatti 2000), higher relative salaries for public officials (van
Rijckeghem and Weder 2001), the absence of an industrial policy (Ades and Di Tella 1997) and
a greater presence of women in parliament and the civil service (Swamy et al. 2001). Most of
these causes vary only at the country level and most are not amenable to direct policy
interventions. My data allow me to study determinants of corruption whose natural variation is
across official types; this gives new insights into the causes of corruption and generates some
practical policy implications.1

1

The World Bank has conducted surveys of public officials in several countries, and qualitative
responses related to corruption are available at www1.worldbank.org/prem/acr/bankproj.html.
Peru is not one of the countries surveyed.
1

My data are from the national household survey of Peru, a middle-ranking country in
Transparency International’s Corruption Perceptions Index (Transparency International 2004).
Concern about corruption led the Peruvian statistical agency to include a detailed module on
bribery in the 2002 and 2003 household surveys, measuring usage rates and reports of bribery for
twenty-one types of public official. The questions pertain to the previous twelve months, and the
official types are specific Peruvian institutions, such as the judiciary or the social security agency
(political parties and the legislature are not among the specified types). Thus the emphasis is on
reports of actual experience, not perceptions, of corruption.2
To establish a corruption ranking by official type, I calculate the ratio of an institution’s
share of bribe takings to its share of household/official interactions. This measure corrects for the
fact that an institution might appear to be relatively honest simply because few households even
interact with officials from that institution. By this measure, the judiciary is by far the most
corrupt official type in Peru, with an impressive 42 per cent of reported bribe revenues compared
to only 2 per cent of interactions. The police force is the other extremely corrupt institution, with
27 per cent of bribes and only 2 per cent of interactions (see Table 1 below). Transparency
International (2004) reports that in 36 of 62 countries surveyed, respondents perceived the police
and the judiciary to be the most corrupt institutions after political parties and the legislature.
This indicates that the Peruvian situation is not unique and could provide lessons for other
countries.
There are a number of reasons why corruption might vary across official types. First, the
services offered may be demanded by clients with different ability and willingness to pay or even

2

The few previous papers using measured corruption include Hunt (2004), Hunt and Laszlo
(2005), Mocan (2004), Svensson (2003) and some analysis in Swamy et al. (2001). Di Tella and
Schargrodsky (2003) convincingly infer corruption from their data.
2

different scruples.

Officials have some monopoly power and can charge different prices

(including zero) to different clients for their services (price-discrimination). We would expect
officials in institutions with richer clients to take bribes more frequently and to take larger bribes.
Jennifer Hunt and Sonia Laszlo (2005) have confirmed empirically that richer clients do pay
more frequent and higher bribes, both in general and within official type.
Second, officials provide different types of services in return for bribes, and these vary in
value. This influences the client’s willingness to bribe as well as the level of payoffs. Bribes vary
in size both because the value of the ultimate benefit varies and because officials’ ability to
provide the benefit promptly also varies. The latter, in turn, depends on three considerations:
how many officials are involved in the conclusion of business for one client, how easy it is for
superiors to monitor officials, and the resources available to the institution compared to the
demands on its officials. For example, police officers, who often meet clients one-on-one in the
street, have complete control over the imposition of fines and are hard to monitor. If the
resources of the agency granting drivers’ licenses are insufficient to prevent large queues
forming, the conditions will be ripe for frustrated clients to bribe to get to the head of the queue.3
Third, institutions vary in the degree of internal competition between officials with
different levels of scruples. For example, a customer wishing to have a telephone connected who
encounters an official demanding a bribe could return the next day and hope for an official with
more scruples. By contrast, in a court case brought before a judge, it will usually be impossible
to choose another judge unless he or she is caught explicitly demanding a payoff.4 Fourth,

3

Bardhan (1997) discusses how giving many officials the power to stop a file may backfire as a
means of reducing bribery if the client ends up bribing all the officials. Rose-Ackerman (1978)
and Lui (1985) analyze bribery and queuing.
4
Rose-Ackerman (1978: chapter 8, 1999: chapter 4) and Shleifer and Vishny (1993) discuss the
significance of competition between officials.
3

institutions may vary in the degree to which combating corruption is a management priority.
Finally, public officials with few scruples will migrate to institutions which offer more
opportunities for corruption, reinforcing other patterns.
The Peruvian data permit me to quantify the impact of three factors: the direct effect of
client characteristics, the indirect effect of client characteristics, and the share of client cases that
officials acting honestly are able to conclude within the twelve-month window, adjusted for
client characteristics (the “adjusted conclusion rate”). The direct impact of client characteristics
indicates whether the price-discrimination model helps to explain cross-official corruption.
Client scruples are, of course, unobservable, so their impact cannot be judged. I assess the
indirect or spillover effects of the client characteristics by asking if the characteristics of the
average client who deals with a given official type has an impact on corruption even after
household characteristics are taken into account. This captures whether official/client
interactions are influenced by the characteristics of other clients. This could happen if rich clients
corrupt officials so they behave less scrupulously with all clients, or if rich clients attract
unscrupulous officials to the institution. The adjusted conclusion rate is designed to capture
administrative efficiency, resources and lack of red tape.
Raw bribery rates across official types range from almost zero to 37 per cent, and client
characteristics explain 85 per cent of the variance in these rates. Nevertheless, even after
correcting for differences in client characteristics, adjusted bribery rates still span 15 percentage
points. Fully 46 per cent of this variance is explained by the adjusted conclusion rate: a 10
percentage point increase in this rate (a standard deviation) reduces the adjusted bribery rate by
4-5 percentage points, a very large effect. This is a causal effect as long as the conclusion rate of
officials acting honestly is not affected by the extent of bribery in their institution. The results

4

indicate that bribery rates are higher at institutions whose clients have a bribe-prone profile and
whose clients are frustrated with slow service. Policy priorities for reducing the bribery rate
should be improving administrative efficiency, providing more resources and cutting red tape.
The data reveal that neither raw bribery rates and bribe amounts nor rates and amounts
adjusted for client characteristics are closely correlated across official types. Adjusting for client
characteristics does not reduce the variance in bribe amounts across official type. However, a 10
percentage point increase in the adjusted conclusion rate reduces the adjusted bribe amount by a
significant 30-32 per cent and explains at least 20 per cent of the variance. The results indicate
that while differences in client profiles do not help explain the variation in bribe amounts by
official type, clients frustrated with slow service pay higher and more frequent bribes.
I find some evidence that there is a role for spillover effects between clients in explaining
both bribery rates and average bribe amounts. However, the results differ qualitatively between
the bribery rate and bribe amount outcomes, and are difficult to interpret. I draw no firm
conclusions.
Most of the high bribery rate for both the police and the judiciary is explained by the
higher propensity to bribe (whether voluntarily or not) of their clients. That different clients use
different types of official is not something that can or should be changed. However, the relatively
high bribery rate of the judiciary, after adjusting for client characteristics, seems to be adequately
explained by the judiciary’s low conclusion rate (54 per cent, compared to 93 per cent for clients
in the whole sample). The low conclusion rate also helps explain the very high value of bribes
received by the judiciary. A key policy challenge for Peru is to train more lawyers and judges for
permanent positions, so as to speed up judicial proceedings without sacrificing quality. The
police, in contrast, have a much higher bribery rate, adjusted for observable client characteristics,

5

than their conclusion rate would predict. Although increasing the conclusion rate would be
helpful, the need for additional measures is even more urgent than for other institutions. These
might include attempts to restrict abuse of police monopoly power, for example, by limiting the
extortion of bribes from innocent motorists.

Corruption in Peru
Discoveries leading to the resignation and self-exile of the president, Alberto Fujimori, revealed
the enormous scale of grand corruption in Peru. Video-taped evidence showed that Vladimir
Montesinos, Fujimori's spy chief, had repeatedly bribed congressmen to defect to Fujimori's
party to ensure its majority in Congress. In addition, large bribes had enabled Montesinos to
control most of the media and influence the judiciary (McMillan and Zoido 2004).
However, Fujimori is credited with having reduced petty corruption. His 1990-2000
administration pursued policies that reduced the role of government, which he justified not only
on efficiency grounds, but on the grounds that reducing the role of government would reduce
opportunities for corruption. He attempted to reduce corruption in the police and municipal
governments, in the latter case by establishing a supervisory agency to field citizen complaints.
However, despite some progress, several institutions with which ordinary people have much
contact were judged to suffer from pervasive corruption by Transparency International (TI) in a
November 2001 report.5
Fujimori’s reforms of the judiciary are thought to have been ineffective and may even
have made it more corrupt. An increase in the number of temporary judges, appointed in part to
help clear backlogs, contributed to corruption. Such judges, representing 74 per cent of all
judges, were vulnerable to political pressure and susceptible to corruption because of their lack
5

Most of the rest of this section is based on this report: Transparency International (2001).
6

of job security. The slowness of judicial proceedings (and, one suspects, the high corruption) has
led to the establishment of various arbitration systems for settling disputes (U.S. Department of
State 2005).
TI argues that poor pay and equipment reduced the morale of the police, which combined
with weak internal controls and sanctions, rendered them susceptible to small- and large-scale
corruption, as well as to cooperation with criminals. At the time of its report, TI found that it was
customary to bribe the transit police.
Public administration generally was corrupted by poor pay, complex procedures for
sanctioning bribe-taking and the frequent overturning of administrative sanctions by the
judiciary. Only public servants with contracts comparable to those in the private sector were
well-paid, but they lacked the job security that would protect them from political interference
(and, presumably, that would allow them to report corruption by superiors).
The interim regime and the presidency of Alejandro Toledo that followed Fujimori’s
downfall both made corruption a priority, but they focused particularly on prosecuting actors in
the Montesinos affair. Nevertheless, a group including representatives of civil society and the
World Bank drew up a list of anti-corruption proposals in 2001. Some initiatives put into place
include the naming of an “Anti-Corruption Tsar”, the establishment of a special anti-corruption
police division and the introduction of an anti-nepotism law for the public service. Ominously,
however, the Tsar was fired in December 2004 after seeking to investigate accusations of
corruption in the Toledo administration.6

6

www.signonsandiego.com/news/world/20041217-0702-peru-corruption.html
7

Data
The basic data for this study are contained in the 2002 and 2003 waves of the Peruvian
household survey, the Encuesta Nacional de Hogares (ENAHO), conducted by the national
statistical agency, the Instituto Nacional de Estadística e Información (INEI). The sample
includes responses by more than 36 000 households to a large number of economic and
demographic questions and to questions on the use and bribery of public officials. One
respondent per household indicated for each of twenty-one official types and for the previous
twelve months whether the household had interacted with the official; whether anyone in the
household had paid a bribe or been asked to pay a bribe; if they had paid, how much they had
paid, and whether they had concluded their business with the official. The only missing aspect of
bribery is the case of the client offering a bribe and the official refusing. The 2002 survey was
conducted in October, November and December 2002, while the “2003” survey was spread
evenly across the period May 2003 to April 2004.
Overall, 4.9 per cent of households report having bribed in the previous twelve months.
Of households who had used at least one public official, 5.7 per cent had bribed. Although the
share of households bribing may seem low, the bribery rates for some official types are very
high, indicating that, at least for some official types, respondents were not ashamed or afraid to
admit having bribed. The number of bribery episodes is somewhat understated, however,
because each respondent can only report one bribery episode per official per year. If clients
commonly use agents to act as intermediaries between themselves and officials, and bribes paid
by the agent are reported in the survey by the agent (or no-one), rather than the client, the
understatement will be worse and the share of households bribing will also be understated. A
2003 survey by Proética, a Peruvian anti-corruption group, gathered information on bribes and
agents (“tramitadores”) (Proética 2003). Fifty-two per cent of respondents who had bribed to
8

obtain a driver’s licence reported having paid the bribe to an agent, while the share was 15 per
cent or less for the other nine activities reported in the summary statistics (including dealing with
a judge, customs, police on patrol and transit fines).7
A 2004 Transparency International survey of 416 respondents in greater Lima found 14
per cent of respondents had bribed in the previous twelve months, compared to 6.0 per cent
among the 3758 Lima respondents in my 2002-2003 data. However, the TI question did not
restrict itself to bribes paid to public officials. Proética reports much higher bribery rates for the
years 2002, 2003 and 2004 of 32 per cent, 29 per cent and 27 per cent, respectively (Proética
2004). Proética’s bribery rates, conditional on the use of particular officials, look very similar to
mine, but their usage rates look implausibly high for a window of one year. For example, in
2004, 24 per cent report using a judge compared to 2 per cent in my sample; 14 per cent of those
who used a judge report having bribed in this connection in the Proética sample, compared to 17
per cent in my data. This suggests that the Proética time frame, not reported in the documentation
available to me, was in fact much longer than a year, even though yearly bribery rates are
reported. I prefer my own survey to the TI and Proética surveys because of its large sample,
wealth of covariates and additional questions on the bribery and usage of public officials.

Which official types are most corrupt?
Table 1 lists the twenty-one official types in order of their share of total bribery “episodes”. A
bribery episode is an encounter between a household (client) and official in which either a bribe
was paid or a bribe was solicited by the official but the client refused to pay. Column 1 reports
these shares, based on 91 668 total encounters between households and officials and 1628

7

Bertrand et al. (2005) analyze the use of agents for obtaining drivers’ licenses in India.

9

bribery episodes. The police account for 35 per cent of bribes and the city (municipal)
government for 21 per cent, with the judiciary in third rank with 12 per cent. These three
institutions account for 68 per cent of bribery episodes. Column 2 shows that these institutions
are even more dominant in terms of total bribe payments: the judiciary alone accounts for 42 per
cent of the money paid in bribes, followed by the police with 27 per cent and city government
with 11 per cent, making a total of 80 per cent. The third column puts these shares in perspective
by reporting the official type’s share in household/official interactions: that is, the number of
households using the official divided by the total over all official types. The police and judiciary
represent only 2 per cent each of interactions with officials, while the city government has a
higher 10 per cent share.
The data are sufficiently detailed that there could be many ways to combine them to
produce a measure of how corruption varies by official type. Presumably corruption is some
combination of the bribery rate and the average level of bribes paid.8 As a simple summary
measure, I divide column 2 of Table 1, essentially the product of the rate and the amount, by
column 3, the usage rate of various types of officials. The results are displayed in column 4 of
Table 1 and in Figure 1.
By this measure, the judiciary is by far the most corrupt institution, with bribery levels
twenty-six times the level that its usage rate would predict. The police force is also an outlier
with about half the corruption of the judiciary. The next official type is “other”, with one third
the police corruption rate, but four times the next category. “Other” includes the Ministry of
Transport and Communication, which houses the agency that grants drivers’ licenses. Here the
use of agents might be expected to lead to an underestimation of bribery. The “other” category

8

Quid pro quos, not directly observable in the data, can also play a role. See Hunt (2004).
10

also encompasses numerous small welfare programs as well as congress, the office of the
president and the many unspecified ministries such as the Ministry of Energy and Mines. It is
possible that corruption is high for this category because those who paid a bribe are more likely
to remember having used an unspecified official type.
Corruption in other institutions is relatively modest compared to the top three although all
these institutions carry out tasks that might lead to bribery. For example, the city government
provides a variety of bribery-prone services such as construction and demolition permission,
trash collection and title to property. Arbitration is to some extent a substitute for the judiciary.
The Ministry of Agriculture provides title to agricultural land and credit to farmers. The
Department of Migration provides visas for foreign workers and passports.
The election “office” in Table 1 is the Oficina Nacional de Processos Electorales
(ONPE), while the election “court” is the Jurado Nacional de Elecciones (JNE). The election
office (ONPE) runs elections, while the election court (JNE), which employs many lawyers,
deals with electoral justice. The main reason for someone to use and bribe the election office
(ONPE) would be to obtain a sticker confirming that he or she had participated in the mandatory
voting (failure to obtain the sticker results in a suspension of legal rights). The election court
(JNE) can issue exemptions and deals with any disputes over electoral outcomes or eligibility.
Most activity connected with the national elections of April and June 2001 should be outside the
twelve-month bribe windows of both the 2002 and 2003 surveys. However, there were municipal
and regional elections on 17 November 2002, which would be inside the window for many 2002
and 2003 respondents.
The Ministry of Industry, Tourism, Integration and International Commercial Negotiation
(MITINCI) issues permits for businesses, and the National Identification Registry issues identity

11

documents and certificates of birth, marriage or divorce. The social security agency (ESSALUD)
provides a wide variety of health-related services, such as clinics and hospitals, professional
rehabilitation, health and disability insurance and worker’s compensation. Reasons to bribe state
hospitals (in principle distinct from those run by the social security agency) range from wanting
to visit a patient outside visiting hours, to obtaining a certificate of health, to accessing the
desired doctor. The main reason to bribe the water, electricity and telephone utilities is to speed
up connections. The main reason to bribe state schools is to ensure registration of one’s child at
the appropriate school (the Parent-Teachers’ Association typically collects this bribe). The
development agency (FONCODES) could be bribed for a (typically agricultural) loan. State
banks could be bribed to receive a loan or to be placed at the head of the long queue to pay the
fine for not voting. Customs could be bribed to let goods enter or leave the country, and the tax
authority in the same institution (SUNAT), known for its predatory ways, could be bribed not to
do a tax audit, or possibly to lower tax liability. The food agency (PRONAA) could be bribed to
judge that a family is eligible for food aid.

Empirical strategy
I analyze bribery rates and average bribe amounts in two steps. For bribery rates, I begin with the
full data set of household/official pairs (21 officials times 36 000 households), and extract those
91 668 household/official pairs where the household used the official. I estimate the following
probit regression for the probability of household i having a bribery episode with official type j:
P(Bribeij) = α1jµj + Xiβ1 + β2Zij + εij.

(1)

The variables are defined as follows. The official type dummies are µj; Zij represents the
number of visits the household made to the official type (possibly for more than one purpose);
and Xi includes controls for the value of household consumption, respondent and household

12

demographics, education, job type, student status, ownership of vehicles, location and time. The
Appendix lists the covariates in detail, and discusses the computation of the standard errors.
∧

The estimated coefficients α1j on the official type dummies µj are the bribery rates
adjusted for the characteristics of the clients. In a second step I use them as the dependent
variable in a weighted least squares regression at the official type level:
∧

α1j = γ + φOj + ηj,

(2)

where the Oj are the characteristics of the officials. Because coefficients from non-linear
regressions like the probit of equation 1 are difficult to interpret, when displaying the adjusted
bribery rates graphically I most often present the marginal effects (the effect of increasing the
covariate by one) instead.
∧

I use as weights either the inverse of the squared standard errors of α1j in the first stage
(equation 1), or the share of the households that use the official type. The first set of weights
reflects how precisely the coefficients were estimated in the first stage, but in practice these
weights do not differ much across official types.9 The second set of weights reflects directly that
bribery rates are measured with different precision by official type because of large differences
in the number of clients using them.
I proceed similarly for the bribe amount. In the first stage I use the sample of 1628
household/official pairs where a bribe was paid and the amount specified, and run the OLS
regression
log (bribe amountij) = α2jµj + Xiβ3 + β4Zij + υij,

9

(3)

Borjas and Sueyoshi (1994) show that when the first stage is a probit, the weights necessary to
recover the coefficients that would have obtained in a one step procedure are more complicated
than the inverse of the squared standard errors. I show that the results are not sensitive to the
weights.
13

∧

where µj, Xi and Zij are as in equation 1. The estimated coefficients α2j on the official type
dummies µj are the adjusted bribe amounts, and in the second stage I use them as the dependent
variable in a weighted least squares regression with the same form as equation 2. The weights are
either the inverse of the squared standard errors of the official type coefficients from the first
stage or the number of reported bribe amounts for the official type.
I seek to capture in Oj observable characteristics of officials representing factors
identified as important in the introduction. Firstly, I compute an adjusted conclusion rate to
represent the variation in service provision across official types net of client characteristics and
behavior. This is designed to capture queues, red tape and other reasons for slow or ineffectual
service that are unrelated to bribery. Respondents are asked whether their business with the
official type was concluded (“concluyó”). As in English, the Spanish is ambiguous as to whether
conclusion implies successful conclusion. The one word question “concluyó?” is beside the
column where the number of visits to the official is recorded, and both are under the heading
asking how many times the respondents went to the official (in the previous twelve months). In
this context, it is likely that the respondents interpreted the question about conclusion as a
question as to whether they were still in the process of dealing with the official.10 The mean
across households is 93 per cent, with the means by official type ranging from 54 per cent for the
judiciary and 72 per cent for the Ministry of Agriculture to 98 per cent for state schools (see
column 5 of Table 1).

10

I assume without evidence that respondents forced to pay off police officers to avoid fines for
imaginary offences also interpret the question as asking whether they are still engaged in
dealings with the officer.
14

I run a probit with the same covariates as for equation 1, excluding the number of visits
Zij, where the dependent variable is whether the client i concluded her business with the official
j:
P(Concluded businessij) = α3jµj + Xiβ5 + ξij.

(4)

Because the conclusion of business is influenced by bribery behavior, I run this regression on a
sample of household/official pairs where there was no bribery episode. I refer to the estimated
∧

coefficients α3j on the official type dummies as the adjusted conclusion rate, and use them as one
of the covariates in Oj.
I assume that neither the average bribery rate nor the average amount paid for the official
type belongs in equation 4 (that is, that they are not among the official characteristics being
captured by the official type dummies µj). This is important: if speed at which officials conclude
business honestly is affected by how many of their colleagues are taking bribes and/or how much
they are taking in bribes, the adjusted conclusion rate will be endogenous in equation 2. For
example, if corruption demoralizes honest officials or otherwise reduces effort in honest
dealings, the coefficient on the adjusted conclusion rate in equation 2 will be biased downward,
and any beneficial effect of fast conclusion overstated. A related point is that the sample includes
some clients who did not notice that their slow service indicated the official was angling for a
bribe. If dishonest and honest officials differ in ability, the adjusted conclusion rate would also
not measure the conclusion rate that would obtain if all officials behaved honestly. Finally, if
some respondents perceive the question about conclusion to mean successful conclusion, and if
some of these respondents judge success based on whether the official was willing to perform an
illegal act for the client, a high conclusion rate is not unambiguously a good thing.

15

The second variable I include in Oj is the response rate to the question on the amount of
the bribe paid. This functions as a selection correction, in case those who did not report the
amount were disproportionately those who paid large bribes, and in case officials whose clients
were loath to report the amount of the bribe had clients who also underreported bribing at all.
The response rate over all clients is 98 per cent, but is much lower for the food agency compared
to any other official type: 50 per cent, compared to 86 per cent for the official type with the next
lowest response rate.
A third set of variables included in Oj is the means of client characteristics by official
type. Because the impact of individual client characteristics has already been incorporated, these
means represent the indirect effects of other clients’ characteristics. For example, if official
scruples are endogenous and are weakened in the face of temptation, a client may be more likely
to have to bribe if the other clients are rich. Alternatively, if the other clients are rich, the
institution will attract less scrupulous officials, increasing the bribery rate for all clients. I
experimented unsuccessfully with a proxy for a fourth characteristic of officials: the value of the
benefit the official has in his power (how much is at stake).
If a higher conclusion rate reduces bribery by reducing the number of clients disgruntled
with the service, the correct specification for equation 2 is slightly different. In this case, Oj
should include a measure of client satisfaction, which should be instrumented by the conclusion
rate. The coefficient on the satisfaction variable would then reflect the effect on bribery of a
change in satisfaction caused by a change in the conclusion rate.
Such a measure of satisfaction is available: respondents are asked to rate the quality of
service as good, medium or bad. Thirty-four per cent of clients rate their service as good; nine
per cent as bad. As shown in column 6 of Table 1, the share of clients rating the service as bad

16

ranges from 38 per cent for the police to 4 per cent for state schools. I create, by official type, an
adjusted share of clients reporting bad service, using an adjustment procedure identical to that
used for the conclusion rate. I include this variable in Oj and instrument it with the adjusted
conclusion rate. To test for robustness, I alternatively instrument with the adjusted share of
clients who reported seeing the official immediately, and replace the share of clients reporting
bad service with the share reporting good service.

Raw and adjusted bribery rates and average bribe amounts
Figure 2 indicates the raw bribery episode rates by official type and the associated 95 per cent
confidence intervals, with the vertical line at 0.048 giving the city government rate as a reference
point. Thirty-seven per cent of those using the police and 17 per cent of those using the judiciary
had a bribery episode; bribery at the telephone and electric authorities was negligible.
Figure 3 shows the adjusted bribery rates (marginal effects, with the city government
coefficient normalized to zero) and the associated confidence intervals. The adjustment reduces
the confidence intervals (the scales are different in the two figures) and explains much of the
difference between the very corrupt officials and the others, but does not change the ranking of
the officials much. Figure 4 makes clearer that a large amount of the variance across official
types is explained by client characteristics. It plots the raw and adjusted bribery rates on the same
figure (with the city government bribery rate subtracted from the raw rates). The unweighted
standard deviation of the 21 raw bribery rates is 0.084, while the unweighted standard deviation
of the 21 adjusted bribery rates is 0.032, so two-thirds of the standard deviation, or 85 per cent of
the variance, is explained by household characteristics. Client characteristics explain most of the
(statistically significant) difference in the bribery rate between the judiciary and city government
and more than half the difference between the police and city government. The adjusted judiciary
17

and police bribery rates remain significantly higher than that of city government, however. The
adjustment brings the lower bribery group, from the election office on down, slightly closer to
the city government, although the gap remains statistically significant.11
I repeat this exercise for the bribe amount in Figures 5-7. The large confidence intervals
of Figure 5, which reports raw means of log bribe amounts, reflect the small number of reported
bribe amounts for some types of official. The highest “mean” is for the election court, where in
fact only one bribe amount (of 80 Nuevo soles, or about US $24) is reported; the second ranked
institution, the Ministry of Industry, also has only one bribe amount reported. The judiciary,
which by contrast has many bribes and a tight confidence interval, is in third rank, closely
followed by “other”, arbitration, social security and the police.12 The difference between the
judiciary and the police is statistically significant, but many other gaps are not.
Of the 2.1 per cent of bribes that are 500 Nuevo soles or more (US $150), 47 per cent
went to the judiciary; of the 1.2 per cent of bribes (19 bribes) that are 1000 Nuevo soles or more
(US $300), 53 per cent went to the judiciary. The highest reported bribe is 15 000 Nuevo soles
(about US$ 4500), to the judiciary, compared to bribes of between $2500 and $10,000 paid by
Montesinos to ordinary judges (McMillan and Zoido 2004).
The adjusted bribe amounts in Figure 6 have tighter confidence intervals and have some
small ranking differences compared to the raw bribe means in Figure 5. However, as Figure 7
makes clear, the adjustment scarcely affects the size of the gaps between the official types (the
unweighted variance of 0.67 actually rises to 0.71). Although bribery rates vary across official

11

Haisken-DeNew and Schmidt (1997) discuss subtleties associated with measuring the variance
of the coefficients on such group effects.
12
The ranking of average bribes, rather than average log bribes, is different: judiciary (mean 260
Nuevo soles, or US $78), other (144), election court (80), arbitration (72), police (50), Ministry
of Industry (50).
18

types in large part because client profiles vary across official types, the variance in the size of
bribes paid across official types is almost unrelated to these different profiles, and must instead
be almost fully determined by differences in the institutions themselves.
Given these results, one can understand why the plots marked with circles in Figure 8
show little relation between the official types with high raw bribery rates and the official types
with high raw average bribe amounts. The plots marked with crosses show that there is also no
correlation between the adjusted rates and the adjusted bribe amounts.

Determinants of adjusted bribery rates and adjusted bribe amounts
Figure 9 plots the adjusted bribery rate (coefficients now, rather than marginal effects as in
earlier graphs) against the adjusted rate of concluding business with officials, and the unweighted
regression line connecting them. The fit is very good, with only the police rather far from the
regression line: the police have a higher bribery rate than would be expected given their rate of
concluding business. This might be the result of the latitude enjoyed by police officers to seek
out their own clients and impose a fine if a bribe is not forthcoming (inspectors of various kinds
also have this latitude): such actions are intimately associated with bribery but are often
concluded on the spot. Alternatively, clients of the police may have fewer (unobservable)
scruples.
The first column of Table 2 shows that in the regression with weights based on the
standard errors from the first (household/official) stage, the adjusted business conclusion rate
alone explains 46 per cent of the variance in the bribery rate, and has a t-statistic of -4.0. In
column 2 I add the response rate for the bribe amount, which is insignificant and does not affect
the coefficient on the conclusion rate. To make the coefficients easy to interpret, I rerun the
regression of column 2 performing all adjustments to obtain the dependent and independent

19

variables using OLS, rather than using any probits. The resulting coefficient on the adjusted
conclusion rate, in column 3, indicates that a 10 percentage point increase in this rate (the
unweighted standard deviation) reduces the adjusted bribery rate by 3.8 percentage points, a very
large effect.
The first three columns suggest that when conclusion rates are low, clients get frustrated
and bribe. To check that dissatisfaction with service is indeed the correct mechanism, I control
for the adjusted share of clients saying service was bad, instead of the adjusted conclusion rate,
in column 4, and instrument it with the adjusted conclusion rate in column 5. In both columns,
the coefficient on bad service is positive and significant, as expected, with a larger absolute value
than the conclusion coefficient of columns 1 and 2. In column 6 I repeat column 5 with different
weights, the share of households using the official type, which reduces the coefficient on the bad
service variable.
To help interpret the coefficients, in column 7 I rerun the column 6 regression making
adjustments using OLS only. The coefficient of 0.76 indicates that a 10 percentage point increase
in the share of clients who think the service is bad increases the bribery rate by 7.6 percentage
points. We can use the coefficient on the conclusion rate in the first stage of the IV regression,
-0.65 (lower panel of column 7), to relate this coefficient to the direct coefficient on the
conclusion rate in column 3 (-0.38). A 10 percentage point increase in the conclusion rate
reduces the share of clients rating service as bad by 6.5 percentage points, which in turn reduces
bribery by 0.76*6.5= 4.9 percentage points, similar to the 3.8 percentage point effect of column
3. The results are very similar when the first set of weights (from columns 1-5) is used.
The next step is to add to the covariates the third component of Oj:

average

characteristics of clients, particularly the value of household consumption and the share of clients

20

in various types of job such as white collar and self-employed in agriculture (see the Appendix).
Household consumption has a significant positive coefficient if the job categories are included,
but not otherwise. Certain job category coefficients are significant, but only if household
consumption is included. These unreported results are somewhat difficult to interpret. They
might imply indirect or spillover effects between clients or indicate that unscrupulous officials
gravitate to institutions with bribe-prone clients.
The corresponding regressions for the adjusted log bribe amounts are presented in Table
3; Figure 10 graphs the adjusted bribe amount against the adjusted conclusion rate (showing
coefficients, not marginal effects). Columns 1 and 2 and the figure show that the adjusted
business conclusion rate is significantly negatively related to the log bribe amount when the
official types are weighted similarly (in the table) or equally (the regression line of the figure).
The fit is not as good as in the case of the bribery rates, however, with only 20 per cent of the
variance in the bribe amount explained. In column 2, as in later columns, the response rate for
the bribe amount has an insignificant coefficient. The fully linear version of column 2, presented
in column 3, indicates that a 10 percentage point increase in the conclusion rate reduces the bribe
amount by 38 log points or 32 percent, a large effect.
In columns 4 and 5 I control for the share of clients reporting bad service, rather than the
conclusion rate. This variable has an insignificant coefficient when not instrumented, but a
positive coefficient significant at the 10 per cent level when instrumented in column 5. The
coefficient becomes smaller but much more significant when the weights are the number of bribe
amounts reported, in column 6: the increased significance comes from the low weight on the
observations from the Figure 10 regression line owing to their being based on a tiny number of
bribes.

21

The fully linear results of column 7 indicate that a 10 percentage point increase in the
share of clients reporting bad service reduces the bribe amount by a statistically significant 58.9
log points (45 per cent), and the unadjusted R-squared rises to 0.43. Because the first stage
coefficient on the conclusion rate is -0.60 (column 7 lower panel), this means that a 10
percentage point increase in the conclusion rate reduces the bribe amount by 0.60*58.9=35 log
points, or 30 per cent. This is very similar to the direct effect of 38 log points in column 3.
As was the case for the bribery rate, average client household consumption is a
significant determinant of the bribe amount only if the share of clients in various job categories
are included, and vice versa. When all these covariates are included, the significant coefficients
have opposite signs from the bribery rate regression (these results are not reported). More
research is needed to characterize indirect or spillover effects between clients.
I have repeated the instrumental variables regressions of Tables 2 and 3 using the share of
clients reporting good, rather than bad, service. The conclusion rate has a larger and much more
significant effect on the number of clients judging service to be bad than on the number judging
service to be good. Thus, the impact of the conclusion rate on bribery works not through creating
happy clients, but rather through reducing the number of unhappy clients. Unreported regressions
also indicate that using as an instrument the adjusted share of clients who saw the official
immediately works well (and predicts bad service better than good service) and gives similar
results to Tables 2 and 3. Allowing clients to see the official immediately is a good first step in
speeding up the conclusion rate, increasing client satisfaction and lowering bribery.

Conclusion
Peruvian data on bribery rates and on household bribe payments indicate that almost all the
variance in bribery rates across types of officials can be explained by client characteristics and

22

by the share of cases that officials acting honestly are able to conclude (adjusted for client
characteristics). A ten percentage point increase in the adjusted conclusion rate (a standard
deviation) reduces the bribery rate net of client characteristics by 4-5 percentage points. By
contrast, the bribe amounts paid to different official types are unaffected by client characteristics
and are uncorrelated with the bribery rates. However, a ten percentage point rise in the adjusted
conclusion rate reduces the average amount of the bribe by 30-32 per cent. The effect of the
conclusion rate is causal if the conclusion rate of officials acting honestly is independent of the
degree of corruption of their colleagues.
Although it is inevitable that different types of officials serve client pools that differ in
their propensity to bribe, the results indicate that speeding up clients’ dealings with officials
would be very helpful in reducing bribery rates and amounts. The rate at which officials
conclude cases should be easier to monitor than bribery itself, but care must be taken to avoid a
decline in service quality. Cutting red tape, providing more resources and improving
administrative efficiency should all help.
I find some evidence that the characteristics of the official’s other clients help to explain
a given client’s bribery behavior. However, the results differ qualitatively depending on whether
one considers the bribery rate or bribe amount, and are difficult to interpret. I therefore draw no
firm conclusions concerning indirect or spillover effects, or the concentration of unscrupulous
officials in institutions with bribe-prone clients. I speculate that both for the bribe amount and
bribery rates, the stakes and the degree of internal competition play a role in explaining the
remaining variance.
The judiciary is by far the most corrupt institution in Peru, with both a high bribery rate
and a high value of bribes, and it has by far the lowest conclusion rate. Only 54 per cent of

23

clients concluded their business with the judiciary within the 12 month window of the survey.
The magnitude of the effects uncovered suggests considerable scope for reducing the bribery rate
by speeding up Peru’s infamously slow judicial proceedings. This will require a sustained
investment in attracting and training more lawyers and judges and providing these judges with
permanent contracts. Faster proceedings would also help reduce the high value of the bribes paid
to the judiciary, but the inevitably high stakes, low internal competition and unwilling
participation of defendants associated with judicial proceedings may be significant obstacles to
progress.
The police are also highly corrupt in Peru: although the value of bribes paid is not much
above average, the bribery rate is the highest of any official type, at 37 per cent. The police have
a much higher bribery rate than their conclusion rate warrants. This suggests that other, possibly
more difficult to implement reforms, must supplement an increase in the conclusion rate. A
peculiarity of the police -- that they can extort bribes from clients of their choosing, may well
explain this, and should be a target of policy. The police may also deal with clients with fewer
scruples than average, something that policy cannot influence.

24

Data and Regression Appendix
The 2002 survey contains information from interviews in October-December 2002. The “2003”
survey contains information from interviews in every month from May 2003 to April 2004. I
have made no adjustments for inflation nor for seasonality consumption patterns, and simply use
the total value of household consumption as computed by the statistical office. The statistical
office imputes some components of consumption where necessary. Two thousand of the 18 000
addresses interviewed in 2002 were re-interviewed in the 2003 survey.
Regressions at the household/official level to adjust the bribery rate and bribe amount include:
the number of visits to the official type, seven regional dummies, household size dummies, town
size dummies, dummies for interview months from May 2003-April 2004, time to the district
administrative center; “job type” dummies for the respondent’s main job -- employer (nonagricultural), employer (agricultural), self-employed (non-agricultural), self-employed
(agricultural), white collar, domestic worker, unpaid family member, other and not employed
(the omitted type is laborer); characteristics of the respondent -- sex, married/cohabiting,
married/cohabiting*sex, age and age squared, student status, whether main job is in public
administration; characteristics of the household -- number of earners, number of members in
school, ownership dummies for bicycle, car/van, tricycle, motorbike and truck, whether land
obtained by invasion, presence of children aged 0-3, 4-7, 8-11 and 12-15 and whether any
member other than the respondent had each of the several job types.
The regressions used to adjust the probability of concluding business with the official, the
perceived quality of service and the probability of seeing an official immediately contain the
same covariates, excluding the number of visits, but the sample contains only respondents who
did not experience a bribery episode. The standard errors in all regressions at the
household/official level are clustered by district, allowing for correlation of the errors across
residents of the same district in any survey period. This procedure takes into account that people
in the same district might have similar behaviors, and that in fact panel households appear twice
in the sample.

25

References
Ades, Albert and Rafael Di Tella (1997), “National Champions and Corruption: Some
Unpleasant Interventionist Arithmetic”, Economic Journal, 107 (443), 1023-1042.
Bardhan, Pranab (1997), “Corruption and Development: A Review of Issues”, Journal of
Economic Literature, 35 (3), 1320-1346.
Bertrand, Marianne, Simeon Djankov, Rema Henna and Sendhil Mullainathan (2005),
“Obtaining a Driving License in India: An Experimental Approach to Studying
Corruption”, MIT Working Paper.
Borjas, George and Glenn Sueyoshi (1994), “A Two-Stage Estimator for Probit Models with
Structural Group Effects”, Journal of Econometrics, 64 (1), 165-182.
Fisman, Raymond and Roberta Gatti (2002), “Decentralization and corruption: evidence across
countries”, Journal of Public Economics, 83, 325-345.
Haisken-DeNew, John and Christoph Schmidt (1997), “Interindustry and Interregion
Differentials: Mechanics and Interpretation”, Review of Economics and Statistics, 79 (3),
516-521.
Hunt, Jennifer (2004), “Trust and Bribery: The Role of the Quid Pro Quo and the Link with
Crime”, NBER Working Paper 10510, May.
Hunt, Jennifer and Sonia Laszlo (2005), “Bribery: Who Pays, Who Refuses, What Are The
Payoffs?”, McGill University working paper.
Lui, Francis (1985), “An Equilibrium Queuing Model of Bribery”, Journal of Political Economy,
93 (4), 760-781.
McMillan, John and Pablo Zoido (2004), “How to Subvert Democracy: Montesinos in Peru'',
Journal of Economic Perspectives, 18 (4), 69-92.
Mocan, Naci (2004), “What Determines Corruption? International Evidence from Micro Data”,
NBER Working Paper 10460, April.
Proética – Consorcio Nacional Para La Ética Pública (2004), “Opinión Pública: Tercera Encuesta
Nacional Sobre Corrupción”, Lima: APOYO Opinión Y Mercado.
Proética – Consorcio Nacional Para La Ética Pública (2003), “Opinión Pública: Segunda
Encuesta Nacional Sobre Corrupción”, Lima: APOYO Opinión Y Mercado.
van Rijckeghem, Caroline and Beatrice Weder (2001), “Bureaucratic corruption and the rate of
temptation: do wages in the civil service affect corruption, and by how much?”, Journal
of Development Economics, 65, 307-331.

26

Rose-Ackerman, Susan (1978), Corruption: A Study in Political Economy, New York: Academic
Press.
Rose-Ackerman, Susan (1999), Corruption and Government: Causes, Consequences, and
Reform, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Shleifer, Andrei and Robert Vishny (1993), “Corrruption”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 108
(3), 599-618.
Svensson, Jakob (2003), “Who Must Pay Bribes and How Much? Evidence from a Cross-Section
of Firms”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 68 (1), 207-230.
Swamy, Anand, Stephen Knack, Young Lee and Omar Azfar (2001), “Gender and Corruption”,
Journal of Development Economics, 64, 25-55.
Transparency International (2001), “Country Report on the National Integrity System in Peru'',
Lima: APOYO/Transparency International.
Transparency International (2004),
“Report on the Transparency International Global
Corruption Barometer 2004”, www.transparency.org/surveys/index.html#barometer,
accessed 21 May 2005.
Treisman, Daniel (2000), “The causes of corruption: a cross-national study”, Journal of Public
Economics, 76 (3), 399-457.
U.S. Department of State (2005), “2005 Investment Climate Statement – Peru”,
www.state.gov/e/eb/ifd/2005/43037.htm, accessed 16 May 2005.

27

Table 1: Shares of Bribes, Bribe Payments and Sample by Official Type
(1)
Share of
bribery
episodes
Police
City government
Judiciary
State schools
State hospitals
National ID registry
Water
Other
Ministry of
Agriculture
State banks
Social security
Electricity
Department of
Migration
Customs and taxes
Election office
Telephone
Development
agency
Arbitration
Election court
Food agency
Ministry of Industry
All
Observations

0.35
0.21
0.12
0.08
0.04
0.04
0.03
0.03
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.01

Less
than 1%
each

1
2123

(2)
(3)
Share of
Share of
amount
householdof bribe
official
payments interactions
0.27
0.02
0.11
0.10
0.42
0.02
0.05
0.21
0.02
0.13
0.02
0.06
0.01
0.12
0.05
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.004
0.01
0.003
0.003

Less than
1% each

(4)
Corruption
index
(2)/(3)

(5)
Business
conclusion
rate

12.7
1.1
26.3
0.2
0.2
0.3
0.1
3.9
1.1

0.81
0.90
0.54
0.98
0.93
0.88
0.95
0.78
0.72

(6)
Clients
reporting
bad
service
0.38
0.13
0.36
0.04
0.10
0.11
0.09
0.21
0.15

0.06
0.03
0.14
0.004

0.06
0.3
0.02
0.9

0.95
0.88
0.96
0.91

0.07
0.16
0.05
0.11

0.02
0.004
0.04

0.05
0.6
0.001
0.5

0.92
0.86
0.95
0.76

0.07
0.10
0.09
0.11

1.0
0.4
0.02
0.4
1
--

0.87
0.90
0.81
0.83
0.93
91 668

0.10
0.07
0.16
0.10
0.09
91 668

Less than
1% each

1
1628

1
91 668

Notes: Bribery episodes include cases where the client refused to bribe (463). A number of bribe
payers do not report the amount of the bribe (32). The Ministry of Industry is an abbreviation for
the Ministry of Industry, Tourism, Integration and International Commercial Negotiation.

28

Table 2: Determinants of Adjusted Bribery Rates by Official Type
(T-statistics in parentheses)
Business conclusion
rate (adjusted)
Share clients saying
service bad
(adjusted)
Response rate for
bribe amount
R-squared
Adjusted R-squared
Instrumental
variables
Adjusted conclusion
rate (in first stage)
All adjustments
made using OLS
Weights

(1)
-0.98
(-4.0)
--

(2)
-1.00
(-4.1)
--

(3)
-0.38
(-2.5)
--

(4)
--

(5)
--

(6)
--

(7)
--

1.58
(5.1)

1.70
(4.6)

1.12
(3.2)

0.76
(3.1)

-0.46
0.43
--

1.41
(1.3)
0.50
0.45
--

0.12
(0.9)
0.27
0.19
--

1.42
(1.4)
0.60
0.56
--

1.45
(1.5)
0.60
0.55
Yes

1.81
(0.8)
0.41
0.35
Yes

0.06
(0.3)
0.48
0.42
Yes

--

--

--

--

--

Yes

--

-0.59
(-6.6)
--

-0.71
(-11.1)
--

-0.65
(-8.3)
Yes

--

Reciprocal of squared standard errors from
household-official level regression

Share of households
using official

Notes: Weighted regressions on 21 observations. The dependent variable in columns 1-5 is the
set of coefficients on the official type dummies in a probit for the probability of paying a bribe.
The adjusted business conclusion rate is the set of coefficients on official type dummies from a
probit for the probability of concluding business with the official. The adjusted share of clients
reporting bad service is the set of coefficients on official type dummies from a probit for the
probability of experiencing bad service with the official. For columns 3 and 7 all adjustments to
variables are made using OLS. Where instrumental variables is performed, the adjusted share of
clients reporting bad service has been instrumented with the adjusted business conclusion rate.

29

Table 3: Determinants of Adjusted Bribe Amounts by Official Type
(T-statistics in parentheses)
Business
conclusion rate
(adjusted)
Share clients saying
service bad
(adjusted)
Response rate for
bribe amount
R-squared
Adjusted R-squared
Instrumental
variables
Adjusted
conclusion rate (in
first stage)
All adjustments
made using OLS
Weights

(1)
-0.85
(-2.1)

(2)
-0.90
(-2.3)

(3)
-3.83
(-2.1)

(4)
--

(5)
--

(6)
--

(7)
--

--

---

--

0.46
(0.8)

1.58
(1.9)

1.09
(4.2)

5.89
(4.9)

-0.20
0.15
--

2.56
(1.5)
0.29
0.21
--

2.50
(1.5)
0.26
0.18
--

2.42
(1.3)
0.10
0.00
--

2.84
(1.4)
--Yes

-3.1
(-0.8)
0.36
0.29
Yes

-2.63
(-0.7)
0.43
0.36
Yes

--

--

--

--

-0.57
(-5.8)

-0.68
(-9.6)

-0.60
(-6.9)

--

--

Yes

--

--

--

Yes

Reciprocal of squared standard errors from
household-official level regression

Number of bribe
amounts reported

Notes: Weighted regressions on 20 observations. The dependent variable in columns 1-5 is the
set of coefficients on the official type dummies in an OLS regression for the (log) amount of the
bribe. The adjusted business conclusion rate is the set of coefficients on official type dummies
from a probit for the probability of concluding business with the official. The adjusted share of
clients reporting bad service is the set of coefficients on official type dummies from a probit for
the probability of experiencing bad service with the official. For columns 6 all adjustments to
variables are made using OLS. Where instrumental variables is performed, the adjusted share of
clients reporting bad service has been instrumented with the adjusted business conclusion rate.

30

Figure 1: Corruption Ranking of Official Types
Judiciary
Police
Other
City government
Min of Agriculture
Arbitration
Dept of Migration
Election office
Development agency
Election court
Min of Industry etc
Social security
ID registry
State schools
State hospitals
Water
State banks
Customs and taxes
Electricity
Food agency
Telephone
0

5

10
15
20
Share of bribe takings/share of usage

25

Figure 2: Bribery Episode Rate by Official Type
Police
Judiciary
Other
Dept of Migration
City government
Min of Agriculture
Development agency
Election office
Arbitration
Election court
Food agency
ID registry
Ministry of Industry etc
Social security
State banks
Customs and taxes
State hospitals
Telephone
Water
State schools
Electricity
0

.05

.1

.15
.2
.25
Bribery episode rate

95% confidence interval

.3

.35

point estimate

.4

Figure 3: Adjusted Bribery Rate by Official Type
Police
Judiciary
Other
Dept of Migration
City government
Min of Agriculture
Development agency
Election office
Arbitration
Election court
Food agency
ID registry
Ministry of Industry etc
Social security
State banks
Customs and taxes
State hospitals
Telephone
Water
State schools
Electricity
-.02
0
.02
.04
.06
.08
.1
.12
.14
.16
Marginal effect of official type dummy: relative to city government
95% confidence interval

point estimate

Figure 4: Adjusted and Unadjusted Bribery Rates
Police
Judiciary
Other
Dept of Migration
City government
Min of Agriculture
Development agency
Election office
Arbitration
Election court
Food agency
ID registry
Ministry of Industry etc
Social security
State banks
Customs and taxes
State hospitals
Telephone
Water
State schools
Electricity
-.1

-.05

0
.1
.2
Bribery rate minus city government bribery rate

Adjusted (marginal effects)

.3

Unadjusted (raw rates)

.35

Figure 5: Average Bribe Amount by Official Type
Election court
Min of Industry etc
Judiciary
Other
Arbitration
Social security
Police
Min of Agriculture
ID registry
State schools
Dept of Migration
State hospitals
Election office
Development agency
Customs and taxes
City government
Water
Electricity
Food agency
State banks
Telephone
-1

0

1

2
3
4
Average log bribe amount

95% confidence interval

5

6

point estimate

7

Figure 6: Adjusted Bribe Amount by Official Type
Election court
Min of Industry etc
Judiciary
Other
Arbitration
Social security
Police
Min of Agriculture
ID registry
State schools
Dept of Migration
State hospitals
Election office
Development agency
Customs and taxes
City government
Water
Electricity
Food agency
State banks
Telephone
-3

-2
-1
0
1
2
3
Coefficient of official type dummy: relative to city government
95% confidence interval

point estimate

4

Figure 7: Adjusted and Unadjusted Bribe Amounts
Election court
Min of Industry etc
Judiciary
Other
Arbitration
Social security
Police
Min of Agriculture
ID registry
State schools
Dept of Migration
State hospitals
Election office
Development agency
Customs and taxes
City government
Water
Electricity
Food agency
State banks
Telephone
-2

-1
0
1
2
Log bribe amount minus city government log bribe amount
Adjusted (coefficients)

Unadjusted (raw means)

3

Figure 8: Adjusted Bribery Rate versus Adjusted Bribe Amount
Election court

Log bribe amount relative to city government
-1
0
1
2

Election court
Min Industry

Arbitration

Min Industry
Other
OtherJudiciary

Judiciary

Arbitration
Police

State banks

Police

Foodbanks
agency
State

Food agency

Phone

-2

Phone

-.1

0

.1
.2
Bribery rate relative to city government
Raw

Adjusted

.3

-1

Figure 9: Adjusted Bribery Rate versus Adjusted Conclusion Rate

Adjusted bribery rate
-3
-2

Police

Judiciary
Other
City gov't

Min Agriculture
Development agency

Dep't Migration

Election office
Arbitration
Election court
ID registry

Food agency
Min Industry

Banks

Social security

Hospitals
Customs

Schools

Water
Electricity

-4

Phone

.5

1
1.5
2
Adjusted rate of concluding business with official
Observation

Linear regression

2.5

3

Figure 10: Adjusted Bribe Amount versus Adjusted Conclusion Rate

Min Industry

Judiciary

Other
Arbitration
Police

Min Agriculture
Development agency

Food agency

Social security
Dep't Migration
Hospitals

ID registry
Election office

City gov't

Schools

Water
Customs
Electricity
Banks

-1

Adjusted bribe amount
0
1
2

Election court

Phone

.5

1
1.5
2
Adjusted rate of concluding business with the official
Observation

Linear regression

2.5

